Uh, we are going to start with
House Bill 112, and I believe
there is a sub.
We're gonna start with.
We have to take the role first.
That's right, Patrick, to take
the rule.
Representative Armstrong
Representative de la Cruz.
Representative Fernandez.
Representative Lee,
Representative Mason.
Representative Matthews.
I think I'm here.
Representative Murphy.
In spirit
Representative Parajon.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair, here, Madam
Chair.
Madam Cherry, you have a quorum.
Wonderful. And before we begin,
I just want to make a quick
announcement. House Bill 93 is
still listed on the agenda
online, but it has been rolled,
so if anybody here or online is
for House Bill 93, we will not
be hearing that this evening.
All right, thank you, uh,
Representative Lujan, you have
the floor. Good afternoon, uh,
Madam Chair and committee, um.
Before us today, we, uh, we
bringing before you a house
bill, um.
How's commerce and economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 1112 HB 112 is a
bill you heard previously as
proposing changes to the
cannabis licensing statute.
With the objective of being able
to have the FBI run federal
background checks as a
requirement for licensure.
Currently in New Mexico is only
able to do background checks of
activity.
Activity in New Mexico.
The CCD believes the proposed
changes will satisfy the FBI
standards. The committee
substitute 230711. I'm sorry.
Point 230717.2 that I offer
today addresses the three areas
where you committee expressed
concern. First, definitions have
been changed so that they work
together more clearly on page
one.
The committees
The committee
I'll pause now if you wanted to
move.
The substitute for discussion.
Do we have a motion?
OK.
So Madam Chair, um.
First, uh, issue was, were the
definition, so definitions have
been changed so that they work
together more clearly. On page
one, the committee substitute
changes the definition of
applicants so that it's clearly.
An applicant for a licensure and
can't be confused with an
applicant for a federal
background check. It also
accommodates licensure for
either an entity or an
individual.
This definition allows for the
the definition on page 5 of
Controlling Person.
As being the human person that
would be fingerprinted and
controlling person is related
to.
To either an applicant or an.
A cannabis establishment.
2nd on page 20, the definitions
that no longer reference
language in the statue have been
struck.
Third, uh, page 25, the
committee said restores the
previous scope regarding
cannabis businesses that are
required to demonstrate.
Rights to water.
Without Madam Char will stand
for questions.
OK.
Um, since we have already heard
this bill before, and we've had,
um, public comment and debate, I
guess I will open it back up to
the committee for the sub if
there are any questions.
Representative Lenting.
I'm chairwoman and we would do
pass.
I'm sorry. I'm sorry, yeah, OK,
let me get that right.
Sorry, folks.
Move a do not pass on house
commerce and economic
development, house build.
112, but a do pass on house
commerce and economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 112.
Excellent
from Representative Lente a
second from Representative de la
Cruz, Patrick, to take the role.
Representative Armstrong? Yes.
Representative de la Cruz.
Yes, Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente, yes,
Representative Mason,
Representative Matthews.
Yes
Representative Murphy, yes.
Representative Palejon.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair? Yes. Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, final tally is 8
votes yes, 0 votes, no.
All right, you have a due pass
on your committee set. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you
committee.
OK, next we have representative
Silva, see you back there
presenting House Bill 285.
Whenever you're ready.
chair, vice chair and committee,
uh, thank you for hearing my
bill. This is House Bill 285,
um, and I'll just read the
description and give a little
bit of background and then, um,
and then stand for questions. So
this is relating to consumer
protection, making it an unfair
or deceptive trade practice to
use dynamic pricing to change
the price of a good or service
sold by a grocery or retail
store in certain circumstances.
Uh, section.
The first section gives some a
definition for dynamic pricing,
retail stores, um, and, uh,
electronic shelving labels.
Section 2 describes the use of
dynamic pricing to change the
price of a good or service, uh,
and then offer some descriptions
and then uh also defines the use
of dynamic pricing changes based
on personal data or data
collected on purchasing
patterns, including the use of
facial recognition.
Um, and so I just wanna say a
couple words, is that OK? and
then I'll stand for questions.
So dynamic pricing has existed
for generations. Um, in 1999,
Coca-Cola put uh thermometers in
their vending machines, and
whenever prices, temperatures
would go up, the price would go
up in that vending machine.
There was huge backlash and
they, uh, took the thermometers
out.
And, um, however, today
corporations are able to use um
things like putting small
cameras in electronic shelving
labels to determine the
demographic, um, of a person and
then determine the price based
on that demographic or a time of
day or if they are um extreme
weather uh events that cause
people to need to stock up on
certain supplies, and so.
um,
all I'm asking for is a ban on
the electronic shelving label
digital price tag that could
change a price at a moment's
notice, uh, and so with that I
stand for questions, thank you.
Thank you, do we have anybody in
the room in support of the bill?
Is there anybody in opposition?
OK, go ahead. Um, please come
forward and make your comment
and keep your comments within a
minute, please. Thank you.
One moment, we have a microphone
for you.
My name is Ron Brown, madam
chair and committee, uh, today
I'm representing the New Mexico
Grocers Association were not
opposed to the bill per se to
stop unscrupulous.
Uh, or even, uh, prejudice type
of pricing, but there are 3
things on the bill that we think
need to be reworked. One is the
definition of dynamic pricing.
Number 2 is the section A1, the
use of software, all stores use
software to change prices.
Uh, that, that needs to be
defined a little more clearly.
And then in B2.
Uh, the use of tracking, well.
Madam Chair and committee
everybody uses loyalty cards.
Which basically tracks.
You're purchasing habits, most
of the time it's to the benefit
of the consumer, but I think
that needs to be clarified.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. Patrick, do
you have anybody online?
OK. I will open it up to the
committee for questions,
Representative Sarato to begin.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative for bringing
forward this bill. Um, I just
had a couple of questions and uh
somewhat related to what the
testimony was, where did the,
uh, definition of dynamic
pricing come from?
And
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, uh, the
definition came from a federal
uh legislation, um, that our
drafter pulled, um, and made um
concurrent with New Mexico
statutes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, and I have
not had a chance to look into
the statute, but in the unfair
Practices Act, dynamic pricing
would only be in terms of
grocery and retail stores, is
that correct in this one? That's
correct, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair Representative.
That's kind of wild to me that
we wouldn't have that already,
um, but it's, it's good to have
it and I understand why you
would want to hone in on this
one. Madam Chair Representative,
are there any other states that
have something similar to this,
um, that you can give us
information on.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
um, there is a pending
legislation in a number of
states, I can't remember them
off the top of my head, and
there's also federal
legislation.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I, I really
do like what you're doing here.
I, I do hope that you can work
with the industry to see if we
can tighten those definitions in
a way that's amenable, but still
keeps the soul of this bill
going, um, as we've seen in
emergency situations, especially
those have been, um, those,
those dynamic pricings has
really been abused and, and
harmed community. So, um, I do
support this bill, but I do
really do hope that before it
comes to the floor, you can work
with the industry. Thank you.
Thank you and Madam Chair, and
yeah, I agree. Thank you. Thank
you, uh, Representative Mason.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you.
Just a few questions here on
this bill.
Uh
Is, is this a pro
That's a problem they've been a
lot of complaints on this type
of pricing.
chaired Madam Chair
Representative, um, this is a
problem that we've seen come up
in Colorado and Texas as people
were testing out, um, dynamic
pricing and electronic shelving
labels. Uh, we also saw the
restaurant chain Wendy's, uh,
attempt to test uh dynamic
pricing on their menus and
received huge backlash, um, what
the purpose of this bill is to,
um, prevents.
Things like this from happening
in New Mexico in the event that
there's a natural disaster, a
fire, a flood, I don't want us
to get caught in an event where
a corporation is taking
advantage of New Mexicans, and
we have something in place
already.
Thank you, Representatives, uh.
But both the bill doesn't limit
it to that time, right, Madam
Chair representative?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
uh, if you look at page 2 line
8. It does, um, offer some, um,
Um
Events that would.
All under a dynamic pricing, uh,
during holidays, weather events,
natural disasters, supply chain
disruptions or other events that
can cause a sudden increased
demand for goods and services.
Thank you,
I read that, but it does not
limit it to just those
situations. This is
24/7 bill, right? Is that right
representative. Um, that is
correct, yes.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative.
We've all talked about going up
is it's gonna be illegal for
them to reduce the prices also.
dynamic pricing you repeat the
question again, Representative
is it gonna be if we had on
dynamic pricing, is it just?
Is it illegal to go down the
same as it is to go up, you
know, that's a really good
question, representative and and
chair, um, I do see when when
you read the bill, so on page.
Um
On page 1 line 12.
Um, and again on page 2, line 6.
And on page 2, line 23, uh,
Representative Madam Chair, it
does designate change. It
doesn't, uh, specify up or down,
and I would be open to a
friendly amendment to say only
in the event that a price would
increase.
Thank you
Madam Chair.
Thank you, thank you.
Madam Chair Representative, uh.
Would this not increase costs
for the retailers?
Going from
Electronic price stickers to.
We're gonna have to go
And all we have to do that.
With this, we just have to go
take our pencil out there and
write in a new price to use
electronics. Is that true?
Uh, Representative Madam Chair,
I think right now because
electronic shelving labels
aren't widespread in New Mexico,
the cost would be, um,
relatively the same, they'd keep
the same amount of workers' time
uh and effort that they
currently use in New Mexico,
Representative Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
Uh, I agree it's not, but we
used it as an example earlier,
the reason we
The problems we've seen are in
states that already
You know, so
Or are we jumping the gun a
little here or?
It there's not a problem that we
need to fix it, Madam Chair
representative Representative
Madam Chair, um, I'd offer, are
we jumping the gun if we have
fire, um, um.
Like fire hydrants or um, smoke
alarms in our homes and so I
think this is really similar,
this is a matter of preparation
for New Mexico, thank you,
Representative, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair, yet uh.
Yeah
Uh
You know, with the
In certain instances,
I guess
Are these
Gas pumps where they change it
electronically inside that
they're gonna all be illegal
now.
Representative, Madam Chair,
that's a great question. Um, no,
those would not be included in
this bill.
Does it say that in here
somewhere?
Uh, no, that is not defined in
this bill currently.
You know, there's
Sometimes there's
Madam Chair Representative,
there's uh
Reasons, other reasons besides
gauging were prices rise and
fall, you know, of course.
As a retailer, you know, demand.
Does
Usually
A high demand if there's a high
supply drive high demand, low
supply drives the price up, and
that's
That's it, uh
I don't know, you know, to me
it's another.
Law that we're putting on our
citizens is are we overreaching
our bounds is what government is
supposed to do.
For the for the individuals.
We're both
Aren't we able if somebody.
In our community we.
found gouging, don't we just,
just don't go there anymore and
let the American way.
I just, I have a problem with
All these regulations that we
put on all our business.
That's really just more of a
statement.
Yes, that's all, Madam Chair
Representative.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Mason,
uh, Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, I was curious, um, all
stores use software to determine
or change price, what exactly
does dynamic pricing me.
So dynamic pricing, um, in this
still on page 1 line 22 means a
digital process that uses a
software program to determine or
change the price of a good or
service displayed on an
electronic shelving label in a
store.
I thank you for that, um, Madam
Chair and Representative. So,
um, most big chain grocery
stores, do they use that type of
pricing already.
Um
Or that digital.
Madam Leader, uh, vice chair.
They right now it is my
understanding that many um
chains, retail stores, grocery
stores do use a form of dynamic
pricing.
Um, the, the place where, um,
I'm adding some definition and
some specificity is around an
electronic shelving label in in
um.
Uh, in a shared use with dynamic
pricing. And so that right now
is not, um, used by large
chains, uh, retailer grocery in
New Mexico, um, to, to my
knowledge.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Um, and
then on page 2, section B.
2
Regarding personal data or
purchasing patterns, nearly.
Each nearly each store, um,
every store maintains a loyalty
program through the key tags or
uh, you know, um, entering your
phone number.
Um, people may opt out by not
signing up.
Or by using their card. This
legislation, does that make that
loyalty problem uh program
illegal.
Uh, Madam Leader and Madam
Chair, you know, I was reading
um my bill over while I was also
talking to folks about it and
getting some feedback and um and
actually page 2, line 11, so
that's section 2. I think it, it
might and so again I'm open to a
friendly amendment, um, whether
we on online 12 of page 2,
strike the word weather.
So that it's bi facial
recognition system and then
strike other digital or
electronic pro uh process and
insert by an electronic shelving
label, so again, creating that
specificity that it is a
shelving label that is
electronic that we're trying to
limit, um, so that we don't have
those sudden increases, and
that's what I really want to
prevent is those sudden
increases within seconds or
minutes of something happening,
um, so thank you, leader and.
Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
um.
Madam Representative.
So that that's, that's two
amendments that I've heard of.
Um, so far.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
representative.
Did you actually, did you say
facial recognition.
was what you would want to
change it to.
Uh, leader, Madam Chair, um, the
facial recognition is already on
line 13 of page 2,
What I would um consider a
friendly amendment.
Is striking the word weather on
line 12.
And striking.
On line 13, other digital or
electronic process.
And inserting by an electronic
shelving label.
Thank you, leader and Madam
Chair.
Uh, thank you, uh, Madam Chair
and Representative. So this bill
would be you would be required
to put in facial recognition if
you wanted to do one of these
processes.
Uh
Leader and madam leader and
Madam Chair, no, um.
It would say, um.
So it is, it would be considered
an unfair deceptive trade
practice, um.
If and when
Um, there's facial recognition
system used.
OK.
Thank you for that.
Um
A lot of uh Madam Chair
representative, a lot of
entities just say like.
Uh, the airlines, other entities
like that always uh.
Hotel rooms, they go up and
down, and they fluctuate during
Christmas or things like that.
Does that, does this affect
anything of that and and the
other part of it is right now we
have an egg shortage.
And so with this prevent
Um
Businesses from
Actually raising the price
because it's costing them more
to get eggs.
Um, Madam Leader and chair, uh,
unless they're using an
electronic shelving label.
And then suddenly raising the
price, um, so, and, um, so
within, again, seconds or
minutes of that digital price
tag being changed, then that
would make that a deceptive or
unfair practice, um, and then to
your other question, uh, Madam
Leader, for, um, like regular
adjustments to prices, no, this
would not include, um, regular
seasonal, um, or.
changes that a retail or grocery
store would make Madam Leader
and Madam Chair.
OK, thank you, um, Madam Chair
and Representative.
Uh, that's all my questions.
Thank you, Madam Leader, um,
Chair de la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Oh, sorry, time out. I skipped
someone. I'm sorry, Mr. Chair,
um, Marian is actually next.
Representative Matthews.
No idea that we had a echoing.
Hey
Um,
This is uh
Madam Chair, um, representative,
this is a really interesting.
Question.
the way
That the world is changing
around this much faster than I
can ever.
Keep up with. That's clear, but
one of the things about your
bill, I'm not 100% sure about.
Is the problem.
The label or is the problem?
That
The
It's somebody is manipulating
the price.
And
Well, first I want to answer
that.
Uh, Representative Madam Chair.
I
I think the the problem that we
are seeing in um our current.
Market is that there are
entities, corporations, and, uh,
heads of those big corporations
that are trying to make the most
of scarcity and, um, I want to
make sure that New Mexicans are
protected from, um, this false
scarcity, uh, especially in
times when there is high need um
in, in times of emergency,
especially. And so, um, so yes,
this is a consumer protection.
Bill.
Um, and I wanna to protect
consumers from, um, price
gouging that we, as you said,
have not seen in any way, shape
or form in in our history.
Um.
Madam Chair.
Yeah
Representative then.
Um, and I'm not in favor of
price gouging, just.
Say that at the beginning, but.
It seems to me
That
Uh, you, you're focusing on the,
on the electronic.
and I quite frankly.
Maybe I just don't go that
happens much.
I don't, I'm not even 100%. I
mean, that happens on my
computer all the time. That is
popping up and.
Um, telling me, and then I got a
text today that I hadn't paid my
toll road.
A number of us got to toll
world, uh, penalty because we
hadn't paid on time, of course
we don't even have any toll
roads.
So a lot of fraud going on out
there, um, but when I'm
Who's benefiting is.
is if a local pharmacy, let's
say, there's not very many left.
And they put in some kind of
software system to help them
keep their inventory.
Um, in line and so forth.
And the software system, and
they have electronic.
Price things
Um
and, and they sell some goods as
a result of that.
Are they the ones making the
money from that, or is it?
The
Person behind the electronic.
Uh
Ha
Uh, Representative, Madam Chair,
uh, it's my understanding that
it is the corporation that's
utilizing the electronic
shelving label that would
benefit from it. So, and, and
more pointedly, um, shareholders
of that corporation.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair. Well, um,
Representative Madam Chair, not
all of the companies that do
this or corporations, are they?
Sorry, say that again I said not
all the uh
Stored not all the businesses
that.
Um, use electronic tags or
Um
Some kind of electronic pricing.
Uh, they're not all
corporations, are they?
Um, Representative Madam Chair,
uh, what we've seen so far is uh
that they are larger
corporations, so grocery stores
like Kroger's, Albertson's, um,
and, um, other retail stores
that are that are corporations
and have large chains across the
country are testing this sort of
um digital price tag.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair.
Um
Representative man and chair.
Uh, should there though be some
kind of your definition is here.
It's a retail store or grocery.
Um
And it doesn't, it doesn't.
Distinguished based on the size
of that business or who owns and
And I guess, I guess you would
say that, well, they're not
using those.
But isn't it probably just a
matter of time before, I, I
mean, I, I could see a small
business.
Wanting to have a good software
system.
And using this kind of system
and not intending to cheat
anybody.
Am I, am I being naive?
Representative Madam Chair, um,
I mean, I think that's a
possibility and uh the, the
problem now is large
corporations, chain stores that
have the resource, the time and
the talent to put behind
creating all of their algorithms
and um.
And
Artificial intelligence in order
to adjust prices, um, I, I don't
imagine, um, our small mom and
pops that we see in our
communities would be utilizing
that sort of um software
representative, Madam Chair.
Representative, uh, Madam Chair,
what if?
If they just went over to the.
The Albertsons or something the
local grocery store, saw where
they had raised the prices and
came back and raised theirs,
that be a problem?
Uh, Representative Madam Chair,
um, potentially.
I, I don't know, I wouldn't
presume.
OK
Um, and, and you're.
And I think that you probably
are correct that it is certainly
easier for major.
But I guess I'm not at all
convinced that.
Smaller
Organizations, whether or not
they're corporations or not.
Very well engage in this, I
mean.
Um, gas station, Jesus system.
price, I see the price.
On the
Uh yeah on the on the sign
outside.
268 a gallon I drive by 10
minutes later and it's 297 a
gallon.
Why aren't you including gas
stations in your bill.
Uh, Representative Madam Chair,
because that is.
Global industry in which I have,
um, it's just a different
industry that.
Even fathom regulating, um, and
that is not the purpose of this
bill, Representative Madam
Chair. All right, I think I have
one more question. Um,
Hmm
We had a bill come in.
Uh, about
Using these logarithms,
algorithms, sorry.
To
Um, try to
Deal with rents, manipulating
the price that rents were being
charged for apartments and
Um, potentially, I guess hotel
motel room.
Um
And that was on a local level.
Really, it, it seemed very
destructive.
Really made it very difficult
for
Both the landlord and the
potential tenants.
Yeah
Have any certainty as to what
the price would be.
We didn't, we didn't, uh.
Approve a bill, but
Uh, I guess my, my point is.
That the more local this is
perhaps a more.
And that
Maybe
We need to look a little
broader.
Uh, in
Terms of defining the harm that
we want to stop.
My last question would be, uh,
I, I noticed the Attorney
general had.
Uh, did you have any contact
directly with the Attorney
General's office and what their
view was on this.
Uh, representative and Madam
Chair, not on this bill, no.
Thank you, Representative
Matthews, Chair de la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So I gather that the that the
A real effort in this bill is to
try to avoid.
A form of
Ice gouging in a modern format,
which would be this digital.
Entry point that would
Move quickly depending on
whatever condition they felt was
warranted. Is that correct? Uh,
that's correct. It's
representative, Madam Chair.
Thank you, man. But it seems to
me as I read the introduction to
the bill.
That
The effort is
Is a little broad in nature, and
I think that's why you're trying
to offer the amendments,
although Madam Chair, I don't
think that we can do amendments
on the fly.
Um
Madam Chair
Immediately
When I was hearing
Representative Mason talk.
I thought about gas prices
because they are always their
own form of digital.
Price changing.
I see it every, every time I'm
coming from Albuquerque to Santa
Fe, because they typically stop
it.
uh, Senator Mingo to get gas and
I'm always looking at that gas
price.
Uh
But I don't think you're trying
to deal with gas prices here,
are you?
Um
No representative, no madam
chair.
And so, that's why I
I've just got to be frank with
you, Representative Madam Chair,
I don't think this this.
The intent is good. I understand
that. I'm the first one to say
that.
Uh
We should not be manipulating
prices based on things that are
are really profit driven.
Uh, so,
I I tried offer you ought to
consider rolling the bill.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
I am, I think that's a friendly
suggestion. I'm open to rolling
it and uh working with um.
folks in the industry to improve
it, this is, this is new
legislation for many, many
states across the country, um,
because folks are facing, um,
floods, as I said before, um,
torrential rains, snow storms
and, uh, and then discovering
this is an issue in their
community, and so I wanted to
get ahead of that, and I, I
brought this bill knowing that I
would get some really good
feedback and so I, I appreciate
that and would be open to to
rolling this bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Mr. Chair.
In that spirit, since you have
agreed to roll the bill, would
you like to continue taking
committee questions, we still
have several like they have
other issues that they want to
point out.
Representative, are you open to
that? Madam Chair, I'm open.
Um
Representative Murphy.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I too support
the concept of this, um, and I,
I think it may be a little
premature to bring as um
Uh
Representative De la Cruz has
suggested, um, I, I'll keep my
comments short, um, under, on
page two, where you, where you
look to find retail store, and I
guess.
In some cases, I feel it's too
broad, in other cases, I feel
it's too narrow. So giving you
these comments in the spirit of,
of trying to get to a good bill.
Retail store to me could mean a
gas station because so many of
our gas stations sell things
other than gasoline, right? And
so, to me, that's a definition I
think that has to be tightened
up very quickly. Um, in terms of
when it applies, I go down to
B1, and it does appear to to
fall during certain times of the
year, Holidays, for example,
that seems pretty broad.
Change disruptions or other
events that also seems.
Um, a little rod.
Um, to me, what we're really
talking about here is that we
don't want to see price gouging.
When there are things and having
just experienced this in my
community, such as
Weather events or natural
disasters. I mean, to me, and by
focusing on just this, uh, you
know, uh, very limited.
Um, electronic, and maybe I
don't completely understand the
technology, but the very limited
um
Focus
Um, we actually during prices
during a natural disaster, we
wouldn't want the the fellow at
the corner that usually sells
wood for, you know, $300 a cord
to start selling it for 1000,
right? So in a sense.
It's really narrowly focused
when it might actually need to
be.
There needs to be some thought
as to.
You know,
All of the goods and types of
goods, food, water, fuel, you
know.
Limited, basically during
weather events, natural
disasters, because I think you
would avoid a lot of the, the
sort of pitfalls that that some
of the committee has discussed.
Um
I don't want to belabor this
cause I think a lot of folks
have already made these points.
Oh, I will say one last thing
and, and I'm not in the retail
business, but I've been told by
people in the retail business
that one of the things they
consider.
When they're thinking about now
price gouging is, is probably
pretty well defined in the law
somewhere, cause I suspect that
there's states that do have it
and I'm surprised we don't.
But, um, but many times the way
they think of it, what I've been
told is
It's, it's not the price, it's
not the price I paid for the
item.
And that that I can't go a whole
lot up on. I've got to go up on
the price because I've got to
replace that.
And so,
If, if overall prices have gone
up and somebody bought something
for $1 and now to replace that
item, it might cost $1.30.
Well, they're gonna probably
charge $1.35. So is that price
gouging? I don't know, but I
think it's something that, that
the bill could probably address
and I'll comments. Thank you,
ma'am.
Thank you, Representatives.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Murphy, I just want to thank you
for bringing this bill forward.
As you mentioned, this is kind
of like a brand new area.
Um, and we haven't really seen
legislation like this before. So
I really appreciate you, um,
bringing it to the committee. I
also really want to thank the
committee for the excellent
discussion and really positive
feedback, and I hope to see you
back with the.
Maybe some clearer.
Language
Sure.
So
In addition to speaking to
business people and so forth.
Talk with law enforcement.
Particularly the Attorney
General's office on how you
would structure.
Um, a bill that would be narrow
enough to be enforceable.
Um, but broad enough to deter
what you're trying the bad
behavior.
I, I would really suggest you do
that
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Silva.
Thank you all. I really
appreciate your time on this.
All right, next we have
OK, Representative, whenever
you're ready.
Afternoon, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, House Bill
154.
Relating to Raffles exempting uh
New Mexico.
Exempting from the
And the New Mexico bingo and
Raffle A Raffles.
Or fundraising purposes held by
tax-exempt service.
Educational athletic, or
extracurricular organizations
that primarily serve youth.
Who are under 18 years of age.
And Madam Chair.
I think I already messed up and
I didn't let my expert witness
introduce themselves.
That's the introduction of the
bill and I'll let my witnesses
and introduce themselves.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, and Michelle Pedo,
I'm the staff counsel for the
game. Madam Chair, members of
the committee, my name is
Patrick Garrett. I'm the
chairman for the gaming control
board.
And Madam Chair, with that I'll
let uh Michelle give an
explanation and in layman's
terms about what the bill's
about.
And then we'll be ready for
questions.
So right now this bill is
targeted, oh sorry, Madam Chair
members of the committee, this
bill is targeted towards, um,
youth groups essentially of all
types, um, whether we're
talking, um, for athletic clubs,
academic clubs, schools, um.
We've all seen that they have a
raffles regularly to raise money
for trips, competitions, new
uniforms, new supplies. Um,
right now under our statutes,
these are not exempt raffles,
they would have to go through
the gaffles.
We don't believe that when the
gaming control when the um bingo
and raffle act was begun that
this was something they really
wanted gaming control.
Law enforcement agents coming
after for these kids, um, so we
are looking to um because these
do tend to be very low stakes
raffles they're having, um, and
so we.
Madam Chair, with that little
stand for questions.
OK, do we have anybody?
Online who would like to uh
speak in favor or in opposition
to the.
OK. Um, Chairman de la Cruz.
Thank you, ma'am. Sure, I like
Bill.
I like to bill because I was a
former director of Parks and
recreation not too long, I
shared a story, and I'll briefly
recap the story again.
When I was director of parks, we
had a seniors programs under our
auspices at our community
centers and
Uh, the seniors would have a
little collection in the morning
before they played bingo.
And then they would play bingo
and then they would win a little
pot probably around 20 bucks or
so, cause there's really low
numbers and also there were
giveaways, little gifts that
people would bring. In fact,
many of the the items that were
given here at the legislature,
we call it the swag, right? cups
and
Teddy bears and all kinds of I,
I put in my bag and I take him
to my senior centers in my
district because
I know they use them for bingo
gifts, right, or bingo prizes.
And so
What his intention originally is
a good law to prevent illegal
gambling and, you know, all of
that that the the state can't
regulate or license is the
reason that it wasn't allowed.
Well, finally, Burley County in
our instance, they sent us a uh
an email and I got a call from
my boss, said, you guys got to
put a stop to these senior
citizens cannot be doing that.
It's illegal, it's against the
law.
And so I didn't really want to
have to do that cause I know
that it's really important for
the socialization of our
seniors, and they enjoy it. It's
just a good time.
And so, Madam Chair, uh,
We put a stop to it. Well, every
one of those seniors across
Burley County started calling
their elected officials, and
everybody decided, man, I'm sure
they would just look the other
way.
It's gonna look the other way
because they felt it was de
minimis, and if the state wanted
to enforce it, hey, come on
down.
It never happened.
And that's kind of what happens
even now, so you're trying to
make a segue so that it can be
done legally.
Madam Chair Representative, and
I get that.
I, I have to tell you, while I,
while I support the bill, I
really think you ought to
consider a little bit stronger
language.
Only because
In, in, in the ability and
unless I missed it, I don't
think that it, it talks about
501c3s perhaps as being
qualifying agencies or
government like like our parks
and rec department with their
senior programs. So the only
thing that I would recommend,
Madam Chair, is maybe tightening
up the language a little bit so
that it was qualifying
organizations because what you
don't want to see at the same
time is somebody.
Abusing that.
Privilege if it's allowed under
state law by then trying to make
a buck off of it illegally, so.
Madam, the only thing I would
recommend to the sponsor is that
he might want to consider
tightening up that language
cause, you know, good intentions
sometimes can go awry.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, um,
Representative Mason.
I'd like to make a motion to do
pass.
OK, we have a motion for do pass
and sight, Representative
Matthews.
Thank you, madam chair.
And just hang on.
Representative
I'm,
I'm not opposed to this either,
but
Um, I would kind of follow up
with what uh Representative Dela
Cruz said,
Um, I mean, this can be abused.
Um, I mean, $75,000 prize.
Is a pretty good sized prize,
um.
But I, the real reason I raised
my hand was on subsection 2.
C2
OK. You say nothing prevents.
Um
Define organizations that
primarily serves youth who are
18 years of age and younger.
And what I didn't understand was
whether.
The
Organization served youth or
whether.
Um, the fundraising effort was
for um I I just thought that was
I I wasn't real clear what you
were saying.
Whether the organization that
was doing the raffle had to
serve youth or whether
The um the nonprofit.
Uh, had to be certain if that if
that makes sense it's just.
And it kind of goes along with
what he was saying. It's to
tighten it up maybe a little bit
so it.
Be less easy to play games with
wrong bad games.
Did you want to respond to that,
Madam Char, my expert witness,
respond to it.
Madam Chair Representative, um.
We were hoping that the, the
language, the $75,000 would not
apply to these raffles, um,
because that is a separate part
of the bingo and Raffle, so
these raffles would be exempt
from the acting in its entirety,
um, and and see, um, we have the
language.
That nothing in the New Mexico
Bengal and raffle act with
regard to Raffles shall be
construed to apply to a raffle
held or fun reading, raising
purposes by a service, um.
Educational athletic or other
extracurricular organization
that and then the actual
organizations.
that are included in this are
defined by um subsections 1 and
2 with subsection one referring
to the tax exempt status, um,
that should differentiate which
organizations um serving these
youth would um.
That this would apply to.
I'm sorry, does that make sense?
Men, ma'am, sure, I, I would
simply say that then you would
be leaving out seniors and so
forth.
So that that's why I thought.
I, I wasn't sure you were
meaning to do that and, and
maybe it would be nice to be,
there's lots of good causes that
hit people, all kinds of
different ages.
Just a thought. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Matthews. Um, if there are no
further questions from the
committee, we're back on the
DuPath motion.
Patrick take the role
Representative Armstrong.
Representative De la Cruz.
Yes, Representative Hernandez.
Representative Valente, yes,
Representative Mason,
Representative Matthews.
Representative
Representative Murphy,
Representative Pajon. Yes.
Representative Serrado.
Yes.
Madam Vice Chair. Yes. Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, final tally, 10
votes yes, 0 votes no.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee on 154 and
everybody hold your horses for
House Bill 155, also by
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
We'll move on to House Bill 155
and try to get everybody home.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, House Bill 155
relating to gaming control
changes.
Changing employment
qualifications for the executive
director of Gaming Control
Board, removing the limit of
annual salary of the executive
director of the gaming control
board.
And Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
What, what happened here is, is
that there was a uh.
A figure set on on the wages of
the.
Of this position of this FTE
that they need in the gaming
commission.
And
The way it was written, it needs
to be changed so they can hire a
qualified personnel for for the
for different or a higher amount
of money that was listed before.
Because of the times and how
wages have gone up in
qualifications.
Madam Chair, with that will
stand for questions.
OK, there is no one in the room.
Is there any questions from the
committee?
Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for bringing this
forward, our representative,
what is the salary that's set
now in statute.
Madam Chair, I'll let my expert
witness, uh, answer that
question.
Madam Chair, members,
representative, the way that the
statute is set right now, the
executive director of our agency
and its exclusive for agency
cannot meet or surpass the
salary of the current governor
serving in office.
So in this particular case, our
governor, according to the
sunshine Por makes $110,000 a
year. Um, and if you compare
executive directors of same size
within the state of New Mexico,
they make a considerable more
the averages on the average is
about $30,000 and I can expand
further to see um executive
directors for ribal gaming or
out of state make a
considerable.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. So
we're removing the cap so that
there's no.
Um, it, it's whatever you all
decide.
Madam Chair, members.
The uh
Capped now with the with the
change in the language will be
set at the discretion of the
board.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Thank you, Madam Leader, uh,
Representative Serato, Sorato.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I think
you hit a lot of it. I'm only
curious why there wasn't a limit
set. I don't think you.
Uh, yeah, why there wasn't a
limit set, Madam Chair
Representative.
If you're referring to a
specific cat, cat, excuse me,
pardon my allergies, cap that's
been set for um we kind of
discussed it, but we just
decided it was best to leave up
to discretion of the board, I
believe, um.
Has the same thing, do you
remember what it was? I
apologize.
Can't remember um
Struggling to remember who it
was, but that's the reason being
they'll serve at the discretion
of the board, um, we still have
to go within budget confinements
and we'd have to meet the
approval from from Spo and from
each.
DFA as well anyway.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, representative and expert.
Um, so this estimates that the
that it would probably be raised
to something more like 167,000.
That seems like that would also
include benefits in terms of
what the going rate you're
looking at is that your
assumption to when those
numbers, Madam Chair members,
yes, that's correct. Um, OK, uh,
and then last just general
question. Why was this
originally tied to the
governor's salary in the Madam
Chair representatives, I don't
have a specific answer for you,
um, if you remember during the
Johnson administration, you
know, they passed to legal.
gaming and so forth and I they
scrambled back to to get all
this stuff set forth and statute
set in place, place, and in my
opinion, I think they kind of
overregulated.
Keep the gaming integrity in
place when it started and and
now that we've evolved 20 some
years later, it's just time to
implement a lot of changes and
modernize it. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you for that
answer.
Thank you, Chair Sorato,
Chairman de la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
appreciate you bringing this
bill. It's really a cleanup
bill.
Uh, this was done as I would
have surmised that it was an
overreaction.
Uh, what it does in effect
without a change, it it it uh
will limit the pool of
applicants uh that would want
this job.
And I will remind the body or
the membership at the committee
that I think it was the year
before last, I forget, time
flies that I sponsored the bill
that increased the salaries of
our elected officials, but we
did not increase the the.
The salary of the governor,
that's to happen in the next
governor, and so this is kind of
being held hostage by that. So
thank you, Madam Chair, I, I do
support.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. All right,
what is the will of the
committee?
I move approval, Madam Chair.
Second,
we have a due pass motion from
Chairman de la Cruz and a second
from representative Hernandez.
Patrick to take the role.
Did you have a question?
Oh no,
Oh
OK.
Representative Armstrong?
Representative De la Cruz, yes.
Representative Hernandez,
Representative Valente.
Representative Mason,
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy, yes,
Representative Padajon.
Yes.
Representative Serrado Madam
Vice Chair. Madam Chair.
Uh, manager, final tally, 10
votes yes, 0 votes no.
All right, thank you very much.
You have another due pass and we
