So if you're here for that bill
it will not be heard we do not
know if there is an amendment or
substitution so it is we'll go
just back in the queue once the
sponsor request for that to
happen so unsure with that will
be rescheduled if we could start
by taking the rules.
Representative and.
New York.
Representative Duncan your.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente.
Representative a little more.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez your.
Representative Mason.
Here.
Representative Matthews here.
Vice chair Serrato your.
Madam chair that goes up has.
I present to I think we've got a
quorum
thank you and Representative
please start your presentation
madam chair please start your
presentation thank you madam
chair members of the committee
now for the second time in front
of you you have H. B. seventy
seven other should be an
amendment madam chair the right
one this time I it's going to be
an amendment to section.
Page three.
Section see in line I.
it just adds a different
definition for what we call a
met tower which is a
meteorological tower that's
covered within the purview of
this law I'm delighted to have
discussion on the amendment
madam chair before we go on
anyone like we did.
Wait
I think we should start with the
amendment so we can get that
amendment move for discussion
purposes.
And if so moved second.
So.
So madam chair members of the
committee all that is is that.
Clear definition of any tower in
ET our them in ET tower that
would be within the purview of
this law as it relates to honey
C. identified registered.
As per the aviation Department
New Mexico department
transportation.
Thank you Representative and I
know that we had asked for
clarifications just to type of
the bill and I appreciate that
you took the time to do that so
please proceed thank you very
much madam chair so essentially
what this H. B. seventy seven do
I it adds new section to
chapters sixty four aeronautics
which is related to the
meteorological valuation towers
are in the Representative excuse
me.
We don't have that we don't.
Wait yes thank you.
This bill has been hard to get
through this committee.
It is true to the best madam
chair if you actually had an
extra one we still don't have.
Sure one of the you can we can.
Sure so representative madam
chair
If you would please start with
the two to number we could start
there it said to two point two
two four six six four point one
chair.
I was so I'm just confirming
thank you Mr speaker.
All right and all this does is
it gives you a better definition
of what a neurological power it
is and the type of equipment
carries to make sure that it's
covered within the scope and
purview of the what we're trying
to pass today so madam chair
getting back to the bill is that
the new section to chapters
sixty four which is related to
neurological evaluation towers
I'll.
Com immunities from here on out
and then we teach our as a
freestanding tower or of removed
maxed which carries measuring
instruments with more logical
and with urological capabilities
such as thermometers and
instruments to measure wind
speed this particular bill would
define I'm here on school
valuation tower is expanding
more than fifty feet and less
than two hundred feet above the
ground at the base of not more
than six feet in diameter and is
associated with the development
of the study of wind powered
electric generation it would not
include a structure that is
located within the curtilage of
residence or adjacent to a
building fire or electric
utility substation this bill
also requires that terrorists to
be painted immediately upon
installation with option any
chance of forms in white paint
it would establish other
requirements for identification
and maintenance of immunities
and require the D. O. T. so the
aviation Department DOT to adopt
rules to create a registry of
met towers and requires
operators of neurological towers
to notify due to the existence
of such towers and would be
ownership operation installation
of a met tower in violation of
these requirements a misdemeanor
subject to criminal penalty we
also want to establish January
first twenty twenty four is the
deadline to bring existing met
towers into compliance with that
madam chair I'm going to
introduce my experts here with
me today this is Mr Ryo of the
aviation department and Mr rove
you like to add any other
remarks thank you Representative
and I only have to see this
madam chair members of the
committee is that this started
because the national
transportation safety board
wrote a letter along the lines
of different things and their
plane crashes into some of those
lower mineralogical towers
because they're not handle but
yet the help your cheek or
higher than the committee
approved legislation so the
national transportation safety
board has asked the states to
regulate the power to under two
hundred feet and about fifty
feet and that and that's this
with this statue.
Covered by definition of the
prior administration would be
related to do this this
administration is also related
to the use and of being the
aviation director with that okay
maybe we should so so that's
what this what this is.
And with that manager we're open
for questions thank you
we had a little trouble here you
so.
Three questions you would please
what part you are.
Thank you
so I'd like to go to the
audience is anybody would show
by.
My initial pants who is in favor
of this bill anybody.
Anybody propose.
Everybody on them.
I think that I'm going to
committee
to questions from the committee.
With that Representative is.
You madam chair representative
just one question what needs to
would would be put in charge of
this force this is.
the agency representative or.
Madam chair representative thank
you for the great question I'm
going to surmise that probably
be the aviation department but
I'd prefer to my experts.
The what I would which is faster
madam chair and Representative
Hernandez is that that.
We enact rules and regulations
within the scope of that that
would be determined more by
rules that the US chances of us
a portion of the rectory are
minimal because of this the
staff that we have we'll get
more into to grants to
enforcement of.
Okay would probably ask the
state police or somebody else to
do and we would do that.
Act of terror thank you.
Representative Matthews.
Madam chair thank you that money
is a really simple question are
these wind turbines.
That that produce electricity is
that we're talking about no they
are here on a logical the
valuation towers use the
seductive powers that are lower
than to to be evaluated new to
see if you want to put the
region of the.
Okay so that is a precious to
those towers of to the valuation
part of the web page and decides
they're not going to you to put
up the big ones and generated
interest that's what those are
madam chair these are the the
baby whether two hours before
the real weather showers.
Madam chair of the presenters
thank you for that explanation I
started vision these in my head
and my other question would be
madam chair is up who puts him
up.
I mean what is the company is it
at.
Yes it's Madam chair
representative Matthews yeah
many people put them up in the
right now New Mexico is in the
middle of our renewable energy
renaissance so we can have a new
renewable energy companies
putting these types of towers up
we can have you know I have
public or private whether
trading services or entities but
these that my missing.
Any.
Well I think I think this
practice just about anybody that
wants to make money doing this
Representative Matthews of
continuation back.
Thank.
That is here.
So so this is how far back.
That is.
This
is the lawyer the lawyer you
turn the secretary I'm sorry you
an attorney at yes well I was
doing we get.
As.
Thank thank you for that for
that answer and I I hope that
the experience was this a
memorable.
But also positive.
She can be my questions.
It has sure I would love the
that one the.
Yes committee any other
questions.
Representative Martinez.
Madam chair representative of.
One question Ortiz these are the
permanent structures for the
temporary.
Madam chair and representative
or to use the answer is their
intended to be temporary to be
removed from the study is
finished.
So I I only have one question is
what.
I'm sorry for the little things.
K. them to be able to figure out
which pockets or which which
pieces of land would have that
type of favorable weather for
our launch and so we hire
companies to put up these types
of towers these at the towers
can be hired by airports as well
or anybody else that has an
interest in weather patterning
or.
Yeah I hope that answers your
question.
Leave anything out we just want
to add this to Madam chair
representative little if you
have if you all of the mesa the
the page private lives just
years if you wanted to valuation
just in case you want to see if
you can show companies that
there's clearly could generation
on the mesa you could do an
evaluation before you with your
powers in place if you have the
proper wind speeds and
consistency of these.
follow up question.
Here Representative.
What happens what process for
this violation.
Is it the individual.
The company that.
This.
Please explain how that process.
Under this statute the shooting
the madam chair these the
individual that all of the power
of the subject.
And we don't have the rules yet
we would be defining those the
aviation division apple's to
define that gives.
Give us some better.
Understanding and some more
details so that everybody knows
exactly what's going on because
this authorizes to enact
regulations regarding these
towers.
Thank.
Anybody else from the committee.
I only have one follow up
question so any new
committees that are being put up
I understand will be marked but
top of the existing ones will do
they have to go back in and and
make sure that their mark to be
in compliance madam chair yes
there is a provision within the
saw that would give out those
companies would it be to
starting in existence until I
believe January first twenty
twenty four to get them all.
I did see they just wanted to
make sure that the committee was
aware that that's that would be
the process thank okay.
At the.
Sure.
We have a motion for it to pass
in the second.
Please take the role.
Representative and in order.
Representative get yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Let yes.
Representative little yes.
Representative.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Mason
Representative Matthews yes.
IShares rob yes.
Yes.
That is our ten as as you think
you have a two passed thank you
thank you.
Appreciate you fix in the bill.
Your patience.
Wait a minute.
I'm being told we did not vote
on the amendment.
That place it can't thank you.
The one yeah this is so let's go
for the amendment let's go ahead
and make a motion.
Two thousand and then.
And we have a second.
Let's take a vote on that I
apologize.
Representative and in order.
The question I would just the
manager still hasn't and just
the just the.
Yes on the end of.
Representative don't get.
Yes Representative that is
Representative Lente yes
Representative little yes
Representative Lundstrom.
Senator Martinez yes
Representative Mason with
Representative Matthews yes.
I share Serrato yes Senator
Gallegos yes Senator them in the
past ten zero ten yes is no.
We have an amended bill.
This bill has been done
backwards anyway so that just
kind of but with the home built
so I think you have a that and
amended bill.
Yes.
All right thank.
We got a house bill thirty nine.
That I think we.
The to move.
Just come on.
They were so close.
Yes it's I moved I moved do pass
on the bill as amended.
Deregulation.
By acclamation because I think
that we used to only know thank
you yes okay so.
But Mason is there anyone
opposed.
Chasey walk out slowly.
Thank.
Yes.
All right.
Are you ready I am ready.
Thank you madam chair I'm I'm
glad to see that other tiers are
as
Whatever.
The word.
So I madam chair this is a bill
that I've had for many years and
let me just give you a little
history when the three tier
system came in for teachers back
in long time ago the early two
thousands yes so on the webcast
they cannot hear you so either
okay I can I can use this.
Okay.
So I I started working on this
nearly twenty years ago when the
three tier system first came in
mmhm many of you know that I'm a
pediatric physical therapist too
is that many of my years in
public schools and so when the
three tier system came along we
were left out people like
physical therapists occupational
therapists speech language
pathologist social workers
psychologists interpreters for
the deaf orientation and
mobility for blind I'm up all
those kind of people and and
what I'm trying to do is get
those people I am no longer
practicing but to get those
people on the three tier system
and what has happened through
the years is I'm madam chair
probably remembers this when we
were on probation they come in
all excited that that of the
staff and say we're going to
give teachers a two percent
raise and we'd say I'd say you
mean educators and they take no
teachers so many races have
happened that didn't include and
these are the people who are are
in large part responsible for
their kids with disabilities in
the LFC Martinez so I'm just
trying to level the playing
field you may have gotten some
emails that say oh my god
they're going to cut my salary
madam chair you know you can't
hire social worker for fifty
thousand dollars you can't hire
physical therapist for fifty so
there is no intent to have
anybody lose any money it's just
to get people on the system so
would raise this come along
those very important
professionals are not left
behind.
And and as I said almost all of
those professionals there's no
way you can hire one for that
the minimum amounts and this is
the floor not a ceiling and most
of the people who are in the
schools already are making more
than this and this does nothing
to those I mean they're they're
school districts can try to do
something but those people all
will leave and so they don't
want that to happen and just one
more quick thing in terms of how
how they are funded most of them
are funded with teachers you get
you get the odd student just
need the student.
That dollars per student so if
you have one classroom with
forty kids you get the money for
forty kids were as if you don't
have an FTP in the place you
don't drop down the money so
tell you could hire someone the
money doesn't flow to the school
district and I will say that I I
my last job was at a school
district that hadn't had a P. T.
in eight years and the reason
based found me is because they
had settled a lawsuit with the
family whose kids didn't get so
I worked with her a lot eight
years her senior year a lot of
hours or senior year so with
that madam chair I stand for
questions.
Do we have anybody in the
audience in support of this
bill.
Came do we have anybody opposed
to this bill.
Okay let's start with the side
of the room.
I'm here madam.
Madam chair Madam co chair
members of the committee and
sponsored a representative
Thompson I stand in support of
this bill I think that it levels
the playing field and it brings
the necessary services and
supports are across a broad
population without marginalizing
portions of that population and
if there are other questions
level be happy to answer them of
the committee in the interest of
time thank you madam chair madam
co chair sponsor Thompson and
can you give us your name my
name is Matt dean and I'm a
disability advocate and also a
survivor of multiple traumatic
brain injuries thank you thank
you.
Anybody else you can stand in.
You madam chair ladies and
gentleman my name is crystal
right the public policy officer
lobbyist for the work of New
Mexico we represent the with the
lifelong developmental
disabilities throughout the
state large amount of our client
all are you representative at
the public school level this
will bring that sponsored option
is that
number of individuals who do
take care of and teaching our
children with disabilities up to
age a respectable salary and the
our New Mexico would stand
strong support of this bill
thank you thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is John
direction with the New Mexico I
want to thank all the sponsors
were only hearing this bill I
know this is closed personal
life story but it's also really
impactful for students of the
service so we really appreciate
the efforts to slow one to
districts this is really
critical in particular for rural
districts that are serving
students where I can be needs us
to sponsor noted this is what we
want to be able to level the
playing field that so that these
services can be provided
regardless of districts
districts we've been able to
negotiate salaries but if you
were in committee on Monday my
test where you're on the
educational assistance minimum
salary this is another pocket
critical educators of play a
role in our schools I didn't get
included in that preacher rains
last year for trying to chip
away these discrepancies and
ensure raising that time all the
school so we can make this a
viable profession ones tractive
gate many of these folks to make
way more money in private
practice but call service need
to committees as we have for
those.
Thank you anybody else on the
side of the room.
Revenue madam chair members of
the committee.
Steve young is in the New
Mexico's government relations
director and we have our members
we support this bill because
Ristolainen Senator.
eight we.
The ongoing shortage the
computers.
And making sure we deliver a
quality education.
To students especially those in
the
timings of the reasons we
support this bill thanks for the
sponsor rated for
it we do have some considerable.
Thank you Steve.
Chairman of the committee on
Charles the locker.
Speaking to you today on behalf
of Mexico which is for children
action fund and we strongly
support this bill for reasons
German as well as the sponsor
at.
Free project previous testimony
that stated that just so or you
get these three what licensed
provider of the teacher's
schedule so many students miss
out on some of the critical
service.
Thank you anybody else on the
side it will go can't.
Madam chair members of the
committee it was.
Social workers New Mexico
chapter in the stand in support
of this bill I thank you also if
few updates calls from some
social workers anything that we
should not pass this bill
because it.
Because of hiring practices
having to do with hiring
practices.
As some of the other people
stated it is so important that
we get these pay raises and the
rural social workers take care
and help them out so that they
can provide the necessary
services to to excuse me small
it's also really important to
to let people know that we don't
have an answer presenters
schools and with the community
schools are going throughout the
state right now.
Brings on more and more social
workers so the box this is this
is something particularly in
rural areas that we really have
to focus on the past or will
social workers we've gotten
assurances organizations and
agencies that we work to correct
in the interim some of the other
concerns that you have but it is
it is our it is our belief at
this point that these are top
priority to get our rules of.
Thank you very much anybody
else.
Members of the committee.
I'm sorry we're going on soon.
When Norris.
Thanks Karen.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee plans going north
vice president Albuquerque
teachers federation
and I want to say that the ATF
representative all license
educators and in our APS
district this includes educators
to whom this bill would apply we
call them essential and related
services educators because there
are truly essential to the
academic and social emotional
success of our students as a
classroom teacher for twenty two
years I worked closely with
therapists social workers
counselors nurses and many
others who just made invaluable
contributions to educating the
whole child
with all gratitude for the
efforts of this legislature to
fairly compensate public
employees public school
employees year after year raises
a been appropriated with dual
standard like representative
Thompson said for example last
year teachers we received
increases of nine thousand to
ten thousand dollars which is
equivalent to like fifteen to
twenty percent pay raises for us
which is great thank you however
all other educators given pay
raises of seven percent this
affected the dual license
colleagues that we have in APS
so we had to go to the
bargaining table with APS to
find a way to equalizes raises
and we were able to do so
through collaboration
but it's imperative that we
recruit these dual license
professionals in our public
schools and HB thirty nine would
really enhance our efforts to do
that it would also help us to
adequately fund the salaries of
these folks on a statewide basis
to alleviate the strain on
districts operational budget and
finally it would set up a
professional three tiered pay
scale for these educators just
like their teacher appears we
want to thank representative
Thompson for sponsoring this
bill and we ask members to
recommend do pass thank you.
Thank you.
Garcia said deal.
Yes hello Madam chairwoman and
members of the committee my name
is a lease to deal and I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty and
also a member of the legal team
representing the representative
plaintiffs in the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit we'd like to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this important piece of
legislation and her tireless
advocacy in this area and then
C. O. P. and transform education
New Mexico strongly support this
bill is consistent with the
Yazzie Martinez reeling and for
the other reasons given here
today we urge you to pass it
thank you so much.
Okay let's go to the committee.
Representative Martinez.
Madam chair representative
Thompson.
thank you for reading this bill
for the very important like to
have a couple questions on what
select.
Your.
Use run will circle years and
all.
What were some of the issues
that held it back in and having.
Those issues.
Madam chair representative
Martinez generally it was just
run out of time I mean it this
bill I believe got stuck in
Senate Judiciary along with just
like thousands of my bills but
I'm and I I I think this may be
the fourth time I've run it I
started working on it as an
advocate when I was working in
the school so people haven't
really I mean people who don't
understand the bill think that
we're trying to cut the salaries
of these related services
providers that is farthest from
the truth but some years I think
they had a really big push and
not understanding I mean I had
somebody send me an email and
say can you please send me
summary of your bill and then
call me and it's like you all
know we don't have time for that
so so I don't I can't remember
that there have been problems
besides just running out of time
and people not understanding
what I was trying to do.
Thank you madam chair
representative so this sets the.
Minimal standard.
Yes madam chair it sets minimum
salaries out commensurate with
teachers but it doesn't setting
the ceiling and and as I said
before very few of these people
will come to work I mean I'm
I've been retired for three
years and I still get five
emails a week offered me a job
at a hundred thousand dollars a
year so I'm you're not that most
places are not going to be able
to hire the professionals at
eight at the minimum level but
we want to make sure that no one
is below that but we we don't
want it to affect people who are
and like a pretty public schools
in Rio Rancho have both come up
with their own three tier
systems for these people but
some of the other places haven't
so we're just trying to make
everyone on the same level
playing field.
Madam chair representative
Thompson I appreciate that and I
think it's it's important for
everybody to understand that the
starting point it's not that's
where which were stopped one
last question madam chair
I noticed that there's not
appropriation attached to this
bill is this already.
PED's budgets I'm not exactly as
I said before as as the school
districts hire people then they
get the money so it's hard it's
we have had issues with the FIR
through the years the I several
years that's what actually now
that I remember that's what
killed it because the FIR
pretended like none of these
people existed so they would
have to hire them all from zero
and paid that entire salary I'm
not exactly sure where these
numbers come from I'd I don't
believe there correct I'm it
would be great if tomorrow are
we when this went into effect
every school district would have
every profession as many as they
need that won't happen so most
of most of the people who are
who are I'm thinking about are
already in the system being paid
so this might add a little cost
if they can hire more people but
the people who are already there
are already compensated above
these amounts.
Madam chair representative
Thompson thank you
Sh so choose as as we get hired.
They'll drop down that money is
there a fund is there of.
Pot of gold.
There is this year.
How is that.
Going to be handled as I said
I'm that there is some of money
in there I'm it's it's hard to
determine how can I hope can
find that golden ticket and find
a social worker provide a speech
language pathologist so there
there is money that set aside
it's hard to say because we
don't know how many how many
people will.
Flocked to New Mexico are
flocked to the schools when as
someone said you can easily make
twice as much in any other
practice setting so I I'm I'm
assuming it won't be a huge
number and there is money set
and there's a lot there's money
set aside for FTEs.
Madam chair thank you very much
representative Thompson again
for.
Forward
I don't know what.
Fully this year it to us
Because social workers are
desperately needed at all.
If we want to mitigate some of
the things that we're seeing in
schools mental health.
and and wraparound assistance
is.
Sri really important.
We want to see those can succeed
so Madam chair representative
Thompson thank you for thank you
for having the patience and the
drive to keep reading for
stubbornness madam chair.
Thank you Representative is
right.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative ring for this
bill it's always good to see you
all the time.
I want to have a quick question
because our committee secretary
noted that or three analyst
noted that there were two places
that the word provider is left
out just on page two line ten.
In page three line nineteen.
And.
You know they recommended to be
amended to include those simple
words in there I didn't know if
you there is a reason why they
were not included
and madam chair and we talk
about simple amendments that I
think that passes the mustard
not substantive I just simply to
make it consistent across the
board if.
If the Representative would want
to do that at this point.
I see.
I see what you're saying I'm we
could do that so you said page
two what was the other page to
like ten and page three line
nineteen.
Actually I believe on page two
It it's the duly licensed
instructional support and duly
licensed instructional support
program administered so
providers probably would work at
their I I'm totally open to that
if you if you wanna make
amendment on the fly and then
three line in the page three
line nineteen.
At after support again.
And this is Madam chair
representative sure getting good
luck I I think on page three
it's it's referring to the
license not the person.
Act.
Licenses across port provider
licensure.
Would you what yeah which our
state support dual license
instruction support provider
licensure because it's in.
Madam chair I don't I don't
think it's necessary if the
committee feels that is I'm not
opposed but I don't think it's
necessary.
So I don't think the second one
is that's fine but but I I I
would prefer to the committee as
well if you'd like to.
It sounds like it's a family
amendment yes yeah
let's the amendment would be to
our and then the bill on page
two line ten after the word
support afterward prince.
Let me get out of in.
The.
So page two nineteen.
Provider.
Okay after it after support okay
ad provider.
The first.
Is that right support.
Yes that's that's right that to
us so it would be the first ones
would say the primary
responsibility of duly licensed
instructional support providers.
And duly licensed instructional
support program administration
okay all right got it.
After the first support and then
there was the madam chair was
there another one no okay okay
all right thank you thank you
for catching that thank you
John.
All right so.
You did say it was a friendly
amendment and so does anybody on
the committee have any
objection to to the amendment.
Okay so.
Even amended bill.
Do we need to run that.
And madam chair and I'm would
you pass on the amendment.
And we have this second.
Okay.
For the amendment.
Representative and in order.
Yes to adoption.
Senator don't get yes
Representative is.
Representative Lente yes.
A little yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Mason.
Representative Matthews yes.
I sure Serrato yes.
Yes.
Madam chair this is our tenth
knows is our okay so that now
you've got amended bill anyway
so now let's go back to the bill
does anybody have any other
comments on the bill and share I
mean I'm the the two passed yes.
Before we do that I I just want
to have I have a few comments
first I was really excited
because I thought we were gonna
get out of here without an
amendment.
So we're we're working on that
so I I think I'm working on
doing better on that but as you
know I I'm on the ground and I I
totally support what you're
doing I am a hundred percent
behind this bill
I suspect the reason it
continues to come back is
because when we get FIR is the
talk about the kind of
I mean we're looking at four
million dollars that target
slides in the FY and if it's not
in our budget
you know we have to talk about
building capacity and so
it is my hope that this bill
goes through.
And it I I will be very happy if
it does if it does not
Representative I would really
urge you to look at framing the
bill differently in in the sense
of building that capacity within
the budget so we can get off the
ground because this is the these
positions are still needed and
we want to make sure your
successful and that the people
that are in these positions can
get those races so we could talk
or offline but that would be my
recommendation thank you madam
chair okay so let's take a vote
on the bill now.
Representative and in order.
Yes.
Representative don't get yes.
Jennifer is yes Representative
Lente yes.
Yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez yes
Representative basin yeah.
Matthews.
Yes I share Serrato yes madam
chair that goes yes.
Madam chair this is our tenth
those are zero thank you you've
got an amended bill thank thank
you madam chair members thank
you.
We've got house bill forty
eight.
Senator Matthews.
Sure.
Already Representative Matthews
are you ready to present
yes madam chair other any
amendment.
So now if anybody has amendments
or situations you will be put
into the long.
Yes madam chair we are ready to
proceed please please do.
This is HB forty eight and I
think.
Yes okay and this is this is a
cleanup bill this is a bill
which is designed to bring the
practice the practice statute
for the C. R. NH certified
registered nurse and just this
is at are you we usually refer
to them as C. R. N. A.'s because
the last word is sometimes hard
to say
and they have been independent
practitioners of anesthesiology
services and quite frankly about
fifty years it started about two
thousand one two thousand two
with the change of Medicaid
rules which allow them to bill
independently and governor Gary
Johnson then
opted in New Mexico to allow
them to have independent
practice and they have been
practicing successfully and
safely throughout the state
since that time so what the bill
does is simply boring the
statute up to date show that
it's clear that they practice
independently or collaboratively
of course
and we've we've been trying to
get this bill passed for couple
years
is just to clean up but it is
always good for the law to be
consistent with the reality on
the ground
and I will introduce my expert
is stacking Christine you know
who who has been practicing
independently first thirteen
years in the Albuquerque and
Bernalillo area and with that we
will stand for questions.
Thank you Representative.
Did your please have anything to
say or do in a week for
questions.
Madam chair thank you
My name is Dr Christine Bruno
who have been certified
registered nurse anesthetist
in New Mexico for thirteen years
a practice and San Juan County
Bernalillo county now Sandoval
County at Presbyterian rust my
day to day practice everyday's
independent practice I do not
have a physician supervising me
in my daily practice today the
nursing assistants are
requesting
to update.
And provide clear concise
language to our nurse practice
act that reflects the daily
practice of C. R. needs every
day in urban areas as well as
rural areas there are twenty all
she already only practices in
New Mexico that provide care and
access to rural areas without
those yarn is there providing
that care of patients who have
to travel hundreds of miles in
order to receive care we simply
are asking for and updated clear
concise language allows us to
practice independently as we
have in as market place's
dictated for the past twenty
years thank you thank you all
right do we have a anybody in
the United to support this bill.
Anybody against the.
Okay we'll start with.
Jack this falls on the region's
from this for the New Mexico
association of nurses and that's
what this pandemic membership
status support office membership
believes that this is to help
with recruiting with retention
and as you know we have a
shortage of health care workers
are on the state and the seizure
would be one of those as well so
working in unity all the other
providers ask you please to
support this piece of
legislation thank you thank you.
anybody opposed to the bill.
The economy madam chair okay.
Get to the committee.
Representative Lente membership
with the best.
Right okay.
So
I don't know I think we should
keep in Representative rule.
Because I think they're meant
chair I I don't get a bonus in
this we.
This release a half an hour.
Well it seems like it you have a
I do pass of.
Let's go ahead and.
Seems like everybody was in
unison yes Representative and
you know.
Yes.
In order yes Representative
Hernandez yes Representative
Lente yes Representative little
yes.
Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez yes
Representative Mason.
Yes Representative Matthews yes.
Rules I share Serrato yes madam
chair Vegas.
Yes.
This is our tenth those are
thank you at madam chair members
of the committee thank you very
much and I'm but we have no
amendment is.
Thank you of that is always got
for today we have we have
actually Representative Matthews
you will be on for Friday.
I wanted to confirm madam chair
yes we will be on on Friday and
I do believe we're gonna have a
video a short video and probably
a number of experts to with us
it's S. R. I. it will also have
H. B. fifty five of both of
those are regarding in regards
to crime organized retail crime
okay so with that we we try to
put those together
to see if maybe we can get the
bills to and anyway back to to
send that one claim though but I
understand that you are have
talked madam chair we are in the
process of having conversations
and hope to be able to come in
and present a
I single bill that would be my
preferences I I'm I'm sure it
would be thank you yes but no
members find to
know amendments thank you so
much thank you we'll see on
Friday thank you all and thank
you for your patience today.
