So many I'm gonna to restart
okay but I can.
Let's let's go ahead and start
with rules and.
The
system has always for.
Percent and when you.
Okay let's go throw
Representative and in order.
Present.
Don't get your.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente.
Representative little here
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez
Representative Mason your
Representative Matthews.
Better question.
Yes your.
Madam chair here madam chair you
have a quorum thank you.
Right and for housekeeping today
we have H. B. three seventy two
that is one of my bills and I
usually would put my to go first
but I see that we do have people
that are here point I mean it
leave it as the first one we've
got House Bill three thirty one
and house bill three sixty four.
And.
I am going to go ahead and hand
the gavel over to our vice chair
but I think we are going to.
Yeah okay.
That's the.
This this.
Fund.
This is here to Senate and
house.
Welcome madam chair you may
present your thank you.
Okay.
Get afternoon committee.
At the second floor.
House Bill three seventy two as
recommended by the LFC and RLD
is
House Bill three seventy two
seeks to repeal the into
interior design board and move
all licensure administrative and
all regulatory requirements for
interior designers over to R. O.
G. as a purely administrative
function of the department the
bill also streamlines the
licensure and renewal of the
process and establishes minimum
on going professional
educational requirements for
licensed interior designers.
And madam chair the most most
states currently regulate the
practice of interior designs to
ensure that license interior
designers operate in a safe and
professional manner that avoids
even moderate risk of public
harm madam chair the bill
insurers that New Mexico will
continue to regulate the
profession in a sensible manner
that promotes public safety and
avoids undue hardship to
business owners that rely on
their interior design license to
secure work with hospitals
hotels and the federal
government is that right madam
chair this legislation
guarantees that the state
continues to maintain important
oversight of the interior design
profession inefficient more cost
effective and practical manner
and in and is in line with the
recommendations from LFC and R.
LD I'm going to also have my to
witnesses introduce themselves
and give just a brief statement
and then we will stand for
questions so I will stay here.
Thank you to your guidance
minimized here Representative
time pollution or bell I'm the
chief division counsel for
boards and commissions of that
regulation licensing department
I'm I'm here on behalf of the
superintendent Matt her request
use an app budget hearing and we
like to note first off that this
is not an agency bill and we
would like to thank at the
Sanchez chair guy a goes
Representative Hochman Vigil for
supporting us it been working
with us to find a solution to
what will be Senator heading of
this for
we we recognize the economic
value that this that this board
provides and can continue to
write provide under director
model and.
I wanted to mention that you
know this is very important for
these people to have jobs and
it's also would be very harmful
if this point handsets and no
one can be licensed in a and a
very big reason is because
although this is really a that
title.
Act title licensing the fact is
that there are many.
Areas where these conduct
licensees work where
requirements for licensure R.
where there is a licensure
requirement particularly for
governmental facilities hotels
and they provide a valuable
service it wouldn't be able to
contract with those entities if
they don't have licensure
I would mention started to get a
little nervous don't.
I would imagine that there are
two sections of the act that did
not get in the bill it's still
reference the board that in that
section nine and fourteen so we
should possibly and does
This.
Bill will significantly reduce
costs we have.
Fifty four to fifty six
licensees I believe two people
were license last week and so
the you know the need to reduce
costs is hi and this would do
that and still keep the public
safe with these professionals at
and that's really all I have to
say thank you.
You madam chair members the
committee Jason Weaks I'm gonna
try to get the the total rate is
an international interior design
association southwest that's my
client I'm a registered lobbyist
for them
really want to appreciate thank
Mister bell and superintendent
treat working with us to come up
with concept that works well to
drop the board down but still
allow for this licensure to be
maintained it's important part
quite frankly state regulatory
efforts to ensure that these
types of first professions are
regulated in a cost effective
manner this is a good government
bill this is in compliance with
the LFC and or of the
recommended relative to sun
setting some service certain
boards and commissions that they
have a small licensure with the
licensure is still very
important so this is a very good
resolution to the relevant issue
of how we continue the licensure
don't eliminate that but do draw
down the board which is a costly
endeavor to continue to maintain
from our of the and the state's
perspective so with that I
turned back up for sponsor of
the stand for questions thank
you and yes Madam chair
representative for questions.
Thank you sponsor thank you
witnesses are there folks here
in the audience who are in favor
of this bill please raise your
hand.
I and are those there those
opposed to this bill bill please
raise your hand.
Great can we have those in favor
starting from the side of the
room in the fact going to get
testimony Sir.
We were.
That's actually can you can
abuse the microphones that can
hear you on the on the webcast.
And if you are in favor or
opposed to know if you are in
favor online please go ahead and
raise your hand on the on the
internet will get back to you
once we occurrence either of.
Madam vice chairman chair
members of the committee thank
you for hearing us I am a
license inner designer in the
state of New Mexico and I have
been for approximately twelve
years I am I support this bill
because I support the.
The duty that we take as license
interior designers to ensure
that we are respective of codes
that we are protecting the
public safety we're protecting
the safety of our clients in
spaces such as this we are
responsible to ensure that all
of that but services all of the
flooring services the acoustics
all of the code of requirements
need to be met to ensure safe
egress for there to be a fire
flammability codes slip
resistant codes in all public
buildings I myself am.
Do commercial work at commercial
office lobbies of hotels
restaurants and so I take the
what the licensure binds me to
as that responsibility very
seriously to ensure not only
that my clients can have faith
in no because I'm license but I
I have continuing education
requirements and continually
educating myself and
understanding the updates and
codes and I take on that
responsibility personally as an
interior designer to ensure that
every single decision I make
from the furnishings to the
finishes to a lighting
applications and acoustics are
to the benefit of them and their
dollar spent and their liability
that they have to all of the
users of their spaces and also
to to the public users to make
sure that accessibility and
universal access to spaces are
also considered so please
support continuing the
importance of of our licensure
thank you thank you is there
anyone else in the audience who
likes becomes.
Madam chair and vice chair my
name is Benjamin Huntington as
you probably could hear I'm not
native to this country but I've
lived in America for thirty five
years in New York and I met two
months transplant to your great
state thank you for your welcome
by intention I've I'm a
certified interior designer New
York plantation is become
certified here most importantly
as Stephanie my colleague
associate succint the pointed
out to protect the public and
provide valuable services but
more importantly.
Supporting of this bill three
seventy two will help encourage
younger members of our community
who was studying interior design
to stay in state become
certified and work in the state
thus supporting the economy and
growth of fish the state
the other aspect of it which I
feel is quite important at is by
encouraging it to John decided
to become state certified it
holds them to a high standard
they held to a standard of a
code of ethics and Stephanie
pointed out well so continuing
education which is incredibly
important especially in all
fields when I was first a
designer TV side the corner of
the room was three foot square
now this hang on the wall so
and every if you think about
every single public buildings
that you will step into the work
get to even this room right here
has had into its on services so
I almost madam chair Madam co
chair and committee please look
favorably on this bill thank you
very much thank you.
Others would like to speak in
support of the room.
Thank you madam chair and.
Madam vice chair in the
committee my name is Susan
Kirkpatrick and I am also
licensed interior designer I am
also native New Mexicans and my
husband and I chose to stay in
New Mexico and
starter businesses here he's a
CPA I starred in a commercial
interior design firm and we have
designed and furnished hotels in
twenty four states and Canada
most of the work that we do yes
for Hilton Marriott and I only
mention this as an introduction
to hi this interior design bill
is so important to us our
business because Helton requires
that anyone that works on their
properties be a licensed
interior designer so if we do
not have the ability to be
licensed in our state then we
have to look up what do we do
with our business at that point
the other thing that I think is
very important yes it's
difficult to find the talent
that we need to work in our firm
we often have to bring interior
designers from out of state
and.
We're able to attract younger
designers to come in because
they're required to mentor under
a licensed interior designer and
we're able to provide that
service them it's a very good
two way street then they receive
the qualifications they need to
take their nationals Sam if
At someone that's just
graduating cannot mentor under
license inner disorder they have
to go to another state in order
to be able to work and I think
what we need to be doing is
bringing jobs into New Mexico
and growing our economy here and
that's why this bill is very
important to us and I thank you
for your consideration on this
it would be happy to answer
questions that many of you may
have thank you thank you.
Is there anyone else in the
room.
Have an online yes Sir we have
one person that.
Right chair in the room if you
you can go ahead and on mute and
Give your thoughts.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is memory
signed with the council for
interior design qualification
our organization administers the
instead to exam which is the
prerequisite for interior design
less for New Mexico the exam is
a yes Senator for competency is
required to protect health
safety and welfare we like
safety building codes
construction standard fire
safety
however because see I think you
is a testing credentialing body
we don't have the enforcement
capabilities beyond our exam
administration or any process
for sanctioning I'm confident
practice which is why in
licensure of interior designers
is necessary to.
this bill would allow the state
to that function and we ask that
you support it and so are you
thank you to the committee and
the Sanchez superintendents
Rubio for recognizing the
importance of this bill on I'd
be happy to answer any
questions.
Thank you and it looked like
earlier we did not have
opposition in the audience is
there any online you can raise
your hand now.
Seeing none will turn it over to
the committee on Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you madam vice chair
actually just have a question
really super tears super this is
up what is the last of the
interior design board actions
will be staffed fully have
members on it sure it's been
awhile.
madam chair Representative
Hernandez I I think you can
answer that if she just stand up
and provide that information
thank you.
Can you can use the microphone
please thank you.
Senator folks on my repeat the
question please I was just
curious when the last time the
interior design work at all of
its
Twenty eight when it was fully.
Fully staffed appointees when
was the last with board members
yes we have three professional
into public members and it was
fully outfitted last summer okay
sooner than I thought thank you
so much thank you Mr thank you
next up we have Representative
Martinez.
Thank you madam chair of
Representative.
So the issue will
well I do have a question on
page six of the bill it talks.
I was.
school year in New Mexico for
two years.
Here Representative Martinez I
may not be the best expert at
this.
Of.
Thank you thank you for that and
thank you just reminder for
everyone to go to the chair.
Members of the committee.
so that's one of our
responsibilities and something
we need to work with Act is that
our education institutions
currently do not have programs
and interior design and that I
think really sheds light on why
we don't have career pathways
yet
and we're working we've kind
we've been working with folks in
the administration's of
institutions to talk about how
to seek funding resources and to
meld with you know the school of
architecture and planning to
help support this program what
we do provide are graduates of
the programs and the need to go
outside of the state to continue
their interior design education.
Thank you madam chair so.
The majority of the of the
people that are licensed in New
Mexico or going through.
Apprenticeships in order to get
their license.
Know they have their meeting
qualifications of education and
training and the examination of
the NC I do too
you may get and their number of
pathways to do that
for me personally I graduated
with a masters in architecture
and then pursued interior design
through and interior design for.
And then sat for my licensure.
Very interesting thank you madam
chair representative thank you
thank you next up we have
Representative Matthews and
again just a reminder we go
through the chair for any
responses because that we keep
the conversation.
The check thank you
Representative Matthews.
Share it.
Thank you very much and thank
you presenters I apologize for
being late
I was a little peers about pages
six and seven.
are interesting that you're a
practice.
For eight years and
Nobody would ever.
I think that I was a
two year decorator but I managed
to become a lawyer three years
and.
Just curious why such a long
period of time.
every all the great work but
still it does seem a little
eight years you could be a.
Senator.
Madam chair representative
Matthews that there tension of
that is that if you're not
taking the relevant yes that
that's the alternatives of
licensure in to get the
licensure by that means the
British ship is going to be a
very long period of time it is
language that was referenced in
the additional statute
authorizing the board and
commission and we thought.
To continue an alternative the
wasn't specifically based on
eight no sorry that it's this
it's a standard that is required
other than getting educational
criteria to then sit for the
test take the testing it
licensure it was an existing
requirement for option under the
boards and commissions act for
the act that created the board
for the two year design board so
we kept it in there as an option
and it was vetted thoroughly by
the interior designers in the
room and everybody agreed that
that was a reasonable
alternative to
subsection a of that section.
thanks for that answer madam
chair for presenters and I'm.
But if I understood the prior
ensure required for questions
and I need to you can't do that
apprenticeship in New Mexico.
I don't understand that Madam
chair Representative Matthews
you can do the apprenticeship in
New Mexico you can do
apprenticeship under any
licensed interior designer.
And madam chair
Presenters the other the other
at.
Asian in here that I found.
It's pretty interesting was that
your licenses are good for four
years and during those four
years required to have a total
of eight hours of continuing
education so like two hours a
year.
Testing time.
I'm curious what what the basis
for that.
Madam chair Representative
Matthews the basis for that was
basically from the existing
interior design act the and
initiated the board we did want
some ongoing continuing
education requirements we didn't
want to make that requirement to
cumbersome so it is in there it
is not a significant requirement
but it does demonstrate that
they are pursuing some
additional ongoing education in
the profession which they're
licensed and madam chair
presenters that could be.
That eight hours the additional
education could come through
zoom or something they don't
have to leave the state to do
that Madam chair representative
Matthews that's correct.
And and chairs and presenters
just one last question is what
you think of our.
Carolina to.
Madam chair representative
Matthews I have to have to turn
this over to account.
Thank thank you very much for
your presentation and that's all
the questions thank you
resentment
no Representative little I
wanted to.
One moment on the motion
Representative Mason you had for
the discussion.
So.
Madam chair of.
Madam chair Committee so if I
understand correctly we don't
yes this that we know
regulation on the industry that
way and.
Madam chair Representative Mason
that is effectively correct now
this would be some of the board
would be sunset so there's gonna
be a drawdown period
and I think the drawdown periods
a year for the board this
proactively repeals the board
replaces it with this licensure
criteria I thought that this
would lead and that's out of
that.
one of the things.
Section nine I heard one of the.
The table was not always.
Hello that that Mr all.
Section nine the last but the
the sections
for this represents all what's
the the the.
Did you go over that I missed
it.
That year if I may
representatives Representative
nation we are I didn't hear
anyone go over that the the at
provisions are repealed all have
to do with the board for the
board creation at and you know.
So it's not they are they do not
affect.
Anything substantial if we're
not gonna have a board those are
all.
Thank you there is a motion for
I do passes their second.
Representative I know it is a
second at the ocean by
Representative little.
Is there any opposition to the
motion.
Then.
Let's
let's do it.
Extend my time.
Representative and in order yes.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente.
Representative little yes.
Representative Lundstrom yes.
Martinez yes Representative
Mason yes.
Senator Matthews yes.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair the final tally is
yes votes nine no votes there
Senator you have any pets.
But we were to come back as the
motion it for my cooler.
But.
Thank you.
Thank you very.
You want to.
I don't know why.
My.
Solutions.
In.
She's good.
Students.
We're not the amendment.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Just.
Welcome Representative please
present your bills.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members are.
Today I'm presenting.
HB three thirty one there was a
just a little bit of can't madam
chair we did present to.
We were going to presents an
amendment we're not gonna have
that amendment on.
So.
Initially but we are present
today madam chair of committee
members is a cleanup bill to the
cannabis regulation Act.
That hearing.
The make a little stronger okay
thank you.
Thank you so.
Technology.
Again madam chair this is a
claim a bill to that cannabis
regulation act
This bill of FBI background
checks for canvas licensees
gives full effect to the
original intent of the this year
be the cavs regulation act the
C. R. eight required a federal
background check for cannabis
licensees and the FBI needs to
approve the background check
language they did not approve of
that language this farce to this
pandemic we have this bill in
front of you the cannabis
control division has no
authority or ability to check
FBI criminal history records at
present time so lack of FBI
nationwide criminal practice
background checks excuse me puts
New Mexico out of compliance
with the D. O. G..
Of coal and will consume
memoranda and currently only New
Mexico statewide DPS background
checks are run on licensees.
And the cannabis control
division has no idea of
licensees if those licensees
have any criminal record from
another state or country so this
is the bill we have before you
madam chair and we stand for
questions and I would like to
give them like to my expert
witness to introduce himself.
Madam chair Committee mentor
members my name is Andrew by a
host on the act the acting
cannabis control division
director and the current alcohol
director the double duty so
we're here to present the bill I
I just had a couple more
comments madam chair is we do we
do have background checks at the
state level we we are unable we
didn't have the proper language
for the FBI to give us an O. R.
I. number that's a fancy way of
saying that they they would put
us as a different category to do
background checks this language
has been vetted in other states
and then suggested by FBI to
allow for example Georgia and
other states who were trying to
do background checks and
cannabis because of course as
you all know cannabis is still
off a schedule one drug at the
federal level and so they have
to kind of find specific
language to perform acts in
duties on behalf of cannabis
regulation so this is the
language is been vetted by the
FBI and with that I was stand
for any questions that you might
have thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
presenter thank you what are
their folks in favor of this
bill please raise your hand are
there folks opposed to this bill
please raise your hand.
Our illustrious would come into
the room Sir.
I'm gonna be taking like thank
you.
Okay.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm actually here as a
private citizen some of you'll
know me as a registered lobbyist
but I'm here as a private
citizen I served with the.
The cannabis director of the
campus Tax forced and and.
Two thousand nineteen I stand
behind it for only because I
think this is follow the spirit
of how we're trying to cannabis
in the state Representative
behind.
Great thank you often this right
side.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee chairman is our
behalf of the municipal league
we support this bill we believe
it will help screen out
potential bad actors adding a
comprehensive background check
will help keep our community
safe so for those reasons we
support this bill thank you is
there when anyone online that is
in support of this bill please
raise your hand.
Is there anyone in the room
that's again opposed to this
bill.
Anyone online that is opposed
this bill please raise your
hand.
Thank.
The comments we have the public
announcer the committee is there
any questions Representative
Martinez.
Thank you madam chair
Representative up.
This.
It talks about a criminal
background check.
What level do the check I mean
is it simple assault is it up.
Four degree felony will where is
the line drawn.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Martinez it's
at current time we the only
background check is done through
the the GPS and that's this is a
statewide background check it
would catch all those those
things you've mentioned and if
there's anything else.
Madam chair representative nice
seeing you again
serve together previous
administrations but
so as you probably remember the
cannabis regulation act exempted
a lot of felonies you know of
barriers you know to licensure
for certain felonies in the old
days with alcohol if you had any
kind of fell on the you could
hold a liquor license.
The social equity aspects of
cannabis was that they wanted to
open up opportunities for a
newly regulated of a product of
two people that maybe had a
background and maybe a
conviction a felony conviction
for for drug possession or
people that have been affected
by the war on drugs so the the
current economic regulation Act
is very I guess we would say
very open and it you know two
of.
Criminals who have rehabilitated
themselves I want to get in the
cannabis industry the only real
felonies that we look for in
cannabis that would be
disqualified is if you got
convicted of trafficking
involving a minor you especially
involving a minor so that's
pretty much the bright line
rules for cannabis pretty much a
lot of the other of creating
felony criminal of the charges
it that maybe in your back would
not be disqualified this really
is a of in many ways in which we
can check with and we also do
check at a federal level using
other services lexis nexis and
clear our private ways of doing
it but we think that it would be
better just to use the FBI's
criminal background checks but
the net effect is that it lets
you really do have up of
criminal felony convictions for
trafficking especially involving
a minor that would be pretty
much the only disqualifying
felony Madam chair
representative so.
You're charged with a violent
felony that's not going to
preclude you from being license.
Madam chair representative not
no no that that that was the way
the the the act was written was
that there weren't going to be
bright you know really there's
only brought a few bright line
disqualifying felonies but
general like if you if you have
been as you know in your past
had had a felony conviction for
battery or something like that
it would not necessarily be a
disqualifying condition are
disqualifying conviction.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you next up we have
Representative Mason.
What.
Are there
Representative I think this will
allow
All of.
Madam chair
Representative Mason yes.
Little.
Rather there says it is.
Part of that is that I.
That would be illegal.
The.
Okay it's.
But.
This year also so in your.
At the all I.
Describing doing illegal drugs
this.
Exactly what I.
For the application process for
the C. R. E. S. correct.
Check.
Sure that that sounds.
At the as well.
And the only other one of.
I guess
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair.
Person who is on probation.
At the legends.
Madam chair of defer to my
experts with.
Madam chair representative up
appropriations would not be a
disqualifying conviction in less
it was one of this if if involve
trafficking in the utilization
of minors in that if you on
probation for that that be
disqualifying but other than
that general Uh appropriations
would not be disqualified.
And madam chair the Senators in
the can someone who is actually
in prison the license.
Of course you
have to the convictions for
trafficking to a money that.
Thank you madam chair I will
defer to my experts with.
Madam chair representative those
are excellent Law School
questions having to so as a
practical matter it probably
would be a disqualifying up
saying it the criminal
conviction would not be a
disqualifier but we have
requirements that you actually
have to be participating in the
business and and you know you
you would have for other
practical aspects of like not
being able to sign a lease and
be able to help build the build
up your business and so I think
in that case the practical
aspects even though the the
criminal condition might not be
disqualified the practical
aspects of trying to run a
business from present would
probably be disqualifying.
Madam chair thank you for that
Representative thank you for
that answer act.
What popped into my head.
The prison farms.
The but I have but I do have
madam chair I do have one more
question so.
We have expunged prior
convictions for certain drug
crimes and for the as part of
the passage of this act.
Here is that when you do it F.
B. I. check.
If you come across.
it is qualification or unique
impact if there's been
convictions.
I guess my question is how did
they report does to exceed.
If they get there I mean are
they actually reported in the
numbers if if there's a
conviction in other states
sorry.
It was a good vacation in our
state.
And the ideas check they would
report that to you and you would
just simply ignore it is that
how this works.
Thank you madam chair that's
that's another question I'm
gonna pass expert to answer.
Madam chair and representative I
I don't.
So we we in the application
process they have to attest to
certain things and they have to
be truthful on their
applications line on the
application will be grounds for
revoking your license so we ask
a series of questions have you
been convicted of a crime if so
please describe what crime they
are you have to be very candid
about that because will be
double checking like I said
we'll check with the state
background checks to see the
state police but and we also
checked online databases such as
share us our is lexis nexis in
clear you know to source C. and
to confirm the FBI check will be
a more definitive check you know
to make sure that they're being
honest on the application and
they're not have it if you don't
have a disqualifying conviction.
but in in may I can just tell
you Representative in our
process we do come across people
that have had criminal
convictions a drug convictions
and we go through a kind of a
rigorous process with our
general counsel to dig a little
bit deeper to make sure that we
have all the facts and so we we
we've that much more and so
although it might not be a
disqualifying condition we
investigated very thoroughly to
make sure that they they were
accurate in what they said to us
and that we can confirm that
conviction.
And so madam chair.
Senator what this bill is going
to do is allow for that higher
level.
Testing because you have more
FBI.
Your search sixty nine
understanding that was built by
madam chair that's correct.
Thank you.
Thank you next up we have
Representative Hernandez.
This year.
One minute.
actually just a question of the
floor as your.
This was gonna be put to try and
get the lower rate I mean.
So this is it.
This is here to get out we have
not the language in the bill is
currently not satisfactory to
category members.
I understand thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
yes we just didn't feel that
that amendment is is of ready to
be put on yet but that is that
is the direction removing yes
correct.
That's kind of what in order to
Without.
What does not
just remove I'm gonna let I
witness.
Speak.
Enter Madam chair representative
so the bill as written you'll
see the strike through the all
language that didn't qualify us
for an O. R. I. number and the
new language below it is the
language has been vetted by the
FBI and by other states to get
the O. R. I. number from FBI
should get.
Yes so we should get one.
The actual war I like the
language in your.
But we have not been issued or
and we're trying to make sure
because this without all right.
Madam chair Representative.
Madam chair representative so so
yes you are correct so right now
we can't get into our a number
with the existing language we
have in the bill so that's with
Representative was seen at the
Sanchez state was the intent of
the C. R. A. was to do a
criminal background check at the
federal level but their language
we had in the bill was not
sufficient for the FBI to issue
an O. R. I. number so the
language it's included the new
language is language that would
allow us get or I number from
FBI.
Thank you so much thank you
madam chair thank you that
representatives Representative
little.
We will hold on that motion
because we do have more debate
Representative guidance.
At thank you madam chair and
Representative I guess I'm so it
sounds like this is this bill is
to clarify the language.
And in order and also to make
it's a language that we're
clarifying is to make sure we
can get FBI background checks is
that correct and your that is
correct okay so what we've been
doing since we have not been
getting that ground checks how
you been operating without that
madam chair as explained earlier
we have only been able to get
background checks for the state
of New Mexico and using other at
Lexus and other methods to get
federal information but is not
complete as complete as an FBI
background check would be and
that was what I thought I heard
I just wanted to make sure that
we have clarification of of the
bill
okay that's all.
I think there is a motion for to
pass on the table is our second.
Second by Representative
Martinez.
All let's go have a roll call
vote thank you.
Representative and in order yes.
Senator W. yes Representative
Hernandez yes Representative
that day.
Representative little yes.
Representative Lundstrom yeah.
Representative Martinez yes
Representative.
Yes Representative Matthews yes.
Better vice chair yes.
You madam chair yes.
beneficiary of a of total
telehealth tools poll thank you
Representative Townsend.
Thank you.
That's the.
All right.
Representative Lane House Bill
three sixty four.
I'm very ready for me.
I think we are getting is that.
This Madam.
It is passed out we need to be
answered.
All right Representative these
two can't thank you madam chair
thank
it probably makes most sense for
me explained underlining line
bill then explained the
committee substitute because the
substances for a technical
correction so madam chair this
bill seeks to bring parity for
our alcohol retailers in New
Mexico so I'm sure this
committee remembers in two
thousand twenty one we passed
actually pretty big change to a
lot of our alcohol of policies
in the state and one of those
are created the opportunity to
have alcohol delivery services
with an asterisk and so this
this bill seeks to resolve that
street so what the answers was
is essentially you could do
alcohol delivery.
In less you had a facility that
was ten thousand feet or two
thousand square feet or larger
and you happen to reside in a
classic county so classic
counties percent of all San Juan
Bernalillo Dona Ana in Santa Fe
so what that means in a
practical sense is if you have a
state grocery store in
Farmington you can't do I'll
call delivery but you have the
same one in Roswell you could
and so there's inconsistencies
across the state in terms of how
we're applying this
and again we're doing this is
just for the smaller venues so
it's restaurants breweries
distilleries winegrowers those
types of businesses are
currently already doing this and
so just trying to seek some some
parity there.
regarding the advertisement
language just so the the
committee understands for the
the non alcoholics in the group
I guess maybe but so if you go
on to one of these delivery
websites you can scroll through
the beer or wine or whatever is
it that you want to select and
so there there's a practice that
we're trying to make sure that
we protect the consumer to where
basically the big
alcohol companies can go and pay
for preferential treatment so
that way there are calls at the
top so this is the the the idea
here is to keep our New Mexico
breweries and and distilleries
competitive in the market place
that's the reason for of the the
online advertising piece.
I think everyone knows my expert
witness here
miscarry bathrobe and render.
and then I think madam chair I
can explain now the the
committee substitute.
The committee says to for
discussion.
Second.
Thank you madam chair and so so
it it moves the requirement page
two line seven the any business
that has a delivery permit must
verify agent in the of the
recipient to page four line
fourteen so of course it keeps
in there the requirement that we
must have
confirmation with Indian in age
of the recipient but but by
moving it under this section on
page four it's really to make
sure that the alcohol beverage
control division has to complete
before they need to to to
basically do rulemaking to get
into the nitty gritty of of the
identification and age
requirements so that's the
purpose of the technical change.
Yeah so what's going to get.
Yeah.
Thank.
Those.
Okay let's start.
On this week's.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee Jason Weaks a
registered lobbyist for the
distiller of New Mexico
distillers guild we stand in
support of this legislation we
do think it's a good piece of
legislation there's a provision
in there that that creates
parity inequity between the
larger producers of
distilled spirits and beer and
the smaller micro folks were in
the state I think there's also a
good public safety argument at
play here being able to deliver
alcohol to folks at home so that
they're not driving to the store
is important and for those
reasons we think this is also
what we also think it creates
parity between counties meaning
all counties in the state will
be able to do this not just
those that are not Class say so
for that reason we think the
spots for bringing it and
support legislation.
Thank you.
All right madam chair a good
afternoon madam chair L.
partridge your lobbyist on the
behalf of the New Mexico brewers
guild we support everything that
Mr we sat on the additional as
we work closely together in
particular we also want to thank
the sponsor and everyone working
together with respect to the
advertising language I think
that's an important component we
haven't talked a lot about it
but I think that is.
It's a critical piece and we
really appreciate both the
sponsor and everyone involved
working on that piece Legisla-
on that part of the legislation
so thank you madam chair members
thank you.
I get afternoon madam chair
members of the committee and Pat
block registered lobbyist for
Walmart we appreciate the
sponsor for bringing this bill
fourth we felt like the twenty
twenty one legislation was a
knowledge ment of the way the
world is evolving COVID really
made that happen quicker
people are having more and more
things delivered to their homes
and this bill would level the
playing field so that everyone's
playing under the same set of
rules and we encourage you to
support the bill thank you thank
you.
Mr speaker set.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
president and CEO with the New
Mexico retell Association this
Dennis are exported legislation
as mentioned before it does get
regulatory relief Parities that
we're treating all stores in
geography and size the same
thank you thank you.
Is there anybody on zoom.
And support.
Okay any opposition food down.
Anybody on zoom and I just okay
let's go to the committee.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative.
Is there anything in here that's
going to protect that small
start up to.
What this opens it up to.
A large Walmart which option
Smith's.
Have a tendency to kind of
squeeze out the small read the
small additional or.
It's going to protect them.
So madam chair and
representative of Martinez I
would say that there are a
couple of things that are
working on behalf of some of our
smaller brewers and distillers
the first is they're all able to
deliver now regardless of where
they are located in the state so
if there and aposs a county or
not a classic County they can
deliver secondly is larger
retailers can deliver right now
anywhere outside of a classe
County so in Roswell the big
guys can deliver along with the
little guys and those little
guys are still able to hold
their ground in our smaller
communities the third thing I
would say also though is the
specifically because of this
advertising language when we
have our small local brewers and
distillers who are able to sell
their products in places like
Smith Kroger's even Walmart they
actually can have more than
market share because I know that
many New Mexicans when they're
ordering alcohol they're
ordering from the brewery that
they like to go to so that is
also way we feel that they can
increase their package deals as
well which is why I think
they're support from the local
brewers and distillers in the
state.
Madam chair show.
Customers are going towards
specific brands specific lines.
The Russian thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
representative Duncan.
Thank you madam chair
Many many many years ago I was
on the receiving end of a.
Sherri truck on about sixty
miles an hour about kids.
The and so.
I was grateful in this to see
that there is an employee that
they hire that's twenty one
years old and Bates and has a
server's permit.
It in my heart I know that this
won't stop people from driving
trucks but at least maybe give
us one more avenues for people
to stay home and not get behind
the.
Get in their vehicle and and
kill themselves or some other
person so I'm I was grateful to
see that thank you madam chair
thank you representative
Representative Matthews.
Centers thank you I guess my
question is slightly one is same
lines as Representative down.
I'm we've had an increase I
think in hi.
Have.
In the state.
and I'm I'm just wondering if
there's been any data.
Or any research done to see what
impact you feeding.
This law has actually had a
pretty to be a high rates.
Madam chair and Representative
Matthews I don't think that the
studies have been completed yet
because we just allow delivery
back in twenty twenty one and I
think that that data may look a
little strange because of COVID
we are all stuck at home anyway
so I think that that's something
that we're gonna have to wait
and see over the next couple of
years but I know that there are
many groups that are interested
in that and I'm sure that that
data will be forthcoming.
Chair thank you.
Question.
Representative Fernandes.
Okay those for chapter
appropriations one question can
you respond about why.
Additionally this.
I opt to do the difference
classy County that's just.
Madam chair and Representative
Hernandez actually wasn't
involved in all of the
negotiations on that bill at
that time which is pry a
blessing and a curse I do know
that at the point in time in
twenty twenty one there were two
separate bills are introduced
there was the state liquor law
overhaul and then there was a
stand alone bill that was only
for delivery I'm I believe that
during the debates there was a
public policy argument around
what we want to protect some of
the little guys and we want to
make sure that they've got a
head start and so I think that
it was probably appropriate at
that time but now that we're two
years in and even our you know
local producers are saying this
makes sense to them I think it's
probably time to make sure that
in class a counties we're just
providing parity for those large
retailers at forty happens that
the warranty and every other
county in the state it's just
the Class As that they were
locked out with this very
strange ten thousand square foot
number that was put in the bill
but god knows how it got there.
Thank you madam chair okay
Yes in the committee.
What's the pleasure of the
committee.
Okay so.
There's a subsidy you can make
the.
We do not have.
There's a reason for that.
Over the past.
Substitute for House Bill.
Do we have a second.
Right
please call the roll.
Representative and.
Yes.
Senator yes Representative
Hernandez yes Senator that they
yes Representative little yes
Representative lunch.
Representative Martinez yes
Representative Mason yes
Representative Matthews yes that
a budget here miss madam chair
yes
final tallies of votes yes zero
one twenty.
Thank you all right that's all
we've got to think thank you all
will see on Monday.
