Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Sir Serrato.
Here.
Please correct me if I'm wrong I
apologize.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Mart√≠nez.
Here.
Madam chair if you get our
funeral funeral I apologize.
And
then my last as.
And I am here thank you and we
have a quorum I
I'm gonna turn the gavel over to
vice chair Figueroa and give me
a second to walk down into the
well of the committee room to
present house bill two fifty
five thank you Madam.
Thank you Mr chair take a
moments pull up your documents
as the chair said will start
with house bill two fifty five.
Chairman are there any
experience that we need to pull
into the room.
Representative Romero is here
for the next bill is.
Said you the die just for this
hearing if she wants and then.
Secretary could send a and if I
also link.
And then when he gets in the
attendee room we could bring him
in if there's any technical
questions but but but I think of
Representative Martinez and I
will go ahead and present it.
Mr chair.
The floor is yours to present
house bill two fifty five and I
believe you have an amendment so
let's do the bill first.
Madam chair if we cannot move
the amendment for discussion
make but in my remarks.
Discussion purposes Madam thank
you Representative Baldonado all
second the amendment is under
discussion.
Thank you please read the tier
two number all thank you at the
point four version of.
And the amendment is two one
nine six eight two point four
and the analysts receive this
yesterday
And so that's the main I'll be
discussing.
All right if you would just hold
on a moment everyone pull it up
the one I have is twenty three
so I'm gonna go look for points.
I.
A point four six for everybody
provide point four.
I emailed everybody couple hours
ago.
And Mr chair my madam chair and
members of the committee it is
in the Here file the point four
version is in the Here file
thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr chair why
don't you go ahead it's been
moved for discussions on take us
through the amendment.
Well as well if I could just
present the bill and I'll make
mention to the amendment madam
chair thank you very much
audible members we two years ago
we heard about six or seven and
proposed a.
Admins to the liquor control act
to remove barriers to entry to
increase economic activity and
to give homegrown New Mexicans
opportunity to open up
some form of liquor
establishment those bills we
tabled and we told everyone in
the room we're gonna come back
this year and try to come up
with some solutions and bring
everyone to the table in the
past two years we had a robust
than testing public hearing up
in Farmington of when we're up
in Farmington madam chair of the
the the members and the guests
many of them say in Durango they
bought hotel rooms in Durango
town of maybe fourteen thousand
people instead of living and
spends are staying rather in a
town over the weekend in a town
of roughly forty one thousand
people.
Because in Durango there is no
barrier to entry it's a fun or
town it's a more entertaining
town it the a tourist would
rather go to Durango then
Farmington I just down the road
this has to stop in an economy
that's based on food services
hospitality and restaurants we
cannot have a barrier to entry
with regards to permission to
sell spiritus liquors and so
this is what this try to solve
now here's the issue everyone
agrees that we know we we should
have markets we should have
competition of that's the
American way.
But we have a statutory scheme
madam chair that has existed
for.
Thirty three minus twenty one
for eighty eight years eighty
eight years in this country
when the federal government
passed its constitutional
amendment ending prohibition and
January of nineteen thirty three
New Mexico than codified its
laws under the liquor control
act it changed its laws in
thirty six and thirty eight and
forty change them again in the
fifties the last major rewrite
was in nineteen eighty one and
so the the task before us is how
do we open up these markets.
While not disrupting current
investors and and folks who
relied on that existing
statutory scheme that's our task
and I think we've accomplished
that in a in a great and a great
and reasonable and conservative
way today in nineteen eighty one
the the state.
Ended liquor licenses as a
commodity again a ten year
sunset and ten years worth of
tax credits to the liquor
license holders and and I think
our state would be a vastly
different state today if that
law would have remained on the
books it went to the courts and
the courts said two things it's
not a taking.
We take your license we don't
owe any money for your license
it's a it's a permission slip
from the government it has no up
property right intact but it was
also bad tax policy it was
illegal to give these persons a
tax credit for doing the exact
same economic activity as those
persons and so the it the entire
statutory scheme came down like
a house of cards nobody
benefited nobody got their tax
credits but they did maintain
their monopoly and here we are
forty years later the poorest
state in the country in the
midst of the worst economic
crisis of our lifetime.
Trying to save our restaurant
industry which is the backbone
of our tourist industry which is
the backbone of our hospitality
industry which is the backbone
of of of of our small towns and
and and and Albuquerque I think
we've done that and and so here
is the bill of the bill is to be
acknowledge that knowledge the
existing license holders they
they maintain their monopoly
were not issuing new up full
bore liquor licenses what we're
doing is three things we are
allowing delivery of alcohol not
just for restaurants but for but
for the mom and pop liquor
stores so if you have a package
occur today this bill is in your
interest because then you got to
deliver are you can hire a third
party deliver or you could have
one of your workers who has a
serving permit over the age of
twenty one deliver that I'll
call to your neighbors.
To it expands on the bear in
mind license we created a beer
and wine license in the eighties
for restaurants under very
strict guidelines you have to be
a restaurant sixty percent of
food sixty percent of your
revenue was food up and you can
go past eleven o'clock so it
doesn't compete with bars or
taverns or other entertainment
establishments it just grows our
restaurant economy so we create
a restaurant B. license our
restaurant a.
Will be a very wind restaurant
B. will be beer and wine and
spirits under the same
conditions as the beer and wine
license of those are the two
major things that we do there's
other things we do in the bill
that that I think will work for
for restaurateurs and
entrepreneurs and if you're a
restaurant owner that uses a
liquor license well guess what
you now get a new liquor license
you can purchase the new one
from the state and put yours on
the market now granted they'll
be a couple dozen maybe three
dozen liquor licenses on the new
market but I think the demand
given our growing economy once
COVID is over will sustain that
market and that the market
values of those look like this
is
will not diminish or diminish
not enough to overcome the
compensation we have in this
package thirdly we have tax
breaks we have tax breaks and
we're trying to do everything we
can under the law to to maintain
and make these folks hold with
invested and work hard in their
communities with the existing
license structure so in sections
one two and three we created two
hundred thousand dollar tax
deduction for anyone who has an
existing license regardless of
whether they're market is
affected or not a two hundred
thousand dollar tax deduction of
for for liquor by the drink and
so how do we pay for this stuff
we now have a five percent
consumer tax that can be passed
on of good summers it's a user
fee if you don't drink alcohol
then you're not part of that tax
but we definitely did raise a
few dollars to for the maybe the
increased inspection by the
state police because you know
with the hope of growing our
restaurant and and and tourism
economy so we had a wonderful
hearing on Friday with House
Bill to await I'm very grateful
to Representative Hochman Vigil
Representative guy because they
came out with a fantastic
a bill for home delivery those
ideas were incorporated into to
fifty five we took some ideas
from the Senate version and some
other versions that we've spoken
about in this committee but it
is time it is time two years ago
there was a bill to pass out I
knew licenses I realize.
Some of the folks who are going
to talk here today also talked
against that bill.
Well if we would add that bill
two years ago we may not need
this bill today but that that
aside we're gonna listen to the
public comment we're gonna make
adjustments along the way and
we're gonna we're gonna save our
restaurant industry in the state
and we're gonna go this economy
manager the of the amendments
are mostly not ninety percent
stylistic of theirs are for
substantive changes the
restaurants can deliver now with
ten dollars worth of food
purchases that a twenty five
it's the the pizza rule somebody
was a pizza they can also order
a six pack we also fix the
language the old language as
introduced was twenty four
ounces of wine.
Or twenty five ounces of wine.
Seventy two ounces of beer we we
we have better language seven
hundred fifty milliliters of of
one of a wine which is a wine
bottle and then at six twelve
ounce containers of beer wine or
spirits in other words a six
pack of whatever you want to buy
you know a lot of people like
all those.
you know for food drinks and
stuff like that if you're not a
beer and wine drinker but that's
better language there we also
have better language with
regards to the five percent
consumer tax we have better
language with regards to
restaurants under under this
current bill of the the local
option district would have to
pass an ordinance we have much
better language in the amendment
in the amendment it's the it's
the opposite it's an opt out so
this bill would go into effect
July first and if the local
option district does not want to
restaurant be license then it
would pass an ordinance to opt
out and then
And then we change stuff like
alcoholic beverages to spiritus
liquors are and we have better
language for for who can deliver
we want this to benefit the mom
and pops and those license
holders we've had him for
decades so we exclude those
retail stores ten thousand
square feet or more from from
this delivery opportunity and so
we will listen to the public
comment will make adjustments I
ask that you role in the amended
at some point madam chair and
with that
We stand for questions.
Thank you Mr chair do you have
anyone in the attendee.
Just to that needs to be brought
in as an expert at this time.
Let me glance at it I think
we're gonna.
Get some expert testimony from
all over but
If you could bring in Mr battles
the alcohol director of in case
we have any questions
regarding his agency but there
is there's no expert
Specific expert with me today
thank you Madam.
Thank you chair these are we
public comment and and Secretary
Stewart yeah would you please
move in Mr value our while we're
speaking here just so that he is
there in case the call center
professionals I'm gonna go to
the committee for discussion on
the amendment first and get that
into the bill before we go to
public comments committee
members do you have any
discussion on the amendment
itself.
Madam chair I'll move the
adoption of the amendment when
appropriate please.
Thank you representative.
I don't see any hands raised for
discussion on the amendment.
I was second on the adoption a
second.
Thank you so yes.
Do I see any objections to and
action of the amendment.
Now okay Sanchez you have an
amended bill now let's go to a
public comments and what do
opposition first and then
supports so if you are here to
speak in opposition.
Please click your raise hand
but.
and if you do not have your
name.
First name last name there
please rename yourself put your
first name and last name so that
we can call you in for public
testimony.
Thank you and we have while
folks.
We have several people who want
to speak.
if you would name for the two
minute mark make your comments
and you don't need to repeats
what's gone before you can say I
agree with.
Previous speakers.
And we'd like to hear your
testimony Shelly court TA.
We can miss court TNA please
speak.
Okay I have been a resident New
Mexico for over thirty years I
am a small business owner I own
a very a rural dispensary
lessons out in real Colfax
County.
I've also been a recovered
alcoholic for eighteen years and
I say this because I know during
this pandemic alcohol
consumption has increased for a
lot of people being a restaurant
bar owner have been affected in
many different ways.
I can't say enough that this is
very bad timing again to a more
licenses
I understand and the concern of
San Juan County being over run
by the Durango population and
people wanting to go to Durango
versus Farmington area I'm just
not real convinced that it is
because
of the places that sell alcohol.
I'm sure there's more that plays
into that.
The New Mexico department of
health.
Large six thousand seven hundred
eighty nine alcohol related
deaths in the state of New
Mexico in twenty seventeen.
During the pandemic COVID has
only lost three thousand four
hundred and thirty.
When I say only comparing it to
the almost seven thousand lost
alcohol related deaths in the
state of New Mexico.
Being a recovering alcoholic I
understand that.
It is a person's choice to
drink.
And over consume but it's also.
The bartenders the sellers the
server's responsibility to not
over serve on.
Patrons in constituents and.
I feel that delivering to homes.
With the Miller even without a
meal if it's just for with the
mail right now it will get to
the point where you're going to
be okay with just a little ring
alcohol without a meal I am not
okay with that.
Senior citizens the people who
have the chronic liver diseases
is the person delivering this
alcohol going to.
Past the server status and
actually say I'm sorry I cannot
deliver this to you I cannot
sell and take it back I don't I
believe you're opening up a big
bill can.
That cannot be monitored.
Policed or.
I really believe this is a bad
idea to deliver to homes if you
are physically thank capable of
getting in a vehicle going to
the package liquor store who's
already set up.
And getting your beer to go back
home then you do not need to.
I I I feel very strongly in this
this is something I have a
package in to go.
We only so big packages for
people to go home with.
We do not sell individuals.
Because there's a reason for if
you're buying one beer to go
home you're probably gonna drink
that before you get home it's
just not practical this is not
common sense to me at all and
with the problem in New Mexico
with the alcohol related deaths
this is not helping the
residents of New Mexico overcome
this.
We've done better in the past
years granted thank god we're
not number one anymore and we're
doing better but this will set
us back completely as far as
owning a new liquor license I
have one I could have just
bought a beer and wine I didn't
have to purchase the alcohol why
can't consumers and business
people.
Make their own decision whether
to buy a liquor license why do
we have to open it up.
Where you can buy more alcohol
easier this is not an answer for
the state of New Mexico.
Thank you Mr Tierney thanks for
coming here to speak with us
Chris.
Marci Dickerson.
Yes ma'am.
We can miss or simply stay.
Thank you all very much for the
opportunity first I would like
to say that previously a
statement was made that with the
creation of the restaurant be
licensed that the people who
currently own the inner
dispenser licenses which are
valued at about three hundred
and fifty thousand dollars that
they could just put their
license on the market and sell
that license and that value
would not be diminished I would
like to say like see the
economic study on that because I
do not believe that is true what
will happen is the moment that
the restaurant be licenses are
created everyone of the
restaurants that had purchased
and have on their books because
eight hundred part of your
belief it is property most of
that money is borrowed against
it is leveraged again with banks
we owe that money that the
minute that the demand for that
product goes down that's the
creation of the be like this is
there will be no one to sell our
licenses to the only people that
would want those licenses would
be bar owners or people looking
to bring in a bar not a
restaurant the problem is that
with bars there's not that
market in and of itself is a
dying market the banks will no
longer finance just a liquor
license if you wanted to open up
are you couldn't get finance for
that you do have to have the
food component now with most of
the loans so there's just a side
note on that I don't believe
that that is an actual true
statement as far as your tax
breaks go thank you for taking
those tax breaks up to two
hundred thousand dollars but
we're still looking at a three
hundred and fifty thousand
dollar asset so something needs
to be done if the tax break is
the way that you're going to go
to restore that the balance
sheet and restore the asset
value for these restaurants who
certainly have suffered over the
last year and basically the
minute that that asset value
falls the banks will call those
loans because the banks will
only loan you something up to
what your asset is eighty
percent of the value and so the
minute those assets fall the
debt will fall that fast and
they will call those loans which
will cause a tremendous amount
of bankruptcies in the
restaurant industry especially
with those.
Restaurants who have already
purchased licenses I have heard
discussion of a.
I don't of the pending amendment
or just an idea that's floating
out there but there is a
discussion and I know that
Representative guiding us is
very familiar with that that
requires what we would call
another alternative which would
actually be where you would turn
every every license that is
issued your turn it into three
licenses what that we do is that
would triple the amount of
licenses available in the state
of New Mexico it also would
allow for the value of those
licenses to fall those licenses
from our economic studies would
end up at about a hundred
thousand dollars apiece which
is.
Very low barrier to entry for
the restaurant business that may
sound like a lot but trust me if
you're getting into a restaurant
you have that much money or more
to do it but with that one of
the benefits of the three what I
call the split the three stock
split one of the benefits of
that is is that allows us to
open the market up it allows us
to provide three times as many
licenses as we currently have
but it still keeps all of the
the asset value intact it keeps
the banks and tax and that the
banks will not call the loans
because what would happen is
most restaurants who had one
license would then have three
they would sell the other two
once they sell the other two
that debt to the bank comes down
and then that sets us in about
where we need to be so that you
have you know you have a value
to those licenses which does
keep one of the things we need
to remember is with enforcement
are enforcement agencies are
vastly understaffed but the
reason why people the reason why
the people who on the liquor
licenses follow the laws is
because it's not that they're
worried about a five thousand
dollar fine is that they're
worried about getting a license
and their assets seized so we
want we don't want to have it to
where everybody who's anybody
can come in and do it because
there's more profit and breaking
the rules than there is in
obeying the rules we need to
have a barrier to entry to make
sure you know all those smaller
one to make sure that people are
vested in making sure that the
alcohol procedures are followed
and that the laws are followed
and legacy I think there's some
better options yes is better the
last thing we talked about but I
do think there is a better
options out there and I
encourage you all to explore you
know the split option for these
licenses because I think that we
get everything done without any
really negative a fax to these
restaurants that are still
struggling they you know have
been making these five thousand
dollar monthly car license
payments throughout COVID
they're struggling and you they
will not be able to survive if
their assets are devalued that
quickly thank.
Percent thank you for for coming
to speak with us.
Mr calls.
Okay.
We can you have two minutes
please us thank you at three
points I want to express my
opposition to this bill into the
amendment on the first point.
Increasing the sales spirits is
not economic development of four
percent of the restaurant sales
typically are hardly that just
you know making everyone L.
eligible to sell on the Scotch
in whiskey and one that.
we need to look at the future
we're trying to keep in the
state we're trying to attract
millennials and Gen Z. years
they'll drink hard liquor the.
Barely beer with the drink is
craft beer and the drinks are
all our soldiers and family
store here we replace an entire
cooler or with the hard seltzer
from all the different companies
so again hard liquor sales are
not the way the future is being
phased out of this younger
generation my second point two
hundred thousand dollars in tax
cuts or tax rebate for who the
way this bill is right and
interim for investors because it
says the last four can get.
From the last seed generate
celestial or being someone who
leases their license with their
hard so that your the way it is
right in.
I'm understanding it correctly
it looks like it's only for the
benefit of the lessor who has a
less under them which means that
investors secondly what is for
somebody to say this was a
seller convenience store and is
looking to sell it right now or
in any year to somebody what is
that two hundred thousand dollar
is no of course with the
previously estimated as four
hundred five hundred thousand
dollar commodity which is
obviously not a commodity
what is the valuation of two
hundred thousand dollars is an
oil in that situation so really
it seems by investors for
investors and then issue is you
mentioned the fact that New
Mexico is a very poor state
And we have you know a horrible
going on so is the answer to get
everyone dropped.
Basically what this is looking
at because what is talking about
is something we've kind of over
in this hearing is how now
there's I don't know who's in
there what to open a restaurant
beer and wine sales at seven AM
on.
And only for restaurants that
so let's is law if we're being
serious Scott well Scott all of
it because you can't say that
okay we care about the W. eyes
so you want people to be able to
drink at seven AM go to
Shelley's and start getting
sloshed we've all had colleagues
all of us colleagues been in
drunk driving accidents or just
be W. Y. this is hell and what
does this mean for package the.
Let's also name Natalie this is
Ryan the way this.
And it is.
Restaurants and festers and
doesn't do anything.
Because a lot of people to start
drinking at seven AM which is
ridiculous in this court say
that one of the highest the wide
range in the entire country so.
Clearly opposed all of this
notice anything you will help
our economy all of those you
know just how about the.
All distributors and all X.
that's it thank you.
Thank you Mr because.
Also.
Your name.
Yes Sir we can you have two
minutes.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the opportunity to say
hi my name is Oscar brothers the
president and owner of Pickwick
stores in southern New Mexico we
have a twenty five twenty liquor
licenses and convenience stores.
Throughout Dona Ana County are
we include Deming.
And then the Rado.
Been businesses nineteen fifty
eight I personally been the
business for forty years
starting off in nineteen and two
thousand operate.
Nineteen eighty that's all we
get now
started my way officer clerk at
some level and so I had the
American dream in nineteen
ninety four able to buy records
stores and store or liquor
licenses.
So Senator so many bills from
the house and the Senate concern
record all those folks are
listening to the comments made
by the public.
My first question why the focus
on liquor license changes when
the state is in such disrepair.
To give restaurants and bars.
The proposed when they're
currently closed doesn't make
any sense I mean I would think
the first thing is to open up
the restaurants and bars.
And again how many are to
survive this pandemic if we
don't get open up quickly and I
can tell you quite a few that
are not going to make it back.
People are said that there have
not been changes in there is
time for change all act there's
been many addresses since
nineteen eighty one attended.
You're out and you know the real
licenses the restaurant beer
wine licenses and many of those
people to speak to today and you
will hear a lot of restaurant
licenses that are starting out
one part of the group that I
want that responsibility but
they also if I wanted a full
by the drink license I would
purchase one we've also added
taprooms rollers to go.
That is two minutes please
finish what you need to say but
keep in mind there are more than
twenty folks waiting to speak
behind you
or I'm I'm also very
Representative.
My bottom line here.
This analogy with this does end
of life for liquor license in
twenty twenty six and.
The public could be very simple
it would be like a person doing
the American dream buying a home
going to the process as we do to
provide a home to live.
R. D. opposition to the bank to
get approval you get the loan
you have a mortgage and you have
that monumental milestone
Alliance for the liquor where
the house is paid for and this
bill is somewhere to saying well
it's from thirty years you get
off your mortgage
congradulations but you can not
sell your home you cannot take
out a mortgage or a home equity
line of credit and your staff at
that same home so again I cannot
borrow more equity I'm
completely opposed to this
because what am I going to do
there is a sole stockholder if I
die my business cannot be sold
and because of the of the
deadline or twenty twenty six
can I think I should have more
time but I will you'll back.
Thank you Sir I appreciate that
so do the people who are who
been waiting transaction the you
have two minutes.
Thank you I'm back up first of
all I do agree with the Marci
Dickerson if you're gonna do
anything what about three ways
that what you all don't put me
into bankruptcy because under
this plan sitting in my
wheelchair which I will tell you
again you will ruin me second of
all
I'm very upset about the bar
situation has not been addressed
anywhere along the line the bars
have become a forgotten entity
there's money to be made their
ways to open up the bars fifty
at least seventy five percent
nobody will think about it the
bars are being discriminated
against you're sitting telling a
bar who doesn't want to sell
package liquor here will give
you the package liquor thing now
if there
ask that you speak about the
bill that's before us today okay
right thank you for this will be
part of the this is part of the
bill there are not.
Include what about the liability
of the delivery service you know
what and there was a time they
close the drive up package
liquor now the pack of your
drives up to the home where's
the rationale and the act all
right.
I called in last week there was
three people who were for this
bill everybody else was against
it I thought that was the
purpose of these these hearings
is to decide what's our weight
out there I am not seeing
anything that says that our
input which was what ninety five
percent opposing it's falling on
deaf ears I mean the mind's made
up.
And I agree with what Mr.
There's too many problems going
on here there's no way to
monitor this there I said it
before and I'll say it again
there are so many holes in this
that is going to calls cost so
many problems the birch tree to
be included they're not the
restaurant they have had the
opportunity and still have the
opportunity to stay open and
make some money this is just not
a good idea all the way around
and I and so posted for my you
know the end of my life monetary
situation but you know there yes
I love my state but sometimes
the.
Reaching about thought processes
in the state.
I question that's it thank you
thank you Mr Kenny Mr Gordon.
You madam chair thank you for
the opportunity to speak
I have a I have three points
that I want to address but just
not fun I'm adamantly against
house bill two fifty five.
I paid over one point five
million dollars from my licenses
I owe a hundred thousand dollars
this bill is passed will
bankrupt me in about one day.
So.
I know that this call is about
solutions I have three things
going to talk about the tax
credit that's proposed.
Are really not equitable so this
is a three hundred fifty
thousand dollars for those I'll
be licenses what level to me is
that if there were a tax credit
process that was proposed that
it should be at the value that
you purchased you know this is a
nice cure you get you get
everyone whole.
And also the tax credit which
structured only benefits a small
group
I I'm an owner operator and I'm
also an investor as investor the
tax credit does nothing back
towards operational taxable
income dollars rent and once the
REC goes away the credit is
worthless.
the tax credit should be
proposed in a way if this is the
direction that's going to go for
it you will to the purchase rate
The price paid for the license
as well as the transfer ability
on that tax credit so if I take
it out to an open market
somewhere in New Mexico if they
sell that tax credit I could
sell for ninety eight cents on
the dollar give them an
incentive to buy it give me a
way to recover my money so
that's one solution for that.
The second solution that I like
is.
Proposed by Marci Dickerson and
earlier COVID not your garden
the stocks which you mentioned
the three for one stock split
that's fine but interestingly
there's no definition of exactly
how many licenses the state
thanks that to be issue we don't
know what the demand is there's
been no economic study on it.
And you know a well defined
problem seeks its own solution
right now but we having to find
the problem we are not the
problem is doing eight hundred
licenses five hundred thousand.
You are you saying that you can
so liquor the solution is not
really true because it takes a
half million dollars of set out
just to go open a restaurant and
you don't have that kind of
money and you actually three
thousand dollar license you go
open up a restaurant your
requires the banks and investors
another capital which they
typically want to guest on a
liquor license because that's
the only thing of value that
they can get their money back on
no one's going to get their
money back on pots and pans we
all know there.
The stock split concept is is is
viable because four two eight.
Stocks what it doesn't dilute
the value of the owner but it
does increase the number of
licenses that become available
so the value.
But the overall value will stay
intact to the owner and you can
do that system you know if your
license number twenty eight a
one we twenty eight oh one dash
one dash to a dash three so I
have those particular licenses
and you can you can stagger the
way that your releases signal
for the market and only till the
value because you supplied.
Why there is demand you can also
temper back if if it's causing
some kind of societal issue
maybe only release the dash twos
in one year and then the dash
three two years later now we
have some kind of temperature
control the process.
Recommendation letter
recommendation to buy out the
current owners is you can issue
general obligation bonds to the
state of New Mexico and under
this general obligation bond
because we're talking about four
hundred million dollars of that
you just you know back of the
envelope Matt I did.
That you're you're gonna destroy
the that you're gonna start
roughly four hundred million
dollars in the state half a
billion so.
We could do is issue a general
obligation bond and as the
chairman lance this.
has proposed his proposal a five
percent consumption tax which I
kind of agree with.
You can taxed by the bottle by
the sale and that that tax could
be used to pay off the general
obligation bonds there's no
there's no tax to society and
and the citizens of New Mexico
except for those that consume
alcohol which is exactly where
it should be you taken a
consumption tax based on those
that consume and your
reimbursing the people have been
endorsed by the state purchase a
license to participate in this
industry and you're giving them
a way out at the end of the day
for state what they can continue
to impose that tax we could use
that tax for other benefits
towards society.
but it would still be in place
so to me that's a win win as
well so there's three options
here that really what the state.
How the back the current owners
they don't destroy five hundred
million dollars of of what your
license value.
And it doesn't it doesn't the
tax back to citizens of New
Mexico to me one of those three
ideas I think makes complete
sense I know my time is up thank
you very much.
Thank you Mr.
J. R. pull all.
Mr Mr Latham all would you like
to and you yourself and speak
oh I'm sorry thank you.
Representative Figueroa.
The chairman of the committee my
Estes and members of the
committee I appreciate your time
and effort of trying to help the
state of New Mexico I am a third
generation owner operator of
Chinese restaurant in Santa Fe
New Mexico.
back in nineteen eighty one.
I was part of the legislation
back in in those days were less
Houston tried to.
revamp the liquor control act
and think in those days there
was a quota and it was one
license per two thousand people.
there's fourteen hundred and
eleven licenses out there now we
have two point one million
people in the state
that comes out to one thousand
fifty we are over quota by three
hundred and sixty one.
Something needs to go.
And and make rationale out of
this to where we know exactly
what you folks would like to
offer.
Where where is the shortage of
licenses that.
given the population in New
Mexico that is a prop
approximately two million one
hundred thousand for two point
one million.
With approximately one point
five SantaFe million individuals
twenty years or or older.
These estimates suggest that one
unit increase in the liquor
license outlet right.
Would be it would associate
approximately five thousand
forty additional alcohol related
crashes four hundred and sixty
two additional alcohol related
driving fatalities.
Four hundred and eighty three
additional suicides.
This is that just Adams study
that has been conducted by.
A prominent professor.
I take that the.
We are the professionals you
folks are the attorneys you need
to listen to the operators.
And consider us as a valuable
resource.
With that I yield back my time
and thank you for your efforts
for our wonderful state of New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr Palermo was exactly
two minutes well done.
Need you have two minutes good
afternoon Mister chairman chair
for grow and members of the
committee my name is that's all
I need and I'm the registered
lobbyist for Garcia wait LLC I
respectfully stand in opposition
to house bill two fifty five
I've talked with the Sanchez
about my concerns as I say I'm
fighting this committee the last
five years my client has
invested one point five thousand
one point five million dollars
towards our liquor licenses they
have six licenses we are owners
operators and investors in the
last twenty two months my
clients have purchased an inter
local for three hundred and
thirty five thousand can be a
license for three hundred and
thirty and a distillery license
for five hundred and ninety
thousand additionally they've
invested in the design and
construction of horizontal and
vertical construction land
planning and attorney's fees
well over ten million dollars.
Their most recent license was
purchased in August in twenty
twenty and they still a
tremendous amount on their notes
house bill two fifty I would
nullify their investment
overnight it does not in any
manner recognize the risk and
investment that this client has
undergone based on the value of
their license.
We recognize the goal of house
bill two fifty five is for
economic development and job
creation we commend the sponsors
for their commitment towards
jobs and economic development
however house bill two fifty
five as written will reduce the
value of my client's license and
if that essentially pulled the
rug from beneath them overnight
it's the wrong message to send
to people that are invested in
our state especially during this
distrust economic time about
multiple conversations with the
sponsors of this legislation as
well as members in the house and
Senate and executive about our
concerns we believe one fix
would be for in our local
district licenses that lost her
package to have been reinstated
specifically those that
purchased the last five years
and as Chris Gordon stated we're
supportive of a deduction in the
amount of the price rate and
maintaining the transferability
of the license another option
would be to waive the license
fees for fifteen years for those
license holders I purchased in
the last five years the message
house bill fifty to fifty five
cents to investors is
inappropriate unlocks
recognition of the investment
Corp for pursuing economic
innovativeness and risk I do not
think that is a massive the
state New Mexico should be
sending to our economic partners
and investors I sent my
suggested language the sponsors
of this legislation I hope they
will consider amending so we
made support this legislation
thank you.
Thank you.
T. J. E. L..
Good afternoon madam vice chair
can you hear me.
Yes Sir we can't thank you very
much.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is TJ Trujillo
I am a registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico all hall aka
Alliance which is a group and
and the members are consistent
of license holders.
For the reasons previously
stated.
We respectfully stand opposed to
the bill.
Having said that we greatly
appreciate the sponsor
considering a soft landing from
a financial standpoint for
existing license holders.
New Mexico akel Association
greatly presents a sponsor
working with us we will continue
to do so as this bill moves
through the process one of the
provisions I talked about last
time was hopefully taking a look
at a lender protection provision
if we're gonna go for with the
financial soft landing
but I'll stop there and madam
vice chairs I want to allow
sufficient time for you to hear
and other members of the
committee to hear from existing
license all holders they have
personal stories to tell you
thank you.
Thank you Mr Trujillo.
It is so K..
Mr Adam Daddy so this yes you
are and muted you have two
minutes.
Can you hear me vice chair.
Yes Sir we can thank you ma'am
and thank you the committee for
taking the time today my name is
Adam there's lotus I own and
operate Z. liquors in Fruitland
New Mexico top right up in the
four corners.
I'm a board member of the New
Mexico package liquor
Association.
I'd like to quickly touch on the
Farmington verse during closing
that we quickly touched on that
the seem to be an issue as
somebody who lives in this
community and spends time.
Both in and first of all I'm a
third generation restaurateur so
I understand both the restaurant
and liquor business two big
differences between Farmington
and Durango one is poverty and
the other is the immense
reservation the surrounds our
community down here in
Farmington these are several
reasons why the adjustment of.
Deregulation would greatly
affect our community in a
different way than it does the
Durango community and the way
that they operate their licenses
out there
just a big big difference when
you try to compare that would be
like comparing Gallup in Santa
Fe you two very different
communities very different
economic and social implications
so comparing those two and and
and looking at that as a is a
very is a panel I think there's
problems are much greater than
the number of liquor licenses
that are available in the
community of Farmington and
surrounding areas
second of all I would like to
talk about some might.
Experience around the
reservation my grandfather was a
judge for forty years in New
Mexico he was the head of the
New Mexico.
The magistrate judge's
Association for over thirty
years my father's a retired
state cop was injured in line of
duty my mother was the executive
secretary for the staff for
McKinley County when I was
growing up so
You couple that with my
experience on the edge of the
reservation I can tell you that
this bill puts a big target on
rural areas which can't really
afford more distribution.
Point to the bureau report that
was sent to this committee by Mr
roads in a in a memo exhibit be
talked extensively about what
the impact of deregulation would
have on our state.
We looking at a high number of
fatalities that would be
increased every year this report
locks it down to a number of
five hundred deaths per year
just from DWI fatalities on top
of about five thousand more D.
W. eyes.
Another thing that the bureau
report that is on a suicide you
know there's a very strong
correlation with the number of
outlets in our community which
the liquor control act has done
of a job a good job of
controlling over these years
which is how we came to these
values these values are
correlated with limit limiting
outlets and increasing outlets
as a direct correlation on abuse
suicide in a number of other
things that I'm I really have
the.
Wish everybody who has that
report in front of them to
really delve into because it's
some really morbid stuff you're
basically.
Have a economic paper written by
one of the top groups in the
country that says you're pretty
much mark off a couple thousand
deaths a year to this bill by
two minutes Mr dentist office
would you like to sum up yes
ma'am a couple things I think we
need people need to realize that
our liquor licenses of already
been devalued by such a drastic
legislation.
you know I'd call somebody up to
try to sell my liquor license
today after the search bill
that's going to be devaluing it
completely by twenty twenty six
our licenses already been
devalued I think there's an
important difference also that
needs to be pointed out between
the tax credit in a tax
deduction what you're offering
is a tax deduction last time I
did my taxes I didn't get a
hundred percent of my deductions
back I think you get about
twenty five percent is what it
is what my companies getting
back so really you're offering a
fifty thousand dollar of soft
landing I think it's important
also to point out that the
restaurant association does not
back this legislation which is
also in that memo appendix a a
board member of the restaurant
association says they do not
back this so the idea that this
is something that's being pushed
for economic stimulus for the
restaurant association they do
not even back so thank you for
the time vice chair and thank
the committee for the times
well.
Thank you Sir Mr Hennessey.
You have two minutes thank you
madam vice chair.
I would like to reiterate that
what the prior speaker said in
the yes these are tax deductions
and not tax credits
and for a liquor license holder
their deductions from your gross
receipts of alcohol sales so
that amount is five point one
two five percent which comes to
about twenty five hundred
dollars per year in gross
receipts tax savings that
coupled with the waived fees for
the license renewals of thirteen
hundred dollars a year that this
that this bill is offering
license holders about sixteen
thousand five hundred dollars in
net cash for their license.
yes the cost of these licenses
is gone up over the years but so
is everything else the cost of
land cost of building cost of
operating.
But these cost or not
Too much to be able to make up a
living selling alcohol or being
having a restaurant roughly five
percent of liquor licenses are
changing hands every year so the
liquor license market is a
healthy functioning market
In the name of Commerce and
economic development it is
perplexing to me that the
committee is proposing to
eliminate over six hundred
million dollars from the balance
sheets of the businesses in New
Mexico this value it came from
the numbers that director by a
host presented to the Senate tax
business and transportation
committee last week.
If the goal is to help
restaurants then let's help
restaurants most restaurants are
using door dasher GrubHub for
their delivery the way the bill
is written restaurants won't be
able to deliver using these
platforms because these
platforms take the payment
directly from the customer then
subsequently paid the
restaurant.
The people that will benefit
from this bill in the delivery
aspect of it our Amazon and
Walmart they'll take over the
package liquor market prices low
as they want.
Until not small businesses go
under.
Or do whatever they want.
Two minutes Mr Hennessey.
In the interest of transparency
this bill is named alcohol
delivery well the most
significant item in the bill is
to eliminate the ability to
transfer or sell a liquor
license the verbiage regarding
this doesn't even appear until
page forty six and then again on
page fifty six of a seventy five
page bill.
We stand against this bill thank
you.
Thank you Sir Mr skin more.
So this is more you may amuse
yourself you have two minutes.
Now can we get more user awesome
thank you for your time and all
the committee members for
listening I am the owner of
holiday bowl here in Albuquerque
we purchased in March of eighty
six and in June of eighty seven
we added a full service liquor
license.
the timing of this bill under
our current economic situation
for our business is terrible in
that we have been closed more
months than we have been open
we're presently operating on a
limited Patty only no other
income is being generated and
then to the value of the license
to a point where we just did a
renovation and the bank holes
that as collateral with our
collateral based changing then
they will either want something
else for collateral or we will
have to come up with some form
of cash infusion into the
business
I believe there is a place in a
time nobody when they were
thinking about this change news
that the the pandemic was going
to happen and we would be
sitting where we are.
you know it would be nice to see
the changes happen gradually
assuring the people that have
purchased their licenses that
they have an opportunity to
recover some of that cost and in
listening to the other speakers
it sounds like it would be
should be a dollar for dollar
type of process
and I think that would be the
better way to serve the small
business like us that we could
have the opportunity then to
recover this and make the bank
happy with the process.
Excuse me
and the other part would be.
It may be two years from now
when you have another sixty day
session and everybody has had
the opportunity to get back to
normal and the whole again
might not be as a better a pill
to swallow for some of the
people thank you know I know
change needs to happen I believe
there the time in place just
isn't this isn't the right time
and I would be against us at
this point unless there is a
better way to accommodate the
the licensees
and be able to recover what
we've got invested in our
licenses I thank you for this
time.
Mr Skidmore Mr roads.
Thank you I appreciate the
opportunity to speak this bill
and I appreciate the fact is
there's been a lot of thought
that has gone into it by
representatives by just this and
and this year Martinez who have
sponsored it but it will flood
the market with alcohol
currently there for and sixty
places to get a string with
spirits seven hundred and twelve
places to get beer and wine with
food and a thousand four places
where you buy package.
That if this is expanded to
allow restaurants for example
breweries wineries and
distilleries to cross pollinate
to serve all three products beer
wine and spirits you have the
potential of getting up to two
thousand places with this very
short period of time
I was fortunate enough and I
should mention this at the
beginning I represent the
package liquor Association and
I'm a lawyer represents every
type of license in the state for
the last thirty years I was
fortunate enough to get
authority to get economic report
done by the bureau folks at UNM
they are the same people who did
economic report that was
utilized to create the the
liquor control act in nineteen
eighty one.
I'm at individuals within have
testified about the effects
essentially if you go from the
equivalent
of the licenses Ford sixty
licenses where you can get
spirits right now to two
thousand of the report talks
about the effects per license
and and others and talk about it
I'm I have Representative over
the years every type of the
business and this bill has
problems for every time I've
gone from very small mom and pop
businesses where if for example
I have one client and works for
that is eighty seven years old
husbands died she's run her
business for fifty seven years
given the two thousand twenty
six sunset provision if she at
this point time dies in the next
few years just in our car part
time transferring her business
license up fifty seven years to
her children I also have
Representative local businesses
who cannot expand because they
can't justify recouping the
expense of a new business within
five years I also represent
national chains national chains
often will lease licenses for
and they will prefer to get
twenty to twenty five year
leases with five year options
under this bill if you have
moratorium on being able to
lease your license after two
thousand twenty six there are
existing clients that bring
enormous amount of jobs and
income and taxed to the state
that will be able to renew their
licenses the message we're
sending throughout the country
is horrendous that's not
exaggeration that is basically
why come to New Mexico to do
business when there's a lot of
places to do business there are
a lot more receptive and
welcoming I think the idea was
this would be a good idea for
economic development but sadly
when you implemented it has
exactly the are.
Opposite effect.
Sinestro's what you like to wrap
up yes I would thank you for the
warning the bill is also silent
on some other issues which I
think are crucial.
There's no indication of what
happens at twenty twenty six is
are these licenses just go into
a vacuum in a re issue and I
don't how that's supposed to be
done second element is it was
touched upon briefly by a bar
owner they're the only business
within this industry that has
been shut down for a year yet
they're not included in the bill
the bill defines a dispenser
license as having by the drink
and.
And package I'll these which are
in our local dispensers don't
have package and they're not
defined and they're not allowed
to have delivery finally there's
less destructive option I have
been talking it up within the
industry and there is initial
support for a bill whereby you
have the COVID of a silent
auction you literally create up
to put for example a
hypothetical number twenty two
licenses figure out where
they're needed and then you have
a silent auction the benefits of
a less destructive option is one
you don't got the value of
licenses across the state to you
literally have situation where
you're meeting the specific
needs of the specific area and
three the funds because it's not
a lottery but rather a silent
auction go directly to the state
so instead of speculating that
new operators to get new
licenses will hopefully pay more
taxes give a guarantee that the
funds this auction purchases
we'll go to the state thank you
for the opportunity to speak.
Thank you Mr rose so we have
eighteen fox still waiting to
speak someone ask you to please
try to stick to two minutes and
try not to repeat what's been
said before but add your your
own experience and perspectives
Mr Neal Rowe.
These yourself you have two
minutes.
Thank you very much madam vice
chair and the rest of the
committee
I am Neal wrote we don't risk
real and bar here in Roswell New
Mexico for just over thirty one
years if you count the year
we've hardly been opened and
then I've been doing this in New
Mexico for forty one years this
is our third project and we kept
this one go
You're right a lot of this is
that a lot of it has been said
already so a lot of repeated
from last Friday I was one of
those folks but so I think I can
say well under two minutes with
what I have left to that.
Thank you quarter licenses away
and and twenty twenty six it's
pretty much like taking them
away now how do we sell a
license as a package with our
other restaurant acids if they
won't be good to ask you for the
twenty six to sell lease or
transfer
and then I am a very happy was
brought up I think it was Mr
Hennessey that brought up the
deduction versus the credit I
think there was some confusion
on that for awhile
so just so it's clear for
everybody that the two hundred
thousand dollar deduction let's
say that fifty thousand a year
over four years that's a
production from our from our
taxable sales and then we still
pay taxes on what's left that
would be.
Very little help to all of us
compared to what we have having
value with our licenses
The next subject matter was
giving spiritual non quarter
licenses and
I don't I don't I know that's
been discussed enough to
including last Friday but again
on the I agree with one of the
one of the participants that we
are going to over saturate the
market and that will create not
only problems for us force value
but but the situation would work
I need to be allies to chalices
with car accidents and central
so there's a quirky on that
delivery deliveries a good idea
I'm not sure why all the
restaurants with liquor licenses
would not that happy I'll do is
would not be included it maybe
I'm incorrect on that but even
if we were going to get
delivery.
It wouldn't even be close to
worth it if the delivery at bill
includes taking away the pork
chop licenses by twenty twenty
six shade taking away that they
lose their value because you can
no longer sell these or transfer
on and your.
Mr row thank you and we're
adding spirits to bond portal
licenses.
It just wouldn't be worth it to
get delivery to make that trade
out for those two things
I thank you all on everybody on
the committee for giving us time
to get in part and we thank you
for everything you do for our
state.
Thank you Mr row Mister Anthony.
And you hear me yes Sir we can
thank you we have two minutes
hello my name is Ronald youth on
a Ronald I'm thinking on a my
family has two locations here in
Silvercity one with a local
dispensary license which is
valued around three hundred
thousand which we pay a twelve
hundred dollar fee Joe renewal
fee to this day every year are
roughly around that we also have
a beer and wine license at one
of our other locations which we
pay twelve hundred dollars to
obtain the license and then a
little over a thousand dollars
to renew it every year.
We've been in business for ten
years like I said and we've been
in the industry for seventeen
years and some type of fashion.
I have a couple points want to
make we do need to and I'll call
reform bill.
One that just not for tax house
out the seven hundred beer wine
licenses.
The current fourteen hundred.
In local dispenser license.
I'm years are like a buzzing
sound.
We can hear you Sir okay.
I feel the trade off of giving
these licenses for three
thousand up to twenty thousand
dollars for the beer and wine
license.
Holders.
All the people that have the
local dispenser license or their
full package license that pay
anywhere between three hundred
to up to a million dollars just
a far contrast in in price
range.
I'm giving them those licenses.
Is it true economic development
and especially for not the whole
entire industry our industry has
been impacted severely this year
and not just the beer and wine
license holders our whole entire
industries from hotels
restaurants movie theaters
Jabbar's to catering companies
everybody.
So what's the real reason of
passing this bill right now
during this time especially
after what's going on with this
pandemic.
I just feel that if we're really
trying to make a real impact in
the state wants to open up
licensing fees go ahead open it
up but put it back after market
value so the people that have
the investment of three hundred
thousand up to four hundred
thousand.
It's not developing their
licenses.
Salamat three hundred thousands
in the state to get those funds
into thank you.
Working on a all right.
Go ahead Mr Mr king Donna I
really feel that the state needs
to consider a better time of
passing this bill.
And they really need to get with
the people that are leading the
industry like some of these
people said.
And by the people within the
industry and Marci Dickerson had
a really good idea of splitting
up licenses to create more
licenses for the people that
want to get them thank you.
Thank you Mr can.
Mr are doing all.
I apologize Mister Baca you are
already in the room with us
please send me and say Mr Baca
and then it will be Mr column
forty okay can you hear me now.
Yes Sir we hear you thank you
for so Mr chairman Mr chairman
Westerman thank you for the
opportunity speaker my name is
Ruben Baca I am the state
executive from New Mexico
petroleum marketers association
and I'm also a contract
lobbyists for the grocers
association I would just like to
stand up and oppose this the let
oppose this legislation I've
been dealing with liquor.
Issues probably for twenty two
years I don't know if your
license most of my clients are
The between us in in the
convenience store been as we
probably only about.
between three and three and
three hundred fifty licenses
rose Association probably about
about at least a hundred hundred
fifty.
to these licenses and completely
do value once you hit that magic
drop dead date.
And I don't know what how they
came up with the date of June
thirtieth twenty twenty six.
I have to agree with the person
spoke awhile ago what do you do
with them after that and not
only that if you want to pass
this bill if you're in the
process of leasing a license so
only a license we're going to
build you store and and we have
plans to build more stores.
You you know you just put the
brakes on it you talk about it
could the economic development
let's go to economic development
you know and I have I agree I
agree with you that the
restaurant Assoc the restaurant
be will need some help they have
been hammered hammered on for
over a year and the bars to and
it's time for us to happen but
this to help women in a in a
logical way you just can't give
away who we have I thank you
very much.
Thank you Mr come fourteen.
Michael.
Would you like to amuse
yourself.
There you are Sir we show you
unmuted would you like to speak.
Okay Mr Conforti well we work on
your technical issues Mr John
Beasley would you like to amuse
yourself and speak they will
come back and try Mr Conforti
again.
Yes thank you so much all to
take a very quick.
Now here I am a CPA will spruces
work with several clients that
are involved in the liquor
industry I just wanted to
reiterate the difference of
people of maybe about the credit
versus the deduction the benefit
of this will be somewhere
between fifteen and twenty
thousand dollars maybe twenty
five thousand over a four year
period of time not a direct two
hundred thousand dollar budget
secondly in the several of our
clients we have will have
problems with lending and that
we will have an immediate
violation of many of the loan
agreements that have been in
place because the value of the
property the value of a licensed
would decrease immediately and
so these businesses will not be
around for the end of the twenty
twenty six period of time the
third and last thing is the more
mention of this in discussion of
this has already have a negative
effect on several out of state
businesses who are looking to
come to New Mexico and by
license because of the
uncertainty because of the
devaluation we have actually had
to clients lose out on sales of
their old long term businesses
because of proposal of this
legislation thank you very much
appreciate it.
Thank you Mr basically Michael
Kahn forty would you like to
speak for two minutes.
Thank you is muted Sir but we do
not hear you.
Secondary would you try removing
Mr Conforti back to the attendee
Rome and then moving him back in
here and while you're doing that
tied UP.
Would you like to speak two
minutes please.
Hello representatives of the
committee can you guys hear me
yes we can.
Wonderful I thank you for the
time and I don't want to repeat
anything that has already been
said because I think.
I I also agree that this is
going to be detrimental to
To our restaurant I am the owner
operator Pacific Rim and Hobbs
New Mexico.
and we purchased our our license
in twenty fourteen for for the
two thousand dollars we're still
paying it off.
I would just like to say that we
are in opposition and that.
The only responsible thing to do
for the state would be to to.
Hey just out at whatever we
bought in at because just as the
previous speaker said at the
devaluation Authority occurred
the we we have no market
seeing how it it looks like it
is as if we are going to have to
change one way or the other
so.
I would just intrigued that the
that the committee and that the
legislature do the responsible
thing and whatever the case the
make us whole because we are
also offering and I thank you
for the time and the opportunity
to talk.
Thank you Sir appreciate that
Mr Conforti Michael would you
like to try.
I'm sorry Sir we do not hear
you.
Mr John.
Yes can you hear me.
We can we can hear you Mr Chow
as two minutes.
Thank you very much thank you
madam chair and Mr chair my name
is John Chavis I signed up under
the ten three restaurants but
I'm the CFO for sandy beach and
company in Santa Fe ski company
and I related company our auto
realty company we how the whole
three hundred licenses and we
are in the and recreational
skiing and the restaurant
business as well as other.
Businesses
I'm not gonna speak a lot about
the not our company itself and
how it's affected us although we
invested in New Mexico or or
more than fifty years and
continue to believe in New
Mexico and and particular
restaurants ski areas family are
having a difficult time at this
at this time so this legislation
is used as you can might imagine
is even more devastating to to
us
being that I am the CFO of the
company in a CPA I want to speak
in behalf of what others have
spoken before me and that is
that to be clear that the
deduction is not the same thing
as a rebate and really the
what's in the bill right now
those deductions amount to about
sixty eight percent on the
dollar with the value so if you
calculated out in some of our
attendees have.
It might be sixteen thousand
dollars or less than five
percent in value so those
provisions are really worthless
and in terms of practicality
there was some other provisions
that we're a.
Alternatives that we're at the
panelists again of to that one I
would suggest that has been
given yet is an alternative of a
saleable tax rebate which is a
dollar for dollar
a transfer of money and this
sale ability of those make them
even more
able to you able to work with
those a little bit more it's not
unique there's a thing called
a conservation easement credit
which is sellable people give up
their private land and they get
a easement credit they then
again they give up the land for
public good and usage and then
turn get something in return.
There is a up analysis of the
similarity to ours in that if we
were to be forced to have to
give up our license maybe it be
seen as for the public good and
what would that could be less
letter licenses since they're
going to be Representative or
left liberated
and so that to be justified some
of the provisions of the gross
receipts tax are all to learn.
It's to
try and wrap up if you can thank
you.
Sure sure
so some of the provisions also
are unworkable really
mechanically for the for the
grocery seats tax you can
we collect close you see status
other people's money that's our
customers money we can then keep
that money that's just not
ethical I don't think the
legislation is thought that
through
and
otherwise and since I am
committed to my end of my time I
just like to say this is really
about hard to take up
legislation at this time and
it's not the believe good
government to take from those
who invested and try to help
others there's nothing wrong
with trying to help others but
to take from others that it that
it invest it is not the right
thing to do.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Chavez.
Mr so blue so blue so.
Mr Bruce so we do not hear you.
Okay we'll take a moment and go
to Danielle Danielle Soto Daniel
would you like to take a couple
moments.
Hi
Daniel Chad
I am the owner of rebel
entertainment and I respectfully
propose House Bill two five five
I purchased my liquor license in
early twenty to twenty twenty
unfortunately we have not been
able to use it as planned due to
the pandemic the license was
that I purchased had been
released for the four years
prior to that and I feel like we
paid a full price for it about
three hundred and fifty thousand
dollars
and as a family owned business
this and I worked my entire life
to build up to this point I feel
that the purchase was an
investment for myself and my
family my grown kids who are
invested into this business as
well and the purchase of the
building just as the purchase of
the liquor license so we just
got into we felt as an
investment for future a tangible
asset that we can use moving
forward so this bill was to pass
this could have a detrimental
effect on my family and our
future and the the way that we
do business moving forward along
with that comes the great
responsibility of owning a
liquor license in the state of
New Mexico which takes on the
customer safety as well as our
community and everything that
comes along with that
as reform may be needed I
believe that the timing on this
is not good for anyone in my
position and I appreciate your
time and I hope we show all.
Prevail in the future.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Would you like to try again.
All right Mr Matt Reeves.
Thank you for the opportunity hi
my name is Matt Reeves I'm two
pac stores and two bars in
Albuquerque I'll just quickly
echo supports and the sentiments
for the deductions versus the
credits.
And some good alternatives that
have imposed here a stock split
type solution buybacks a silent
auction for more licenses or tax
rebate of some times to try to
make those honors hold us has
participated at this point in
the existing laws.
A couple of things as we look at
the sunset in this legislation.
The licenses that we hold all
have ten year terms on our note
so having four years we've
basically accelerated by more
than double.
Hans terms if that still has
collateral value after this
legislation is even proposed let
alone passed.
We're still going to be in a
considerable out considerable
amount of trouble with the banks
and need to right size that that
that's been spoken about quite a
bit so I'll move on from there.
What happens after the sun sets
and when we can't lease the
licenses sellable licenses
transfer the licenses how do we
sell our businesses or move the
businesses on in any way
whatsoever change locations
because we have a disagreement
with the landlord.
In what way are we able to
continue to do business if our
licenses the mobile
nontransferable.
And.
On delivery.
All of us by.
Based on volume and all those.
By points that were able to buy
are based on the volume that
we're able to buy so when you
get into delivery those that can
do the largest volume are going
to have the best price points.
And when you take away the
convenience factor that we have
by being in the neighborhood
because you can get deliveries
from anyone.
Those are the best price points
will win and push all those
others out.
When you look at other states
companies like Drizly get one or
two operators that they work
with and they take over the
delivery market so that's what
we're opening up for here not
for all the local businesses to
be able to deliver.
But for a small group to take
over that entire portion of
business.
And finally on the tax I'm just
concerned adding a new tax.
In all that's going to do is
reduce.
What consumers have to spend so
that doesn't stimulate
restaurants or anyone else if
you have a thousand dollars to
spend disposable income and
there's a new five percent tax
transpires sent last that's
going to go into the coffers of
any of our local businesses now
I don't see how that helps to
stimulate our economy.
I'll leave it there thank you
for your time.
Thank you Mr Reeves.
Hello crested trading would you
please give your first name last
name and you have two minutes.
Thank you Hillcrest treating
would you please give your first
name and last name you have two
minutes.
Hello my name is Junie Irvine
and I live in Las Vegas New
Mexico where I'm a six
generation restaurant owner of
the Hillcrest restaurant was
established in nineteen twenty
three and I'm also talking on
behalf of Dick's liquor who is
established in nineteen forty in
Las Vegas I'm I'm gonna not to
be on all of that tax deductions
and rebates are by back to in
stock splits although I'm very
opposed to this bill I want to
remind everybody what it looks
like when you could get liquor
license very easily I grew up in
the nineteen eighties here in
Las Vegas where there were the
crystals and bars on every
corner and we developed a
horrendous drinking and driving
situation what was the worst in
the country
those liquor license became
harder and harder to get and we
were able to kind of thanks Bob
situation but it was because we
were invested to three hundred
and fifty or four hundred
thousand dollars in our liquor
license.
And we were we're very very
strict on hand to willing
the liquor license in general
with training our employees with
somebody being on site
With.
What is being absorbed in our in
our in our it in our of
restaurants and bars are people
really going to do that it to
the degree that we have.
If there are just barely
invested and getting a liquor
license in the state I want to
remind you how this culminated
and the Gonzales family of six.
All right are five of the six of
them died on the highway about
fifteen years ago and how it
impacted our community.
This is silly and dangerous and
not a way to
Have any kind of economic
development in the state thank
you.
Thank you
Mr Robert we know.
Afternoon can you hear me.
Yes Sir we can two minutes good
afternoon thank you thank you to
the committee for letting us all
talk there's a plethora of very
very smart voices on this call
and I just defer to almost every
point that was brought up
there's a lot of good solid
thinking on how this committee
and and New Mexico and whole can
help.
legislation like this past this
bill is not it I'm strongly
opposed to it it started as
something and has become the
entire restaurant sink if you
don't mind me using that.
it is we are third generation
restaurateurs down and someone
park New Mexico on the border of
el Paso Texas a lot of but it
this bill has to it is doesn't
help our investment in our
license we bought the license
twenty plus years ago we're not
as much as people are paying now
and we understood it was an
investment I don't see how this
bill shows that this will remain
an investment for us my parents
had to put their home on
mortgage to take out another
mortgage for the home for us to
get this license we've been
contributing to the tax base
down here for over twenty years
and just a little quick side
note
about what's going on and how
New Mexico helps business this
was going to be one of the
busiest weekends for us of our
year and of course we just got
the go ahead to open inside.
Forty five minutes ago.
You all don't realize the
restaurant business can't
operate this way we've been
shuttered for way too long we've
been doing no no business on the
patio take out and delivery will
not help us.
And
and
Of course alcohol delivery is
doesn't have not margins that
will help us it won't help
people get our food we want to
be in business in New Mexico and
I'd like my kids to be and this
is New Mexico this type of
legislation does not promote
business in New Mexico this type
of legislation says invest in
New Mexico but don't worry it'll
sunset and for years so I
appreciate all the very smart
mines that are giving you all
options of how this could look
into in a smarter way and thank
you all very much for your
service and your time.
Thank you Mr Lino.
Mr Sanchez.
Is it Ramon Sanchez yes Mister
Raymond sons as we hear you you
have to decide cases anyway my
name is Raymond side just I
Representative also ups the New
Mexico
we respectfully Madam chair of
stand in opposition to this
legislation I recognize that the
sponsors of put immense effort
and time into this project but
it is a project that is rich
time.
Our I was president in nineteen
eighty one when we did the
canopy licenses and at that time
we doubled up on our licenses we
thought that was going to last
us for the rest of the the
century at least pretty much
dead the fact of the matter is
that you have problems with this
bill that go beyond the
ordinary.
To use the pandemic as a reason
for this
Doesn't make a whole lot of
sense to me because this
pandemic is going to end and
what you all have created in the
mean time is another plethora.
Of issues that are just going to
just immobilizes industry in
fact it is going to put them at
risk of considerably.
I would only echo what was.
Offered by.
Miss our end.
by Mr roads and by Mr Baako.
I think they pretty much nailed
it and I think we ought to.
Recognize what they've said.
I would also point out just a
couple of things.
Back in eighty one and through
the early nineties madd mothers
objected strenuously to drive in
and drive up liquor licenses
windows I'm surprised that.
That has come up again with
regard to the delivery issue and
I'm not against the deliberation
mind you I think it's a good
idea.
But it does create other
problems that many of you may
not be aware of or even thinking
of yet.
I think that
One of the
sinister Sanchez would you let.
It's done.
I'll just leave it for someone
else thank you very much well
thank you Sir.
Christine is always check.
You hear me yes ma'am we can.
Thank you so much for allowing
me the time to speak up my name
is crystal easy act hi I'm the
mom and pop restaurant the
chairman my Estes seeks to help
in the committee as well and I
really wanted to put a face to
the local restaurateurs who you
all seek to help but also the
unintended consequences of this
bill.
In two thousand two I open the
melting pot restaurant in
Albuquerque and I purchased a
liquor license for hundred
eighty six thousand dollars it
took me ten years to pay that
off so I and I paid about the
three hundred thousand dollars
that the liquor licenses valued
at now next to my home this is
the single largest asset that I
have.
So in two thousand eighteen I
open a second restaurant called
burger twenty one in when
marchers LKP my loan for that
restaurant is guaranteed or
maybe like a license yes my
liquor licenses to evaluate my
longest calls how am I going to
pay back three hundred thousand
dollars.
The pandemic and the state's
restrictions I have gone from
sixty team members to twenty.
year to year I dropped fifty
percent in sales I personally
have not had a paycheck in
almost a year I have had to make
bad deals with my landlords to
not to fall.
Representative says I'm out of
PPP money and hanging on by my
fingernails hopefully to get the
next P. PPO but again if the
bank calls my loan because my
liquor licenses to value not
only do I not make it is a
business I lose my home is a
small business owners typically
are leases and loans are
personally guaranteed so I lose
my home in twenty to sixty of my
employees lose their jobs so I
know that you all are trying to
do the best by us but.
Those of us who will fail due to
devaluation devaluing our liquor
licenses.
But in the business for years
and this is of low margin tough
business replacing us with new
liquor license holders is simply
not.
The answer again I know you're
trying to do your best to help
us but in doing that listen to
us we love our community we care
about our team members it's
going to take us a few years to
rebuild our business the just a
restaurant association says and
many of the commentators that
have spoken
in opposition to the bill now is
not the time my recommendation
is either make us whole but
preferably partner with the
restaurant association
Representative from from bars
law enforcement anybody houses
office take a year your I have
to look at this and see what's
best for restaurants in our
state but now is not the time
thank you.
Thank you.
Mr Russo try again please.
No Sir we do not hear you.
This panel of Palermo.
Palermo would you like to and
yourself.
Can you hear me yes ma'am we can
you have two minutes.
This is not just about tearing
apart and destroying my family
and other families that have
invested their entire lives in
this business.
This is not about the fact that
I gave up a potential fabulous
career to help support the
family business for over thirty
years just in my lifetime
and invested my life in this
it's not about also about the
numerous issues raise that have
been brought forth by the in
Newport and numeral innumerable
entities affected.
it's not about the fact that at
least twenty one probably out of
the twenty three that testified
last week were against it and
it's not about the fact that I'm
a static if you take this
approach in leveling the playing
field that maybe he'll propose
legislation to allow gaming in
bars I'm but now it's also more
about it's it's about more than
that it's not about just the
possibility but the probability
of tearing apart future families
my dad was in the Air Force he
was in food when the Vietnam War
he moved on to work for economic
airlines you raise my sisters
and I on a farm learning how to
drive a quick lube oil it before
you we take it out to work.
One of the things that sticks in
my mind is you're allowed to
make a mistake.
But that mistake could be the
last one you make.
I'm he was in charge of numerous
like over four to six hundred
people's lives on flying a plane
we'll just think about it now
you guys are in charge of taking
the wheel of people in in their
cars but in increasing the
possibility of many many deaths
that that's a big responsibility
in this is serious.
You have experts who are trying
to advice do you have a
structure in place people who
have who knows how many
thousands of years of combined
experience in this business and
we've got your backs to want to
help to support in doing the
right thing you need to
recognize the expertise that is
trying to help guide you in a
good direction so do you make a
mistake.
You know you go to doctors for
medical advice you know you
don't you want to pilot flying
your plane who's not going to
make that mistake well don't
make the mistake for the
citizens of our state
we would not people in this
industry are not selfish not
greedy they care about their
communities and they are
experienced and they are why is
you need to listen to the advice
that you're getting a because
they would not steer you wrong
this legislation is a bad idea
do you realize that your
predecessors.
Quota and put a lot of effort
into revisiting mess and setting
up a good system to help protect
the citizens of our state.
and do you realize that you
would be taking the licenses a
point of contact for sales of
alcohol to a whole new level
able anywhere in the state for
anybody to sell and have those
access points from maybe four
hundred access points of the
accessing hard liquor to once
COVID opens it could be four
thousand points of hard alcohol
access it's your opening the
flood gates it's the responsible
people are putting their lives
in your hands depending on you
and your decisions at so be
responsible behind the wheel now
what you are responsible for
because you do not want to be in
the headlines trust me that a
crash the W. I crash it with
your name on it saying I voted
for this.
Please be responsible in the
end.
I'm completely in opposition of
this it's not just tears apart
my family but many other
families it could be future
families and it could be you.
Your kids or your grandkids who
were on that highway.
So thank take it serious and
trust the people who are
advising you because we are your
experts.
You need to listen.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Miss block.
Allison block.
Madam chair that's this is
actually her husband mo Travis.
Well as Mr Chavez you have two
minutes my apologies and madam
chair members the committee
thanks for the Mike.
madam chair members of the
committee of money to smoke
Chavez and I am here
representing the responsible
liquor license coalition here in
New Mexico and you know the
sponsor.
Representative Maestas Mr
chairman my Estes reference that
in the early nineteen eighties
that the Supreme Court
said that this was not a taking
one here to say today make no
mistake this is nothing but
taking
I've been told for years my
client's been told for years
madam chair there's too much
alcohol in the state of New
Mexico Furthermore I hear that
New Mexico is the D. W. Y.
capital of the world.
Now in the last couple years
madam chair all of a sudden out
of no where I hear that we need
more all call to save the
economy.
No don't listen to that madam
chair we need more all called to
see the economy I need to see
the study that shows this we're
where did that come from.
so madam chair what I'm here to
say is let's take a common sense
approach to all of this.
Let's scrap the bill.
Let's just scrap it a few people
have kind of reference that
lets bring all stakeholders
together in right common sense
legislation for everyone.
Let's take a whole year and look
at it.
Because this past year I know
there were a couple of
committees where we talk about
all call for an hour to that's
not enough madam chair
we need a lot more put into this
and I would just challenge the
the Sanchez please consider
scrapping the bill listen to all
these fantastic ideas here
today.
but with that madam chair
members of the committee I
respectfully stand in opposition
to this bill thank you very
much.
Thank you Sir appreciate your
testimony Mister Eugene more
yeah.
Yes Sir we can two minutes.
Thank you madam vice chair
Mister chairman the committee
members.
so just a few quick points will
try to get done in two minutes
so Mr Travis just reference the
one of there's been talk to the
the expectation that this change
is going to stimulate the
economy and I'm just wondering
if there's actually been a study
to to confirm that or or where
that information is coming from
I'm I'm speculating that is.
Cannabis legalized it would
probably do way more to
stimulate the economy them
adding more liquor licenses and
I'm not sure if there's anything
going on with regards to
legalizing cannabis in the state
not just medically but.
Recreationally but I do believe
that that would probably have a
much larger impact.
secondly is the safety aspect of
been talked about and I'm just
wondering if there have been any
studies on the safety aspect of
making the changes.
Mr chairman you you mentioned
something and I didn't
understand what you were talking
about so I was going to bring it
up because I would like to
understand you mentioned
something about a monopoly that
the liquor license owners of I
think what you said with liquor
license owners of had a monopoly
and I don't understand that
comment because you know a
liquor license owners have have
all the licenses the you know
how are available and have
purchased them on the open
market so I'm not sure
what that meant but the the
other thing is that.
Okay I mean I am opposed to this
bill
there is a huge problem with the
endo and the like in twenty
twenty six is very problematic a
lot of people have already
talked about that.
I think there have been good
options presented today as well
as last Friday the look the
license what I think is a very
good option the general
obligation bond I think is a
very good option and the silent
auction that was proposed today
I think is a very good option
what I really like about those
three options and none of them
penalize New Mexico taxpayers
there wouldn't be a five percent
consumer tax or anything like
that.
So taxpayers will not get
penalized at all.
I just I just ask you all of you
to really think about what's
happening here because a lot of
what this bill is doing is
penalizing the people that
you've been hearing from today
and other people that are out
there that aren't on the line
today who have been.
Playing by the rules as
established by the state.
Thank you I'm almost done
settlement of we have been you
know running businesses that
contribute to New Mexico's
economy for well some of these
people for their entire lives
and so we're panel at this bill
I think is penalizing those
people and and allowing other
people to.
enter into the market at a much
lower price point and and not
having contributed I'm not
saying I'm against liquor reform
that's not at all what I'm
saying I just think that this
bill penalizes those people who
have been working putting blood
sweat and tears into their
businesses for years and years
and and it penalizes them.
Very severely so thank you for
listening and I hope you take
into consideration a lot of
what's been heard today.
Are you able.
Thank you Mr Moore yeah Mr chair
also more.
Yes thank you very much for
taking the time to hear me out
today.
I want to stress by saying I am
the person I am the small
business owner that this bill is
supposed to represent and help.
And I'm on both sides of this
because there was a point in
time when I felt that it wasn't
fair and things like monopoly
and things like that came to
mind but there's so much more
that I understand now that I've
gained the experience and worked
for what I've I've heard.
With saying that I'm a small
business owner you know I I own
and operate three bars and
restaurants but the truth is I
don't know him and they own me.
My family all of us put our
blood sweat and tears into these
things.
I'm not the caller that's on
here to tell you about all these
investments in millions and
millions of dollars I'm losing
and this that and the other I'm
here the small business owner
that you're supposed to be
trying to help to tell you this
is not the way to help.
And in all actuality
understanding both sides the one
license that I do lease is a
restaurant license so on a face
value I can go in let go of this
lease that I have with this
restaurant licensing get a full
liquor license.
You know in place of it for a
fraction of the cost but the
truth is.
That is not going to be my
solution right now to help me.
It is not it adds no value.
When we walk away from these
businesses there's no four oh
one K.'s there's no long term
retirement everything that we
put into these things we passed
down to other family members we
utilize the small assets that we
obtain in order to propel our
family into the next generation.
That's how wealth is growing
right isn't that what we want
with the American dream the
opportunity for the small guy to
own more in order to pass it on
to the next what you're doing
with This Is Your taking away my
opportunity to do that because
when my life for my restaurant
is over like it was before is
just pots and pans not worth
anything.
At all.
If you really really want to
help us listen to us I'm not
against alcohol refers I'm not
against liquor delivery the
truth is that's probably not
gonna help us either it will
help Ms on its mother.
Egolf delivery companies but I
think it be better for a social
perspective less D. W. eyes
potentially you know whatever.
But if you want to help us sit
down with us like Mr Chavis said
sit down with us for about a
year talk to us that are on the
ground that are in the trenches
learn about what we need let's
not just talk about with the
people that are current owners
but all the people that
perspective we want to get in
the market.
We're willing to sit down and
understand where they're coming
from where you're coming from
but to throw this at a time like
this right now I'm sorry I know
you're trying to help but this
feels nothing more like kick us
while we're down.
Thank you very much for hear me
out I do say everything with
respect thank you guys for all
your service have a good day.
Thank you Mr some are.
She then you had two minutes.
Thank you madam vice chair.
My name is Terry keen my wife is
that we both own and operate the
arch of cafe for me pizzeria
inferring also and we stand in
opposition to this bill as
written along with everybody
else that you for today
We do strongly support the
solutions that have been
proposed here.
Bye and number of different
people Chris Gordon the next
hour read more Chavez.
The stock slid to consumer tax.
Could be bonded against to come
up with enough money to be able
to.
Reimbursed for the value of the
liquor licenses that were
purchased by all the people that
have been doing this for years
and years and years
The task force of operators the
needs to be put together this
seems to be this this bill seems
of come out of nowhere and is
being pushed through without a
great deal of input other than
these meetings which which seems
not be yes seems to be falling
on deaf ears some
Mr Jarvis.
Suggested that we're smart
raiders get food to eat.
Two six months to put together a
column.
That I think everybody can be
can get behind the state small
businesses you're trying to
help.
By myself
And the liquor license owners
like myself as well they're
trying to you know see a path
forward.
Reimburse ourselves for some of
the investments that we've made
here Jones mora hit it hit the
nail on the head he.
It is a small business owner
like myself my family and I
always.
It is Mr team if you were.
Wrap it up this five percent
consumer.
Seems the only reimburse the
state for this offer as a two
hundred thousand dollar tax
deduction I don't know why you
don't bond against that so that
you have money to reimburse
liquor license owners for what
they paid for it just because
Gordon said you know some of our
paid a hundred twenty thousand
some pay three sixty some paid
more
That's all I have to say.
This twenty thousand dollar fee
per year after twenty twenty six
twenty restaurants over a
hundred seats at the original
cafe and freeing also
I believe that twenty thousand
dollars a year feed heck of a
lot of money to spend.
To be able to serve our own
restaurant thank you for giving
us the time and I hope you
really do consider that ask for
of professionals and experts
that can help you put together a
common sense plan it will be a
win win for everyone thank you.
Thank you Sir Mr more Garcia.
Your me.
Yes Sir we can do.
First off thank you everyone for
let me have this time to speak I
just want to reiterate I know
people have been saying how
their loans are going to get
called and I I just want to let
you know that.
The other bag my lenders already
reached out let me know that
they've heard of this happening
and if it does happen we should
start talking to lenders as of
right now.
To get us into a situation
refinance the loan we have
appointments with the new bank
and.
I I'm I'm a partner at the
library bar and grill and I can
tell you right now we haven't
been open since March there's
not a lender in town or anywhere
that's going to give us a loan
right now to allow us to
continue our operation and.
Earners we're all born and
raised here in Albuquerque we
all have kids and then go home
and tell my family not only did
we lose our liquor license but
our our real estate we also
bought the building when we
purchased our our company is now
gone and now I've got to start
all over we've got to start from
square one again.
To help a restaurant association
which would tell you I'm all
about helping the restaurants
all you're gonna do is take the
business from other places and
put it into restaurants which if
you go sit down with the
association there against this
law altogether this bill.
And just reiterating what the
last few people have said sit
down with the people that are in
charge and making the moves in
this industry to educate
yourself on how we can make this
work for everyone
That's also one last point at
something that you're not
thinking about is there's
there's a department call this
idea that goes around it checks
if if bars and restaurants are
are operating fully with
alcohol.
You're not realizing by opening
this up how many more people the
state's going to have to hire
go around and check all these
places out how much more cost
that's going to come into play.
You're not taking into
consideration all the aspects
that you need to so that I'll
give up the rest of my time I
appreciate the time and I just
hope that you guys listen to
everyone that's talking today.
Thank you Mr Garcia is.
Amy Perez.
Well good afternoon madam chair
and members my name is Amy
Patterson together with my
husband Kristin and my brother
in law Victor we on the Beverly
hills hall and cantina in Moscow
this we strongly oppose this
bill we've been in business
since two thousand six and in
two thousand ten we purchased a
dispenser liquor license given
the current state of our country
in the pandemic that continues
to ravage small businesses we
cannot afford to take another
hit in order to purchase our
license we had to use the land
are businesses located on as
collateral so if you decide to
pass this bill it's not just the
value of our liquor license that
will be lost it will also
constitute a taking of our land
your vote to approve this will
create a domino effect act that
will change the trajectory of
our business for ever well we
understand you are trying to
make changes to allow more
businesses to gain access to
licenses these changes will do
just the opposite it will be
such an injustice to all of us
who work so hard to get one well
we realize a lot thank you
licensed laws were step by your
predecessors US lawmakers have
an obligation to do right by the
people who trust you to make
fair and equitable decisions
decisions need to be made fair
for all involved parties this
bill was not drafted keeping the
real interested parties in mind.
It was drafted to benefit future
liquor license holder interests
you are essentially taking from
one to give to another no one in
their right mind is going to
fire license for three hundred
thousand dollars let alone half
of that businesses are going to
wait until they can get one for
several thousand.
We encourage you to reconsider
I'm in favor of current license
holders we believe we we need to
work together to provide an
equitable solution to keeping
current license holders whole
before we start to work on how
to better a system riddled with
pitfalls thank you for your time
and consideration.
Thank you
as the least worst all.
Okay third time's the charm
third time is the charm we hear
user.
All right chairman chairman and
committee members thanks for
your time and patience in my
case.
many license holders I have
commented today on the direct
impacts this proposed
legislation will have on their
livelihood businesses and their
employees others have made great
suggestions on compensation and
other ways to make this
equitable if it moves forward.
Which I hope not I would like to
focus on the big picture this
message sense about doing
business in New Mexico stamen
New Mexico providing
opportunities for your kids and
our kids here in New Mexico
keeping talent and skills in New
Mexico and drawing talent and
skills to New Mexico.
Riddick double helpful
consisting government is what it
takes to move New Mexico from
being ranked first in the US on
the bad list and fiftieth on the
good let us and moving us
towards first in the US on the
good list.
The in the US on the back this.
Pulling the rug out from under
businesses local or not sends
the wrong message centipede tram
company reinvested millions into
the tram and it's restaurants
for its fiftieth anniversary in
two thousand sixteen to carry
this New Mexico traction forward
for the next fifty years a
liquor license was purchased for
two hundred eighty five thousand
as part of this reinvestment at
being a license to to other
license already owned by
affiliate companies Santa Fe ski
and daini known as ten three at
the top of the tree.
A highly photographs brand new
custom tram cabins built in
Switzerland.
We're specially designed to show
off the New Mexico Z. assembled
to the whole world.
These cars are photographed a
quarter maybe a quarter million
times a year this was done at
our cost to promote New Mexico.
Now with this legislation you
want to devalue our new liquor
license investment with the
stroke of a pen with no warning
no plan and no real
compensation.
This is not how you preserve or
grow a healthy economy and it's
businesses.
Our businesses are owned by
forty six families and employed
hundreds of skilled and talented
individuals many native New
Mexicans like me please do away
with house bill two fifty five
and help move New Mexico forward
thank you very much for your
time.
Thank you Sir Mr Michael called
forty.
We still cannot hear you.
All right.
We have a few other people with
hand raised on the attendee list
and we generally need your first
name and your last name in order
for you to speak but Maurice
let's let's try Maurice give
your first name and last name
please and please try to keep it
to two minutes and not repeat.
Thank you.
Glorious would you and yourself.
We hear you there's a lot of
feedback.
Can you hear me.
Yes there is tremendous.
About no now.
We can hear you.
Got a lot of Jericho.
Let me.
Trying to get.
Try some hands on Sir and if you
would mute yourself now and will
listen to do you and then try
back with you.
The.
Eight.
Are we.
You.
And we hear you.
All righty so it sounds like up
there hasn't been enough studies
just with the increase of the W.
is or or the underage drinking
with the deliveries at home or
the robberies that might have
been with the jump these guys on
delivery of these guys gonna
start carrying guns with them
there's all kinds of studies to
hasn't been done with these with
this bill that wants to be
passed
You don't know how many felons
will be in this establishments
you don't know
but these guys that have the
concealed weapons are they gonna
have to store the call of
firearms in the cars now the
gonna more robberies with
firearms I mean there's there's
tons of studies there has been
done with all this and I I spoke
with the representative of a
couple days ago in the end they
talk just like everyone else on
here of of how how it's gonna
affect our lights Our Lady.
And us she said well it was just
like playing the stock market
you invested you lost your the
small minority in this decision
but yes it sounds like the the
restaurant the of the settlement
doesn't even support this bill
so who's this bill for.
I mean you guys see that it's a
privilege.
Well a lot of driver's license a
privilege but you can't take
away my car but you're gonna
take my privilege to sell
liquor.
For you're going to say it's a
privilege and then take away my
money.
I don't I don't understand any
of this.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Yes.
We hear you Sir.
Yes miss by seen why target
liquor aspect of recovery when
there's other ways of restaurant
covered stress state stimulus
packages then the tax breaks for
restaurant in re after being
customers of reactivity
customers my favorite because
just you give out with slide
since everyone doesn't mean
consumers are gonna go.
We're still not condemning cope
still around it hasn't gone
anywhere there's no research
that says that the license is
quite COVID.
Otherwise no liquor licenses or
no research this is a list of
licenses is going to bring back
the economy a study by McKinsey
company say early indications
from China Germany where the
president seems to be under
control suggests that consumer
demands don't merely rebound
restriction listed estimating a
year or two or even more to
reach previous norms so what's
the point of.
You know more particularly since
is it doesn't do anything
Furthermore how do liquor
licenses stop the resurgence of
COVID specially with the new
string so you're going to
bankrupt all the previous or
current
questions holder.
And then not have a plan to
fight over so we're back to the
same position that we started
up.
Furthermore the state Mexico
rigs in national impaired
driving this.
We can't even control D. W. I.
right now how we can control it
there's more liquor licenses is
there more funding for police.
Is there going to be a bureau D.
W. I can think I am hearing you
that in CTE research on that
Furthermore we have a population
to hunt two million what
population what percent of the
population actually during.
I don't see any research for
that either.
The average income for single
house will home single person
house in New Mexico's twenty
five thousand households fifty
thousand.
So when you raise the liquor
licenses given to everyone now
the wholesale liquor has to
raise their prices because we
have to hire people yes you can
you sure trucks insurance goes
up so bottle that was in dollars
could be twenty dollars now and
now the consumer has to do that.
eight twenty four.
Is the biggest population
drinks.
So other three years of that
population can't even drinking
restaurants.
Do not population I don't think
they have much money so how you
soon that.
They're gonna buy in actually re
up their industry.
There's no studies on this.
The senior arbitrary it's just
opinions.
You guys have no research
you can't pass a bill without
that there's so many people's
lives the state of New.
Two minutes would you like to
write wrap up.
just like to say just because
we're the minority doesn't mean
our rights to be overlooked and
we should not be taken the
initiative.
Thank you Sir.
We
Harold.
I believe is the last person we
have with the name Herald please
on yourself you have to manage.
Yes madam vice chairman can you
hear me.
Yes we can.
Yes I'm Harold Meyers from
Clayton New Mexico.
About ten years ago we had a
liquor.
Basins in town that that can
hotel they went bankrupt we
bought from the bankruptcy court
their liquor license for about
eight hundred thousand dollars
at that time it was the most
expensive license in the state I
believe.
But my wife and I bought that on
the premise that we want to get
back to the committee we want
the committee to continue to
have a choice have to lace is in
town and now we're setting with
the after making another million
dollar investment in the
facility that's the
of the envy of anybody in the
state we believe this what we're
been been told by a liquor
salesman.
we think that's in five years is
going to be over with this all
happens I'm sixty five years old
I blown retiring in five years
that was probably gonna be my
retirement.
You know that to have a
discreetly taken away for
literally sixteen thousand five
hundred dollars this is
ludicrous.
Like to talk about markers see a
mention about about is banker
I've already had a conversation
my banker is saying.
What we gonna do about we need
you need to come up with another
three quarters of a million
dollars collateral the day this
this thing if it passes because
he is required by law that the
he has to have collateral on
hand that I've pledged at the
current value the the value of
it is is literally gonna be
nothing and so I'm up to
something else or he's gonna
start calling notes and that's
that's just not right that
we relied on existing statues at
the time and
we thought the state is going to
be on our our.
Of on our side and then this is
this is crazy but the I
appreciate your time madam
chairman no you're you're
struggling with the time limit
so I feel my time thank you.
Thank you Sir appreciate that
very much I think
We have one more person who
wanted to speak.
But.
But he doesn't have resumed
addition that allows him to be
moved into the room.
So this point we are moving to
folks who want to speak in
support if you have been waiting
patiently and that attendee Rome
and you now want to speak in
support of the bill please
indicate that by your little
ray's hand marker.
Let's start with Pat block.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I'm Pat
blocking today I speak on behalf
of the New Mexico retail us.
I'm the similar bills I
mentioned that consumers expect
delivery of groceries and other
goods including beer wine and
liquor and that expectation
hasn't changed since last year.
Today a chairman my Estes gave a
good historical recap this
presentation and illustrated the
need to bring our liquor laws up
to date and we agree that
allowing delivery of liquor
search only moves things in the
right direction.
Members of our association
deliver alcoholic beverages and
most other states this bill
would allow them to do that in
New Mexico if it becomes law.
Our members it provided me with
several suggestions that would
improve this bill without
altering the intent and would
select a implementing the
changes compliment contemplated
in this legislation I requested
a meeting with chairman my asked
us to review the suggestions
that we stand ready to discuss
the proposed changes in greater
detail on these available.
I do feel the need to qualify my
comments today with the
understanding that this bill has
been amended and we have not had
opportunity to review and
analyze the amendments.
And again all.
It sounded like the amended bill
would set an arbitrary ten
thousand square foot size limit
for delivery this is exclude
many grocery stores whether
they're locally owned or part of
a chain we will take the time to
analyze this amendment and if
that truly is the case I
probably spoke to light and
should have gone in your group.
with that thank you for the
opportunity to speak.
Thank you Sir appreciate that.
Are you small non.
I believe Maurice is the
individual who does not have
assumed addition update that
will let us in.
All right.
Thank you for your patience
committee and thank you to all
of the community members and
people from across the state of
New Mexico who took the time to
be here and speak with us this
morning.
We appreciate your participation
in this.
Efforts to modernise local
licensing in the state of New
Mexico.
I'm and now goes to committee I
believe the sponsor did you has
if I may madam chair co sponsor
or yourself yes that needed to
speak thank you madam chair and
thank you audible members and
members of the public toward a
tremendous conversation and
thanks for what he's doing and
this is one of the.
One of the instances in which
the the closed session actually
benefited the the public
participation and we just thank
everybody a special shout out to
addicts in Vegas thank everybody
for commenting it but if I may
just up may save us some time if
I kind of address some of the
things that were said madam
chair if I may one is we we
heard you we hear you we hear
you.
We heard on Friday you know no
more no new liquor stores are
going to saturate the market
this bill does not add a single.
Liquor license all it does is it
just the existing restaurant
license the currently sells beer
and wine to add spirits that's
all it does on that end.
you're correct you're correct of
the twenty twenty six of.
A deadline is is problematic and
and will and has affected the
market and I I heard hear you
loud and clear and once we get
back to the committee on the not
recommend that we delete section
sixteen and section nineteen and
get rid of that twenty twenty
six sunset was officially five
years.
July first twenty twenty one to
June thirtieth twenty twenty six
in the nineteen eighty one bill
madam chair there was a ten year
sunset a ten year and they've
they refer to it as a
They refer to it as a a period
of economic adjustment so the
eighty one a law had a ten year
period of economic adjustment
and and so deadlines are
liberating we need to figure
this out in the next five years
how do we valuation an
individual license and how do we
essentially compensate people
and make them whole for for any
devaluation of their licenses
that was the thought process
with regards to that but but I'm
gonna propose that we remove
that also just just if I may
madam chair we we can't we can't
kind of have it both ways of
these arguments were fantastic
because half of the arguments
argued against the other half of
the arguments so you know we had
arguments that we're going to
flood the market with alcohol
but yet we we had arguments that
millennials don't drink spirits
and it's only four percent of
restaurants anyway that you know
this this lady and large Berg
had a fifty seven year liquor
license I don't know how much
competition was in large Burke
but we want to make sure that
she's made whole and and and
Are you know not necessarily
transfer about being made whole
for the expected retirement of
that license you know folks are
like upset that they the will be
able to renew the license this
is because we're gonna issue
state licenses this is a state
license the state license.
Current law is is bad public
policy if you through a hundred
economists in a room every
single one of them to a tee
would say this is bad public
policy and I am grateful to the
conversation because I think
we're all in agreement just
question how do we how do we
overcome this statutory scheme
it is as if I I'll get to the
driver license innovative
alternate back over the
committee chair but we didn't
shut down the economy I
international pandemic shut down
the economy we as citizen
legislature towards are not part
of that.
Part we don't have the authority
to affect that.
But we're gonna try our
darnedest to jumpstart the
economy once once COVID is gone
from our communities
The argument that we're going to
saturate the market will
licenses is incorrect now that
the twenty twenty twenty six
cents that is going to be
removed from this bill package
license is not affected.
It's really not but package
licenses can now deliver and
then there was an argument that
the walmarts are going to
dominate the market no we
exclude Walmart's in this bill
to allow mom and pops and those
long time liquor store owners to
do delivery so we can you know
I'm hearing it from both sides.
When we did the Barron one
licenses the same arguments were
made the sky didn't fall when we
added breweries the same
arguments were made the sky
didn't fall when we added
distilleries to the state
statutes the current arguments
were made the sky did not fall
banks want monthly payments let
me just lastly address the issue
with the banks.
You're not paying back the loan
by selling the license you're
paying back the loan because
your successful business people
you're making your monthly
payments to the banks yes yes
theoretically if if that
licenses is is that that
collateral goes down which is
not without collateral goes down
significantly
you know the banks you know have
a provision in the contract that
you know if you're under
collateralized that might be
considered an adverse change in
because the bank to have a
discussion to remedy that that
with the borrower but it's not
in their interest to forclose
it's in their interest to
continue getting payments that's
why it Madam the banks are not
here today.
It's my understanding that the
banking committee has remained
neutral on this
but I can go on and on madam
chair with regards to do the
eyes.
Provided the committee asked and
then you can use to answer them
to drive.
There's more restaurants closer
to your house it's safer for the
public thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr chair.
Members.
Money were you out.
All right it's.
Colbert's.
Thank you madam chair on trying
to make sure nobody hears about
miles of the work going on on
the sideline.
That we did on Monday and
Tuesday and.
Was whenever it was madam chair
and and Mr chairman I.
I have to say that this you know
this raises some concerns listen
to the ticket testimony opens a
number of folks that have some
some very legitimate.
Concerns.
And I'm wondering at this point
and I agree with you there's
always going to be somebody
that's going to disagree.
And there's always those folks
that
I really
They have been in the business a
long a long time like you're not
discuss they've made a lot of
money off of these licenses.
But you know regionally we were
just talking about your
deliveries and as I read the
bill fact.
A couple of times and and I do
have some concerns.
And.
How do you feel about as good a
gentle table and then looking at
it again at the end term with
their involvement.
Thank you madam chair
representative covered and I I
shared the same concerns you
have.
We can't it's just it's a
whatever it's it's complicated
because it's not a property
right.
Like a piece of land you know so
we can just buy it back that
would be legal so we have to get
creative on opening up these
markets lowering barriers to
entry and keeping these folks
hole and that's what I hope to
do this year and in the coming
years but I think it's
imperative that we allow
delivery and that we open up and
they that we adjust the beer and
wine license to allow spirits.
Well this we're at a.
I disagree with on this.
But I'm gonna listen to the
others before a vote but I I
honestly you know you enough
always been straight forward is
that I do have some major
concerns you know as to how much
is in the bill you know because
we originally with just talking
about the
The delivery.
It just seems like it's gone
into this so many other things
would tax deductions and all
that kind of stuff I know some
of it's already there but the
changes not that we need to have
more discussion with that and so
that's that's where I am thank
you madam chair.
Thank you representative of mine
the committee that would go
through the chair or the vice
chair in this case
Representative Dow.
Chair Mister chairman and co
sponsors who are present.
I guess what I would like that
was.
Thank you so could you please
describe madam chair
Representative Maestas what you
envision just cried.
The Kerr how do people obtain a
liquor license in the future if
this bill passes and what do you
envision as the results of the
bill passing.
Thank you madam chair
representative out of that we
save our restaurant industry and
that we save our tourism
industry but you're correct it's
I mean it's you know it's it's
fascinating
You know in nineteen eighty of
of.
You know and it.
Back in the day we don't out
liquor licenses per fifteen
hundred people we meaning the
state after after prohibition
ended.
in nineteen fifty nine the state
then moved it from one per
fifteen hundred people to one
per two thousand people.
we didn't do it by people over
twenty one
We did it by counties and by two
thousand people
and then that you know and then
in nineteen eighty when we did
the revised.
But to back up madam chair that
In nineteen sixty three the
Legislature clarified.
Clarified in a chapter two
hundred seventy which went into
section at the time section
forty six dash five best fifteen
Mexico statutes annotated
nineteen fifty three that eight
the licenses have no vested
property right.
There is no vested property
right in the license as against
the state.
but that it could be considered
a proper like property right for
security transactions of you
know it allowed folks the
ability to borrow which was
fantastic.
But the the courts clarified in
nineteen eighty one.
In Acronis the state
which is for the lawyers keeping
score score back home is a six
hundred seventy piece second
nine fifty three nineteen eighty
three.
The court clarified that a
liquor license holder has no
property right that's what we
can't by Ambac of just straight
up we can't brought back a
liquor license holder is no
property right in the license as
against the state the liquor
license is a privilege it's a
privilege to sell a highly
regulated commodity liquor and
the court said quote a privilege
subject to regulation and not a
property right that there was no
taking of Mr Cronus back in
nineteen eighty three because
the law was recently related to
a proper purpose and did not
unreasonably deprive a licensee
of all of the substantially.
Of all or substantially all of
the beneficial use of the
license and that's what these
package liquor folks need to
understand you can still sell
package and you can deliver.
There is no new package licenses
with this bill we took that out.
All this bill does is adjust the
existing beer and wine license
law to allow it rest from the
license to add spirits that's
all this doesn't so what that'll
do to the package the committee
is nothing.
What it does to the up to the to
the licenses that that's going
to be interesting those and
restaurants that currently have
a liquor licensing is still open
till two.
They can stay open till eleven
with the new license and put
their license on the market or
just keep it.
But restaurants need to be able
to compete with the Applebee's
in the Chiles of the world we
don't have any mom and pop
restaurants anymore in the state
that that that that have you
know relatively fine dining and
so.
We're charged with doing is
compensating these liquor
license folks making them whole
by getting creative with with
this bill and I think we're
we're we're getting more
creative by each committee
but the licenses are not gonna
go to zero banks and I'm gonna
default on a loan I'd rather get
paid once a month and and there
might be a fluctuation in the
market as it relates to I know
thirty or forty new licenses
into the the Barron tavern in
the entertainment industry.
But these same arguments were
made when we did the beer and
wine and whatever happened then
will arguably happened now which
is it grows our economy boost
our tourism and increases our
hospitality industry.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you Mr chairman.
I don't disagree that we need
some sort of reform I'm just
trying to see
how this plays out of the court
said that we were required to
buy them out to the court saying
that we could not do they
prevent us from buying or making
a whole.
Thank you madam chair of doubt
thank you what a marvelous a
question yeah the Supreme Court
said no this is bad tax policy
that it's illegal it's
unconstitutional
the the that nineteen eighty one
bill gave tax credits.
And the Supreme Court said that
the there was unconstitutional
tax policy so we could not buy
them out using tax credits this
is why we're.
Try you know this is why we're
trying to do what we're doing
the tax deductions and we're
fully aware that is between tax
rates and tax deductions as
legislate tors but I am open to
any and all suggestions that
will that will allow folks to to
continue doing what they're
doing and and and maintain their
expected future income based on
these investments.
Thank you Mr chairman chair
Mister chairman for the.
So I I was going to ask
questions about the tax credit
and from all of the folks
commented on it
it is not for us to do
responsible tax credit
I was restaurants hotels hardest
industry in the state I'd be
surprised if the tax liability.
After a year of COVID clothes
and then even in the four years
moving forward it's going to be
a slow recovery and with their
losses.
Are we allowed to do a
refundable tax credit or is also
considered that tax policy and
and then a refundable tax credit
on the meets the percentage and
eliminates the the net cash
persons that you know the
percentile based on our taxable
income.
Refundable tax credit.
Thank you madam chair observed
out that's probably the best way
to do it that's the way it was
done back in eighty one in a
perfect world.
We have like the UNM economist.
the UNM professors at the
economics department at UNM you
know value everyone's license we
do a tax credit on the license
and we make a transferable
that's a perfect world but we're
just unable to do that
For the constitution and per
stay between us our our task is
to get around Cronus to make
people whole.
On the Mr chair.
Chair do you disagree with the
folks were saying that they
would really actually see about
as much as sixteen thousand
credit some people are
suggesting twenty five hundred
because of their taxable income
that determines the rate that
they would be able to receive
the credit did you disagree with
is there a way for us to do.
Last.
Under thousand thank you
representative Representative
thank you of Madam
Representative out no it this
we're going to tax committee the
minority whip has some strong
amendments to to increase the.
The at the so called soft
landing of the license holder so
we can do that the argument was
based on the fact that these
licenses would become zero
once we remove the twenty twenty
six provision that's that's not
gonna happen apac is like your
package liquor licenses will
remain the same and continue to
rise faster than inflation of
the other lives as I believe
will can will rise faster than
inflation hopefully that if our
kind of comes back will be more.
Demand for these for this you
know slight increase in supply
But but yeah they are we can do
more that's why and that's why
it's kind of a.
A twist folks are against the
twenty thousand dollars because
they think it's too much.
But if we waive the fees for
existing license holders over
ten years that's arguably two
hundred thousand dollars so if
we lower that to ten dollar
maybe so anyway those are the
policy decisions we have to make
but yes we are gonna be me
meeting with the stakeholders
to.
To increase the
The.
The the I want to call it.
I don't use these words but to
increase the.
You know the sections one two
and three in the bill in tech
and house tax.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you Mr chairman and so
you mentioned that box stores
we're not gonna be able to
solve.
What what what grocery stores
will be allowed to do delivery.
Thank you madam chair
representative out under the
under the the current language
everyone will be able to do the
delivery
that restaurants will be able to
do let delivery under limited
circumstances and that those big
box stores will be excluded from
delivery and that's you know we
can have that conversation and
take that out but I think it's
another act of faith for these
long time license holders
essentially in in the bill it's
up to ten thousand feet.
So the bill is
Some section for madam chair
It's
five ten thousand square feet so
if the grocery stores less than
ten thousand than they would be
able to deliver.
Thank you Mr chairman I was
it's important point for my
community we have.
Thanks family owned and operated
grocery store public's interest
the consequences which has a
pretty significant section
however they are more than two
thousand square feet thank you.
And and for the record madam
chair of sent out what's page
nine line seven and eight.
Thank you.
Mr chair Mr Chairman I'm so I I
think yes we are talking about
in the next committee to leading
a sense that.
Also we what happens to a
license after for your sake four
years from now or even opossums
in western tomorrow I can go and
open a restaurant liquor license
for three thousand dollars might
and I and I understand that
correctly.
No madam chair Representative
Dow no that was in the bill that
we tabled the the bill on Friday
that we table that included all
the new liquor licenses the cost
in this would be anywhere from
five thousand to twenty thousand
dollars depending on the size of
the restaurant
and you could adjust your beer
and wine license to add spirits.
The and the first part of your
question however.
but I missed it if you could
repeat the first half your
question I'm chair Mr Chairman
striking the funds that but the
point is that change thank you
no no that that and I took you
know copious notes during the
public comment and and eighty
percent of the the of the push
back was this was this a what
this clip so to speak so I'm
gonna propose that you know I
can do it as a committee member
but I prefer want you guys to do
it to delete section sixteen and
nineteen those are the two
provisions that have that
deadline in the in eighty one
they give a ten ten years ten
year economic up fluctuation
this bill again give us a five.
But
but we need to take to still
need to maintain the sense of
urgency of solving this problem
but I think it's best to remove
that sunset if someone will make
that motion I'll second.
Where is it again.
Madam chair representative
public comment section sixteen
and section nineteen.
She was listening to the
conversations I've it's a pretty
rocky regulatory environment New
Mexico anyway you just never
know what kind of building a
building and you just never know
what kind of those are in the
process and and and the
nonprofit work.
costs you know when you're costs
the the nonprofit eighteen
thousand dollars to comply next
year forty five thousand dollars
to comply and so you know even
our our water laws are you
losing so you know they are like
a license are sitting out there
that are not being utilized
right now just holding your
value and growing in.
You're not contributing to the
economic in that common of New
Mexico so I see the need for the
the correct one.
I'm also human understand that
based on the way our password
are we exactly how does a
license harmless and the only
thing that can happen there was
a
it is absolutely the license I
don't know other industries
Mexico so well protected even
for those who do not use.
Right now we're doing this and
so I see the need for reform I
also still have a lot of
questions and words.
Representative.
Covert's concerns.
From my district at this point.
Not heard from constituents one
supporting one pointing out a
portion of the bill is going to
directly help in my district
which is a rural area that
doesn't have enough license but
not folks in my district you
would like to participate.
Have reached out of this is the
fix so I I definitely share the
concerns I share the concerns.
And at this point.
As I'm not have a single
constituent my district ask you
to support but I have lots of
contact us need to ask that this
be rules or asked that this be
considered further thanks
committee has opportunity to fix
it and I would also suggest and
back up our senior member most
senior member in the house
chamber that we continue to work
on here and get it right thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative jobs.
Representative Mart√≠nez.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative my sister Maestas
for all of your work and and of
course Representative Gallegos
and and that Hochman Vigil for
for their work on their bill.
And Representative Scott to he
he's been part of these
discussions as well first and
foremost madam chair and and
chairman Maestas you know I
think that.
Of this undertaking is is heavy.
We've been living under the
status quo now for decades and
and I think we all understand
how how difficult it is
additional no no easy answer.
and and to all of the the public
comment today and that we heard
last week.
you know please know that we do
we we do listen we are listening
I mean clearly we're having this
discussion.
you know otherwise bills which
is rolled right through without
these without us making these
thoughtful decisions.
madam chair and and share my
status.
One of the things that you
suggested Mr chair madam chair
is that we delete section
sixteen and nineteen and and
that I I would agree with you I
think that we heard very loud
and clear today that that is one
of the areas that.
Most concerns I think.
Many of the the folks who would
join the call today who could
join this meeting today.
and I think that that's a that's
a very fair compromise and I
think that if if it's something
that we can do now in order for
this discussion to continue I
think that we should consider it
now you know I will say that
Many.
Many of the calls that I've
gotten in the mail that I've
gotten you know it's it's not
heavy one way or the other it's
it's it's having all the way
around I should say you know
I've I've heard from a lot of
small you know more top
restaurants in my district same
thank you like this is really
going to help us I've also heard
from folks saying look this is
going to be really bad for my
business right this whole issue
of of of these you know these
bank loans that are somehow
collateralized with these
licenses.
it's a real issue.
but I will also say.
the the status goal might be
working for some people that's
great it's fantastic.
It's not working for many many
others.
and you know the the the way we
treat liquor licenses in the
state with all due respect to
legislature that came before us
they they really got it wrong.
The way they created this
monopoly.
Really really has hampered
economic development across the
state particularly in rural
communities it wasn't too long
ago I was on a bus touring
southern New Mexico with with
many of you the fact that thank
you.
My colleague percent down and I
had a discussion about this very
issue in downtown Los crucis
because we heard from people on
there that the current liquor
license system was really
hampering their ability to bring
life back to that specific
community because these licenses
are in the hands of of the few
people not through any fault of
their own that's just the way
the game was set up.
so to me not doing anything.
is is not an option we've got to
do something.
Whether we do it did session
with the risks next session you
know that's obviously going to
be up to this committee and to
the to the legislature to to
decide here soon enough but
we've got to do something the
status quo.
Is great for the folks who
already have it.
And it is something that is a
huge detriment in a huge
obstacle for the small
entrepreneur out there who's
trying to break into the
business and and and do right by
their community
I say that with all due respect
for for for every single caller
today you know I I I I go to a
lot of your places of business
some of you are in my district
and and I I love what you've
done in our community and I
appreciate and I respect that
and so we're gonna try to do
that so we're gonna try to do it
right because we've got to do it
right this is not about
punishing you this is not about
punishing anyone this is about
doing what's best for our state
the way we see it right and and
obviously our our votes and and
our decisions have have
hopefully you know.
A lot of thought behind it and I
know for a fact that a lot of
thought has a lot of thought has
gone.
You know today's to this
particular piece of legislation
I know you're Maestas you've
been working on this for several
years you've been the one ring
the alarm bells about this so
this is not a fly by night.
Proposal you got here and I just
wanna I just want to say that
for the record now with regard
to section sixteen and nineteen
madam chair and and chairman
Maestas.
For the record can you tell us
what the.
What the.
In a very concise way if you
can.
What the impact this of removing
sections sixteen and nineteen
from this bill.
Thank you madam chair observe
Mart√≠nez of section sixteen and
nineteen have the the June
thirtieth twenty twenty six
sunset were licenses may not be
least sold or transferred after
June thirty twenty twenty six it
was trying to create a you know
a five year.
of.
They call it back in eighty one
the
The economic transition.
Right of economic adjustment but
so within two places so to
remove the sections madam chair
of the Martinez we would have to
delete on page forty five line
twenty five.
All the way to page forty seven
line six that section sixteen.
To remove section nineteen
because my so remove the whole
section you know but the only
amendment in the section of just
to remove section nineteen we
need to delete beginning on page
fifty three line nineteen.
To page fifty six line twenty
four.
Representative I I thanks for
that and and I've got I've got
those I've got those sections
highlighted here in my copy of
the document but can you explain
for the committee and for those
watching at home what is the
what is a practical impact of
removing the sections from the
bill.
Based on what we heard from the
callers today and their concerns
thank you madam chair of the
Martinez that there's no of
significant devaluation.
There's no significant
devaluation and there's no
You know because you're right
it's like who's gonna buy
license if they can only.
R. resell it within the next
five years even though the vast
majority these licenses they
don't plan on reselling you know
that the convenience stores and
the Walgreens of the world it's
it's not a marketable commodity
it's a it's a permission to
sell.
Spirits but once we take this
provision out the levy is
tremendous stress amongst a lot
of folks and we could focus on
delivery and the restaurant be
licenses.
So madam chair representative
status by removing the sections
folks who have one of these
licenses out there they no
longer that they're no longer
there's no longer a cliff for
them if you will after that
period of time.
And some of those concerns can
be addressed simply by striking
those two sections from the bill
this is what I'm hearing you say
so madam chair and
Representative I I would move
I would love to amend.
House bill two fifty five and
and I'm gonna I'm gonna read
this out hopefully who's who's
taking our notes here is a
Taylor Taylor Moran.
And and you know this is all
webcast too so that there's a
record of this but I'm and I can
email this to you as well after
we're done here but so we're
gonna remove section sixteen
we're gonna strike from page
forty five starting line twenty
five.
Through the period on page forty
seven line six.
That effectively strikes out
section sixteen.
And then on page fifty three
line nineteen starting.
Through page fifty six like
twenty four to Jerry and we are
striking that language and that
effectively strike section
nineteen.
And then the third piece is just
remembering and re entering
things
you know.
Accurately since the meeting
those two sections Madam chair
representative so that is the
amendment but I would move at
this time.
Second.
We have an amendment moved and
seconded is there any
discussion.
Representative Baldonado your
hand was that before I assume
you want to speak on the bill as
a whole thank you for clarifying
with the thumbs up I see no
discussion on the amendment is
there any objection to the
amendment.
madam chair.
The amendment did he seconded
long bill.
I can second that but he gets
that phone bill thank you
Representative Powdrell Culbert
will take it was in record miss
more yes secretary million
please mark Representative
Powdrell Culbert as the second
on that amendment is saying no
objection to the amendment.
You have a twice amended bill.
Chairman staffs and that will
continue with discussion of the
bill Representative Mart√≠nez you
have the floor.
Thank you madam chair I yield
the floor appreciate it.
Thank you Representative
Baldonado.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr chairman for your bill
today.
Have you left we keep on we keep
hearing this thing eventually I
think something's gonna.
In the past but I don't know
that that I'm I'm happy with
everything we've got here chair
Mister chairman
So couple small things
specifically on.
On page twenty seven it talks
about.
Restaurants and it looks like
we're giving them the ability to
do package with this is that
what we're doing in that piece.
Mr madam chair Representative
Baldonado no no no Sir
absolutely not we're not giving
any package occurrences in this
bill
All we're doing is adjusting the
beer and wine statute.
To allow someone if they so
choose.
To get a restaurant be license
which would include beer wine
and spirits.
And then allowing home delivery.
Okay my my package and by
restaurants.
Okay
so I'm I'm just specifically
it's page twenty seven on line
six and seven it it read more
striking out with this bill It
red restaurant licenses shall
not sell beer and wine for
consumption off the licensed
premises and we're striking that
so reads to me like we're
allowing them and need to do I
guess that's a delivery please
then is that
Madam chair representative no
yeah we have that out to to
comport with the delivery of
secretary I'm gonna okay gotcha
In this bill Mr chairman will
will will of an operator of a
bar be able to deliver.
Or do we exclude them.
Mr a madam chair of reputable
that'll they they will they will
and that was a great comment
made by a gentleman you know
what about what about in our
local artists there's you know
what about the in our local
dispensers license we can
clarify that language it.
But yes in our local dispensers
are eligible for delivery we
simply use the word on page nine
line I we use the word
dispensers that includes.
All dispensers including it in
our local but we'll we'll Adam
and just you know so folks don't
freak out.
Okay Mister chairman.
On the delivery drivers up but
first beginning of the bill.
These page twelve Mr chairman
honestly I think here.
Page twelve it's it starts on
page eleven letter H. their line
twenty five and then it reads
the department by rural show
creating third party alcohol
delivery permit and at a minimum
condition insurance follow up
the number one on online three
requirement all delivery
employees of the third party.
Alcohol delivery service shall
hold or hold a valid New Mexico
all calls for.
I kind of feel like that's all
encompassing the you're catching
every employee like they may
have certain employees that just
deliver food you know maybe they
have the did you know the one
vehicle that just does food runs
or whatever doesn't do the LFC
or vice versa maybe only have
one vehicle one delivery person
that does alcohol I kind of feel
like right there we might be
making a requirement for all of
their employees to be a Google
certified and and maybe that's
not what we want to do on that
one.
B. twelve one three so do we the
same I do not want to thank you
madam chair of that about that I
don't know it doesn't require it
it requires if they do the
delivery and we're putting him
in the same class as bartenders
you have to be twenty one years
old.
You have to have a of a server's
permit in order to get the
delivery permit so and I think
up because they take classes to
become a bartender they take
classes they get their service
permit and then they would.
So I guess two minutes later get
their delivery permit but we
want to keep folks we want to
put him in the class with
bartenders over twenty one and
we want them trained we want
them trained on a.
On delivering of these beverages
to the home same as in a drink
they're at the bar.
Thank you Mr chair Mister
chairman I still feel like that
one would would make a.
A company that uses to to just
have one or two people
delivering alcohol on it might
put them in position where
they're to feel like they want
to get all the people license so
but the other thing I wanted to
kind of kick around Mr Chairman
is the is the the the soft
landing piece we keep talking
about and and the the tax credit
I guess is that we're recalling
that a credit on their on their
G. is that what it is Mr
chairman Madam chair of several
that deduction for using them Dr
Would be illegal.
On.
So.
So when reading this is it it it
if you're not a very busy
operation because it reads to me
like for.
With the net income the
deduction is based on on their
sales of alcoholic beverages
only is that correct Mr Chairman
on their on their at the
restaurants on food or anything
else just yeah thank you madam
chair rose above and I don't
know great great catch one of
the gentleman spoke to that
point and all work with the the
tax lawyers and the drafters and
that hopefully the tax experts
and not Chairman Martinez is
committee if this does go
through but just to clarify it
includes those that are leasing
their license and those that are
utilizing their license the
leasing is infections wanting to
those that are using their
licenses section three but
correct right now it only allows
a G. R. T. deduction on liquor
sales and we let's see if we can
do that for for the for all
sales.
Mr Chairman so the attempt there
it's the it's if if they are
dispenser licenses fifty
thousand per year for four years
so we're trying to get them.
Of twelve hundred thousand is
that is that apple's apple yeah
actually credit two hundred
thousand resisted a deduction
meaning there's a paying the tax
on that fifty thousand dollars
of sales thank you madam chair
representative of that know it
would be a deduction so you're
deducting it before you pay the
tax it's not a tax credit.
like we would like so they're
putting Mr chairman and madam
chairman they're putting fifty
grand in their pocket a year for
four years basically is that
what we're.
It is long as they meet that's
the that's the plan might not
and I think by taking out of the
twenty twenty six deadline.
This may not be necessary but
we're gonna keep it is the right
thing to do so in Mr Chairman
why don't why don't we want to
differentiate between the
dispenser license and
and the retailers licenses there
is.
Reason for the chair of rules
about not because the up will as
as the folks on the on the in
the in the audience know.
It's not package or by the drink
it's you know it's retail or
dispensers but the retail
licenses and affected.
the retail I there's not a a new
retail license there's not any
new.
Package liquor stores in the
state of Mexico and when we use
monopoly would want to be rude
but there's a barrier to entry
if I want to be if I want to
look or store I got it going to
fork out you know Senator grand
a to get a license to sell
liquor so those folks are
getting a deduction in this bill
we feel is the right thing to do
but that deduction is less than
the dispensers because
theoretically.
When they thirty or forty
restaurateurs you know put their
dispensers licenses on the
market.
It would it would directly what
it would affect the market value
of price less than the deduction
but.
but somewhere in the
neighborhood.
Mr chairman and if you like and
then tried to like.
We're gonna miss the mark on
that like I feel like that's not
enough of a number based on the
fact that these licenses are
average I think about three to
fifty thousand with the numbers
we talk about
Why not explore a scenario where
we do a fee.
And and use that fee to
compensate those those.
Liquor license holders and and
make them home I know we've done
we've we at length debated the
the pet food on label bill
whatever it was the last couple
years on and that was I was told
million times not attack the
and so so when we use that fee
to pay for for Spender
appropriations for for for folks
for their animals so what we're
using that money we're giving it
to people or we're we're
obviously okay with that and not
doing not breaking that to
donation because why not have a
feed it then builds of the Kitty
that we can compensate these
these license existing license
holders Mr chairman thank thank
you madam chair Representative
Baldonado that that would be in
a perfect world hopefully this
video is not.
Not working two years from now
when somebody you know what what
this bill becoming law but we
that's the reasoning for the
five percent consumer tax so the
five percent consumer taxes
essentially like a user fee if
you don't drink alcohol you're
not you don't have to pay it but
I think that people will be
comfortable with the with the
five percent of user fee to grow
our economy and have flourishing
you know nightlife and
entertainment venues in the
state of Mexico so that so we'll
be keeping tabs on that will
know exactly how much that makes
it will be in it its own fund
but will will all the dollar
amount and then how will provide
the the the legal Avenue to to
compensate these license
holders.
Knowing that it's not cut
costing the taxpayers any money
other than the folks that are
drinking a few beverages.
That's a lot to my plan.
And you know we're gonna be
talking about this during the
interim the next couple three
years I think everybody on the
zoom once our economy to grow we
just need to ensure that these
investments
Are honored.
As best we can yeah I agree with
that Mr chairman I do
The the ten thousand square foot
limitation that we're putting on
on the retailers in order to be
able to deliver so that's
obviously designed to get the
small guy to be able to deliver
not the big guy right Madam
chair of the above not exactly
what Mr Chairman what's to
prevent say a Walmart or
whomever a big a big box from
just you know leasing space and
it are renting space Senator
industrial area that's that's a
nine thousand square foot
building and have frozen shelves
of of bottles of whiskey or
whatever they're selling
whatever they're going to
deliver not have a retail fund
up front and just have to worry
drivers and just knock it out of
the park for you know but less
bottle or whatever you know it
is it did do we have to a way to
prevent that I mean that created
thank you Mr and it was about
not I think you might get a an
offer to be a high level
Management that'll heart it's a
great idea they can do it only
if they buy a new liquor license
they cannot do it with an
existing license the license is
attached to the to the property
so if they purchase a new
property with a smaller store
put a W. on it directly they
could do that but it be its own
entity but that's but that's a
great that's you know using a
little it's
We're you know we're trying to
put on paper something that
will.
really help these license folks
and I think that's as good as we
have as of right now but we get
adjusted later.
Mr chairman and madam chair one
more
well my question the the fee for
this for this new license what
what is that fee and the the the
to entry is a thirty thousand of
which is that I thank you madam
chair of rules about that also
the feed to adjust your beer and
wine license to add spirits
depends on the size of the
restaurant the seating capacity
is determined by the.
Fire marshal whoever and it's up
that way that if someone wants
to open up a small bistro they
don't have to pay twenty
thousand dollars so it's five
thousand ten thousand fifteen
thousand twenty thousand
depending on the size of the
restaurant.
One to twenty five twenty six to
fifty fifty one two hundred or
more than a hundred and at if I
may madam chair of the above not
only Senator only four percent
of your sales is alcohol but
yeah but that four percent
attach is to meals so that that
spirit license enhances the the
viability of your restaurant
tremendously and and that's why
that's why we wanna add this
change to the beer and wine
license statute.
Thank you madam chair Mister
chairman you know I just I guess
I'd say that at this point you
know we keep telling all these
folks on their attendee list
that the writings on the wall
something's going to change you
know we're gonna we're gonna
have some sort of reform at some
point in the future I would
already say that we've
compromise the value of those
licenses that are out there
right now anyone trying to sell
a license right now has been put
in the position already I
wouldn't buy license right now
if I was opening a restaurant to
be looking hard at and what
we're talking about today before
I dropped you know half million
dollars or whatever it is on on
on a on a license but but I do
feel like we you know we need to
compensate specially those folks
not necessarily
I think we compensate everybody
but the ones that may have
bought a license the last two or
three years or whatever it may
be and haven't had a chance to
recoup you know big numbers over
over a lifetime or twenty years
or however long some of these
other folks of licenses for but
I'm I'm hoping that this thing
can get better and and and be
more palatable for the industry
above to see you open up the the
the conversation more and more
to to these folks and see what
they can get into that bill that
at least on makes things work a
little better for them so but
with that madam chair that's
that's only questions for today
thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Johnson.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you colleagues I have the.
A real heartburn with that seven
AM and Sunday the situation in
the bill
as you know I was the legislator
who propose at the house bill to
change package delivery hours to
open at seven AM from two to ten
AM.
So
I'm I'm very concerned about
the seven AM opening out of
those establishments and as you
know in my County we have so
many many more liquor licenses
per capita.
In making the county and so as a
result our county has
provisions.
In the law
For any anymore
Worker at I thank you for
licenses.
So I've heard from my
communities and this is a very
very very very complicated
We should for me however I do I
do know in my community that we
need to do something different
day after day after day we do
the same thing and so now we
have for substance abuse
recovery centers and Gallup
alone.
And so I think I'm making a
change and as Representative
Martinez talked about the status
quo you know I agree to
improving our community and
you know growing our economy we
all we're always asking our
young people to go get an
education start a business
make a contribution to your
community and make it better so
that's that side of the the
situation here so I hope that
along with Representative
Baldonado and other comments
that we can continue to talk
about
Working out an ironing out some
things in this bill before it
goes if.
Or before it goes to the tax
committee thank you madam chair.
And just want to know what your
sentiments are regarding this
seven AM situation madam chair.
Senator thank you madam chair
Representative Johnson and I
appreciate your leadership in
your own community not just
statewide but I know that
McKinley County has some
challenges and uniqueness and
laws are different even though
it's a statewide law as you
recall madam chair
Representative Johnson they are
local option district and inter
county transfers do not apply to
McKinley County it's sixty that
six B. dash twelve there's
there's magic words and that
statute that we can put in
section a of the delivery permit
it's a bill on page nine.
Section a at the top so I commit
to you up to getting that bit
drafted and and proposing that
at the next committee as well as
removing the seven AM provision
as well no it's not.
Is not unique to the world it's
it's unique to New Mexico that
that we don't sell a.
Alcohol before eleven o'clock on
a Sunday every every day should
be treated the same but I
respect that and I'll remove
that as well
That was one of the things in
the bill
That that that frankly people
come from out of town and they
they catching a flight and they
order drink and they lose their
money because they can get a
drink before eleven o'clock but
all remove that as well.
My word it.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative.
Thank you representative
Johnson.
Representative Fajardo.
Thank you madam chair I didn't
realize that is not a valid does
I'm just you know it just it you
know this is our days I don't
know how many days we've been
listening to what liquor license
the conversations you know I
just want to you know with some
of the comments that that we're
said by some some of the
the public public comments and
you know they're talking about
some of the things that you know
we're not listening to we're not
paying attention and we're just
kind of doing something and
we're trying to do something at
the wrong time and you know if
if those people are still online
I want I want to understand we
are listening we have been
listening this is why we have
spent three days of listening to
different bills listen to public
comment hours upon hours because
we have been listening you know
I've been here for nine years
and you know we need to fix for
exit liquor licenses in the
state of New Mexico.
Avid licenses three hundred
fifty thousand Colorado's two
thousand.
And so the other problem that
exists that we have to fix
you know there's a lot of
arguments that this is not the
time well it is the time if we
can do it right.
And so I want to assure
everybody out there is listening
everybody all those license
holders and everything that we
are trying to do this right.
We that is our goal and so
please keep talking to us pretty
sharing your ideas with us but I
assure you that we are trying to
do this and we're trying to do
it right
and so and I think you
I'm Madam chair representative
for where the amendment that
that you did that shows it shows
that we're listening you know
the amount you know that
consideration that you describe
Johnson her district that shows
that we're trying to do this
right they do have a quick
question.
Online sales track anywhere in
the state and how does that look
and will look good.
Online sales I know that we can
have wine delivered into the
state New Mexico but I can't
order a bottle of tequila.
So I'm just wondering that that
I really know that but I know
that but if you can expand on
that a little bit Madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair
representative though
Great question I don't know what
exactly
But I can order a bottle of wine
from Florence Italy.
But I can get it delivered from
the from the restaurant down the
street but the restaurant down
the street can actually put in
the mail and get it the next day
but yeah there is a bunch of
corks to our statute we need to
even we even if we don't change
the law we need to rewrite the
statute and and and work from a
good foundation but there are
quirks like that in
contradictions we need to solve
at a in the coming months and
years.
But the white white white noted
the killer and yes to wine okay
so madam chair representative
that is not included in the
balance what we're not
addressing any of that we're
just doing straight delivery is
correct.
Madam chair representative out
of the right now the bill is two
fold allowing delivery.
Under certain circumstances for
restaurants and excluding the
big box stores and are creating
this restaurant be license
modifying the bear in mind
statute.
Madam chair representative I
want to also congratulate you on
on that too because I I like to
focus on local local businesses
and you know I'm not against big
box stores but when we can give
the local guys have you know a
little bit of lead a leeway give
them an advantage as far as
delivery goes that does support
business and you know it it
probably has some tweaks and if
this loopholes and this happens
and you know the goal plus is
going to move move over after
come back here in and do some
adjustments but I want to thank
you for that because you know we
have a lot of local guys who are
suffering is the local
restaurants local breweries you
know you know liquor stores were
shut down in New Mexico while
the big box stores were allowed
to stay open and so any
consideration we can get to
local I. I appreciate but this
is complicated by and wish that
we had done separately
delivering in one fell and I'm
like a license in another failed
but all of the bills that we've
heard have them combined so I
guess we're going to just do
this I'm.
In the day you're going to make
some people mad and you know
we're not going to and not
everybody's going to go away
happy
but we're just at that point
we're gonna have to do something
and I just want to encourage
everybody out there who has an
investment and has a stake in in
this argument I understand that
we need you to come to the
table.
We we need to make a change it's
going to happen.
I would rather have you at the
table listening to your voice
and listen to what you have to
stay and be part of the
conversation because I'm it's
going to make a difference on
how this sport and that you know
I don't know what this bill is
going to go
but thank you for your time
thank you madam chair thank you
representative.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative Dow
Representative Powdrell Culbert
your hand is still up is that
from just remaining from your
previous comment or did you want
to second round here I have
another question I'm just
curious about some.
Colors.
Okay thank you madam chair you
know one of the
Public members mentioned about
the
Possibility the robbery is and
all that you know from the
delivery person do you have any
information have you had any
information in regards to the
rock we all hold up issue you
know as far as deliveries are
concerned.
Thank you madam chair of the
partial cover no that's always a
concern.
Of it's a concern to the pizza
delivery guy up the statute is
clear that they can have extra
alcohol like they can have a
whole.
Backseat full and make multiple
deliveries.
Whatever that's worth so
theoretically they can steal the
alcohol that it's being
delivered but I think it's going
to be prepaid is prepaid via a
credit card so the person buying
now called by it I suppose that
they could jump the guy but.
that's always a concern and
that's why we need to train
these folks and and hopefully
restaurants and and mom and
public or stores will have a
relationship with folks are
inclined to.
C. home delivery but home
delivery
Yes lessons lessons of folks on
the road no question about it
yes I agree with you on that but
I'm just curious that's that.
Hello has there been very many
incidents are you aware of it as
far as the.
Delivery individual being harmed
in any kind of way.
Thank you madam chair
representative covered I'm not
aware I don't know the stats I
know it's a criminals are more
apt to attack somebody that.
It's not a bird in the in the
front yard for a particular
purpose but I it's always a
concern but I don't have any
okay thank you madam chair.
You representative
Representative Serrano.
Madam chair it leave it there
it's that time to the and I'd
like to make a motion to pass HB
two fifty five with no
recommendation as Amanda I was
twice and.
I'll second that motion we have
a motion and a second two passed
with no recommendation as twice
amended.
All right.
Take the chairs provocative in
and add my comments here.
Because I really appreciate the
work done today I think this is
been an amazing example of New
Mexico doing things right.
We have an alcohol licensing
system that is the last of its
kind in the nation and it is.
Not functional it is not
economically feasible for the
growth in our state.
And yes.
We have many folks who spoke to
us today to have it invested
tremendously in that system in
good faith and the state has led
that system ride for decades.
And we have to find a way to
make it right.
And I truly believe.
As Representative Fajardo said
and that is the sponsors of the
bill have indicated if we work
together we will find a way to
do this.
I really appreciate and admire
the work and the thought that
has been done in this committee
today.
and with that I'm going to ask
the secretary to call of all.
Representative Baldonado.
I'm sorry can you repeat that.
No.
Thank you Representative Dow.
Representative Fajardo Fajardo
sorry about that.
Yes explain.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Johnson.
Past.
Representative Mart√≠nez.
Yes and I like to explain able
please.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Yourself.
Representative I'm also Culbert
you are muted.
I said no and I don't want to
explain my boat.
Thank you sorry about that.
Representative Serrato yes.
Madam vice chair figure are up.
Yes.
Chairman my Estes.
Yes.
I apologize I am sure looking
back to Representative Johnson.
Thank you yes and I would like
to explain why the.
Was are totaled and I'm
secretary it is.
Once again site.
So it is I to.
Sixty three sorry about that.
Six is very don't.
Yes he did pass one now at
commend Dacian.
And we have with us twice
amended and we have three folks
who need to explain their votes
for her Representative Fajardo.
Thank you madam chair I'm.
Thank you I'm in the I don't
like I do passed with no rack
it's just I don't like it I
always believe it's our
responsibility to to do the fix
the bells in the committee
they're assigned the reason I am
and I say yes because I do not
going to tax
you know and that the
conversation that we started
here is going to to continue
madam chairman my Martinez is
going to be very diligent in
making sure that all the
stakeholders are heard that
Representative and that this
conversation is going to
continue and so I guess I don't
like to know rack but it's I do
like the fact that we need to
continue the conversation and so
thank you madam chair and thank
you at chairman.
Thank you.
Just to explain your vote.
Thank you madam chair and I also
agree with my colleague reserve
our little look you know this is
one of my favorite committee
serve on because we're so
different I mean you know
Representative Powdrell Culbert
has said this before you know
that there's nobody more propose
politically there's than she and
myself but this committee
practice itself is working
together and in really getting
things right and working hard at
getting things right and quite
frankly it's been the culture
this committee for a long long
time I mean I think today was an
example of that so I'm very
proud of this committee and
proud of of the chair and and
you by your FIR for leading us
for all the advocates out there
on both sides of this issue you
know this process will continue
This bill will go on to its next
committee will have more
opportunities to to refine it to
to make this as as a workable
for as many of you as possible
and with that madam chair thank
you for the opportunity.
Thank you Representative.
Everybody take a breath.
We are now moving on to house
bill twenty eight madam chair
water I think of Representative
John.
Don't.
Resented Johnson to explain your
vote my apologies thank you
madam chair and yes I I know
that this bill is going to the
tax committee next and we're
going to continue to work on it
I I will appreciate a seat at
the table with my community as
we continue to work on this bill
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative.
All right I will get back over
to the chairman.
No I won't.
Well.
Hello you documents for house
bill twenty eight out of the
file.
Miss more yeah we do you be able
to find a sponsor and move her
into the panelists room please
Representative Andrea Romero.
Thank you madam chair I also
have a no expert Elizabeth a
grain Eunice she's in the
attendees I believe.
Yes if you would raise your hand
that makes it easy to spot you
in the attendees section and we
will move you over.
Thank you madam chair.
She has great brought here.
Thank you Representative Romero
you have the floor thank you
madam chair this only take about
four hours to debate it's one
accident today well done
everyone on this committee
thanks for sticking with us this
is house bill twenty eight
slamming and cramming for many
of you are very familiar bill
that just has made it through
the house
it yet hopefully it again this
bill basically allows for folks
who built with their telecoms
companies to add a third party
charge to their phone bill so if
you're someone like me who loves
the Mandalorian and also has a
Verizon phone you can add Disney
plus to your
billing and it just streamlines
essentially all of that we
haven't fixed this loss since
nineteen ninety nine and so just
wanting to basically make it
easy for consumers and customers
to have a great relationship
with their with their billing
and with me is Elizabeth gray
Nunez she will speak on behalf
of the bill and added anything I
forgot thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr yes.
Hi there are madam chair members
of the committee thank you very
much for taking the time to hear
from me today I am here to talk
to you about house bill twenty
eight which as Representative
Romero said allows telephone
providers to bill customers for
non telephone services so this
is something that squares New
Mexico law up with.
Literally every other state in
the union New Mexico is the only
state where telephone companies
like Verizon I should introduce
myself I'm sorry I am government
affairs counsel for Verizon.
College eyes
And Verizon it's who I'm here
representing today
and my my business asked us to
work on this issue it started
when we ran a promotion that was
very popular where you could
receive a certain period of time
from apple music that was free
before.
that you would then be billed
for it if you wanted to continue
having a service and in every
other state we were able to
allow our customers to roll over
and build those streaming type
service packages on their phone
bills and there are a number of.
Laws and provisions both in
state and federal laws that
regulate how telephone companies
can do that down to their
requirements that those charges
be in a separate section of the
bill clearly labeled as non
telco charges but that's right
now we can't do it so if you're
in New Mexico customer and you
like me took advantage of
Verizon's promotion to offer a
certain time three hundred plus
I'm you would not be able like
customers everywhere else in the
country to continue paying for
that Disney plus subscription
with you know the tap of a
couple of buttons seamlessly
when your period of promotional
time and it instead you would
and our customers have had to.
And that free promotional period
and start over with Disney plus
so while this seems like a
pretty pedestrian issue and it
is extremely straightforward
we're providing customers in New
Mexico as an option as consumers
it's important to us because we
want our customers to have the
best possible experience and the
same experience as murders
everywhere else in the United
States.
So I'll pause there I am here
members of the committee madam
chair to answer any questions
you may have.
Thank you yes.
We'll go to public comment we
have a few intend these left you
are at and the row if you are
here to speak in opposition to
house bill twenty eight would
you please click your raise
hand.
If you are here to speak in
opposition.
All right if you're here to
speak in support.
Click your right hand.
We will draw you in.
Please send me your yourself.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee share this our
behalf of T. mobile just briefly
we appreciate the clarification
to the definition of cramming
and we think the sponsor for
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you for your privative
Marco Gonzalez.
Good afternoon on madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Marco Gonzales and I am the
registered lobbyists for Ryzen I
don't really have much to add
except to say the sponsor this
bill did come through this
committee in the previous
session and it just got hung up
on the calendar at the end but
this is essentially just an opt
in for consumers so it's
consumer choice option
not to opt out and so with that
we think the committee and and
and appreciate the committee's
consideration in support of this
thank you very much.
Thank you Sir I see no more
raised hand so we will now go to
committee.
That some.
By now
Madam secretary well let's do it
this way is there any opposition
to to pass on this bill.
Saying you have a do us.
You'll.
Well done everybody thank you
madam chair appreciate you.
Thank you Representative thank
you for sticking it out and
waiting with us and share a
sincere announcements were just
for the committee before we
depart.
Thank you members of the
committee thank you analyst then
that'll is just been working
their tails off of analyzing all
the bills
The the
Friday is a four sessions you
know so we will not be meeting
Friday afternoon and I'll be
speaking with vice chair and
ranking member Representative
public comment about a Saturday
meeting from ten to one so we'll
let you know tomorrow morning
thank you Madam.
Thank you committees see you
Saturday.
The decision has been made.
Yes low.
Everyone.
