Madam,
you have a
corn.
Thank you. All righty. Our first
order of business, I'm gonna go
to Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
In consultation with you and the
chair from tax um Chair Lite,
uh, I moved to remove Senate
Bill 112 off the table and make
it the next order of business.
We have heard this bill, um, and
it's been removed off the table.
Um, I'm gonna ask Patrick to go
and go to Rome.
Oh, we need, I thought he just
speak.
I need emotion. It's not a
subway or anything, right? No
pass on 1 ft.
OK.
Patrick to Cavill.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative De la Cruz, yes,
Representative Fernandez, yes.
Representative Bente.
Representative Mason
Representative Matthews
To take.
Oh.
Would you like to pass and we
can come back to you.
OK, pass.
Yeah
Representing Murphy,
yeah, representative of
Representative Serrado.
Uh, Representative Matthews.
I'm sorry,
on what?
I.
Oh, OK.
Yeah, I
I was
I went
it, it's already been removed
from the table, we're just
voting.
Yes.
Representative is voting yes.
uh, Madam Vice Chair,
I know, Madam Chair. Yes, Madam
Chair, final tally for the Du
pass motion, 9 votes yes, 1 vote
no. We have a due pass. Thank
you.
All righty.
I know that um
Senator Shindo didn't believe
that the house met this late,
but here we are.
All righty. Senator Sindo to
present your bill.
Uh, thank you, man and chairs
and thank you members of the
committee.
A Senate Bill 158.
It's uh a bill that ensures that
all current data uh reporting
practices.
And the two of our states
flagship economic development
programs, the local economic
development Act. It's also known
as LEDA and our JTI programs
will continue. This is part of
several initiatives that were
designed to strengthen the LFC's
evaluation.
Of economic development
programs, including the 350,000
non-recurrent corporation to the
LSC for Economic development,
uh, I mean economic analysis
software, um, in the feed bill.
Currently, the economic
development department
internally collects and monitors
performance data regarding Lita
and Jade Kiy practice, the
department does share
information regarding uh
shares the department
information with the legislature
and the public.
The Senate bill, uh, what the
Senate bill does is really
formalizes that practice into
statute ensuring that current
data and sharing practices
continue regardless of
administration. So all we're
doing is qualifying
distractions, so.
With me here is Julisa from uh
LFC.
our expert witness, and to my
right is Representative Dixon.
Thank you. So, um,
So do you stand for questions?
Is that, is that the end of your
presentation.
All right, now, so we're, we're
good. OK.
Thank you. Uh, do we have here,
anybody here in favor of this
bill?
Do we have anybody on Zoom in
favor of the bill.
No, man.
Senator, nobody likes your bill.
Do we have anybody in opposition
of this bill.
Anybody on him.
No, OK, uh, questions from the
committee.
Uh, represented, yeah, Chairman
London.
It's that's rude. I'm sorry,
it's not down. I'm watching DuP
Pa on Senate Bill 158
OK, before I, before I take that
motion, I actually have some
questions. Um, Senator, um,
could you
Um, it sounds like basically
what you're wanting from LFC is
a report. Is that correct?
Uh, Madam Chair, um, we are
putting in statutes that the
economic development department
will report on Jacob and Lida,
um, and then that data will be
available to the LHC for
evaluation purposes. So it's
more of the report in for
economic development.
OK, so is it a more intense
report? Is it?
How, how does it differ? Yes,
madam, like, like the senator
said, we're just putting all the
current practices that the the
EDD is doing in statute, so it's
not anything new that we're not
putting extra reporting
requirements. It's everything
that the agency has already
collecting.
All righty, and on my analysis,
it notes that EDD notes the
requirement to disclose
confidential and proprietary
information will greatly deter a
company's confidence in its
protection and will make it the
weary to work with New Mexico.
Um, what is your response to
that? Yes, Madam Chair, so Cenel
150 only allows data that um
provided to the lepsy that can
be used for evaluation purposes,
um, we can't publish that data
unless it's sufficiently
Um,
anonymized so like it
sufficiently analyzed, um, so
we're not collecting and we're
not gonna be sharing any data
that the agency isn't already
collecting and we're not going
to be publishing it. It's just
for simple evaluation purposes.
All righty. All right, well
then, um, unless anybody else
has any questions, I will go to
um
Chairman lent his motion.
Patrick Representative
Armstrong.
Representative Dela Cruz.
Representative Fernandez.
Representative Lente
Representative Mason
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy, yes,
Representative Paramon.
Representative Serato, Madam
Vice Chair, and Madam Chair,
yes, Madam Chair, final tally
for the Duin motion. 10 votes
yes, 0 votes no.
Right, let's go on to you're
welcome. See, wasn't it worth
the wait
All right, let's go to
Thank you
Uh
It
Actually, I'd like to go to
Padilla, um, SB 169 cause I know
he's under the weather tonight.
Thank you.
So I asked for everybody else's
uh
sympathy for him on his behalf.
No, I thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
and, um, ranking member and
members of the committee. I'm
Senator Michael Padilla. I also
have with me the, um, secretary
designate for the Economic
Development Department, Rob
Black, and we're before you
today on Senate Bill 169. Uh,
Madam Chair, numbers, we do have
a key ingredient missing in our
economic development tool kit
and what, and that key
ingredient really is site
readiness, sight.
readiness is uh something that
we can easily do for ourselves,
which a lot of other neighboring
regional states do in our area,
but essentially what we do is
we, we build the site
characterization study that is
overseen by a strategic economic
development site advisory
committee that knows what to
look for, uh, that helps us to
put together every single bit of
every single inch of the every
square of new and I do have a
co-sponsor, by the way, who
happens to be your, uh, your
vice or your, I'm sorry, your
ranking member. I also have sent
a Representative Dixon.
And rep and Senator Branton and
the whole slew of other
characters, Madam Chair. So, so
here we go. So the, the uh
advisory committee will, will
be, uh, full of people who know
exactly what to look at from an
economic development standpoint.
It's sort of this, this thing
that we've been missing for a
really long time, so that when
you get off the airplane, we
can, and you tell us exactly
what it is that you're trying to
accomplish and do with your
business or you're in New Mexico
business, wishing to move or
expand in your community, we can
tell you exactly what is the
best site in New Mexico for what
you're trying to accomplish.
Um, and then we designate those
and prepare those uh a strategic
plan for those sites, and then
we hand that over to whoever and
they go and make that happen.
This is a companion bill to
Senate Bill 170, which is also
parked in your committee at the
moment, and I hope that we'll
get to that eventually. Um, so
on that, why would we want to do
this, Madam Chair? One is
accelerated economic growth.
Uh, I know you want to be fast,
so I'm not gonna go into all
that unless we have questions.
Competitive advantage, um,
efficient resource allocation, a
comprehensive planning to make
sure that we're doing this the
right way and then uh
infrastructure improvement for
that particular piece of
property and then the ones that
are following it successively
down the road. I'm going to ask
the, uh, cabinet secretary
designate to say a couple of
words. Why I should allow my
co-sponsor here to chime in.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
co-sponsors are sorry, members
of the committee, um, this is
something that me and
Senator Padilla and Rob Black
before he was secretary and a
whole group of others have been
working on for years. Um, I'm
excited to be here to finally
get it going. Um, I will also
keep it super short and hand it
over to the secretary.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, one thing I would
like to highlight is the kind of
the process, uh, the way this
would work is we would work with
cities, counties, tribal
governments to ask them to
identify sites to apply for site
characterization work. So we
would be working in hand in hand
in glove with our local
communities, uh, in partnership
with them, providing them free
resources to do that site
characterization work, giving
them the the consulting to say
what is best used for that best
economic value for that.
plan, but it would solely be to
them to apply and be part of
that program. It's not something
we put on them. It's they're
working with us to do that
application. Uh, similarly, when
we're looking to allocate funds
that will be part of the fund,
uh, that would be an application
process through the board that
the, the senator mentioned, uh,
with that, I will, I will pause
and let you ask questions. And I
sure, I'll just wrap up our, our
opening statement with, uh,
there is approximately, as you
know, it's very fluid Madam
Chair of the budget, but now
that it's over on our side, we
do know there's about 2.
Or or so a million dollars
available for the implementation
of this program. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, I'm gonna go to
the public comment. Is there
anybody here in favor of this
bill.
Ready to line up. I'll have our
attendants, uh, meet you in the
middle. He'll hold the
microphone. You have one minute.
OK. Good evening, Madam Chara
Gallego is a member of the
committee.
Um, so the majority whip, but,
um, Carlos Lucero, the um public
service company in New Mexico.
And was Senate Bill 169 it will
allow the Secretary of Economic
Development to solicit proposals
for site pre-development
projects. This would include
pre-development works such as
surveying, planning,
infrastructure improvements and
permitting. Furthermore, the
sight readings fund can be
utilized as further site
infrastructure.
This will help speed up the
timeline processes for full
development of um economic
development project and in turn
attract business and industry to
the state. For these reasons,
PNM supports and Bill 169. Thank
you, Carlos.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh Kent Cravens,
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico Association of Realtors,
uh, we too stand in full support
of, of Senate Bill 169. Senator
Padilla, thank you for bringing
it forward, Secretary Black and
others that have been working
really hard on it. Uh, we think
it's a critical element of any
economic development plan to,
uh, to invite companies to come
and tell them, yeah, we're ready
for you. So this is wonderful.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee ad Jason Espinoza,
executive director with New
Mexico IDEA, the statewide
economic development
Professional Association, uh,
we've had the pleasure of
working with the sponsors and
the economic development
department throughout the
summer, really flushed this
initiative out and this is our
number one priority from the
economic development community,
and it's really about shortening
the timeline so that we are
ready when projects want to come
to New Mexico that we have sites
ready and available uh for those
projects to come here and create
jobs and we have the
infrastructure.
ready, so you stand in strong
support. Thank you. Thank you.
Chair and committee members. I'm
Leslie Hillema, president and
CEO of the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce, and we support this
bill. Um,
Senate Bill 169, uh, because
site readiness is one of the
biggest factors in attracting
business investment and economic
growth. When businesses look to
expand or relocate, they need
shovel-ready sites with the
right infrastructure and
permitting in place. Without
that, they moved to to states
that are better prepared. The
bill accelerates job creation by
reducing delays in site
development, allowing businesses
to start operations faster and
higher sooner. It also leverages
public-private partnerships,
ensuring that both local
communities
communities and private industry
benefit from these investments.
SB 169 is a smart, forward
thinking policy that will keep
New Mexico open for business.
Thank you.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
committee members Ryan
Cangelosi, University of New
Mexico Health Sciences Director
of Economic Development. This is
one key element of economic
development that we have not
had, and we fully support this.
We were very grateful to send
uh.
Secretary Black for bringing
this forward, because this is
something that we really need.
Thank you.
Good evening, Madam Chair, and
as members of the committee. My
name is Paul Loh. I'm the
founder, president and COO of
Mercury Bio, we're developing a
drug delivery system here in
Santa Fe at the business
incubator. I expect by the end
of this year, we're gonna need a
new site, uh much larger lab, so
I totally support this and um
the thing bioscience needs in
New Mexico is infrastructure and
capital. Thank you very much.
Good evening, chair and members
of the committee. Um, thank you
very much, Alex Cole. Um, I'm
speaking on behalf of the
bioscience Authority, um, I
definitely support the bill very
strongly.
As out of my own experience, it
would have made a tremendous
difference for me, myself, when
I actually needed the site to
build out a company here and
would have shortened the time to
get access to the site
massively. Thank you.
Patrick, do you have anybody on
Zoom Marla Schultz.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marla Shots,
registered lobbyist for NAOP,
New Mexico, the Association of
Commercial Real Estate
Developers. We stand in support
for all the reasons previously
stated, and we would like to
thank the sponsors and the
cabinet secretary for bringing
this important piece of
legislation forward. We believe
this will increase business
development and reduce the
timelines for site selection.
Thank you.
And we get and and Enrique Nel.
Thank you. That was, that was
perfect. Good afternoon, uh, or
good evening, Madam Chair and
committee. Enrique now here with
the Greater Albuquerque Chamber
of Commerce. We do strongly
support Senate Bill 169. Right
now, we have very little
inventory for medium to large
scale commercial, industrial, or
other uses, and these sites can
take anywhere from 2 to 4 years
or longer to prepare utilities
and be ready for development,
Rather than risking asking the
next Netflix or Amazon, if they
can, you know, maybe just wait a
few years.
Senate Bill 169 proactively
allows New Mexico to create an
inventory of strategic economic
development sites, Mexico more
competitive with other states,
and we hope will attract
significant capital investment,
tax revenues, and jobs. We do
ask for a due pass on Senate
Bill 169. Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have anybody
here in opposition?
Anybody on Zoom?
No. OK, let's go to the
committee.
Uh, Representative Matthews.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
thank you, uh, presenters and
senator and Representative.
Um, I'm looking at it. I kind of
had made a note to myself that
how are you gonna decide where,
where the sites are and who's
gonna make those decisions, and
then I was thinking at the fur,
I thought they actually kind of
asked the question, maybe in a
little better way, um, first of
all, I think what I I was in an
interim meeting this summer and
thought, you know, this was
incredibly great idea, but um,
In terms of execution, that's
kind of what I'm looking at
here. So, um,
One of the things he the uh uh
ferments is that there is a lack
of criteria in goals. Uh, goal,
and now while the bill does
specify that the advisory
committee is responsible for
recommending an application
processing criteria criteria for
approval, there are no clearly
defined goals or measurable
objectives for strategic
economic development sites or
pre-development projects. It is
not clear whether the sites and
then it goes
on and on. So I'd like um
perhaps the uh secretary, um,
To answer
And I'm afraid I have to go to a
another committee and present a
bill, but I think it's still a
good question. Well chair and uh
representative, thank you for
the question. I will ask the
secretary to comment, but
essentially, that's the reason
for the advisory board. They're
going to be professionals in
this very area. They're gonna
know exactly what this matrix
questionnaire, etc. needs to
look like. So that's, that's
where that will come in. Um,
second, um, if you're a, uh,
business owner out there or this
or that, you're gonna be highly
motivated, Madam Chair, to get
in front of.
This advisory board to get on
this list. So you're, you're
gonna be motivated to get that
done because it's just an
additional sales way to to
market and sell your property
if, if it's something that would
be usable here. I do also want
to say just to make sure that
we're being as inclusive as
possible we did amend in the
Senate Tax Business and
Transportation Committee. We did
an amendment that um added uh in
including Indian nations, tribes
and pueblos to make sure that
this was open to absolutely
everybody across the state.
Secretary, if you want to add a
few things to those questions.
chair, members of the committee,
um, we actually were able to do
a pilot of this last year with
public property. And we did, I
think 23 different sites around
the state, uh, local
jurisdictions came to us and
said we would like you to look
at sites in Roswell in Las
Cruces, in Hobbs, uh, we, we
contracted with professional
site evaluator to do that work,
and we characterize those sites
by things like access to public
infrastructure, uh, public
utilities.
environmental limitations,
zoning, etc. And those are
things that are laid out in the
bill, um, as to how we would do
a site characterization study.
And um, so again, when, when
asked
How are we going to determine
what sites to look at, those
will be applications that we
will solicit through cities,
counties, tribal governments,
uh, private property owners,
those would go through our, the
public process with our, our
advisory committee, and that's
how we we would select those,
uh, and make the determination
whether they were in actuality,
strategic economic development
sites because you may have sites
that are zoned incorrectly, that
aren't, don't have access to
water, that would be very
difficult to get into a
developable.
position and we would then have
to say, we don't see this as a
really strong economic
contender, whereas the site next
door might have access to those
resources or the sighted in
another community. So that's how
we would go about that process
and, and more specifically,
Madam chair, if you go to page 3
lines 4 through 18. It does
outline exactly a list of things
that they're gonna want to take
a look at, but this advisory
board will certainly complement
this and add to it, subtract
from it and all that so.
Thank you. Uh, representative,
uh, Chair de la Cruz. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Senator, so when we talk about
site readiness, we're talking
about
Offerings to this board in terms
of a location and then this
board will vet the location for
site readiness, is that correct?
Uh, Madam Chair and, and the
chair Dela Cruz will wind up
happening is it'll build a site
characterization model, and the
model will become a massive
database. I'm assuming that at
some point it'll land on the
homepage of the economic
development department. You'll
go in there and you say, I would
like to uh create a basket
weaving site that the baskets
all have alarm clocks on. I
don't know, and then they're
gonna, they're gonna serve you
with um every site where this
would be the most ideal place
for you to to do that kind of
work.
So
Madam Chair
So a business that owns some
property that thinks it's ready.
Do they identify the type of
business it might locate there
or is that done separately or in
tandem.
Mount and and the Chairman Dela
Cruz. I, I, I think that uh it
would be both, essentially, um,
they might say that, yes, this
is what we think can be done
here, but I think the beautiful
thing about this effort here is,
hey, did you know that there's
also these other three
industries that you may not have
known about, they would also
because this has become a hub
for X, and that might be how but
uh secretary designate if you
want to come. Madam Chair, uh,
representative, uh, the idea was
be what what EDD would be
responsible for for would be the
characterize the assets and
liabilities for that particular
piece of land.
And then we would provide that
as a report back to the local
jurisdiction to the property
owner with its county, city,
state land, tribal government,
um, it's, then we would also,
as, as a senator stated, the
plan is for us to advertise and
market those plans uh for
businesses who are interested in
growing their business here in
New Mexico, whether they're
local or they might be
relocating to New Mexico. So
they, they would also then have
the opportunity to come back.
And that's what the fund is for.
To come back and say we the site
analysis that was done says that
if I get an environmental review
of a housing study done, have a
traffic study done, this site
becomes much more developable.
So
they would apply for funds and
then the that commission would
review and characterize or grade
which sites are best eligible
for funding, and that's what we
would do some of the
pre-development funding for. So
that would be the process. I
hope that's helpful.
So Madam, sure, I'm glad you
brought that up, so.
What does the fund cover in
relation to what you're
proposing. Are we talking about
infrastructure, are we talking
for things that would be on site
and relate specifically to the
property itself, to buildings,
what are we talking about?
The, the, the funding that's in
the budget right now already
exists. It's just to to to stand
up the effort, and then there
would be, you know, you'd have
to go tour the sites, you'd have
to do a search, if you will, for
all the things say on page 3,
again lines 4 through 18. Yeah,
um.
I'm sorry, page 7, also, the
surveying the environmental
assessments, pay, you know,
public infrastructure and the
data of collecting things like
workforce availability, housing
availability, government land
use restrictions, putting all of
that data and information
together about that site. This,
this does cost some money to get
this together. And over time,
you're going to see a very
robust list.
Thank you, Madam Church. So,
that's what I'm trying to
determine, so Senator, if, if
you recollect in our district,
we have uh commercial property
that is la estancios.
And it's very successful, been
great for government, been great
for employment, all of that, but
retail qualify.
Uh, in this venture, Mr.
Chairman, Madam Chair, and, uh,
and, and uh Chairman, yes,
uh, there would be anything
goes, this wouldn't have the
restrictions. Thank you, that's
an excellent question. That has
not come up yet, has it? Uh,
it's like the 5th time we
presented this, um.
There aren't the restrictions of
say Lita and JTip and all that,
those types of economic
developments, that would be sort
of a later phase, but this would
simply be to collect the data
and information to help people
understand what's going on in
Lates.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That was
actually gonna be my next
question. Would it still qualify
for LIDA if it qualified under
the criteria of LIA and share
and and uh chairman, yes, uh for
whatever is allowable in that
community because we know that
that plays into the various
economic development in centers
that we have. This is simply
another piece to the puzzle. So
Madam Chair, uh, Senator up to
now we're talking about private
endeavors, private properties,
where everyone to stay, even on
tribal property.
So an extension to that question
is would government properties
qualify as an example, UNM has a
branch of, of uh commercial
development that they're
undertaking right now. So with
universities, counties, cities
also qualify. Mr. Madam Chair,
sorry, Madam Chair, I'm really
not feeling good, uh, that I'm
sure, yes, and Chairman, yes, a
great example would be the very
first bill y'all voted on this
evening. The UNM, uh, I believe
it's called, uh, there's a name
for it.
go.
Oh, OK, I'm sorry. Well, that
new thing they're building at
UNM on the south side of the
campus, that would be a great
example if we'd want to know
what exactly is capable on that
property.
Thank you,
said her chair. Thank you so
much. I really appreciate this
endeavor and uh we do see more
of this in the future. Thank
you. Thank you.
Any other committee members have
questions? I've got just a
couple, um,
Senator
So
Will the committee be working in
conjunction in conjunction with
local governments, and tell me
what that would look like.
Uh, Madam Chair, yes, and I'll
ask Rob to it's it's
specifically called out here
somewhere, so.
Let's see, Madam Chair, uh, if
you look at, uh, the top of page
6,
section section 5 E. Uh, it
talks about consulting directly
with state agencies, county and
local governments, um, that was
actually.
We clarified that, uh, to
include county and local
governments at the request of
the municipal league, um, and so
all of any of that, whether
it's, uh, the site
characterization process or
evaluating whether or not they
would be qualified for
pre-development funding would be
in consultation.
And that madam chair is actually
yeah, page 6 lines 5 through 10,
is that right? Yeah, or it's
specifically called out there.
And
So explain to me too, I, I, I
get that there's the committee
that's gonna be working. How,
what are the safeguards
so that uh they're not just
picking their pet projects or
their, you know, is what
describe the matrix that you'll
be using.
Chair, I'll ask the
Secretary Desmond the advisory
committee would, would have
members that would be in the
entire breadth of land
development, and utilities, um,
Uh, higher education, they'll
all be a part of it and there
won't be, it won't be, this is
not one of those boards which
I've seen here in the 13 years
I've been here, that can be
controlled, you know, you just
kind of outlined by sort of an
interest, the state fair, um,
insurance fair.
plan or fair play plan or
whatever, which is in your
chamber now, by the way, uh,
that board needed to be
completely flushed because of
what you just described. This
board is going to be very
far-reaching.
This advice report excuse me.
So, Madam Chair, the advisory
board, uh, as, as the, the
senator stated, uh, is, is
outlined in, in the, in the
language. I would also there
would be 5 members appointed by
the Legislative council service,
uh, so that again, that has a
specific expertise in
development law, engineering,
etc.
And those, those recommendations
would come to the cabinet
secretary for for going forward.
So that's, that's the effort to
create the guide around uh
found that it would allow for
public comment on those as well.
So, uh, we will be going through
a rulemaking process once uh if
we are fortunate enough to get
this approved, uh, that would
flush that out more
specifically, but that would be
the overall process of how we,
we've envisioned it.
And I guess like my follow up
question to that would be, would
you all be looking at regional
areas to pick board members.
Yes, madam Chair, this is going
to be a statewide effort. It's
gonna be pretty exciting if
you're in a community that may
not be able to afford a full
blown, say, economic development
team like say in Albuquerque or
Las Cruces or whatever, you're
suddenly gonna have a really
great tool in your toolbox when
someone's looking at your
community or you know someone
that will look at your group.
All righty, that does answer my
questions. Um, do we have a
motion from the committee
I pass. OK, I've got a do pass.
I've got a second. Patrick, to
take the role.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative De la Cruz, yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Linte, yes.
Representative Mason.
Representative Matthews,
Representative Murphy,
Representative Parajon.
Representative Serrado, Madam
Vice Chair, and Madam Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, final tally
for the do pass motion. 8 votes,
yes, 0 votes no. All right,
you've got to do pass. Hope you
feel better, Senator. Thank you,
Madam Chair. May I grab a little
sandwich on the sandwich,
in the South. OK, thank you.
Alrighty, um.
Representative Henry, thank you
for being patient. I'll take you
next.
I do appreciate your patience.
Absolutely, yes, ma'am. Thank
you.
Give it just a minute.
OK, Representative, whenever
you're ready.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee, uh, we're here to uh
talk about House Memorial 52,
uh, this memorial requests the
establishment of a short-term
rental work group to study the
economic contributions.
Workforce housing benefits
taxation policies and regulatory
framework of short-term rentals
across New Mexico.
The work group will include
representatives from key
stakeholders, including New
Mexico's short-term renal
Association, New Mexico
Association of Realtors, New
Mexico Economic Development
Department, New Mexico Tourism
Department and the New Mexico
Assessors affiliate of the New
Mexico Association of Counties.
The memorial also requests
county assessors suspend further
uh reclassifications of
short-term rental properties as
non-residential for taxation
purposes until the study is
complete.
Uh, ensuring tax policy
decisions are based on
data-driven analysis and
economic impacts assessments.
And why does this matter? Short
term rentals play a crucial role
in New Mexico's tourism, and
workforce housing, however,
taxation and regulatory policies
must be based on comprehensive
data data to ensure fairness for
short-term rental owners, local
governments, and broader
economy, and, uh, Madam
Chairman, I do have an expert
with me, uh, Mr. Carl Videll,
was there anything you'd like to
add, sir?
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
so there are approximately
14,000 short-term rentals in New
Mexico.
Uh, by my estimate from the
economic impact study we're
looking at about 7200 of them
being reassessed.
Um, of these, uh, 7200, 5100 are
owner occupied, uh, a good
portion of the year. What we're
looking at is
Homeowners that are renting out
their house, trying to make ends
meet, make mortgage payments,
um, and that is our biggest fear
with this. Uh, there is a
mortgage issue.
There is a belief that if the uh
assessment goes to be
non-residential that it may be a
violation of mortgage rules, uh,
Freddie, uh, Freddie Mac and
Fannie Mae, and it could trigger
mortgage note calls, that's the
doomsday scenario, so we would
have 7000 homeowners who could
be facing no calls now of these
uh 7000, many of them are
Highly leveraged, some of them
are well funded, and so what
we're seeing is about 10% of
tourism that, uh, a lot of
people are trying to keep their
houses vacant for at least 180
days a year to avoid
reassessment which is hurting
our tourism and the other people
that are highly leveraged are,
you know, facing potential of
extreme taxes with tax lightning
and losing their house for that
reason, um, we are asking for a
study to be done because it is a
very complex situation.
Thank you. Um, does that
conclude your presentation? Yes,
ma'am. uh, Chairman, I keep
saying speaker, sorry, Madam
Chairman, uh, will stand for
question. Thank you. OK, do we
have here, anybody here in uh
favor of this bill.
OK, if you like to come to
center.
The attendant will hold the
microphone, you have up to one
minute, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, my name is David
Sara. I'm the director of
government affairs for the New
Mexico Association of Realtors,
uh, the New Mexico Association
of Realtors strongly supports
House Memorial 52, which seeks
to establish a work group to
study the economic impact,
taxation and regulatory
framework of short-term rentals
across our state, short-term
rentals significantly bolster
New Mexico's tourism economy.
They also provide essential
housing options for traveling
professionals and workers in
areas.
is lacking traditional
accommodations. Recent
reclassifications of these
properties as Nazrekran
residential for taxation
purposes, but have unintended
consequences, potentially
discouraging homeowners from
offering short-term rentals and
impacting their ability to
maintain ownership. We are
supportive of the proposed
comprehensive study to ensure
that any policy decisions are
informed, balanced, and support
both our housing market and
tourism industry. Thank you.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, good evening. Uh,
my name is Chris Leslie Curtis,
and I'm president of the New
Mexico Short Term Rental
Association, a newly formed
501C6 in 2023 that advocates for
reasonable regulation and
responsible hosting.
We, um, feel that the current
property tax, um, situation is
quite precarious for many of us
owners. I am a short term rental
owner and a 2nd generation New
Mexican and put my children
through college and medical
school with that extra income.
Many of our um short-term rental
owners across the state are
dependent on this income and so
we asked, um please if this um
memorial bill that authorizes
the study group, um, we strongly
considered.
We think it's a very
Positive thing for our state.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, I'm Gordon
Leadingham, and I may resident
of uh the city of Santa Fe. I
have two short term rental
permits. I'm also the policy
chair of the New Mexico
Short-Term Rental Association. I
would like to speak to have the
opportunity to help people
understand the community and
industry of short term rentals,
there's a lot of
misunderstanding and it's
important that we try to
Put a pause on what the uh
appraisers, the are trying to do
because of it's a matter of
principle and unfair taxation
and the state will result in a
net loss of taxes if people with
short term rental permits give
up because they're being
overcharged with property taxes.
I can speak for hours, but I
will.
ma s and uh thank you very much
for this opportunity to be here.
Thank you. All righty, do we
have anybody on Zoom?
No, I'm sorry we got one.
To Caitta.
Hello
My name is Will Risborg. I'm the
owner of Two Casitos, Santa Fe
Vacation rentals. I'm also a
board member of the New Mexico
Short Term Rental Association.
We manage 107 permitted
properties uh in Santa Fe area,
some out in the county. Uh, we
have 11 full-time employees and
employee countless numbers of
contractors.
Um, I have obviously since we're
managing all these properties.
I've got all of these homeowners
who are worried about this tax
increase and considering pulling
out of the industry, which, if
this happens on a large enough
scale, would, would hurt the
tourism industry in New Mexico
considerably. Um,
Many of my homeowners have
written to you personally, so I
hope you'd take the time to uh
take a look at their messages.
Um
You know, we all have a mutual
interest in supporting the
tourism industry and have the
tourism industry support our
local community, uh, two casinos
is committed to making short
term rentals good neighbors in
uh and uh promote the values of
professional management to
ensure that, you know, negative
externalities are kept under
control.
So, uh, we really appreciate you
taking this bill into
consideration or this memorial
into consideration and um
I think it's great to have
legislative input rather than a
unilateral decision made by the
county assessor. Thank you.
OK. Do we have anybody here in
opposition?
Anybody on Zoom.
No
All right.
do we, we go to the committee
chair Dela Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative, what's the
genesis for this effort, how did
it come about?
Uh,
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
uh, De la Cruz, uh, this started
roughly about 18 months ago, uh,
the county assessors looked at
the current verbiage and uh in
the tax code and they made a
decision that short term rentals
should no longer be qualified to
be residential, uh, prior, uh,
for about 2030 years, uh, tax
assessors have treated short
term rentals and bed and
breakfasts as residential, and
they maintained a residential uh
tax classification.
Um, I think there is within the
community, a lot of debate on
whether this is being done
correctly as far as a
reassessment, um, and whether
they're reading that language
correctly.
So
Madam Chair Representative
expert.
If this effort is undertaken.
And you succeed in what you are
trying to accomplish, what would
be the net result? Could you
briefly encapsulate what that
might look like.
I'm sorry, the result if we're
successful, so you're wanting to
do a study, and more.
Should you be able to do that
study, could you briefly
describe what it would
accomplish.
Yes, uh, Madam Chair, um, and
Representative de la Cruz. So
what we would like to really
uncover here is number one, the
tax consequences if we have a
property that's zoned
residential.
But taxed as commercial, number
one, what are those taxes going
to do the reassessment, how many
people is it going to put out of
business. We've got about 14,000
full-time employees that come
from the economic development of
short-term rentals and about
14,000 homeowners as well that
depend on this income.
So there's a lot of concern on
what is going to happen. I know
there was also an amendment
introduced uh this afternoon
that I saw come through for
getting the mortgage finance
Authority involved in this as
well as housing to determine
what will happen with these
mortgages. Could there be note
calls and will people, you know,
face losing their houses. Um, I
am very
Aware that uh housing is
critical in New Mexico. Um, the
data shows that 85% of these
houses that are short term
rentals are used by the
homeowners, the other 15%, which
is about 2000 houses that are
full-time rentals.
We find many of those are
actually owned by people who are
out of state currently working
for a job, whether I, I was
talking to a woman who was here
earlier at 1:30. She was here
because her daughter, uh, moved
to Colorado to go to nurse
practitioner school for 2 years.
She's coming back to New Mexico,
and she doesn't want to lose her
New Mexico home. She didn't want
to sell all her furniture. She's
renting it as a short term
rental.
Those stories are everywhere.
We've got military members who
have been reassigned. They want
to retire in New Mexico. They
are, you know, renting out their
properties till they get back.
So that's what we're trying to
uncover with this study is
really figure out how's it going
to impact employees and how will
it impact home ownership.
And Madame Chair Representative,
if I can add on to that, kind of
what I said in the beginning,
something I'm very interested in
is what is the economic
contributions that these are
making. I, I don't I'm not sure
we fully understand that. I
think if, if we do a study on
it, we would get some better uh
details on that to to to make
those decisions. I think the
workforce housing benefits could
be.
Be huge and we might not even
know it. I know in my small
town, uh, you know, when we have
any kind of major turnaround at
the factories, anything like
that, those short term rentals
become very important to us, um,
so I would love to know, uh, how
that's impacting our workforce,
housing benefits, the taxation
policies. I do think we need to
get a handle on that, make sure
we're understanding that
properly, um, and that it's
happening properly, uh, and just
the regulatory framework. So
that's what I would hope to get
out of this as well, sir. Thank
you, Madam Chair one.
the benefits is I get to stand
when I'm here.
I'll jocularity aside, um.
It seems to me that the
assessors scared the heck out of
people.
Uh, if they get together and
say, oh, it's, it's not really
an extension of a home, it's
really a site business and needs
to be.
attached as commercial. I could
see how that would scare the
heck out of people.
Um, in my area, Madam Chair of
Albuquerque, there is a housing
shortage.
And um
In fact, the city of
Albuquerque, somebody can
correct me if I'm wrong, uh, the
city of Albuquerque was actually
giving two versions, two plans,
two types of of casitas,
otherwise known as mother-in-law
quarters so that if you have the
space on your property, city of
Albuquerque will literally give
you two choices of plans so that
you could build a little side
house so that people could rent
it or if family had to stay in
it, they could stay in it, and
so it
was a way of kind of combating
that housing shortage.
And so, um,
The other flipped to that the
complaint is that because Maam
because there are so many.
Side houses there being
Used as short term rentals that
it decreases the availability of
more.
rental housing units, which I
don't necessarily agree. I'm
just saying that's what, what
the complaint is, um,
But you know, it, it bothers me
about I'm sure I'm gonna get a
bit of a soapbox here bothers me
that heaven forbid that somebody
owns a house might be able to
make a couple of dollars extra.
That's all I've seen, I'm sure,
thank you.
Thank you, Representative Pajon.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative Henry, um,
expert. I, I could you define
short term rental. I'm sorry if
you if you did that in the
beginning, but how many months
are we talking or days? Yes,
thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
representative our home, um, I
hope I said that correctly.
Thank you. Um, so, traditionally
short term rental is, uh, you
know, one day or more, um, what
we do find a lot though in short
term rentals is we do a lot of.
term rentals, which is
traditionally over 30 days.
There is a large percentage of
the industry that rent their
homes to contractors, Netflix,
traveling nurses, contractors at
Intel, that's in Albuquerque,
Santa Fe, you know, has their
own industries that they handle.
And what we see is you try and
rent it for those 90 day
contracts, but then you backfill
it with the short-term rental
reservations when you can't get
those long contracts.
and um an expert, so I that's
pretty.
one day or more like a year, one
day or a year, 1 day or 2 years.
So are these short term that
that seems like that's a full
rental term to me.
Yeah, so the Madam Chair, the,
uh, there's not a under the real
estate laws of New Mexico, there
is not a definition of what
constitutes short term.
At all anywhere. Um, if you, I
guess there is in the real
estate handbook, it defines a
short-term rental as a uh house
that provides dishes and other
amenities that you would find
where it's fully furnished and
provides dishes. It's a couple
lines of code in there. That's
really the only true definition
of a short-term rental that
there is, it's not defined by
the number of days. Um, you
know, most people will rent.
for, you know, a minimum, uh,
but there are people that will
rent one night at a time, and we
do see a lot of uh couples and
stuff where, you know, they're
generating extra money if you've
got to marry or two people,
they'll stay at one person's
house and rent the other one for
extra income, and we see
situations like that frequent
and I, I
understand what you're saying,
but I think
Uh, I'm, it seems unclear, like,
I understand the need to wanna
understand the short term
market, but from what you're
explaining to me, it, it doesn't
seem like it actually a short
term because there's also
midterm rental pieces. So what
distinguishes this short term
rental from, say, if I were to
go and get a a month to month
contract um at an apartment
complex.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I and uh
Representative Parejon, uh, I
believe that's what I'm getting
at is the inventory is very
intermingled. We cannot
financially have midterm
rentals, which would be 30 days
or more without backfilling
empty space with short-term
rentals.
If that makes sense, you know,
we, there's a lot of uh homes
that want those longer term
reservations, but if Netflix
isn't filming at the time, then
you're vacant, and a lot of that
time is backfilled by just doing
it on an Airbnb or a Verbo, uh,
for the shorter time. Does that
answer your question? um,
I, I guess.
I, and I, I personally love
data, so Madam Chair and
Representative and, you know, I
think this is a great
opportunity to study this, the
short term market, um, I think
as my uh neighbor here has
stated already, you know, there
is, um, in, in other states
they're enacting legislation to
restrict short-term rentals to
restrict Airbnbs, um, because
the lack of housing is so dire
and so I, I guess I'm, I'm
feeling.
to see how this would be
distinguishable from, uh, just
the rental market period and
Madam Chair and and
Representative, I think.
Uh, you know, anything that we
can do to make housing more
affordable in our state. Um, I'm
100% for that, um, but I also am
for ensuring that our housing is
accessible for New Mexicans. Um,
yes, love of the people who come
here to film for Netflix and
film for other things, um, Madam
Chair and um representative, but
um the fact of the matter is
that those units that then get
put out for um short term.
rental, which is my
understanding is more lucrative
is less time commitment, right,
because you're able to manage,
um, like just as you said, the
backfilling.
That madam chair and um
representative that that housing
would then become unavailable
for a Mexican who may need it,
so Madam Chair and
representative is um is the
Office of housing or um and you,
you know, understanding not just
from the business perspective
but also from the housing
perspective is that incorporated
into this, into this plan, Madam
Chair, and, um, representative.
Madam Chair Representative, if I
can back up just a tickle bit
because
Some of what you're asking, I
think would fall under that
regulatory framework. We try to
help us get a better
understanding, uh, just as, as,
uh, the gentleman said,
What, what, what is short term?
What, how does that mid feel,
what, so I think part of the,
part of this study is trying to
better understand what is it
that's out there.
Um, I can tell you once again,
just from experience in Artesia,
we do have what we call
short-term rentals, but they're
The government, and so they
become a little bit longer, but
government can't sign long-term
contracts, so we have to keep
them short. So, so there's a lot
of other things that play into
this that I think we need to
understand better, uh, which
would be the, the whole point of
this is to try to get a better
understanding of of what we're
dealing with, how it's impacting
all of that, um, fully
understand what you're saying
about making sure there's
housing available, but I also
wanna make sure there's housing
available. There's so many
events as representatives said,
um,
How many of us would, would
We kind of enjoy our, our
casitas when we come up here,
right? If that wasn't available,
what would happen, uh, type of
deal, balloon fiesta, I'm sure
has a huge uptick in those.
We're looking forward to it in
our area when, when what was,
what used to be reno A races now
gonna be the Roswell Air races.
A lot of folks are trying to
figure out how to short term
rentals work for those type of
events, and those are long
events.
Um, so I think this just helps
us better understand what we're
dealing with and how it plays in
our, in, in the whole system.
Madam Chair, and, um, and
representative. So would it be a
friendly amendment to add the
Office of Housing to um to the
working group.
I am not the main sponsor of
this bill, um, but I will
definitely ask her. I, I would,
I would assume that would be
fine. I'll make sure that's OK,
but I, I don't see why it would
be a problem.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all my questions.
Thank you. Do we have anybody
else on the committee?
Um,
Represented chairs right.
Thanks, uh, uh, thank you.
Welcome to the committee. Good
to meet you, uh, Representative
Henry been meaning to introduce
myself. Um, I, I do have some
questions on this because uh
this is my county, Santa Fe,
very proud to represent here
with a very tight rental market
here, um, and I, I, I go back
and forth on this and I'll be
honest, I, I might be more
amenable to this bill should an
amendment as Representative
Pajon brought up earlier, um,
partially because
And, and again, like I would be
there there's a presumption of
economic good that's taking
place, uh, because of short term
rentals in in the area and, and
I, I would love to have an
accurate, unbiased understanding
of how it's really affecting it,
because as a homeowner in Santa
Fe, I've seen the value of my
home increased by more than 25%
in 3 years. That is horrible if
you're a new buyer, right? It's
fantastic for me and my husband,
that's great, but like for being
a first time buyer, that is,
that is difficult market. We
have 1% availability of housing
in in my
Area, police officers have to
drive up from Rio Rancho to work
here. Teachers cannot afford to
live here. So when I look at the
presumption of help that it does
for our workforce housing, um,
it, it is, it is concern for me
that the, that there's a
presumption that that there's
help and I and I and I and I
wanna be clear cause I, I'm not,
I'm not anti-hort term housing.
I, I like I, I would be a sinner
if I said I never, you know,
utilize these your services, so
I don't want to criminalize it,
but what I do want to make sure
is that whatever we're getting
back
From this group is um more
balanced and, and I, and I, I'm
still, because I do have
reservations on that a lot, you
know, and I do understand, you
know, according to, to what you
all researched, there's a lot of
folks that still live in their
homes while they're utilizing
this. I understand and I, I
know, you know, the
mother-in-law Casita, like
that's a thing, but I do know
multiple properties in my own
neighborhoods that that remain
unoccupied until there's a short
term there. And that's just in
my neighborhood. So, um, I, I,
I'm gonna listen to the debate
further. I, I do have
reservations that I made and I
just, I was gonna ask questions,
but
I think it's just better if I
just make that statement, um,
and those are my reservations,
should I be against it, but, you
know, again, as you work with
the main sponsor and other
colleagues, I'd be happy to
input to, because what I would
want is a fair and balanced look
at this. I'm sure there's gonna
be a ton of economic benefit,
um, but my concern remains with
those that workforce housing
that I see. So I appreciate it.
Um, I, I'll give you a moment to
respond if you do have any
questions. Do you have any
answers to that, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, Madam Chair
Representative, I, I hear what
you're saying. I think one of
the things we have to think
about and
And what would be an important
part of this study is, is I
think we assume that most of
those houses would come back on
the market, um, if you look at a
lot of the, a lot of rid of
cloud roeries that were I'm
fairly familiar with. I'm sure
towels, those types. I'm not
sure some of those homes would
come back on because a lot of
those might be what we call
vacation homes for some folks,
and so why they're not using
them, they're trying to get some
money off of them, so fully
understand what what you're
saying and can appreciate it.
Um, I think that's why this
is, is super interesting to me
is to, to better understand
that, what would that really
look like? Would a lot of houses
come back on the market? I don't
know that we know that answer
because I do think there's a
great number of homes, um, as we
heard, that are used most of the
time.
Um, and so I, I guess that's why
this is so important to us is we
need to better understand what's
happening out there, and I don't
know that that we
fully can grasp it as you just
kind of alluded to, right? We
need to kind of understand this
better to see what would really
happen. Madam Chairner I and
again I, I appreciate that the
intent, but again, a lot of
these are a lot of the
presumptions that are in the
language of the bill, you know,
the housing benefits, um, you
know, the improvements, all of
those things. I actually will
ask two questions on this. Um,
has TRD tourism or EDD agreed to
take up this, uh, this task
force to study.
Uh, that I'll find out for you.
OK, madam chair, sorry,
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
representative. I think that's
gonna be critical as there
there's not an allotment of
money towards it, um, and, and
I'm sure you know sometimes
memorials can be, uh,
Uh, swim to the side, should
they not have money attached, so
I would be curious if any of
those are. Uh, last question I
have this may be more for your
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, what is the landscape? Do
many states, uh, tax, uh, these
uh Airbnbs, these, these short
term rentals at um residential
rates. I'm just kind of curious
what that landscape is cause I
don't know.
Uh, to Madam Chair, uh, uh, this
is, uh,
To my knowledge, New Mexico is
one of the first states to do
this.
I did see a headline, uh, this
afternoon that Missouri passed a
bill today that would keep
residential zoned as residential
and taxed as residential.
Um, I can't speak to the entire
country, um, but I do know we're
one of the first ones, uh, and
if I may, I, I will say.
Just to highlight even of the
houses that are short term
rentals. We're dealing, uh, from
my estimates about 0.0058% of
total housing in New Mexico.
We're dealing with a very small
amount that the people that are
short term renting their houses
are able to keep their houses
because of that revenue, so it's
not just an economic impact for
the community we are dealing
with homeowners that likely
wouldn't be homeowners without
this.
Madam representative, thank you
and thank you experts. So it
does sound like other states do
tax Airbnb. I'm sorry, short
term rental, I apologize. I
shouldn't use a company, but do
tax visas as the commercial
rate, is that what I'm
understanding or maybe
I understand this, no, ma'am,
uh, I'm Adam Chair, the, uh, to
my knowledge, all short term
rentals in this country are
taxed as residential, not as
commercial.
Here in New Mexico, we do have 3
taxes that do apply to short
term rentals. We have gross
receipts tax, lodger's tax, and
uh hospitality tax, a total
about 15% currently.
Last year, uh, in 2023, it was
$82 million that we paid in
taxes already as short term
rentals, so on top of the 15%
tax, we would now be taxed
significant amounts, and it's
not just the reassessment, but
we'd also be paying a commercial
rate on top of that.
Um, so we're dealing with a lot
of people who are going to pull
their houses out of inventory
and just keep them vacant, and
then other people won't be able
to afford the taxes who may be
losing their home as a result.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I do think
there's, uh, there's a, a, a
different perspective on, on the
presumption would happen to any,
any new changes on this. I do
think, uh, you know, again, the,
the supply and demand on these
is, is significant, uh, again by
myself to utilizing me. So I
appreciate the debate. I'll,
I'll head over to the chair at
this moment. Thank you.
Thank you. Any other discussion?
All righty. Um, the only thing I
think I would add is um
So,
in recap, we would, you would be
wanting to reevaluate or
evaluate short term rental
taxation policies, and I think
you should include uh more
defined definitions.
Um, so if you just pass that on
to your main sponsor, the impact
of non-residential property
property tax classifications,
zoning and permitting
regulations and potential
pathways for fair and balanced
regulatory framework.
And with that, uh, what's the
Wished to the committee.
Me actually make a
recommendation, um,
That since the main sponsor of
the bill is not here to agree or
make those changes that we roll
it until we at least hear from
the main sponsor or those
amendments have been made.
So
Yeah.
Adam chair. I would recommended
that same thing.
Yeah, roll it, um, get the
amendment done, and then
It will have a much better
chance of getting out of here.
So Madam chair, the amendment
that we're looking for is that
just with the clear definitions
as well or just the addition,
um that representative Perry on
asking if you're gonna do an
amendment, you might as well do
a clear definition piece in
there just to define it and it's
clear. And then um we can put
Um
Yeah, yeah.
Uh, representative, I can help
you with the, what they had
requested um if you wanna to
talk after this.
that if that's what we need to
do, we can do that, um, if we
roll it, when do you think we
can
Uh, probably on Monday. Monday,
yes.
Right, we'll roll your bill.
Thank you.
Let's go to SP 179.
Good evening.
Go ahead and start your
presentation. Thank you, Madam
Chair and committee members.
I am presenting Senate Bill 179
for our senator, A Linda
Trujillo, House Bill or Senate
Bill 179 updates the New Mexico
rental Purchase Agreement Act to
include electronic disclosure
requirements for rental purchase
agreements.
Senate Bill 179 proposes an
amendment to the renal Purchase
Agreement Act for that for
property.
Which a consumer can purchase
online through rent to own
agreement, advertisers must
include electronic disclosure
that clearly and conspicuously
indicates the cash price of the
item, the amount of the periodic
payments necessary to acquire
ownership of the item and the
total number and total amount of
periodic payments necessary to
acquire ownership.
The bill mandates that when a
consumer enters into a rental
purchase agreement
electronically, regardless of
where the customer views the
property, the existing
disclosure requirements of the
act may be met through
electronic means as long as the
required information is this
displayed clearly.
This is a um this is the bill
that modernize modernizes um
electronic purchase rental
agreements, and I do believe we
have an expert witness Stephen
Cobb.
Online.
Yes.
season.
Uh, OK. Do you want him to add
to your presentation or should
we just move forward? Let's go
ahead and move forward. OK,
thank you. All right, do we have
anybody in favor of this bill?
Ready. We want to quickly um
Come to the center. Go one
minute.
Uh, evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Jason
Weeks, registered lobbyist for
PROG Holdings bill does
modernized that.
A lot of these sales now occur
online. It just allows for the
disclosures and then that form
as opposed to not happening
because of little finger tags
and the photos. It's really.
Thank you. All righty. Anybody
on Zoom?
No, ma'am. All righty. Anybody
in opposition to this bill?
Anybody on Zoom?
No, ma'am.
Let's go to Chair De la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam,
what kind of businesses are we
talking about here? Electronics
is kind of throwing me off. Are
we talking about rent to own?
Corner business running for
refrigerators. What are we
talking about?
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, I believe we're
talking about furniture, large
items, um, refrigerators,
appliances, and such.
Perfect. I, I appreciate the,
Bill. Thank you, Man.
Representative Fahn.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
really appreciate this, though.
I can't tell you how much I
appreciate this bill. I'm just
gonna be really quick, uh, when
I, when I worked at Legal Aid, I
actually worked with a woman who
ended up
owing thousands and thousands of
dollars on a refrigerator that
she bought, and she was coming
to us for help. It was not clear
when she signed it up front, um,
and the only thing that I would
say, um, and I mean, I still
love this. I think one thing
that would really make it great
is if we could add languages in
the in this disclosure form, um,
for instance, like Spanish, um,
because the folks who were
coming to legal aid who needed
help, um, many, many Spanish
speakers who didn't necessarily
To get what they needed um from
those, from those um
disclosures. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. May I
ask our
Expert witness to comment on
that.
Can you hear me?
Yes.
Um, yes, most of the companies,
uh, already do that. Uh, my name
is Steven Cobb, I'm a partner at
the law firm of Cos and
O'Connor. Uh, I serve as
national council to progressive
leasing, which is uh rent to own
company that functions
nationwide, uh, already
including Spanish translation.
Great. Thank you so much.
Representative Manhes.
Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, thank you. I
I'm not 100% clear what this
business is. So are we, I
understand it's a business that
rents things like refrigerators,
but
Does the
reenter
Take possession and with the
idea that they will eventually
be the owner.
Or is it
Or are is the is the
refrigerator left where the
refrigerator.
is made or wherever, like, and
it's like a layaway.
I don't know if people still do
layaways.
I use that word, does anybody
have a clue what I'm talking
about.
OK.
Art and I understand this. There
was, um, so I'm just
So people are buying something
on credit, is uh is what we're
talking about, right?
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I'm going to
call on the expert witness to
explain that.
Very thoroughly. Thank you.
Uh, it's my pleasure to be with
you once again. Um, so, uh, in a
rent to own transaction is, is
different than Lightway, so you
take immediate possession, and
then depending on the term of
the rental purchase agreement,
you, you
Buy it over time. And so, say
that you extend your, your
payments over 90 days or you set
them over 120. Um, 1 of the
defining characteristics of a
rental purchase agreement is
that the renter can cancel also
anytime within the duration of
that contract.
And send the property back with
no further payment. So, say you
wanted to buy uh a television.
Best Buy and you wanted to do
that through a rent to own
transaction, you would go
through after going through all
of the disclosures, it would set
for you with that prices and
when they're due over that 90
day period, and at the end of
the 90 days, that property is
fully yours, but at at the 45
day period, the consumer decides
that this isn't something um
that I want to continue payments
for circumstances change, they
can contact uh the company with
which they did the rent to own
transaction, and they have to
take it back without further
charge.
I
Um
Thank you for that, madam chair,
uh.
Presenter, thank you for that
explanation. So,
What we're talking about here.
is instead of the disclosures
and terms of the agreement and
so forth being made.
In writing on paper of some
form. We're talking about them
being made electronically.
And I, I guess one of the things
I would ask is,
Um
Yeah
First of all, how
is it, is there a method that
you verify that the recipient
has got the
Disclosures and has agreed to to
them.
Because when you're doing things
electronically, I mean, a lot of
times.
And and do they get a permanent
copy in some form or fashion, I
guess they could download it.
uh.
But I'm just curious how
And these kind of at least years
ago these kind of deals were
sometimes there were a lot of
problems with them.
And like uh Representative Carvi
says people can end up with
owing an awful lot of money and
not realizing that they were
getting into that kind of a
deal. So I just wonder what's
the verification between the
customer and the
Um
Business
About the receipt and the
understanding and the
acknowledgement of the
disclosures and the terms.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I will
defer to the expert witness.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, they are
prompted several times through
the process, making sure that
they understand and clicking
through for those disclosures,
um, and then they're both, I
believe, emailed a copy of their
contract, um, and another one is
available for download if they
ever can't find their email. So
they, for several times through,
they acknowledge the different
terms and then they were given a
copy at the end of the
transaction.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Representative and
expert.
Some of my questions.
Alrighty, uh, anybody else?
OK, so my understanding is that
all this does is it makes um
The agreements available online.
It's not changing the, the, um,
I mean, you can still go in and,
and do it on paper, but it's now
just allowing you to be able to
do it online. Is that correct?
Madam chair, yes, that's
correct. OK, that's what I
thought. OK, what's the desire
of the committee
Alrighty, Patrick, to take the
role.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative De la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez,
Representative Lente.
Representative Basin
Representative Matthews. Yes.
Representative Murphy? Yes,
Representative Pajon,
Representative Serrado, Madam
Vice Chair and Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, final tally for the
due pass motion, 8 votes yes, 0
votes no. Give it to you. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Uh, Senate Bill 119.
Already represented. Welcome
back. Uh, please explain,
explain your bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I realized that you all have
had a long evening, however, I
am going to read my introduction
because I think it's gonna
provide context for the bill in
case you're not familiar with
it. Um, this is very similar to
legislation that passed, uh,
unanimously and was sent to the
governor two years ago, however,
she vetoed the legislation at
that time. Um, so,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, Senate Bill 119, as
amended, um, is designed to
allow New Mexico to better
recruit and retain bioscience
companies. Um,
My experts will be able to speak
about the impact to bioscience
companies directly and some of
the opportunities that we have
missed out on.
Um, but
Bottom line is this bill creates
an evergreen bioscience
Development Fund. Through equity
investments in companies, with
the potential for financial
returns, which would be
reinvested into the fund for
future investments to support
other New Mexico-based
bioscience companies.
It compliments Lita, uh, the
local economic development
assistance by helping bioscience
startup companies get
established, which Lida cannot
do.
This investment structure is is
designed to attract high growth
companies, while better
protecting the state's
investment.
Investments in this fund require
a 2 to 1 match from
co-investment partners, meaning
that for every $1 from the New
Mexico Bioscience Authority
partners contribute $2.
Individual investments will
range from 5,500,000 to 2
million.
And each investment round will
include 6 to 10 companies, which
could support 30 to 100
employees per round.
Businesses must maintain a
minimum in-state workforce of 5
employees with a minimum median
annual salary of $60,000 as a
condition of the investment.
100% of the funding will go to
investments, not to broker fees
or staff salaries.
The New Mexico Bioscience
Authority must report activities
for the prior fiscal year to the
governor and the appropriate
legislative interim committees.
Additionally, investments must
be reported quarterly to the
Board of Directors, uh, by the
board of the Investment
Committee and information must
be made publicly available. As I
mentioned, this bill passed both
chambers 2 years ago, but was
vetoed by the governor and those
concerns that she put in her
message have since been
addressed through extensive
discussion or discussion with
the governor and her team.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, my
experts, uh, sorry, it's so
late. Paul Lauer, um, and Ryan
Kentley I a, um, are here with
the Bioscience Authority to
answer any questions.
Thank you.
Um, are you standing for
questions or OK. All righty. Do
we have anybody here in favor of
this bill. OK, please come to
the center and the attendant
won't hold the microphone, you
have a penance.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, and Leslie Hillema,
president and CEO of the New
Mexico Chamber of Commerce,
encouraging to vote yes on on
Senate Bill 119 because it's a
high return investment for New
Mexico's future. Some may ask,
why invest public funds in
bioscience. The answer is
simple. This is a $1 trillion
industry with high wage jobs and
New Mexico's already seen
significant growth in this
sector. We don't invest, other
states will.
Others may ask, how do we ensure
accountability. This bill has
built in safeguards. Companies
must meet job creation and
salary requirements, and
investments are made alongside
private capital, reducing the
risk to taxpayers. Bill's not a
subsidy, it's a strong economic
strategy. It creates high paying
jobs, strengthens our economy
and ensures New Mexico is
competitive in bioscience
innovation. We encourage you to
vote yes on this bill. Thank you
very much.
Good evening, um, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
I'm Alex Coling speaking on
behalf of the Biosa.
As, um, mentioned and this will
immediately supported companies,
it also will allow those
supported companies to grow to
approximately what I would guess
to 150 jobs, high paying jobs in
the state was the provided money
initially in the first round.
Yeah
thing to remember is the
safeguards that are implemented,
the trenched release of the
funding actually allows a closer
interaction with the companies
that are reporting and a better
understanding of the performance
and help them and before um
consequences basically what we.
is out and not a performance
that we see in this.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Good evening. My name is Greg
Burns. I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
Biotechnology and biomedical
Association.
I'm also on the board of the New
Mexico Bioscience Authority.
And was there when it was
implemented.
Um, our neighboring states,
Arizona, Utah, Colorado.
This is a billion dollar
industry.
And we have the talent here in
New Mexico, if we can get the
financial resources to grow a
number of our startup firms.
Since I've come here, uh, we
originally had 17 uh biotech
firms and our association 8
years ago, we now have more than
100.
And we have the promise of a lot
more growth here at all
basically comes down to
financing for the startup firms.
Thank you.
Thank you. Do you have anybody
online? Enrique?
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
good evening. Thank you for the
long night of work here, Andria
Nell representing the greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
We want to ensure that New
Mexico gains a larger share of
this very lucrative industry
with very good high paying jobs,
while the state has other
investment in venture venture
capital funds. None of them are
dedicated solely to attracting
and growing bioscience
investments. This sector, as
we've heard tonight, is highly
competitive and requires
dedicated attention.
And that's why we need Senate
Bill 119. We need to get into
this game in a much bigger way,
and Senate Bill 119 is a good
start. Thank you.
Stephanie
Hello, my name is Stephanie
Taffii. I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
Bioscience Authority. I had to
leave early. I
Um, I have kids, but I
appreciate all of your time
staying at the Capitol building
and for my colleagues to be
there. I just wanted to
emphasize that this bill not
only supports urban biotech
companies, but it also supports
rural ag science, which does
fall under the bioscience
umbrella and it's something that
the bioscience Authority is able
to really help burgon with their
collaborations with New Mexico
Tech and New Mexico State. We
are a comprehensive
Board of directors that includes
members from those different
research universities. We work
extensively with their research
offices to help their
researchers to commercialize
their innovation, and we're
really excited to be able to use
this fund to be able to not only
help with that innovation but
also to recruit companies from
outside the state that are
looking for a low cost of
living, better commuting, better
environment to grow their kids
in. These are the kinds of
arguments that
bring to the table when we're
talking to entrepreneurs that
are currently stationed in San
Diego and San Francisco and
Boston. New Mexico has got so
much to offer. Thank you.
Ready. We'll go to the
committee. Represent, oh, I'm
sorry, um, let's, is there any
opposition in the room?
Anybody owns it.
OK, we'll go to the committee.
Representative Murphy.
Thank you, ma'am Chair, um.
Representative, um,
And the friends from you and
them. Um, I like this bill. Um,
the reason I like it is that
there are some things that New
Mexico does really well. And um
one of them is uh a little plug
produced the clean barrel wall
MCF for gas in the world. Um,
but we also do, um, research and
development, technology
transfer.
And um
Uh,
new startups, uh, as a result of
that. Um, we could probably do
better, but, uh, we do that
pretty well. Um,
You and him, together with the
Los Alamos National Lab in New
Mexico Tech, have been leaders
in the human genome project,
ones that have led to um all
sorts of discoveries and all
sorts of startups. Um, so, I am
obviously very supportive of
this bill. Um, Madam Chair
Representative, he noted, um, so
two areas of, or one area to
push back and I'm gonna note one
other and ask how you've
addressed it. One was, um, the
governor's
detail some of the issues that
she had and, and how you address
that. I know that in the, on the
Senate side that there were some
um reluctance uh to support it.
I suspect that that was probably
based upon some specific things.
So, could you talk about sort of
the evolution of the bill. Um,
how you address the governor's
concern and, and those of uh of
perhaps our colleagues across
the, across the way.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I'm
actually going to um ask my
experts uh to provide that
backstory.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and,
uh, representative, um, so the
first part of the question was
how did we address the the
governor's concerns. So I met
with the governor, I met with
her chief of staff, uh, or
economic development advisors.
We tried to nail down what some
of the concerns were, um, one of
them was, uh, that she expressed
in her, uh, message was that uh
there wasn't really anything in
here to prevent companies from
taking state money and moving
out of the state. So
It was um
We, we addressed that concern,
uh, in two ways. One, we put in
this provision that the company
has to stay here for 5 years, or
an an employee X amount of of uh
employees and during that
period. And if they don't, then
they, then there's some
provisions for for getting um
Um, some re uh reimbursement for
that.
Um, I think that's something
that's gonna make it a little
more difficult for us to get
really good deals because some
startup companies aren't really
gonna want to do that, but, uh,
we're just trying to compromise
here. The other thing that I
think we that will help quite a
bit is we came up with this uh
system of using milestones, and
we put some um examples of that
in the bill. Uh, that way if we
do a, a deal where, say, for
instance, uh,
It's just a startup company, uh,
they need a $1.5 million for a
two-year runway period. We can
provide half, half a million
dollars, uh, will rely on
venture capitalists and and
family offices, other Mexico
Angels, other groups like that
to bring deals to us that we
leverage the funds that they put
in, so they'll put in a million,
we put in 500, uh, but we can do
it in tranches, so we can do,
uh,
You know, for, for starters, a
half a million upfront, uh, they
have, we agree what those
milestones would be, and we
monitor them as they go through
that. So then if they achieve
those milestones in 6 months,
maybe we'll release another half
a million, and that way that all
of the money is not at risk
upfront.
So, uh, biotech companies do not
do fail individually, but what
we're trying to achieve with
this bill is to uh create a
ecosystem here. So if one if
companies like I've, I've had
this experience over the last 10
years. We've hired people from
out of state and biotech
companies and companies, the
company didn't do so well. Those
people are now working for other
companies here in the state,
including my own company, um,
which
I, I mentioned in the other, uh,
The presentation, but uh we we
have a an an amazing technology,
and I believe this company is
gonna go really big.
So, so the, the, the ones that
don't make, you know, the ones
that don't make it, the ones
that do will more than make up
for for that and um but it is
also a job creation bill, it's
not just purely economic
development, and so, um, I
creating an ecosystem is a way
that we keep companies here.
Thank you, ma'am, Chair of
representative and um expert um.
You're drilling Wildcat wells.
Some of them are gonna be dry
holes.
Some I'm gonna hit big and and
so that's the nature of the
game. Um, but your minimum,
your, you're mitigating the
risk. Let me think about this.
First, by taking private.
angel investors requiring them
to bring the expertise of, of
the private market and the
capital market.
Um
And you, you benefit from that
analysis, right? And if I recall
the bill, I, I'm sorry, it's
been a long day. I've read it
quickly, but it is it a 2 to 1
match or OK, I'm seeing nodding
heads so directly reflected that
you're putting in about 1/3 of
the money. And so you're
mitigating the risks there. Um,
you are, um, inuring
That those companies say, um,
for lack of a better term, uh,
to New Mexico.
Um, so you have the job growth,
um, and the uh or job creation
and, and the uh
And the revenue that comes from
that.
Um, you're also
Um
Mitigating risk from the
standpoint.
Of, um,
Of uh of limiting the amount of
dollars into any one investment.
Coupled with the private
dollars.
So in all of the things in terms
of private.
Um, public partnerships, it
seems like you're hitting the
boxes pretty well. Um.
I don't know where else to go
with this except to say that uh
uh I like the bill. Thank you,
ma'am, Chair.
Thank you. Any, any other
Representative Matthews, um,
manure, uh.
Representative and presenters,
it is a location for this at the
rainforest in Albuquerque, is
there, are you connected with
that?
We partner with them. Yeah, it's
not directly there. The
bioscience Authority is a state
entity, it gets its own state
entity and it has board members
from both, or from all three
research universities, but Lisa
Kuda, who runs Rainforests on
our board. OK. And ma'am I'm
sure, I, I went, I got invited
to a an event at the Rainforest.
Somebody in my district was
getting an award.
And um,
They were giving out a number of
awards, and I, I, I thought it
was all about primarily
bioscience and
And my sense has been that the
bioscience
Technology sector has been a
little slow in development, and
I'm guessing it's because the
Governor Vito the bill a few
years ago, and I'm
Wondering what you're projecting
in terms of
Growth and
Employment and future.
Madam Chair and committee
members, great question. So back
in 2016, what started the
Bioscience Authority and I'll
keep this very short. We pulled
together industry leaders from
all over to come in and look at
all of the different sectors
here in New Mexico, we have
great sectors, aerospace, um,
energy, all sorts of different
ones, but after doing a study,
Del Becker was a part of the
Matheinnock was a part of it.
We realized that biosciences has
the greatest opportunity for
being the most diverse or for us
to uh diversify the economy here
in New Mexico. From that, each
year at the University of New
Mexico Health Sciences by
itself. Last year we had $250
million of extramural funding, a
lot of that's in biosciences and
a lot of that, for instance, we
have a, a new, um,
Vaccination for Alzheimer's. We
have another vaccination for
opioids, uh, dependents. All of
that kind of research then could
be taken to the market in
biosciences, and what we're
hoping with this is that we have
this co-investment bill
partnering with private venture
to come in and bring the dollars
so that we can invest in these
New Mexico-based bioscience
companies and help them grow.
Um, ma'am, ma'am sure, that was
impressive.
I, I could probably use a few of
those shots at some point. Um.
I'm losing my voice for sure.
Um.
It
I think this is exciting
opportunity, and I'm assuming
that the governor is now for
sure on board.
Um, Madam Chair, and
representative, um,
To my knowledge, yes.
And um
Uh, I think
Um
Also just to address the
safeguard issue, um, we will
also vet these fields that the
private sector brings to us, but
the secretary of uh economic
development and secretary of of
fin DFA has to also sign off on
any deals that we do, so it's,
it's not, I mean, we're we're
gonna be good stewards of the
money, and I think this could
really, we have so much talent
here between the national labs
and the universities.
People want him lived here for
the quality of life, and we want
to keep them here. We've lost a
couple of really big companies
just this year because they
didn't have the support they
needed, so.
Thank you.
That's all my questions and it's
awesome uh.
you.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Murphy, for a 2nd time. Did you?
Oh I did have a follow up, but
I, I think it was answered by
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Yes, it was answered. All
righty. No more questions from
the committee.
I have just a couple. Um, I
guess when I hear that, you
know, the bill was vetoed and it
sounds like because of the
five-year commitment to New
Mexico and if a startup fails,
then they usually don't have the
capacity or ability to um repay
the state and so I think that
that still has not been remedied
and so I, I see that still is a
possible barrier. Um, but
And overall, the bill, I think
it, it moves in a positive
direction, um, you said there
had to be a minimum of 5
employees, and what did you say
that the average wage was?
Uh, Madam Chair, um, it's uh
60,000, the mean, mean, um, uh,
salary is $60,000 a year.
Actually, it's already 80,000 a
year in New Mexico in my
company, it's 100,000 a year, so
that's, that's a, a pretty low
bar as far as biotech goes. You
know, and I think that, you
know, we're constantly wanting
to move people into those types
of um salary brackets, and
there's it.
They're very limited, um, places
for them to go. So I think I see
that as, as a way of getting
people in those wages, um, are
there any tax credits currently
being offered in the industry.
Um, Madam Chair, no, there are
not, to my knowledge. Um, this
is different from the, the film
industry, for instance, it's an
investment so that state
actually owns stock in the
company in exchange for the
funds. If the stock goes well,
um, and the company gets
acquired or
Those public, then the state can
cash that in and the money
reverts back into the the
treasury, so I anticipate we'll
build that fund from where we
start, wherever we start from,
to, to quite a big fun one day.
I hope so. Um, OK, what's the
will of the committee.
You pass. I've got to do pass.
We've got a 2nd.
the 2nd 2nd, Patrick to take the
role Representative Armstrong,
Representative De la Cruz.
Yes.
Representative Fernandez.
Representative Valente.
Representative Mason
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy, yes.
Representative Padamon. Yes.
Representative Serrado,
Madam Vice chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, yes, Madam
Chair, final tally for the Du
pass motion. 10 votes yes, 0
votes no. You have a pass.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
We are adjourned, um, for now,
we, uh, I don't know that we'll
be meeting on Friday, so it will
be at the call of the chair, so
