Mexicans.
But I think it's also important
to put that into context as to
the importance of economic
development and, and how we
think about um the future of New
Mexico and frankly, the future
of our country.
Often we think of economic
development as infrastructure as
um
The bottom line, gross domestic
product, but it's a lot more
than that. And there's a
Stanford professor who who
published a book in 2005 called
The Moral Consequences of
Economic Development. And in
that book he talks about the
role that economic development
plays in our society's cohesion.
And he talks about the
importance of an individual in a
family having a sense of hope
that they're going to be able to
achieve more for themselves and
for their family and improve
over time.
And when you lose that hope,
You lose social cohesion, you
lose the belief in institutions.
It creates a fear of immigrants,
and I think we see those trends
in America today.
And
I believe that
Through, and then, and what the,
the, the professor articulates
in his book, is that in times
where we have prosperity where
there's a sense of shared
growth, shared opportunity, um,
the opportunity that your
children are going to have a
better tomorrow than you had.
That you can provide for a house
that you can pay for college,
you can get healthcare. It
creates a sense of stability. It
creates uh reinforces our
democratic institutions. So, and
I very much believe that um,
Economic development is not just
about the bottom line. It's
about how we nurture and protect
our institutions and our
democracy. So I want to frame
kind of what we do in the, in a
broader context of the
importance to society. And
frankly, what you do in this
committee,
Because you are as much a part
of that activity in the state as
I am as cabinet secretary. So I
want to thank you for your
leadership and your ongoing
leadership, uh, and helping
create those pathways for the
Mexicans. So on our next page,
uh, really talks about how we do
that work on behalf of the state
of New Mexico and our citizens.
And this is a list of our
divisions and programs that we
have, you'll see that um the
legislature has seen fit to uh
provide us with new and
ongoing activities to be
responsible for and to work
towards, and we appreciate that
opportunity. Um, but, you know,
some of the more recent
additions to that are creative
economy division, our outdoor
recreation division. We also,
uh, support the film division.
Um, our healthy foods program,
healthy foods.
Funding program, um, and that's
not even our day job of economic
development, uh, helping grow
and recruit businesses to the
state. Uh, we also, um, support
3 different, uh,
Attached agencies. That's the
border.
I really focused on
infrastructure development. Miss
Madam Chair, I know that you're
very familiar uh with, with the
work that they need to be, they
need to be doing and are doing,
uh, and, and along our border,
the Spaceport Authority and the
Office of Military Base
Planning. Uh, since I've come
into the role, I've really tried
to lean in on the partnership
and relationship with those, uh,
attached divisions so that we're
aligning their activities with
those of the broader state's
economic strategy and approach
so that we're complementing
amplifying each other's work,
not running parallel, and, and,
and really trying to make sure
we're well informed.
So if you turn to the next page,
um, you know, the, the, the
longest kind of the more
traditional parts of what we do,
look at things, our, our program
called LEDA, uh, which is the
local Economic Development Act,
uh, in the job training
incentive program. Um, Lita is
really the our closing fund and
it's how we uh incentivize.
Investment. Uh, this year, the
executive requested $20 million
to be put into LIDA, uh, the
LFC, uh, unfortunately did not
have any any money for those
funds. So that is something we
are hoping that we can work
through. And I, you'll see the
data here and it's, it's, it's
really strong and you know, you
see the ROI of almost 70 or 670%
on state ROI on LIDA assessed.
But those numbers kind of are
hard to
As I look at this, even as the
presenter, it's hard to kind of
get a sense of what that means.
So I wanna use a real quick case
study for you. Um, in 2015, Los
Lunas, New Mexico. The annual
GRT.
For the village of Losunnas was
$11 million.
So, uh, and that was pre-meta.
Today or last month or month
November last, last time we have
data for it. It's just under $4
million for the month.
If you take baseline.
Of
2015 is the year pre-meta,
pre-facebook.
And you run it for the next 10
years to where we are today.
And you just look at the, the
GRT above that baseline.
So above that baseline of where
they were back in 11 million a
year.
Just GRT directly to the village
is $144 million above above what
would the base year?
Back to the state of New Mexico,
$189 million. So you're looking
at about a quarter of a billion
dollars of GRT growth in that
village back to the village or
to the state in 10 years.
We did a $10 million LIDA
investment.
To get that deal done.
And there were other things that
happened. I know it's not just
The GRT from Facebook, but I
would argue that having a
Fortune 10 company located in
Los Lunas, New Mexico is part of
the reason Amazon loaded,
located in in Los Lunas. It's
why Nextera built a solar
facility between Los Lunas and
Berlin to supply electricity to
uh to their facilities. And that
increased GRT is, I mean, if you
want to think about an ROI,
10 million to a quarter of a
billion in 10 years.
That and that's direct tax
revenue. That's not even the
amplifying impact of jobs and
other things. So I, I wanna put
that out as a, as a measure of
the entire last 6 years for the
cost of LIDA.
For the state, how much we put
out was 154 million. That one
project's paid for the last 6
years of Lido alone.
So I think that is the context
of us as we think about ROI and
how we're doing economic
development, uh, I'd ask you to
keep that in mind. Our job
training incentive program. It's
one of the longest running
programs uh run job incentives
in the, in the country. Uh, it's
been incredibly effective.
Since 2019, uh, we've seen
12,000 jobs awarded through the
program and the average wage has
gone up to $24 an hour, uh,
that's up from just over $20 an
hour, six years ago. So we've
seen good good growth and that
average that $24 an hour is
above the median average for the
Mexico wages. Uh, so again, the
jobs that we're incentivizing
are good paying jobs through our
GEP program. Next is the New
Mexico Main Street, uh.
one of our, one of my favorite
programs because it really helps
support our small our small
businesses and our local
communities and villages around
New Mexico, um.
We've had great success with
infrastructure investments
through that program, uh, and
continue to uh support again
through that uh local
communities all over the state.
Our healthy food financing fund,
um, this is a newer program for
the state, um.
Has been incredibly well
received, um.
We, the state.
Had the
Foresight to help invest in what
does it look like? How do we
build a rural agricultural
infrastructure tied together,
uh, areas where we lack
infrastructure, lack connections
for small farmers to markets, to
schools, 2 senior centers who
are trying to create better,
healthier food programs.
And the state funded us for
that. Uh, we had requested uh
funding from the, the executive
budget has $2 million additional
for our healthy food financing
fund. Uh, this is another one of
those places where the LFC had
$0 committed to it. I think
there was some confusion because
because of the success of the
program, we were able to uh get
a 3-year, I believe, I think
it's 44 or $5 million. I don't
have my notes in front of me.
Um
Grant from the federal
government to further enhance
the program, that's shared
between 5 different really great
organizations, EDD being one of
them. And I, I think there was
some confusion because we had
federal money that maybe we
didn't need the state money
anymore. But it was the state
money and investment that
allowed us to win the federal
grant and to start to really
grow that program. So our hope
is is that $2 million request
will get uh brought back in
through the budget process.
Is our Office of strategy,
Science and Technology.
This is an area where we see a
lot of interest from the
legislature, um, a lot of
interest from uh businesses and
this continued to grow as a, as
a portion of our portfolio. Last
year, the legislature saw fit to
give us an additional $5 million
of recurring funds, uh, for
this, uh, division and what you
see in this are the ways that
we've been spending those
dollars, and those have already,
those have gone out. Uh, those
spins, those are being
Um
Activated, we have awarded those
grants. So you'll see that we
really focused on ensuring that
we're hitting those key sectors
of where we think there's unique
opportunity for New Mexico.
And next, I'll jump to um
quantum. Uh, this is a, a really
Amazing area for us as a state,
um, we're uniquely competitive,
uh, one of the reasons we're
uniquely competitive is our
educational system and frankly,
UNM tech state, but in
particular UNM, um, how many of
you,
No what quite, I know you do,
Representative Hernandez, but
how many of you know kind of
what quantum computing is? OK,
wonderful. Um, it is, yeah, I
mean, I'm kind of, of the, I
think I gotta get it. Um, chair,
Madam Chair, but
One of the ways to think about
it is, you know, when we think
about computer program, how
computers work is that binary
zeros and ones. And using that
to do.
Programming kind of zeros and
ones and how the computers
operate. In quantum,
And they can be a 0 or a 1 at
the same time.
So it exponentially expedites
how fast the process can go, and
it is a kind of different form
of logic to think it can be both
at once, but that is kind of the
magic of quantum computing, and
UNM has the best graduate.
Uh, quantum computing program, I
would argue in the world, uh,
has one of the highest rates of
employment in quantum computing
is if you look at other
universities, their penetration
at the highest level in the best
quantum computing companies UNM
is stellar, tied, and the reason
is, is they have a partnership
with Sandia National Labs that
has a quantum fab.
And it's that long-term
partnership, the
apprenticeships, the internships
there that have put New Mexico
in a uniquely competitive space.
We want to double down.
To make sure we maintain that
leadership. Um, quantum
computing process using quantum
computing is, is many, many
times, many thousands of times
faster than the fastest
supercomputers today.
So that's gonna be energy
saving, it's gonna be important
for a variety of national
security reasons. And because of
that, um, we are looking to do
22 bills that were working with
the governor's office as a
proposed governor's bills. One
of them would be a 30% uh Capex
refund, um.
Uh for qua quantum related
businesses. Um, it would be
introduced with a 75 million
aggregate cap with another 75
million unlocked if business is
introduced with this 75 million
aggregate cap unlocked if we are
successful in receiving the
regional engine designated from
the national, National Science
Foundation. Um, second would be
uh 60 million over 4 years in
the form of a gross receipts tax
waiver to Sania and Los.
Alamos National Laboratories,
uh, for a direct $60 million
match for them to set up their
quantum benchmark initiative.
This will allow for New Mexico
to be the center of validation
and verification for quantum
computing in the world.
And I think if we can
If we, and, and I want to give
credit to um Alex Greenberg,
who's here from the governor's
office who, if you have more
specific questions on quantum.
He's way better to answer than I
am. um, and Nora Saks on my team
who's also way better to talk
about it on my team about this
as well. She's not here, but I
want to give them credit for uh
seeing the vision of where we
could go with quantum and
positioning us as a state to
frankly be the Silicon Valley of
quantum computing. And um the
beauty of quantum is.
The, the thing that's really
special about it is you have to
keep the computer extremely
cold, basically at 0 °C.
What that means is you have to
have really great PhDs, but you
have to have people who can weld
pipe fitters, plumbers, HVAC, so
it combines as an industry, our
skilled trades in a unique way
with our PhDs, which we have the
highest concentration of in the
country.
So it's a, again, we're uniquely
positioned and I think um the
fact that we were able to
announce
Uh, the governor announced in
the state of the state speech,
uh, that continuum, uh, which is
the largest quantum computing
company in the world is going to
build an R&D facility here in
New Mexico. We're extremely
excited about that. And again,
that helps encourage that center
of gravity here in the state.
Uh, next, I'll jump to the film
office.
Um
We continue to see a positive
impact of film to New Mexico.
The average wages of our film
crew are almost $37 an hour,
again, much higher than the
average wages of uh of New
Mexicans in general, um, we've
seen that increase over time to
3 by 39%. um
So, again, the other thing I
would say to the film industry
on the film industry side, is we
have seen some up and downs
lately. COVID, obviously was not
helpful to the industry that
shut down worldwide. And then we
had two a writer's strike and a
SAG after strike, uh,
subsequently, um, but we are
seeing an increase going forward
and sadly, um, with the
challenges that Los Angeles is
having today. Uh, we think that,
you know, New Mexico comes.
is a very safe place to hold you
and do your productions as it
relates to natural disasters.
Um, so we, we do think that's
going to continue to be a strong
part of economic development's
portfolio. Uh, next page is
around our partnership with New
Mexico partnership. Are they
really act as our marketing arm,
uh, for New Mexico, um.
They represent a trade shows,
they help bring delegations of
business, uh, individuals to uh
events in Chicago and other
places to really market in
Mexico as a state to locate and
build your business. Uh, next is
the outdoor recreation division,
um, we're seeing a really great
return on investment in ORD, um,
and, and I think, uh, the
legislature for their vision and
leadership and helping uh move
this forward. We have 2 really
Uh, they use the technical term,
really cool grant programs that
run out of ORD. One is our rills
Plus program, uh, which, um, we
do it's a quarterly process.
Uh, local communities, uh,
tribal governments, counties can
apply for uh nonprofits can
apply for grants to help build
or refurbish trails all over New
Mexico. And when you have a
trailhead that ties into your
downtown or your community, it
really does drive a lot of
activity into that, that
community and helps build that
broader tourism economy. So, uh,
we've seen that as being very
helpful. We are also taking that
and, and
Thinking a little deeper about
how we design those grants so
that we're building wildfire
resilience into those trails as
much as we can so that we're
supporting um whether it's
widening, whether that's uh
other sorts of uh fuel clearing
that can be part of that process
so that we're doing our best to
use that as both a a tool for
economic development, but uh
wildfire resilience. And the
second grant program is our
outdoor equity program, which is
really designed to get
You know, young kids who may not
ever go out to the, the
wilderness in our beautiful
state because they don't have
the resources, they don't have
the opportunity, and those funds
really create the opportunity to
to make them advocates for the
outdoors and for New Mexico by
giving them time uh with their
peers, uh, in, in the beautiful
wilds of our state. Uh, next is
our creative industries
division. This is the newest
division we have, um, it started
in 23, 24.
Also, uh, a program that's
providing direct technical
support, business support to
artists in the creative
industries to help them build
business plans, help them
connect to resources, uh, also
providing uh grants to
organizations that uh again
assist those organizations. Um,
Our session priorities next
page, uh, site readiness,
utility pre-deployment,
regulatory transparency and
quantum computing. I'll, I'll
hit on site readiness and, and I
know, uh, the, the, the chair
and uh the minority leader, um,
what, uh, sorry, madam Chair,
what is the proper term for the
minority ranking member. My
apologies. The chair and ranking
member, um, that sounds much
better than minority leader.
Sorry about that. Uh, ran
member.
Would you like to start again
I, I, I, I really have no way to
recover from that, um.
My apologies. Um
We'll just go on to site
readiness. Um, the, the, uh,
presentation at the House
Appropriations. I know you, you
outlined some of your priorities
and I was very pleased that they
aligned very closely with the
department's priorities. Uh, so
we're running a site readiness
bill, um, it will, uh, allow for
The department to act as a
technical advisor and technical
support to local economic
development organizations,
counties, cities, uh, to help.
Uh, identify sites that are
prime for economic development.
Do characterization of those
sites. So what is the access to
water, waste water, electricity,
rail, broadband, uh, so that in
that, that information will be
made available back to those
organizations and those, those
jurisdictions but as part of
that, you're going to see
properties in your district that
may need broadband access or
they may need an environmental
review or a housing study.
Uh, there will be funds in there
that could go towards some, some
of that uh the executive has
recommended $24 million for that
program, the LFC is recommended
35 million, uh, but it's also,
if you think about how to use
your capital outlay. We're gonna
give you a roadmap.
to where you can put those funds
to have the biggest economic
impact for your communities.
And so we think that um and the
reason that site readiness is so
important. And, and I had the
opportunity to uh speak with the
folks from Senator Teresa and
the border authority this
morning and
One of the few places, frankly,
we're doing site readiness well
is down in Santa Teresa.
And we take companies who come
to us all the time. We took them
on Monday this week, uh, and you
can go down and you can see 180,
138,000 square foot building,
115,000 square foot building.
It's already vertical, it's
empty, it's ready to go.
And for a company.
That's really
Easy.
But if you find a piece of dirt,
and we say, you could build
here. It might take us 3 to 5
years to get your electricity
in.
You may need to go through some
planning program, you know,
planning process.
They
Gonna say, well, thanks but no
thanks we're going to Arizona or
Texas or someplace else. We have
very few properties that have
that kind of level of site
resonance. Um, even if we don't
go vertical, if we just go
horizontal, so it's, you know,
getting electricity up to the
site, wastewater, water,
broadband. It makes us so much
faster to market because we
really are now 3 to 5 years for
a lot of these larger projects
to actually move. If we can get
that to 8 months to 18 months,
then we're competitive. But if
we
We can't do that, we won't be,
and, and 36 other states already
have these sorts of programs.
So, um, they're tried and true
and, and we think that we've
tailored one that really would
work for New Mexico. But part of
what, how that would work is
once we've done that
characterization, worked with
the local community, or tribal
entity to do that site
characterization layout, what
sort of investments can help
move the, the needle on that
property.
Um
We will certify that site as a
strategic economic development
site. Our next bill, our utility
pre-deployment bill will allow a
utility, let's say El Paso
Electric, Xcel, uh, co op PNM to
go to the PRC.
Say we've been this site has
been certified as a strategic
economic development site. Uh,
they will get, be eligible for
an expedited 6-month review
through the PRC and have the
ability to pre-deploy that
utility infrastructure to the
site.
Today,
if they do that.
They run the risk of if there's
nobody sitting on that site once
the utilities have plugged in.
They will
They won't be deemed used and
useful. They'll have to write
that, write that investment off,
and they won't be able to get
rate recovery. So what we're
trying to do is de-risk that
investment, allow them to move
that to what's called a
regulatory asset under the PRC.
So that it could once that site
does come into service, they
could bring that back into the
rate base and, and be covered.
And I think the other thing
that's really important to, to
understand about um economic
development.
Projects is especially when
you're dealing with folks with
large load.
You bring someone like that in
in the investment in the
infrastructure goes into place.
The
Impact across the broader
customers, it's actually a
reduction in rates because
you've got a large ratepayer
with uh with that targeted
infrastructure that can then
help fund other improvements
across the system. So by
creating, especially when you're
dealing with economic, those
sort of economic development
projects. So we see that as, as
a really important tool. The
other part of that bill is
because, you know, the investor
and utilities have stockholders
and shareholders to help fund
those sort of projects because
it's gonna
Let them get more electrons on
the system. Our co-ops have a
harder time doing that.
So we have uh there's an
amendment with for the PPRF, the
public infrastructure Fund at a
public project revolving fund at
the NMFA to include co-ops into
eligible recipients of that, and
that will allow our co-ops to
get very, very low interest
loans to be able to do that
pre-deployment. And what's
important for me as, as a, as
someone who grew up in rural New
Mexico and in the co op
environment.
The
You know
When we can get those
investments in and when we can
make sure that we have sites
that are really, that could be
developed, that could create
jobs in those communities. It
creates a sticky environment for
our kids to stay. It gives them
opportunity. We wanted to make
sure that our co-ops have the
ability to also participate in
this program. Um, next is our
building permit data. So this is
around regulatory transparency.
Um, those of you who knew me
from my chamber days, know that
I've been talking about this for
about 3 years. Um, so it's fun
to be a
to take it, you know, in this
seat.
Um, but it is something we're
working with RLD on. And so the
idea is, um, for any entity that
provides a license or permit and
within construction industry. So
that's RLD, it's planning,
you're planning uh departments
and or the county or city level,
uh, we would require them to
publish every quarter.
The average time from
application to determination of
that permit and license.
That's it. No deadlines, but we
start creating a transparent
environment so that we can see,
why does it take 2 weeks in
Roswell what it takes 6 weeks
and Clovis. Now, no spirit, not
disparaging clothes I make those
numbers up. But um it will
really, I think, help, um, also
understand where there might be
barriers, where we might need to
make investments in IT and human
resources and system
improvements. And I'll tell you
as I sit now in my.
in government and administer all
of those programs that I was
telling you about and the grants
that go out.
I couldn't tell you today how
long it takes me to get all
those out.
And I guarantee you when you
have
5 people reviewing a permit.
That manager
Probably doesn't know how long
it takes.
He or she thinks it's, we're
efficient. I've got a great
team, but it might be sitting on
each of those per person's desk
for a week or two, then all of a
sudden it becomes 10 weeks.
And so
It gives them the ability to
think be better managers. And so
that's, that's what we're, we're
uh excited about the building
permit data.
approach.
Um, additionally, um, we'll be
publishing in the next week or
two our update our final update
to the state's 2021 strategy.
Um, it has been, this update
will be closer to, I think 30
pages, not 400. Um, so we're
really trying to make that as
targeted and, and actionable as
possible. I'm very excited that
this was the first update to the
strategy that was done fully
internally, as, as at least our
internal staff drove it, um, but
we
We did, we have been working
with uh Harvard's, um, growth
lab. Uh, we are the 2nd state in
the union to be to work with the
Harvard growth lab, Wyoming was
the first, and we're the 2nd.
Um, so we're excited about
bringing in that capacity, but
the report is really driven uh
from, from our office. Um.
And the next page to that is, it
talks a little bit about kind of
where we've been going on the
recommendations from the
original strategy.
Um, and then finally, our EDD
resources, um, for those of you
who, who don't get our
newsletters, um, I've asked my
staff to make sure that changes.
So you are going to start
getting all of our newsletters,
because I think it's really
important for you to be able to
pass those along to your
constituents. I won't, we'll
work with, we'll make sure that
uh we're doing that to your
staff now that you are able to
have permanent staff because
again, great resources from the
outdoor recreation, uh,
newsletter to the film, to our,
our
core newsletter that comes out
with the resource wrap up, talks
about grant application
deadlines, all sorts of uh very
important information that your
constituents, uh, would need and
we want to make sure that's
easily available to you to
provide to them. And then
finally, our toolbox, um, which
we republished in the fall, both
in Spanish and in English,
outlines all of our different uh
strategies and techno technology
or um investment tools to
support economic development in
the state.
And finally, is a list of our
division and program directors.
So these are the folks who are
really driving that engagement
at the local level across those
various divisions, and I could
not be more proud of that team
as we really focus on that
effort of building up New
Mexicans and creating that
pathway to prosperity. And Madam
Chair, with that, I will stand
for questions.
Thank you. um, thank you for the
presentation. I've got a Madam
Leader Armstrong to start off to
to kick off your question.
Uh oh. Yes, ma'am.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm just
kidding.
Um, I, I do. Thank you for your
presentation. I do receive your
email and uh your updates and I,
I really like to read those.
Um, one of the things that I
wanted to ask you about is the
New Mexico healthy food
financing fund.
Um, do you have an average
amount that's given?
Uh, 2, the entities.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
I don't, I wouldn't want to go
from, I mean, I would do some
math and and divide, but I, I
think it'd be better to get a
little more detail. Like, I'm
happy to get back to you. I
don't have the details to the
average amount. OK, that's OK,
uh, Madam Chair and secretary. I
just am a little bit concerned
that, you know,
Of course I represent rural New
Mexico.
And um, you know, I drive an
hour to get groceries one way.
And uh and we are gonna have a
co op in um in Magdalena, but I
know they received, I believe
the amount was 27,000.
I'm worried that we're setting
people up to fail.
Without, I'm not sure what the
application process is. I'm not
sure if they have to turn in a,
um, uh, business management
plan, uh, all the other things
that go with running. It's
really a business. So I'm very
concerned that, uh, I mean, I'm
trying to support them as much
as I can. I'm staying at arm's
length away, of course, because
I'm the state representative in
the area and I don't want to
tell them what to do. Uh, I'm,
I'm advising them some of the
things I think that they should
be doing.
But I just wanna make sure that
you all have a process that
doesn't set them up to fail. I
see, you know, the majority, um,
are in northern New Mexico. So I
see we have several in Santa Fe,
several in Albuquerque, several
in Los Lunas. Um, now, Dixon,
Rama, Zuni, Magdalena,
Mountaineer, I see rural New
Mexico where we have to drive an
hour to get to a grocery store,
but I see.
Entities getting
These grants that
Where there's a grocery store 15
minutes away. And so I don't
know what we're trying to solve
with that, so I'm just concerned
that we're, we, we may be
setting them up to fail, and I
really don't want to do that.
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
that's a great question, and I
think part of what the funds do
is, is some of it is technical
assistance. So, and, and, uh,
frankly, um, someone of your
business caliber and background,
um, any assistance that you're
providing I'm sure is incredibly
important for the
Um.
But I, I, so we do provide those
technical, that technical
assistance, not just the funds,
um, and that's tied to that part
of what we're the, the program
is designed to do is help
connect small farmers with
markets. And so some of those
markets may be in those more
urban areas, uh, they may be
tying to public school
districts. They're tying to uh
senior centers. So part of the
value chain that we're trying to
create is not only creating a
customer base and, and
pathway for a local farmers, um,
and I believe the average on the
farming side, the average size
of, of recipients was about 3
acres. So very, a lot of them
very small farmers, but then
connecting them to school
districts and, and, and being
able to make our, the food that
we're providing for our children
and our seniors more helpful.
And so, um, I think that's part
of where that mix comes in from
the urban and the rural, is
trying to help that build that
customer base.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I appreciate that.
I, of course, I want to support,
support farmers and ranchers in
any way, shape or form. Uh, the
other uh portion is um.
On the, on the site readiness
portion. I'm concerned, uh, of
course, about our electric grid
and, and I'm glad to know that
you're including uh co-ops in
that because there's a lot of
places that that are um that use
co-ops. Uh, I know.
And in our business and I'm not
sure if I said this the other
day, but it took 2 years.
Set up something because of the
electric portion, not the air
quality control, not the air
quality permit. We got that
right away.
But, uh, the electric, which
shouldn't be that long, so I
really appreciate you doing
that. The regulations and um
transparency part, are we trying
to um kind of mandate in a way
uh to track the average time of
an application from an
application to permit and are we
thinking also about uh
certificate of occupancy.
So it would be Madam Chair,
Representative, uh, I believe
the way the language is is reads
is uh application to
determination is the, is the
concept. So, um, it may be a a
refusal.
And again, sometimes that's OK
from a business side as well, so
you've got clarity that you can,
you need to move on or do
something else. So it's really
trying, but it is, yes, it's to,
to require the tracking of that
information and then making that
information public. Currently
the draft of the luggage
legislation would require that
RLD uh create a data dashboard
that makes it available to
everyone, uh, how quickly those
various permits are moving
through the process.
OK, to the detail as it regards
to, to occupancy, um,
That may have to be, I may have
to think a little more about how
we would structure that
reporting and I can certainly do
that. We, we take direction from
those who work in the industry,
uh, as well as at RLD because
that's occupancy kind of my
understanding would be a variety
of pieces of permits to get to
that occupancy piece. And it may
be that we want to track that
whole process is one part, but
then the various aspects,
whether that's electrical
inspection or permits or other
things as well.
Thank you for that information.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I
just, um, I, I have hyped and
harped for and held my breath
and stomped my feet for 10
years.
Saying that the regulations and
licensing, a lot of that is the
barrier.
To
Building New Mexico.
And, uh, and then implementing
things that aren't fair.
I'm, I'm, I'm always about the
fairness factor of who can bid a
project, who can get it off the
ground, how much is this costing
our state taxpayers, uh, things
like that, so I'm really happy
that that you're tackling this,
I would also say that uh.
Removing those barriers, walking
them through a process.
Uh, is a much better way than
saying, oh, you didn't do this,
I got you. Here's a fine.
And so I know in other states,
Madam Chair, they walk people
through the process, uh, my
husband and I bought a gas
station. We were thrown into
the.
When trying to figure out how to
get the what license we needed,
what permit we needed,
everything else, and there's no
place to go to ask that
question. And so just to put
that on the, in the back of your
head to to think about being
helpful instead of the gotcha
mechanism, uh, not that we,
everyone is that, but uh there
are, I would much rather have a
process where we can help people
open businesses and and get
their their everything follow
the permits, get everything
right, everybody, majority of
people want to do things
correctly.
Uh, but sometimes
It's very hard to, to navigate
it. So just so you, you know how
hard it is to navigate. I'm sure
you probably do, but thank you
for your presentation. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Uh, Chair de la Cruz.
Thank you Madam Chair.
You talked about later earlier
when you're citing the numbers
that are uh in the document.
Do those include local leader
grants as well.
Madam Chair, representative.
I wish I, I don't know the
answer to that, and I don't want
to be incorrect in my statement.
I, I, my understanding is this
is the totality of of what we
would control, so my sense is we
would be capturing local and
state because that
We help fund those, um, but I
would need to verify that for
you. Thank you, Madam Chair. I,
I think the leader grants are
are great tool for our state,
but just so that I think it'd be
worth finding out because it
might beef up that number.
Thank you, man.
A representative Matthews.
And she thank you Madam Chair
and thank you. um.
Mr. Black for a.
Illuminating presentation.
An interesting thoughts and
ideas.
Uh, just a few questions. Uh, my
first one, I was lucky enough,
uh, last summer to do a tour
with a legislators of Sandia
Laboratories.
And um was
And, and part of what they
showed us during that tour were
projects they're working on
that.
Have
Current uses.
Moving toward how do we get them
into, for example, one of them
had to do with using.
Basically solar panels to reduce
the amount of water and time it
takes to grow crops.
Important thing in our state and
I was pretty excited about that
idea because I'm on the ag
committee, um, but.
What I'm wondering is.
You mentioned the connection
with Sandia. Could you be a
little bit more specific how
closely are we working with
them.
To try to commercialize.
Or adapt the things they're
coming up with.
Into our into the mainstream of
our state.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
there are a variety of ways that
the state uh and, and frankly,
the legislature has helped
support those efforts. There's
the
Uh, tax exemption that we
provide back to the labs that
allows them to embed a scientist
into a local New Mexico business
to help solve a technical issue.
Um, so that is a program I think
it started maybe 4 years ago, 5
years ago, I think 5 years ago
because it was something that I
worked on when I was at the
chamber and worked with the
legislature to do that. And it
provides a level of resources
about 3000 to $40,000 that you
can take that, uh, scientist and
embed.
In a New Mexico business. Um,
and it's a
Very popular program. So that's
one way we help bring the
science out of the behind the
fence and put it into our local
businesses. Uh, the program that
I mentioned regarding um
The
Uh, quantum aspect, uh, we work,
we're my team and the governor's
team are working directly with
the national labs on this. Um,
again, it would be, um,
A, a
national benchmarking effort
that supports that is being
supported directly by the
national labs and the way that
we become competitive with that
is to help and, and the, the
GRT, uh,
Waiver for them would would go
directly to infrastructure
that's being built to support
that project and New Mexico
hires that support that project.
So it's really, again, where
we're seeing the growth here,
that's what we're giving them
credit for. So they get a very
deep partnership. Uh, our Office
of Science, our strategy,
science and technology, uh,
works to directly with the labs
on, on a variety of issues
around advanced energy, water,
util
ization um,
So there's a and and I
Meet regularly with the leaders
both of both laboratories around
their uh commercialization
efforts about how they're trying
to roll out their technology
into uh the private sector so
that it can be something that
brings to you. So, um, we, if
you see our, we have several
grant programs that um support
that sort of integration as
well.
Great, thank you. Um.
My second question is kind of a
Do you and I'm gonna understand
if you don't, but um.
I'm curious whether your agency
has.
Thought about any kind of a
strategy to deal with the
possible loss of federal grants.
Federal funding for programs and
other.
Um
Which I call them initiatives.
Potentially coming out of
Washington.
Me and she uh representative,
yes, um, I think this week
across the entire state of New
Mexico.
Uh government, we have been
doing that analysis. Um, we do
have a variety of programs. Uh,
one is a small business support
loan program that's run out of
our office, we received uh a
grant for $75 million. We do
that, we help capitalize
businesses by buying down uh the
cost of their, they're creating
collateral for their loans, um,
making it easier for small
businesses to get loans. Um, and
it does a variety of other and
uh
Program's venture capital
investing in small businesses.
Um, we're working, we've been
applied last November to draw
down the final tranche of those
funds. I think we've used about
40 million of it. We've got
about 30 to 25 million. That's
still waiting to come down and
we have a signed agreement for
that. We've met all the
criteria. We believe we will be
in, we are entitled to that, but
we were watching that very
closely. Similarly, our healthy
foods program, we get direct
federal funding to help from the
Department of.
agriculture, uh, for those
staffing positions. Um, we will
do everything we can on our side
to make sure that we're taking
care of our people, uh, and
making sure that we're
supporting those organizations
that are dependent on us through
those programs, um, but it is
something we are monitoring
actively. Um,
On the flip side of that, uh, I
think.
Things like quantum, uh, are
seen as a national security
imperative. We actually
anticipate, uh, continued
investment in that space if not
doubling down. Uh, you've you've
seen that in the commitments
around artificial intelligence
as well, and the growth of data
centers and, and there are lots
and lots of conversations with
the state and I'm having with
folks who want to build AI data
centers in New Mexico. Um, so
again, I think
We have historically been very
well positioned as it as it
relates to national security and
investments from the federal
government and we will remain
that way.
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair, my
last question.
Mr. Black, um.
I go to a lot of town halls and
meetings where
Um
There's a lot of concern about
the state of the state.
Um, and, um, our apparent
inability to
Deliver the level of health
care, schooling.
Um
Public safety workforce
development and so forth that
the states would seem to need to
really flourish.
Um, those are just some of the
topics that come up. I'm sure
there's others.
And not everybody's unhappy with
all of those, but, but there's a
fair amount of unhappiness.
Um
And I'm
I'm curious about
What you, how you evaluate our
business environment.
And particularly,
What are 1 or 2 of the best
things we could do to improve
it.
And what are 1 or 2 of the
things that we absolutely
shouldn't do.
That would make it worse.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you for that easy
question. Um,
uh, I, I, I, I think I'll start
with things that we should do.
Um, when we're talking to a
business, whether that's a
business that's already here in
New Mexico, or that is looking
to invest in New Mexico.
Actually, I'll pivot to an
example of this this morning.
Uh, as part of the border
conversation uh Union Pacific,
uh, was in the meeting and they
brought this specific issue up.
And they talked about the
importance of regulatory
certainty for businesses,
especially when they're being
asked to make tens of millions,
100s of millions, maybe more
investments in the community
that they know that their
investment, if they make it
here, uh, they know what the
rules are and they so they know
they're able to evaluate in a,
in a fair context.
Whether they're gonna be able to
make a run of that business.
Um
Union Pacific, specifically
cited uh or spoke to not
specific legislation, but
legislation that is introduced
around whether it's their
particular industry in the
railroad industry, or around um
that creates insecurity as to
the regulatory environment in
New Mexico, that because they're
often they're trying to recruit
businesses to New Mexico because
it's good for them. If they're
there by the, the, the real, uh,
the
A yard down in Santa Teresa,
which is their biggest
interchange yard in their UP
system.
It's great for their business
because they get more, more
trains going more um
More cargo to move.
So they are out selling New
Mexico, but when it, when
there's legislation that, that
brings that into
Do, um,
That becomes hard.
And I'll share, and I won't use
the name of the company because
I don't think that's fair, but
We lost the company that is a,
uh, this year, recently.
Um, in Albuquerque, they are an
autonomous, uh, semi truck
manufacturer. Um, there was
bills, their bills were drafted
and dropped to regulate that
industry here in New Mexico.
They are
Clothes shop
They let off 80 people and they
moved to Texas.
And he said, you know, maybe
they'll come back, but the
regulatory uncertainty
environment.
Uh, is something that really
makes a difference.
So I think that is really
important. And then when we
think about, you know, we were
talking about the timelines it
takes to development.
Um,
frankly, for a lot of
businesses,
The incentives are good, and
they help.
But if you can say to somebody,
we can have you up and operating
in 6 months or 8 months
guaranteed.
That
That
Speed the market.
is much more valuable than a
grant.
Um, you know, if, if you're,
let's just use the data center
for example. If you're, if we
can give, you know, we gave
Facebook $10 million. But if we
Our regulatory environment
delays them a year or a year and
a half to market. They're
they're losing billions.
So that's, you know, it's, it's
how quickly we can get and
create that, that certainty is
really, I think, a thing that is
really important. And then
finally, um, the reason we're
is, is how can we, what can we
do be doing better, um,
And it goes back to that speed
of market to a certain degree,
getting our utilities to play,
the future of New Mexico's
electrons and molecules.
Like electricity and water.
And what are we doing to prepare
ourselves today for tomorrow.
And what are the infrastructure
investments we're making so that
we can ensure we have uh uh
An economy that can support our
citizens and our kids. And I
think um if we make those
investments today while we have
the surpluses we do.
Um, it will make us very, very
attractive. Like right now in,
in Arizona, their grid is maxed
out.
Um, they've done a great job.
They've got so much, you know,
they're building chip
manufacturing, they're building
data centers. They don't have
electrons to spare.
We have an opportunity to kind
of take that market now.
If we can if we can get our
utility infrastructure right.
Um,
well, Madam Chair, Mr. Black,
thank you. Those were really
interesting and thoughtful.
Answers, um, particularly the
last one and um I think it
reminds us that we have an
important role to play.
And being sure that the state
thrives. Thank you.
Thank you. Cheers Serato.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you Secretary for the
presentation. 3 kind of
questions to go over, uh, and
they get easier as we go. No not
hard. Um, so to begin with, you
mentioned you have the update to
the strategic plan. One
organizations or groups,
political subdivisions
contributed to that. How did you
speak with them about it?
Adam She, representative, um, I
don't have the exact numbers.
Um, I, I believe it was
somewhere around 80 different
organizations that we worked
with. We had convenings in the
Navajo Nation, um, uh, Kayla on
my team led that effort. Uh, she
also chairs or helps support the
state's.
Um
Sustainable
Economy task force.
And the sustainable economy
advisory Council. Um, and so I
think she did about 80 meetings
across the state, both with
employers, uh, folks who are um
who have lost their jobs in the
coal mines up in the Northwest,
um, and a variety of other
organizations down in the
Permian Basin as well cause uh
what you will see is is there is
this continued effort as, as
directed by kind of the
implementing legislation, um, to
be
Proactively thinking about what
are the impacts as we
decarbonize in a state that is
so based on extractive
industries. How are we, um,
positioning ourselves on
investing in those communities
now so that there's not uh the
trauma that takes place whenever
a mine closes or, or those
industries uh begin to lose
those jobs.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you Secretary. I think that's,
I'm, I'm mostly curious because
I'm how that all kind of escapes
or moves about and all the
different groups. It makes
sense, uh, to, you know, shift
how we're, we're looking at this
in the long run, especially as
we see, you know, global trends
for oil markets have just
shifted significantly over the
past, you know, whatever, and we
anticipate that in every LFC
report we see coming forward. So
glad to hear that we're looking
at those communities in
particular that are affected. I
want to turn real quick to the
film office if that's all right,
Madam Chair and secretary, um, a
couple of years
ago, we passed an additional tax
uh credit for film, I believe it
went up to 50 million if I'm
correct, um, in that, uh, and it
changed the, the
If I remember correctly, like it
could have this kind of skewed
change the percentage that or
the number of jobs that were
required to be in state or the I
guess the the category of jobs
that are that need to be in
state versus out of state. So
I'm curious, and you may not
have these numbers now, but I
would love to get them for you
later. Has there been a shift in
how many new jobs were created
for New Mexicans, and how many
new jobs were created for folks
from out of state.
Madam Chair Representative, I
think what we, what we did, my
recollection on this, and um I
had
I'm sorry, I don't have it in
this presentation. Um, we, we
expanded the rural uplift. And
so we took that as a, it's a 60,
it was a 60 mile.
Um
circumference around Albuquerque
and Santa Fe, and we redid that
so that it's not the city
limits, but to the city hall.
Which allowed for a broader,
more rural uplift. Uh, what
we've seen from that is about a
48% increase in rural jobs that
are going to within the film
industry. So it's really been
effective at, at driving
investment outside of just
Albuquerque and Santa Fe, but
throughout New Mexico and in Las
Cruces, um, as it relates, um,
to the
New Mexico versus, you know, the
overall incentive is based on
New Mexico's spend, so um if
you're, if you're hiring someone
for out of state to come here.
You don't get to offset that
cost. So it's designed to really
incentivize those local, that
local spend. And part of what
we're doing to help increase
that is um the investments that
the legislature has made around
our media arts collective
program, which will really be a
best in class training program
for the digital media arts.
Uh, we're in the, um, we're
building out that facility in
partnership with CNM in the city
of Albuquerque in the rail yards
in downtown Albuquerque and we
are uh as well building one at
the ARED Center in Las Cruces.
Both of those will be ribbon
cuttings and we're on on.
Uh, the timing in spring of
2026, so next year, um, with
that said, we've already started
programming. So this last fall,
uh, we started doing uh OSHA
training, we started doing gun
safety training. We started
doing a variety of other uh
technical training programs for
uh the film and television
industry, also doing some
thought leadership programs
around what is the role of AI in
the future of digital media and
how do we position in Mexico.
As, as a media leader in
technology leader in the as
technology evolves. So we're
really trying to build both that
workforce side so that we're
holding those jobs here and and
they're homegrown, uh, but also
adjusting our incentives so that
we're driving more of that
investment around the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you Secretary. That's, that's
incredible, and I, I really
appreciate some of this
steadfast investments that we've
been seeing EDD, uh, continue to
do, and I, I hope we see it
through the next, you know,
gubernatorial election and
beyond, um, the consistency
makes a huge difference. I
remember a couple years ago
someone came up to me and said,
why are we investing so much in
film? It's a dead, you know,
like, like, all that's done,
it's just throwing money down
the toilet and then
right before session started, I
was at a conference with some
other legislators. And I was
talking to a guy from Georgia
and I was like, you know, we
We're taking some of your films
and we're kind of joking about
it. And the guy from Oklahoma
came over and said, oh, we're
coming as well, because they're
looking at a $50 million tax
credit. So again, this is still
a very competitive space. I hope
we continue to do wise
investments that I'm sure we're
seeing the job growth. I love
hearing those numbers,
especially in rural New Mexico,
um, you know, that's going to
help incentivize more the
infrastructure building that
you're talking about.
The last thing I have to say is
uh more of a compliment and uh
I'm glad I actually met him, uh,
years back here as well. Um,
last week, your, your, your, uh,
one of the folks from your
department presented to rural
Development. And they also have
the business root resource map.
I love this site. I want to see
the business resource map as a
model for every other department
in the administration. And the
reason why it's incredibly easy
to use and you click a button of
where you're at in fundraising,
and it shows you more places.
to go to, it connects you to a
local office for one on one
real-time help. And I would love
to see that kind of expansion
for exactly what the minority
leader is talking about, but I,
I just opened a business in, you
know, A, what is the permitting?
Who are the offices? What do I
need to talk to, you know, and
again, like, you know, you
mentioned in passing AI but if
AI can help us pull these
resources that we have so many
agencies and departments, um, I
would love it. So I see that as
a model and I love that you guys
are doing that. That's
fantastic. Thank you.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you so much for that. Um,
I, I, I agree. I think there's,
what we can do better.
And we will. And I think one of
the areas where we're really
excited as is and kind of
leveraging this site readiness
approach. Um, the state of
Tennessee has done a remarkable
job at really dashboarding this
map, the mapping resource aspect
that you're talking about. And
so imagine that map with all of
those sites that are
developable, and you can click
on, and as you as a developer or
a business, and you can see
what's available, what's
been done already, how
accessible that is, what are the
processes you've talked about,
uh, where they would go for
permits, where they would go for
that, making it very easy for
both our team to to share that
with or or local economic
development organization share
that with a prospective client,
um, but making that a much more
seamless process. So, uh, I
would, you know, welcome
feedback, uh, both, I love the
positive feedback, uh, but I
also want to hear where we can
be better.
Um, and so I appreciate the
partnership with all of you in
doing that.
Thank you, Representative
Murphy.
Madam Chair, thank you, uh, Mr.
Secretary. Excuse me, I think
I'm turning around the
The building cried here, um.
I, um, I'm going to follow up a
little bit on representative de
la Cruz's comments regarding um
slide 4.
And um
The
Return on investment is a common
business term that that we
understand and certainly in my
business, and the first question
is, um, I would assume that the
ROIs on this are undiscounted
and not discounted. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair representative, uh,
you're gonna have to help me
understand what you mean by
discounted versus undiscounted.
There's a, there's an economic
concept that basically the
dollar, a dollar today is worth
more than $1.05 years from now.
So many times there's a, there's
a discount factor put in it
could be for inflation, for cost
of money, that discount
depending upon the type of
industry you're looking at, the
type length of the, of the cash
flow stream and so forth could
vary anywhere from probably 3 to
9%. I would assume these are
undiscounted. You're just
Comparing dollars into dollars
out. That is correct, sir. OK,
thank you very much, Madam
Chair, Mr. Secretary, could you
go in a little bit more to how
you do calculate that. I heard
that you do not use, and this I
think this is a yes or no, you
do not use an economic mold. So,
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
we actually have worked, uh, we
have an internal algorithm that
we've developed within the
economic development department,
um, over the years, that helps
us uh evaluate
both a leader
um
The potential impact of a leader
investment. And that we use to
determine um the quality of
jobs, so that the salary, uh,
the, we look at that, we look at
the number of those jobs, the
type of industries, um, and then
what are the
The
Or what are the economic
multipliers that typically align
to a particular industry, um,
film is one that has typically a
high multiplier, um.
Uh call center, not so much. Um,
we did, we used to do a lot of
LEA deals for call centers in
New Mexico. Those aren't high
paying jobs. We've really moved
away from that as a way of where
we put our investments because
again, we're trying to drive up
those.
Average and or month or hourly
wages within the context of
putting state dollars into a
project. So we take those things
into consideration in the
determination factor upfront.
And then we, as we start to
disperse those funds to uh
project. So, um,
Lita has always done in
partnership with your local
government. So the county or
city. And uh there will be an
action at the local level. So
that means the state is never
coming in and imposing our will
on a local jurisdiction. The
local jurisdictions say no, I'm
not interested, we're not
interested in that project. No
leader for you. And, and then it
doesn't happen.
Um, but we have in those those
agreements, uh, reporting
requirements around those
salary, those salaries and
number of jobs that throughout
the time, uh, and, and they
have, and they tend to be, I
can't remember the in it may
vary depending on the project.
There's a number of years that
we require those reporting back.
And if they're not meeting those
criteria, we have the ability to
claw back those funds. So that's
where we're getting those
numbers, is.
through that reporting process.
Madam Chair, Mr. Secretary,
thank you very much, and I won't
drag this entire room through a
nerdy algorithm discussion.
Perhaps I can come by sometime
and we can talk more about that.
Representative, I, I welcome
that. Um, and there are
It's hard. I, I know it's hard
to believe there are bigger
nerds than me, uh, in my
department you can explain it
better than I can.
German secretary, I'll take your
word for that. Um.
The, so the way I understand it
is you really come in with LIA
funds and back to a couple of
the comments. I think one, you
just made very recently is, is
that those are really coupled
with local and by local, I mean,
city or county or or whatever
the public entity may be
incentives that could include
tax abate, property tax
abatements, cash from grants or
whatever may be available
locally. So it's leverage funds
really.
Uh, Madam Chair, represent,
great question. I should have
talked a little bit about that.
We have a variety of tools.
Thank you to the legislature.
Um, uh, industrial revenue bonds
is one of those aspects that we
can utilize. Uh, the legislature
has done a variety of GRT
exemptions. Uh, so for, uh,
Manufacturing equipment. That
is, there's a gross receipts tax
exemption for that. So we, um,
There's the lead, or sorry, the
JTI program, which for new hires
and economic based jobs can pay
up to 60 to 65% of a new hires
salary for a given number of
months. So direct money back
into that business. So we
We couple and build uh and
leverage both local and state,
uh.
Incentives and
While it's, it is somewhat
complicated because there's so
many parts to it. Um, our team
is really good at helping
explain that and laying it out
and modeling that. So when we're
working with a business, we will
model what that incentive looks
like for them over the years and
provide that. And I will tell
you, New Mexico is competitive
with anybody in the country.
Um, again, ours may not be as
simple as some other states. But
in taking, taking in whole, we
can compete with anyone.
Thank you, Mr. Secretary, and I
know we have a bill, so I have
I'm, I'll move very quickly. Um,
jump to, uh, if we could slide
17, and I think this is more of
a maybe digging in and
reinforcing, following that
perhaps on Leader Armstrong and
Representative Matthew's
comments, and I, I read this and
I say, um, second line provides
a license or permitted
associated with a building and
construction to publish the
average time, and my question is
why limit that?
Madam Chair, Representative,
that is a great question. Um, I
will, um, how do I start this
answer? Uh, we wanted to make
sure that we were doing
something that was achievable.
Um, I hope that this is our
first run at this, and then over
the next few years, uh, with
that legislative leaders will
see this as something that
should be brought to a variety
of aspects of government. Um, I
think what um the urgency now is
around the construction side
that we saw, uh, we were able to
work directly with RLD and get
their support and engagement
around the construction trades
and not trades but construction
aspects, um, and licensing, so
it was really to lay the
groundwork for what we hope will
become a much broader uh role
of, of transparency, and I'll
share very quickly, um.
We got the idea of this when I
was at the Chamber of Commerce,
worked with gentlemen out of uh
Arizona, who was the chief
operating officer for Governor
Duosey at the time, and he was
also the Environment secretary
in Arizona.
But he was the individual who
led the regulatory reform
efforts for Arizona. And he said
they first started with efforts
to set deadlines and create all
sorts of times, you know,
requirements and, and he said, I
was I remember this is him
speaking. He was the Environment
secretary. He's like, I was just
told the deadlines and we just
keep it going.
But
What he found was once we had to
publish how long it took.
It really shifted the, the, the
reaction from the government
side to be OK, we need to figure
out how to, how to bring that
down. As his advice to us was
the most effective thing that we
ever did was just start creating
those timelines or, or those
publishing that information.
Madam Chair, um, Mr. Secretary,
I absolutely agree with that.
And so I would suggest that I go
back to your statement about the
overall regulatory certainty and
certainly support that and would
encourage you to, to drive this
initiative across all the
departments, Environment
Department, the OCD, the
building departments, all of
these could help all of us to
improve the overall business
climate. And I'd also suggest
that the largest driver of the
economy in the state right now
is energy and may be oil and gas
now but it would be something
else at some point in every
industry needs that.
So, and lastly, well, one last
business concept that, that I've
always been taught, and that is
you keep the customers you've
got.
First, right? Because if you
lose that customer and you've
got to go get another one, all
you do are equal, so you keep
your existing customers, and
that means agriculture, oil and
gas or traditional industries,
and all the new emerging
industries too we want those to
come along and lastly, I really
want to echo uh representative
Matthews because I have a little
experience with the national
labs that we have to have a very
robust, uh, technology,
commercialization and uh program
cooperly between the state uh
and those federal facilities.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Secretary.
Thank you and um I actually, I
think most of my questions were
answered. I, I really wanna, um,
stress as well that um, you
know, I think with this
regulatory transparency, um, it
feels like we all know what the
outcome is gonna be or what what
we're looking for because that's
where that's where we see the
stopgap and we're seeing, I know
that I get called all the time
about permits, and you know, I
refer to my city council and um
that's where it seems to kind.
stay and die there. And so, you
know, we need to keep that
moving if we really want
businesses to thrive and so I
would really encourage that we
take it to those steps
afterwards. Um, and I just
wanted you to clarify a couple
of things for me. When you
talked about LIDA funds, um, did
you say that there was no
additional funds that LFC was
recommending. Madam, that's
correct. So the executive budget
requested 20 $20 million for
LIDA. Um, the, the LFC budget.
was 0.
And that's interesting because I
think that you're showing with
the data.
That it pays, I, I didn't even
catch the percentage that it was
paying, but it, I mean it, I, I
know it's very significant, so
I, I find that an interesting
number and also on that point,
didn't we have the same um
problem with that funding last
year.
Madam,
uh,
yes, and I, it, it gets a little
nuanced and I think um part of
the challenge is, is how we, the
budgeting process for LEDA
because the the fund is
non-reverting and it rolls back.
But not to get too deep in the
accounting weeds. At the end of
the fiscal year, we have to
bring that those funds into a
different account, reauthorize
them because we have, we go
through the, the leader process
and we grant.
Uh, uh
A certain amount of money to a
particular business. Um, that
business may never actually may
not take us up on that. They,
for business reasons or other
reasons, maybe they, they didn't
get the permit they needed, they
didn't move forward. Were they
uh
Or whatever that might be, but
we have promised those funds, we
have to hold those funds in case
They are able to then utilize
them.
Sometimes that never happens and
those funds roll back in, uh,
but, um, there are other times
where, so that's, that's some of
the accounting is, is there's
monies that are out there that
have been obligated but haven't
been drawn down yet.
So we reauthorized that process,
that goes from this fiscal first
quarter of, of July to kind of
September. That's when the LFC
pulls their numbers on how much
money we've got in our account.
And it shows that we've got all
this money that's unencumbered.
And so it creates a bit of a
miscommunication as to what's
really there because we, it's
actually obligated. We can't
spend it, but it's sitting in
our account. So you got plenty
of money. Well, no, it's it's
obligated. And so that's, I
think we haven't done a good job
as the department over the years
to explain
Two things, how that process
works so that the our
appropriators um appreciate kind
of the just the accounting
nuance and I do believe we have
fixed that working with DFA. So
going forward and part of it is
we're now gonna have to do that.
I think it's a 5-year window we
do that as opposed to every
year. So that'll both expedite
it and, and make it easier to
understand. The second part is,
you know, I have the chart here
that's really complicated and
has a lot of numbers. I told you
a case study that was really
easy to understand.
stand on the ROI. Maybe we're
not doing a great job of
explaining that ROI in a way
that's um
That, that's, that works. And so
we again need to own that as a
department and get better at how
we talk about uh our own
programs so that, um, I think
folks can appreciate why it's
important to keep investing.
Thank you and I, I appreciate
that answer because I think that
especially as as the
appropriators, we want to know
that those dollars are being
spent, um, but if it even takes
just putting an extra column
saying that these are already uh
spoken for. I mean, that's the
part we need to know. And so
that that's important and I my I
guess my last comment to you
would be, you know, we talk
about site readiness, and we
talk about, you know, wanting to
make sure that the rural areas
are, are, are looked at for
that, um, but when we.
Have so many areas like I know
even in my district, um, where
we don't have electricity. We
don't have water, um, you know,
we need to, to, if we're talking
about site readiness and you're,
I think you said, um, you know,
8 to 18 months is what
businesses are looking at and
we're nowhere close to that,
especially in the rural areas.
And so do you have a plan or do
you have a suggestion for areas
that are, you know, are looking
to try to do that.
And how to get them to to that
level.
Madam Chair, yes, and, and that
is the plan that we talked about
today. So I think the site
readiness strategy um we'll have
a portal on our website and,
and, and, and our field reps
because we have 6 different
regions, our field reps will be
actively looking to bring people
into that portal, say, hey, we
would like our site evaluated.
You know, there'll be some
criteria that needs to be a
certain size, single owner,
things like that, so that it's
easier again uh to develop. Um,
but we'll certainly be working
to encourage.
Our rural communities to do
that. The legislature was kind
enough to give us to let us do a
pilot on this, and I'm happy to
share this research with you.
Um, last year, we, we, we got
the report uh in December, I
believe we did 32 sites, all
publicly owned sites around New
Mexico. I think 3 of them in
Roswell, we had 2 in Hobbs.
We're all all over the ones from
Farmington all over the in Las
Cruces and
And so we did a very high level
dashboard of kind of what those
look like and kind of what are
the criteria that could really
help those. Um, that's an
example of kind of what we're
thinking of. So again, it'll
layout, it'll have a roadmap for
each individual site.
That we evaluate. Here's the 5
things you need to do to make it
more marketable, to be able to
kind of elevate it for a site
selector to want to come here.
And there will be some funds
that that EDD will administer
and there will be a board that
will be created, um, primarily
both on public that will have
public and private sector
participation to help direct and
advise the economic development
department. How do you utilize
those extra funds to best
advantage around the state to
get those site.
into a developable situation.
Um, it may be that we can
provide an environmental review
report for many of those sites
with those funds. Maybe a
traffic study. Again, uh, one of
the things housing is coming up
a lot, right, in the session and
it's an important piece for New
Mexico. Uh, we can utilize those
funds to do uh housing studies
as it relates to the economic
development, so that a local
jurisdiction has that as a
resource. Our goal is to be, you
know,
technical support for those uh
communities around the state
where, you know, obviously, some
of our local communities and
villages.
I was uh planning and zoning.
Chair for the village of
Corrales, uh, before I took on
this role, let me get out of
that one.
but, you know, sometimes smaller
communities don't have the
internal staffing capacity to do
this sort of work, uh, we're
gonna help and partner with them
to provide that work. So my hope
is, is that um
We're both intentional about how
we go out and recruit in our,
our rural communities to be
active and participate. Uh,
we'll also be doing that with
our tribal communities. Uh, I,
uh, this last fall, had the
opportunity to spend some time
both in the Zuni Pueblo, uh,
and, and the Navajo Nation,
where we talked about this idea
around site readiness and what
we're proposing. And there was a
lot of interest from our tribal
partners, um, and they have land
that they're you know, that
maybe they're OK with non-tribal
members.
having access to, whether that's
around our outdoor recreation uh
initiatives or development of
infrastructure for manufacturing
or other types of things. So,
um, we'll be very active in
reaching out and making sure
we've got a broad representation
from across the state.
Thank you and uh thank you for
your well presentation today,
we, we, uh, I think we all
learned a lot and we welcome you
back at any time.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
All righty. Um, we've got one,
bill that will be presented
today. It's HB 44.
There is
Representative Black, if you
wanna.
Come on up.
Welcome.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
I'm just gonna get my computer
ready and I'll be ready in one.
Go ahead and settle in and let
OK, Madam Chair, thank you so
much for the time today and
that's a hard act to follow all
the great things EDD is doing,
so.
I, I don't know how this bill
has anything to do with that,
but I will definitely try my
best, Madam Chair
Representative.
So, uh, HB 44, this legislation
pretty much in a nutshell.
I I've heard from folks in my
constituency and I'm sure across
the state as well, um, there's
been parents who've been
Looking at the data, and I think
the data is what we're really
looking at when it comes to
childhood harms when it comes to
the pornography industry. And so
this bill, I know it's a spiny
subject to get into, but it's
mainly about protecting children
and
How they grow up, we want to
make sure that they have healthy
environments. And so,
According to the data that we
have, the average age of the
first exposure to pornography
for children is as young as 11
years old.
And that's what studies that say
that 100% of 15 year old males
and 80% of 15-year-old females
have encountered violent,
degrading content, and that
includes depictions of rape,
torture, extreme cruelty before
their first real life romantic
or sexual experience.
So this bill does not, this
bill, I'm sure we may hear or
maybe hopefully not, we may hear
that it's gonna censor content.
But it just implements
reasonable age verification
measures to ensure that minors,
they just can't easily access
such materials, and that's
defined in the legislation. I'm
sure that's gonna, we're gonna
get into that, so I won't rattle
on about that. But Madam Chair
Representative, so this is going
to require verification, um.
For certain, certain websites
and the threshold is 1/3 of the
content on the website is sexual
in nature, and the, the
definitions are in the
legislation, which I'd be happy
to go page by page with you, but
I'm sure we're going to get
questions on that. So,
Pretty much I find this to be
common sense. I, I find
constituents across the state,
I've talked to folks in
Albuquerque and Santa Fe and
Cruises and, and Chavez County
and Otero County where I'm from.
And so folks think that this is
a just a common sense measure.
And it also follows a national
framework of some kind of
legislative
Priorities, and I know even in
Congress, Senator Blumenthal of
Connecticut, a Democrat.
And Senator,
Marsha Blackburn of Tennessee, a
Republican, they worked together
on similar legislation, we also
see such legislation in places
like.
Arkansas, uh, Louisiana, I think
Texas passed one. we have
similar language in California,
although some of their language
was deemed unconstitutional, so
we did not follow them in that
regard, and so we made sure to
be as close to the letter of the
law as possible when drafting
this, as well as just keeping in
mind that
We're not trying to keep folks
from utilizing these websites.
We're not trying to censor
anything. We're just mainly
trying to ensure that children
are protected from, from
accessing this. So, that's
pretty much the gist of it in a
nutshell, and I'm so happy to be
here and I'm open for questions,
Madam Chair.
We're glad you're happy to be
here. We'll see how this goes
for you, um, do I have anybody
in the room uh for this
legislation.
OK. Um, would you like to speak
speak on it, and you can give a
one minute, um,
While you're here.
I'm probably gonna repeat a lot
of representative block just
said cause he was like almost
reading my notes. But to require
simple age verification to
protect our children from access
to harmful pornography,
pornographic sites online seems
like such common sense and low
bar registration.
I'm appalled to think that
anyone would challenge this
bill. Good afternoon. My name is
Nicky McCarty. I'm the state
director for Concerned Women for
America of New Mexico,
testifying for Concerned Women
for America legislative Action
Committee. Our members are women
who are tired of big tech and
big porn, putting profits ahead
of safety and decency, treating
our children as expendable. We
stand in support of HB 44. This
bill at the very least would
make it more
difficult for obscene and
exploitative materials to reach
the eyes and minds of our
children. This should not be
controversial and extensive
survey of American youth
revealed that 51% of boys and
32% of girls admitted to viewing
pornography for the first time
before they were 13 years old.
About 15% of children report
they saw pornography online when
they were under the age of 11.
Under 11, I think, now think
about that.
It's also a health crisis.
Is my time? OK, well, let me
just send it to say.
Um, can I get the attendant to
hold the microphone because I
think if it's up so close and
then she'll just come into the
middle of the room, we'll get
the attendant to hold it and
that way I know you're reading
and if it's too loud, he can
pull away from you a little bit
because what happens is it
distorts it and then we really
can't understand what you're
saying, so I wanted to, and then
so, and there is a minute time
limit and so uh we will try to
flag it down when it's getting
close to
If you're like if we're 30
seconds, you can start and then
I'll cut you off at that point.
So sorry for the rough start
there. Thank you. Go ahead. Yes,
good afternoon. Uh, my name is
Gail Martinez, and good
afternoon again, Madam Chair and
Representatives. You know, and
this morning as I was getting
ready to, um, you know, come up
here and knowing what I wanted
to speak in favor of this, um,
my issue was I'm here to also to
speak of from concerned women of
America, but my thought was as a
as a grandmother and a mother
and having
raise my kids in this state, um,
and, and wanting to understand
how to create the right
environment for my grandchildren
to be raised.
So I appreciate your role and
assurance that the health and
safety and welfare, um, and that
role that you play is an
important part, um, and as kind
of similarly stated that there
is a a health crisis around this
issue, and you have an
opportunity to create some
intervention, um, and help
mitigate that type of uh piece,
and as a gentleman that first
spoke your economic development.
Director that you know there's
hope on the horizon, and this is
this bill allows for some hope
on the horizon, um, for our
children and protecting. So, um,
boundaries, um, laws are
boundaries and their guidelines,
but with that you also get what
you tolerate, and I think that
there's an opportunity here to
um to help create the right
boundaries and protection around
our children, so reasonable age
verification is um 19 states
have passed it already, and we
appreciate you both.
Anybody else here in favor?
We do have some people on Zoom.
Jodie Hendricks.
Jodie Hendricks.
Can you hear me?
Yes.
OK, sorry about that. So I am
Jody Hendricks and uh I am a
mother of 4 beautiful children,
and I want to urge you to truly
consider the need for the
protection of minors from
harmful material. Um, uh, some
of the statistics that
Representative Lockhart gave are
so important to recognize, you
know, the average age of first
exposure to pornography is
between the ages of 7 and 13. By
the age of 17, about 75% of
adolescents have been exposed to
pornography and 58% of the
individuals, access to
unintentionally, uh, age
verification requirements would
prevent this unintentional
exposure and reduce our overall
underage exposure to pornography
within the pornographic uh
content we see depictions of
sexual violence, uh, which then
is correlating to human
trafficking and sexual abuse,
uh, porn is just as dangerous as
drugs or opioids, and we've got
to protect our kids from it. We
can't allow this type of harmful
content.
To be unintentionally accessed
and then shape the views that
our kids have on their uh future
intimate relationships. So I
urgely, uh, I strongly urge you
to consider, uh, the need for
this protection of uh minors
from the harmful materials.
Michaela Peterson.
Hi, can you hear me?
Yes
OK, so 1 in 4 New Mexicans is a
child. Those are children who
are vulnerable to are harmful to
harmful online content every
day. Um, there are many studies
that show that children who are
exposed to explicit content do
lead to significant mental
health issues, body
dissatisfaction, distorted
perceptions of relationships and
even to destructive and risky
sexual behaviors themselves. And
these are children like they
said younger than 11 years old
who are being
exposed um to violent graphic
pornographic material and
predators know this, and they
use unrestricted online
platforms to target children.
And those who would argue it's
too inconvenient to verify their
age each time they log on to,
you know, a porn site must
understand the duty to protect
kids. We already require age
verification to restrict harmful
substances and dangerous
activities. Kids can't buy
alcohol, tobacco, or spray
paint. They can't go to a club
in R-rated movie or gamble at a
casino.
But right now, any kid online
can access sexually explicit
content with no barriers.
A verification
and it's no different from
existing child protection we
already have. Thank you.
Wolf events.
Good afternoon. Thank you for
allowing me to give testimony,
um, and greetings to the great
state of New Mexico. We did our
annual women's conference in uh
Santa Fe last year with a
marvelous state you have. I
wanted to express our support of
the Women's Liberation Front, a
radical feminist organization
dedicated to restoring,
protecting and advancing the
rights of women and girls.
We echo the comments made by
other speakers like to thank
Representative Bloch for
introducing this.
correct that 19 of these laws
have passed across the United
States and we actually submitted
an amicus brief and the Supreme
Court for January 15th review of
Texas law upon which the New
Mexico draft is based from our
brief, we'd like to share with
you yes, pornography is harmful
to children online porn is not
what it used to be. It is
featuring human trafficking,
rape, and child assault videos,
uh, singer Billie Eilish said
that she first access porn at
age 11 and it
messed up. Yes, it has been
proven to be extremely
detrimental to children's mental
health and social development.
State action is necessary to
safeguard children from internet
pornography and internet
pornography is a violent
criminal enterprise. There is no
free speech protection for
recording and profiting from
porn.
We
That is all.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
opposition?
If we can form a line, if we get
the attendant to go ahead and.
Hold the mic and we will start
with that.
And yeah, there'll be a one
minute cutoff. Good morning,
madam chair. I had a 2-minute
presentation. OK, Deborah, I'm
the owner of books on the Boss.
We're an independent bookstore
on the west side of Albuquerque,
and I am very concerned about
this bill. Our bookstore is also
part of the American booksellers
Association and they are
fighting these bills and 9 other
states that it was introduced
in, um, the descriptions that
are located on page 2 are
incredibly subjective as far as
what is sexual content. Uh, page
3.
bookstore, um, resell e-books
online, physical books online,
and audio books online and this
would prevent any of our online
sales from going through. The
requirements by the National
Institute of Standards and
Technology in order for a person
to have access to the website,
they would have to do a 3 step
process. One upload personal
information, name, address, date
of birth. Second is then
identify uh identity evidence,
which is uploading a photo and 3
is a biometric character.
istic which is uploading a live
selfie just to have access into
the website.
These measures measures would be
impossible for us to implement
and would stop any traffic from
any person going to our website,
minor or not. We stand in strong
opposition to this bill. Thank
you.
Next.
Hi, I'm Mike Sil with the Free
Speech Coalition. We're leading
the legal challenge in many of
the other states that have
passed these laws. It's not that
we don't believe in age
rification. I certainly support
the efforts to keep minors from
accessing adult content, but I
will tell you in the 19 states
that have passed these laws,
they've been failures. There is
plenty of adult content that is
still easily accessible. You can
go to Google, the first page is
full of it. It's not protecting
minors in the way that it is.
What it is doing is it's
limiting adults' access to
specific websites. So what we
see when our members attempt
to do age verification is that
95% of people who were asked to
upload a selfie, scan their
face, upload an I leave and they
go to a site that is located
outside the US. They go to
social media, they go to any of
the number of the places that
are not affected by this bill.
And so what we're seeing is this
is um there are ways, there's
device level age verification
that's much more effective. We
support these bills, but I think
that we're seeing a chilling
effect. That's why we in the
ACLU.
And the American Library
Association and so many others
have concerns about how these
bills would be used to chill
speech. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Marshall Martinez, the executive
director of Equality New Mexico,
and we're statewide LGBTQ
organization, and it's a
pleasure to be in front of your
committee for the first time
this session.
Access to information saves
lives. In fact, the reality is
that because of internet access,
young LGBTQ people are growing
up in a world today where they
know they are not broken. They
know they are not alone, and
they know there is a life worth
living. This is a childhood I
did not experience being born
and raised in Alamogordo, New
Mexico in a pre-internet age
that I don't love sharing with
people.
We believe that censoring the
information that someone can
access on the internet is
discriminatory. It teaches a
dangerous framing to our
communities, and it tells people
that young people can't be
trusted to access information
and that parents cannot be
trusted to parent their
children.
All people deserve access to the
internet. All parents deserve to
parent their children in the way
they see fit. And we all deserve
to be empowered to determine
what we read, what we see, what
we watch without state
government making decisions
about the morality of such
material. We urge you to oppose
the legislation. Thank you.
Uh, good afternoon, Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
Tatiana Prieto with the ACLU of
New Mexico, but we all want our
youth across to Mexico to remain
safe and healthy, we cannot
restrict their access to
information as it would greatly
impede on the freedoms outlined
in the First Amendment.
Additionally, we have major
concerns with the age
verification provision within
this bill. Everyone would be
required to upload personal
data, such as photo ID with
companies that claim to verify
their age. Efforts to childproof
the internet like this not only
hurts everyone's ability to
access information.
but it also poses numerous
threats to our online privacy
and safety. Mexican youth
deserve our protection and
support, but age gating the
internet is not the answer,
especially considering that for
the more tech savvy users, all
of these attempts at censorship
would fall short anyway. In this
case, parents already have the
tools they need to keep explicit
and harmful content away from
kids, such as built-in parental
controls, rather than infringing
on constitutional rights, we
should focus on educating
parents about these existing
solutions, allowing loosely
regulated.
surveillance of our online
activity is dangerous and close
the door for government.
Thank you chair and members of
the committee. My name is Kat
Sanchez with Bold Futures, my
partner and I raised 4 now young
adult kids, um, and as a queer
person, I know that it has been
documented that biases impact
movie ratings of LGBTQ movies
versus cisgender heterosexual
movies, and those same biases
will no doubt come into play in
an average person applying
contemporary standards.
Unquote on what is serious or
not artistic, political, or
scientific value. At both
futures, we have worked very
hard with community
organizations and the New Mexico
breast breastfeeding task force
to normalize breast and chest
feeding. Some language in this
bill continues with the stigma
of sexualizing breasts and
nipples in a way that undermines
such a, a, a normal body part
and whether this bias is
conscious or unconscious, it
does it in a matter of not all
nipples and breasts.
specific to femme or female
bodies. We urge no vote on HB
44.
Thank you. Do we have a
Yes
OK
So at one minute they will be
cut off, so just to clarify
that.
Marcus Trujillo
Yes, good evening, madam chair
members of the committee. My
name is Marcus Til and I'm from
the pueblo of Laguna and I am
the communications and media
manager with indigenous women
rights.
We opposed the HB 44 as a sexual
health organization that seeks
to make what is not supposed to
be taboo, sex, pleasure, and
safety accessible. Again, as an
indigenous-led organization. We
are asking the government to
stay out of personal decisions
and what should be discussions
about what is appropriate for
their children.
This bill
is a band-aid to a much larger
issue of sexual health topics
more accessible or acceptable,
and the pornographic element
seen more as unrealistic
expectations. Moreover, the
definition for who this does not
apply to is too narrow and can
impact our organization if
someone decides that medically
accurate information about sex,
pregnancy, and safety are
objectionable. This can impact
my work specifically as I am
responsible for assisting our
information.
mind and in person again, Madam
chair and committee, thank you.
Thank you.
Tom H
Um, hi.
Can you hear me? Yes.
OK, perfect. So I'm not
representing or with any
particular organization, but as
a concerned citizen, I'm
primarily concerned about data
protection and my privacy is
online with this, um, attempts
to install a verification
software in the past have shown
how leaky and dangerous these
systems are, um, as a fair
person, I find it disturbing
that we're trying to collate
data between, you know, who is
the user of this with
identifiable.
and the data they're consuming.
If laws or public opinion
changes further down the line,
all of a sudden you have this
accessible database of, you
know, what am I consuming, what
are other queer people consuming
and it can be used to target or
otherwise disadvantage our
communities. That's, you know, a
more
Uh, down pipeline, but even as
it stands now, um,
You know, lots of nefarious
things are happening online with
access to personal information
and then this is just a huge
vulnerability.
Um, in my opinion.
Thank you. Trauma healing?
Yes, this is Tory Brooksalgo
trauma healing and Prevention
Services, and I also founded
Doula by donation.
For over 30 years, I have been
supporting women.
And
People assign female at birth
during the labor and delivery
process and during breastfeeding
and chest feeding. I've worked
with the New Mexico
breastfeeding task force and
with of New Mexico.
As someone who was raised as a
Christian, I use the Bible to
decide whether or not a law is
applicable or equitable, and
then if this law was passed as
is written and as has happened
at every single 19 state that it
has been passed in. We will no
longer have access for our
children to be able to access
the Bible. I don't think that a
law that will censor the Bible
is appropriate because then it
will censor everything. Thank
you.
Gabriel
Good afternoon. Uh, and thank
you for letting me speak. My
name is Gabrielle Dietrich and I
am the executive director of Non
New Mexico, um, not in New
Mexico opposes the still the
sort of vague definitions in the
bill itself are going to
potentially prevent young people
who are LGBTQ and specifically
trans youth from accessing the
information that saved their
lives when they can't find
information they are much more
likely to die by suicide and
That is a, an outcome that
cannot be permitted. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, and I think that's
everybody on Zoom.
On my list, we've got uh Anya
nor you.
We'll start there.
Yeah
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. um, and thank you,
Representative Block for
bringing this bill, you know,
it's a bit of a record. I, this
has got to be a record for you
and me personally, Madam Chair
representative, that in your
presentation that you gave, I
did not hear anything I
disagreed with, um, and that's
gonna be a personal best, but in
reading the bill, um, I did have
Concerns about the broadness of
the language, um, that I wanted
to go over with you. So first of
all,
It says that, um,
of the content on a website
would have to be
Harmful, considered harmful to
minors. Is that correct?
Madam chair
Yes, Madam Chair, and thank you,
Representative. Very good
question. Yes, a 3rd. So like
in, in the examples we heard a
little bit closer.
closer. OK
Sounds good. I just don't wanna
make anyone go deaf today. So,
Madam Chair representative, so a
third of the content, yes. So,
these are, this is what, and I
believe the legal term is, and I
spoke to some lawyers about this
to make sure that I wasn't just
speaking out of my mouth here,
but Madam Chair Representative,
this term.
Essentially means.
That it is, they called it a
bright line. So the bright line
in this would be
The, the rule that provides
Relatively clear objective
standards for the website to to
determine the subject of the law
so that 1/3, you know, it's, we
don't want to be overly
burdensome, right? We don't want
to be overly aggressive when it
comes to that standard. And so
like for the example of the
Bible. A third of the Bible is
not pornography.
Right.
A third of somebody's bookstore.
is likely not pornography, if
it's not like a sex shop, right,
Madam Chair representative, and
a child would not be going into
such a shop anyway. So Madam
Chair Representative, this was
meant to be very helpful in
being duplicative of other
states' language, while also
keeping these protections that
did not.
Overly burdened these entities.
And I hope that clears that up a
little bit. I'm sure, a bit,
yes, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So then how
then?
For a website, would their
content be measured?
Like in terms, how would they
measure what is a 3.
Of like, you, do you know what I
mean, like how would they
measure a third of offensive
material or explicit material.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative, and that's a
good question. And I saw
something about this in one of
the agency analyses that I
thought was very interesting.
And so, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, Ona Nonu.
I think I got it right.
I think uh
I've been practicing for 2
straight years, so I finally got
it right. But Madam Chair
Representative, uh,
That is, first of all, there's a
there's an enforcement mechanism
on the civil side. You could
file a civil lawsuit.
If they're not in compliance.
And so I, I guess,
With the bill, it does specify
with the with the verbiage in
the legislation is a reasonable
person standard.
And so, Madam Chair
Representative, this is a
standard that
is very well known in in legal
circles, I suppose you could
say, and I've spoken to
attorneys about this, that the
average person would have to
comply these contemporary
standards. So,
Madam Chair Representative, I
think that this, this framework
is meant to be less of a very
extremely strict.
Guideline as, OK, let's let's
see every single picture you've
ever put on your website and
make sure that 3 of them are at
least pornography. A majority of
the
Entities that this applies to.
And I'm sure almost all of them
are porn sites is pretty much
what it is. And that's usually
100% of the content on those
websites. So I know that there
are other kinds of frameworks
when it comes to this.
And I, I don't want to keep
rattling on for you, but I did
hear from these attorneys that
there are certain other things
in statute, such as
Um
The, the, the day that you need
to file your taxes, that's a
specific date, right? And you
can also have extensions, etc.
There's also speed limits. Those
are limits for certain things
that that we have and some
people go 5 over the speed
limit. I know I'm guilty of that
sometimes on 285 when there's
no, no trucks around, and please
don't listen to this DPS, but
that's pretty much uh what I
would say regarding that.
OK, so without a clear
Unit of measure.
For accounting for how much of a
website could be deemed explicit
or pornographic.
What then would prevent a
website from uploading to cat
videos for every explicit video.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. This is a
very intricate website. I'm very
no idea who would be going to
that website, but I'm sure I
don't know anyone, but I'm sure
if they're in compliance, if
it's less than 1/3, then they
would be in compliance with this
legislation. They wouldn't need
to have age verification to see
two cats and then porn, Madam
Chair.
OK.
They would not or they would
because if it's too it was
exactly at the limit,
technically, yes, according to
the language in the bill. But if
they were under, let's just say
they had 4 cat pictures and 1
porn. No, Madam Chair,
representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative. So then.
Again, I'm still kind of like
stuck on.
This measurement unit, um, would
it, would the material be
considered
harmful or pornographic, like
the amount of material, would
that be like by file size or
content hour?
Because and I'll just move on to
my next, I'll just kind of blend
my two questions into one
because again, if for instance,
you have 100 videos that are
pornographic and each one of
those videos is a gigabyte.
And 200 videos of
Kitten videos that were taken on
somebody's cell phone and.
Let's say they were like 1/10
that size, so 100 gigs of
pornographic material and only
20 gigs of kitten material, but
still.
Amounting to 300 videos with
that website then.
Require age verification.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you representative that help us
clear it up for me. And so I
agree, uh, yes, there, there are
certain parameters that are set
in the statute, and a lot of
the, if you look at the bill, I
can, I'd be happy to show you
certain places in the bill where
it also refers to current
statute with definitions. And so
Madam Chair Representative, I
know Google safe browser does
this, uh, they have statistics
on, on these kind of things that
they're already tracking since
it's on the internet, they're
already scraping to see what is
on there. So there's those
statistics. There's also
AI image analysis, they're also
capable of this, as well as
keyword scraping and a
percentage of porn, for example.
And so Madam Chair
Representative file size as well
and content hour, they are also
kind of synonymous, so they
could also be metrics to to
measure this, thank you for that
answer, Madam Chair
Representative, because there
again, my concern is that any
website could get around this by
simply uploading if it's file
size, and you can just upload.
2 gigabytes of like.
Outdated windows updates for
every gigabyte of pornographic
material to then make it
available to anyone.
Um, so, uh, that's just
something to think about, but I,
I, I will move on, um, so your
bill makes a reference to um
cloud service providers.
However, Madam Chair
representative that does not
provide a definition for what a
cloud service provider is, so do
do you have one that you're
working off of? What is your
definition of this bill.
Tell me which page. I, I
apologize. Oh, certainly, Madam
Chair Representative, that was,
I believe, page 4.
Yes, page 4. I representative,
uh, line 3.
Under your, um, list of
exemptions, you're exempting
cloud service providers or
Internet service providers to
the extent that a cloud service
provider or ISP is not
responsible for the creation of
the content.
Sure. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. That is good
information. Yes, this, this
definition actually is
specifying regarding
Just the cloud service. So not,
not the actual showing it on the
website.
Constituting harmful materials,
and so, Madam Chair, I do have,
let me see what my, the attorney
I spoke to told me about that
because I did ask him.
I did want to get this one
right.
Madam Chair Representative.
But from my understanding is,
so.
Regarding the servers that these
are, are, are based on, right? I
guess it's just accessible
content. So,
We have exceptions for things
like, OK, if you use Google
Drive.
Your Google Drive is not going
to be.
Searched to see a percentage of
of
The images on there.
To make sure that they're not
porn. You know, I guess if an
individual wants as much porn as
possible on their personal
drive, that is their
prerogative. And, you know,
that's definitely a free speech
thing, right? Like you can, you
can have whatever obscene
content you want on your own, on
your own device. But if you're
putting it out on your, on your
website, then that indeed makes
you the entity that would be
liable or if, if you did break
any of these restrictions. Uh,
furthermore, I know that NIST a
special publication.
Uh, a cloud service provider,
um,
They offer infrastructure
platforms and software services
that they also ensure like they,
they provide security. And so, I
know that we also have
Uh, the Institutes of Standards
of Technology, which is what I
just spoke about.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
it has a definition of cloud
computing and providing. So
there, there are already best,
best practices and standards.
Already out there. So this would
just continue to be
Uh, duplicative of other
statutes federally and this
would also comply with those
best standards of national trade
organizations such as the NIST.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. I certainly get.
Your intent, and I agree with
that, but in order for this bill
to be as effective as possible,
we really need to drill down on
the definitions that you include
specifying what storage is
because at present,
Since most free pornographic
websites.
Don't create.
The material that they make
available.
They could claim right now that
they are a cloud service
provider and get a get.
And you know, have exception
under the way the bill is
allowed laid out at present.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, and I, I guess I
just love to reiterate that it
has to be accessible.
So they could be a cloud service
provider, but as long as the
third of what is accessible on
the website publicly is
pornography, then that would
fall under the stipulations of
this bill. If they're just a
cloud service provider, but a
third, or let's just say 2/3 is
or over 2/3 is not pornographic,
then they would not be subject
to this. And it's not their
personal or their
Their internal
Files, it would be about what's
accessible to the public that a
child.
Could, could get access to
representative. OK, thank you
and I hope that's clear and I
I know it's a little circular,
but I know that.
It's, it's just a very strict,
yet very lenient.
1/3, we didn't want to go, OK,
if you have a 10th, you know,
1/10 of of your website. Maybe
someone posted something weird
and you only have 10 posts.
There you go. You, you'd be
liable.
Madam Chair representative.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. Representative Block for
that and and again, I see what
you're driving at, so just to
clarify, like search engines
like Bing or Google would not
be, would not fall under this
bill.
Because of their, um, because of
I guess the accessibility aspect
of what.
Sure, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So
currently, for example, Bing or
Google search. They do not host
the content. So the host of the
content would be the ones that
would be responsible. I know
currently, if you just the the
regular settings on Google
search, their safe search. So if
you do look up something that is
graphic, then that safe search
would automatically be blurring
those images. And so Madam
Chair, representative, hopefully
that clarifies a little bit
about the search engines. Yes,
yes, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. It does. Um, so
I will.
Then skip now to section 5.
private right of action.
I'm not seeing anywhere in this
bill.
That there's a method for the
Mexico Department of Justice to
enforce any compliance with this
bill. Is that correct?
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. So, no, it would
be civil-based, so you'd file a
civil suit. However, I will
state in all the states, almost
all the states that such laws
have been passed, sites like
like Pornhub have just closed
their doors because they don't
want to have to comply. And so
technically, I would say that's
that's an immediate proof that
this kind of legislation works
because if they think it's
overly burdensome just to merely
make this identification, then,
then
It's just, it's too much
liability for them. And I think
that is really getting into the
heart of the matter. If that's
what the results from this, then
God only knows what is on those
websites that can be accessed by
children, and if it's even
I mean, it could potentially be
legally teetering. So I, I think
that this is necessary and I did
read the Department of Justice,
State Department of Justice,
FIR, which did have some good
information about that. And
essentially what I, what I'm
understanding is these would be
brought to the court for
Damages and then the court.
It would be court dependent
based upon each individual case.
So we're not going to be
throwing anything at the DOJ and
telling them, do this. They have
no significant physical impact
whatsoever according to their
FIR manager.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, um, I understand
what you're saying, but.
From my mind, it's like we're.
Like abdicating.
The like
Our responsibility of protection
of minors like from the state to
pro se litigants and so
personally, I don't, I don't
know, I get what you're saying.
I just don't know that I agree
with that, Madam Chair
representative, but, um, lastly,
You know, by limiting
enforcement.
To the civil side, um, it
requires like a proof of damage,
so we're basically like
requiring the parents have no
other option but.
The child has to
First be harmed or first have
access to harmful material, have
the parent would have to then
prove that harm.
In court
And so
And I like is, is there no other
recourse for a parent.
Then to just wait for their
child to be harmed.
Madam Chair Representative.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and
I, I guess what I would say.
To the first part of that, that
we're abdicating our duty. I
don't think we're abdicating our
duty. I think we're enhancing
our duty because we're trying to
put another tool out there for
parents and individuals who
could be harmed, especially, of
course, children, which are the
factor in this legislation. We
want to ensure that those
children are indeed protected
and that those children don't
have access to these very
detrimental, um,
Images and and situations which
national data and international
data proves. I've even seen a
study from the American Medical
Associate or the the Australian
Medical Association, and they,
they also have data on this. So
I, I don't think we're trying to
put an undue burden on any
specific individuals. However,
the way it's drafted, we're
looking to be as constitutional
as possible. And so when it
comes to this, we're looking at
other states and what has been
Cut down in the courts and the
appeal courts. And so there's
language that we see that, I
believe it was Texas. They put
language that was similar to
this regarding civil matters. I
believe that there also may have
been enforcement mechanisms from
the department of their
Department of Justice, whatever
it was, Attorney General's
office, those have been struck
down, but the Fifth Circuit
District court, the Fifth
Circuit Court of the US, they
upheld those provisions
regarding civil and so Madame to
Representative, we're just
intending to be as
constitutional as possible. And
that's why it's drafted in such
a way, Madam Chair
Representative. OK. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
Representative for your answers,
um, again.
I want to stress that I
certainly agree that we need to
be protecting New Mexico's
children from
Abusive, inappropriate material.
The problem lies in the fact
that again,
The definition of what explicit
material is.
It is extremely subjective and
given the language of the bill
in its present form.
Um
It is far too broad. It's very
easy to get around. So in its
current form, representative,
unfortunately, I will not be
able to support this bill, but I
understand what you're trying to
do with it. So thank you, Madam
Chair, representative.
Thank you, Representative Leader
Armstrong, excuse me.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, uh, Representative
Block for bringing this
legislation forward.
Um, I, I have, uh, at least one
question, uh several of mine
were answered earlier, but the
bill says that um it's
provisions do not apply to news
gathering organizations and
defines.
News gathering organizations.
But it doesn't define
What is news.
Uh, news is just another word
for anything anybody wants to
know about.
Uh, a pornography.
Content provider could find ways
to package this.
Um
Into adult this adult content
into news. Do you, do you think
that is possible, or, or do you
disagree with me?
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and Representative and good
question. So,
I guess I, I can't think of a
specific news website that's
like pornnews.com or something.
I, I, I don't know if that's
Even
A thing, but Madam Chair
Representative, if it was.
This
Would not cover such such
entities, because if you're
Porn or if your news site.
Which is claiming to be news is
the 3rd porn or more, then it
automatically would not qualify,
Madam Chair, Representative.
OK, I that's that was really my
only question. I um I agree with
what you're trying to do and,
and you know, there's been
statements made in the in the
room to let parents parent.
I couldn't agree with that more,
and I, I'm, I'm a little sad
that, you know, I have 12
grandchildren with number 13 on
the way and that I.
The stats that you gave, the
data that that's that was given,
uh, half of them have already
been exposed.
And and that makes me, that
scares me.
Um
You know, we have to, uh, Madam
Chair, be
Uh
Strong about.
Protecting our children.
Um, I was a very, I have 4
children of my own. I was very
uh strong and, and advocating
for them. And, and I, you know,
I love all people.
I don't care color.
Sex, anything else, I don't
care.
They're all people, and I care
about them.
And so
Um
You can't say let parents
parent.
In one room
And be against this.
And in the other room.
Advocate for taking parental
rights away.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Murphy.
Thank you, ma'am. Chair
Representative Block, um, my,
most of my questions have
already been answered, but I
Couple it because I'm not really
familiar with the technology.
Uh, taking me to section, take
section 3.
Um, B2.
And identity assurance level 2
framework.
I assume there's a level one, a
level 3, and probably a lots of
levels. Um, can you talk about
the state of that technology,
the house, how common it is to
be used, how difficult or
expensive it is to use.
Anything more that you can help
me with there, uh, Madam Chair
and and representative block.
Sure. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative, and thank you
for asking that question. I was
chomping at the bit to to answer
it. So Madam Chair
representative, so secure
verification methods, they
include a variety of things. Uh,
and I will just give you
examples for states that have
that have already done such
things. So the state of
Louisiana, they had a bill
similar to this, and through
their driver's license network,
they have an app where the app
automatically can be.
applied to the website and it
would be free through the state.
And so that would be technically
a cost-free way to do it. There
are also multiple other ways of
government issued IDs. So a
like, let's just say there's a
A program that scans your ID,
sees your, your, your birthday,
boom, you're good to go. You can
go to this site, right? It has a
picture on it, you're good.
Another way is a commercially
reasonable method that's an
ident identity assurance level
2, which is what we're speaking
about. And that is defined from
the National Institute of
Standards and Technology as
verification through either like
a credit card or a bank account.
Uh, facial recognition or
AI-based verification and that
estimates a user's age without
storing any personal data. So
this would would be a temporary
uh pass through to ensure that
we're in compliance. And then
that data would be protected. We
wouldn't have any access to
that. The, the website or any
other individual, Madam Chair
and Representative.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you very much for that
answer. So from a practical
standpoint, if we have a minor.
That miner would either have to
have some sort of government ID
that says that they are over 18,
which they're not supposed to
have or not going to have if
they're 18. They're probably not
going to have a credit card
because I don't think you can
apply for one until what, 18 or
21, perhaps.
And
Otherwise, I think that, and I
didn't follow all the
exceptions, but otherwise, they
basically have to show up in
which they'd have to.
Ike. So, OK, I, I, I think I've
got it, and I'll leave that one
alone for now. My last question
goes to enforcement, and I know
you all, um, everyone involved
probably gave this a lot of
thought, and so I struggle too
with with the
33% number and the content
number and so forth.
And I also struggle with the
fact that the definition of
pornography has been difficult
to really nail down for many,
many decades, right? It's like,
You know it when you see it, but
uh it's pretty hard to describe.
And so, um,
In terms of enforcement,
As I think about this,
Going to civil court, you're
basically leaving it to the
factfinder, either the jury or
the judge.
To go through the evidence and
determine if in their opinion,
whether it's by volume content.
Pictures, whatever the measure
that.
Backfinding group may choose.
Um, we'll, we'll figure out
whether it's 33% or not. Is that
a reasonable way of thinking
about this, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Lot.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative
Murphy. Good question. So, the,
the definitions in the bill, and
I, I, I guess I neglected to
Speak about where they came
from. So the definition from the
bill, some of them are just
Uh, general standards from
Black's law dictionary
essentially, Madam Chair, and
then others are actually in
statute. So, so for example, we
have
Uh, offensive material in the
bill, right? That, that refers
to New Mexico or NMSA 30-37-1F,
which is already defined in
statute. So these fact finders,
these judges, these juries, etc.
they would have access to the
current definitions in the law,
or just
Applying them in this
legislation. So they, we were
not.
Reinventing the wheel here,
we're just giving them the tools
to adequately provide the
verdict of whatever it is that
the judgment requires, Madam
Chair, and one last question,
Madam Chair Representative
Locke, because I know I'm
probably the the one between us
and the vote, but um, so
conversely, let's think about on
the other side, on the, on the,
on the criminal side. If you put
it over the enforcement over in,
in the AG's office, then
basically,
If I'm thinking about this
right, the AG could issue a fine
which punish the company.
But by putting it on the civil
side, you're allowing damages to
be collected for the harm that
was done to the child.
Am I distinguishing that
correctly?
And of material represent the
block, thank you so much, Madam
Chair and Representative, and
yes, you are. You are correct.
I'm concluded. Thank you, ma'am.
Uh, errata.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative block for
the bill. Um, I was like seeing
you in this committee. It's
always good. Um, you know, it's,
it's interesting to me. Well,
let me, let me go back for a
second because
You said earlier that
This a similar type of bill like
this.
Stopped a company from operating
so I think he said from
operating in specific states.
Um, and you cited that as, as
perhaps an example of, of how
effective it is just in its
existence. And I, I, the
question I have is that I, I, I
feel, and I want your response.
So it's gonna sound like a
statement, but I want your
response to it.
I feel that
Shows that the language is too
broad and that the um the the
the boundaries to overcome are
too difficult. Um, you know, as
we heard in some of the public
testimony, you know, I wouldn't
want to upload my face. I don't
wanna look at my ID where I
live, you know, all that when
data breaches happen, then you
know exactly what, you know,
who's been looking at it and,
and oh my gosh, you have my face
and my ID and everything. Like I
could see why that would be
difficult for for a grown-up who
is accessing stuff I don't want
my kids to look at, you know,
but like, whatever, you know,
illegally accessing.
that stuff, um, why that would
take away a business from
wanting to do that because that
is too overarching. So I'm just
kind of curious your response to
that take on on porn help or
leaving like Texas or wherever.
Sure. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
representative. So for example,
the in the city of Utah, they
passed a bill that did similar
aspects to this. And
The example of Pornhub.
The entire product.
is porn.
So Madam Chair Representative, I
guess.
That's why I would just make the
argument it's not too broad
because if a 100% porn operated
site that literally has the word
porn in the name that has porn
all across its entire website is
not doing business in a state
because it's overly burdensome
to simply get verification.
That's proof that it's working
because
If they don't want to do the, if
they don't want to do the work
to ensure that children are
safe, then I, I don't
necessarily want this entity.
To be working in a state where
they may be harming children.
And I know that there are
different workarounds, right,
when it comes to people getting
creative about accessing things
online, but I highly, I, I mean,
I know kids are very smart, but
I just think that this is
something for at least the young
children, they don't know how to
use like a like a tor browser or
a VPN, right? So Madam Chair
Representative, that's why I
think this is important,
especially for younger children
in particular, like those 11
year olds we were talking about.
This is something that I find to
be very, very critical for their
safety and their health, Madam
Chair represented. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you
representative for that. I, you
know, I think I'm I'm realizing
we're talking about this because
you and I are starting to get
into what the intent of the
business was when they decided
to withdraw from a place like
Utah. And I think that's for a
larger conversation. I think you
and I just come at it from two
different perspectives on that,
um, because I, and this kind of
goes to your point, I, I, I,
it's funny like on Instagram
with all kinds of random stuff
and I save a bunch of videos for
my kids to watch.
Right? And so when we run out of
those videos of like, whatever,
a dog doing something funny or
whatever, um, like, like it's
like, oh, let's look at more
videos like, no, cause I don't
trust Instagram. I don't trust
what they're trying to advertise
me, whether it's like obnoxious
videos because I'm a middle-aged
mom that they think I want to
lose weight tomorrow or whether
it's like, you know, whatever
else, cause there's a ton of
stuff on there. So I, I
Understand and especially
nowadays how actually at all
times, and I've had
conversations with people who
are my age about how they
accessed information
pre-internet days, and it, it is
shocking at times. So, you know,
to, to me, I, I understand the
intent of this.
I really, after this, I, I do
have serious concerns about um
implementing this, about the
effect on law-abiding adults,
and they're, and what, you know,
what they decide to actually
view content wise, um, and
enforcement, you know, what
appropriately are, but I do want
to talk to you more because
there's two bills that I'm
looking at, and I was working
with AG on one of them, but I
do, because there's some stuff I
want to work with you on kind of
around this. So perhaps
afterwards we can have a
conversation. Thank you for
bringing this up though. I
appreciate it.
Thank you, Representative Del
Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Block, I want to
commend you for bringing this
bill.
I think it's an important bill.
I don't think that if I take a
poll of this room right now, and
I ask, OK, everybody who thinks
that little kids ought to be
looking at pornography.
Whether in any forum would raise
their hand that they think it's
OK.
So the, the notion of the bill,
I think is is great. I think we
need to do something.
Because the reality is that
these things, these cell phones
have become a Pandora's box.
The, the issue though is as many
of my colleagues have already
spoken to, it is the mechanism
of trying to enforce.
And even the opponents to this
bill that spoke today.
I know that's not
What you're trying to do here.
What you're trying to do and
what I agree with is that
children.
Should not have access to
pornography, and you can go
online and I did a little while
ago and what, what is the
definition of pornography,
right?
It's, it's there.
It's there.
And a Supreme Court justice
actually did say exactly what
you said.
And it is, I know it when I see
it, so.
Representative, I would be happy
to join you.
On
Re-crafting a bill.
I will not support this
particular version for the
reasons that have already been
cited, I would be happy to join
you on a bill, and I would ask.
That the opponents of this bill.
White firmly believe think also
think that children shouldn't
access pornography to join in
crafting a bill.
That meets the core.
Need, and that is to prevent.
Our young minds, Madam Chair, I
will tell you this. When my kids
were little.
Well, let me back up.
When I was a younger man, I used
to hear of a lot of explicit
lyrics and songs. I thought
they're great.
I was a dad.
And I'm like, why are they
putting that on the radio. I've
got kids in the back seat.
Stop.
So
Represented, I commend you. I
will join you. We need to get
all hands on deck.
To get a law that is meaningful
and that works.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Hernandez.
I can do this without being
crazy. OK.
Um
It
microphones
both
Both of my committees are in
here and every time I can't
figure it out. Um.
You know, I, I want to out of
what he said, um,
As someone who lives in this
digital space, um, every day.
You know, access to a lot of
this stuff is entirely too easy
to get to. I, I think of my
Daughters who are 10 and.
I don't want them to stumble
across any
um, but also as somebody.
Who lives in this digital space
and, you know,
knows the back end of how
websites work and how to get
around it. And now with like AI
and machine learning and how
much easier that would make it
to
Um
Circumvent some of your
requirements in this bill.
I, I think that
You know
I love what you're trying to get
to and I, I want to get to the
end result of that.
Um
Your bills
Lacking especially in.
This new age with the new
technology that could automate.
So much of this.
Um, I as well would like to sit
and help you with a lot of the
technology side of this that
that I think that your bill is
lacking.
Um
So that we can get to a point
where this can be implemented
and
And
It is not so easy to get.
Um, you know, VPNs are becoming
a bigger thing, um, especially
when kids are in school and they
want to be able to see things
that they.
You know,
Can't through.
school, whether that's
Basics like Instagram and
Facebook.
Um, or TikTok or whatever the
big site is.
So
I, I don't know how I'm going to
vote yet, if you will, if you
want to keep going down this
path, um.
I
More than happy to lend my, my
knowledge, um.
With you so that we can get to a
point where this bill is in a
whole lot better place. I also
worry, you know, Florida started
theirs at the beginning of the
month.
Um
And
Immediately their state got sued
and that has been a whole huge
problem as well.
Um, and I want to figure out if
there's a way we can get around
some of that. I mean lawsuit are
never going to be a
You know, there will always be
that path, but, um,
You know, the that that brings
up a whole another complexity.
So,
Um, yeah, let's, let's talk.
And we're done here and if you
would like some help, I will be
more than happy.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and if I
could just respond to that
really quickly and I appreciate
the
I, I do appreciate it. You know,
I guess I'm making it a habit,
Madam Chairman, to come to your
committee and then be like, can
we roll the bill and change
things. But Madam Chair
Representative, I do agree with
you. I think that I would love
to speak with all the
stakeholders involved, and I
think that we could probably
find a solution that one is
constitutional, another is
enforceable and then another is
just
It's not giving an undue burden,
which I don't think that
legislation does. However, I do
want to see also what other
states are doing when it comes
to litigation because I know the
Texas case, for example, is at
the Supreme Court right now. We
don't know how they're going to
decide on that. And so, I know
it was upheld by that circuit,
but you never know. So I would
be happy to work with you and
Representative De la Cruz and
any of the advocates or
stakeholders, because I want the
best bill possible, and I want
children to be protected. And I
think you're right, like the
VPN, etc. But
I mean, you have to be pretty
sophisticated to even figure
that out. I don't even know how
to do it myself, right? So,
someone who desperately wants to
figure that out, they absolutely
can. So Adam to representative
that's just quick response, but
thank you so much.
Uh, representative Matthews.
I think I have the Madam Chair,
I think I have the last word.
Uh, first of all, I'm not gonna
repeat all the
Really good things that have
been said in this debate.
Um, it's terribly difficult
issue because we have a First
Amendment in this country and in
the state and the definition of
pornography is complex.
And, and I would, uh, I would
just add.
That
In addition to the kind of
content that you are directed
at, that your bill was directed
at.
I think that
It is pornographic for children.
I'm sorry, that it is.
terrible for children and should
and we should be trying to
prevent them from seeing graphic
and gratuitous violence,
particularly when that violence
is against.
Women
Um, this has impact on kids.
And
We just
You know, we, we, we, we see
this around us, we see levels of
violence around us, and it all
goes back to some of these same
things that we're talking about
in terms of the more traditional
concept of pornography, but
violence is also pornographic in
its own way. Thank you.
Thank you. I think everybody has
had an opportunity to speak, um,
so first of all, um.
I want to thank you.
Because, um, I, I think that.
The the bill is well intended.
Um, as a child advocate, I
always want to make sure that
children's rights, um, are
always upheld and that we
protect children.
Um, I also think that, um, you
know, you've been in this
committee before.
And I think you know that we
always want to be, um,
respectful.
And we always want to have
teachable moments with each
other. Uh, I think that you know
that this committee always works
well with each other, um, and we
want to make this a safe space.
Um
That being said, I wanna, I
think it's a very subjective
bill.
I think that there's definitely
some issues with the bill.
Um, and I think that you've
heard people on both sides who
would like to help.
Help you with this.
Um, I'd like to know if you
would like to roll this bill.
Madam Chair, of course, I would
love to roll. Well, I appreciate
that because I, I, I think that
you wanna do quality
legislation, and I think we do
too, and so, um, I appreciate
that and I at this point, uh, we
will roll your bill.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and hopefully I'll see you soon
and you don't get too many
committee referrals, so we
actually can't pay the bill
someday. That's right. That's
right. Thank you.
Thank you all for being here
today and I thank you for uh a
good uh conversation.
And with that, I'm going to go
ahead and um
A journalist, we uh have many,
we've got several bills on
Monday, uh, there's still, if I
ask the committee to be looking
over the weekend, I know my bill
in particular will still be
coming in, uh, we're doing a
sub.
And so, um, please be watching
for that.
So, we will see you Monday.
