Representative dunkin here
representative hernandez.
The.
Representative wednesday.
Representative little
representative lunch
representative martinez
representative mason
representative matthews.
Manifest chair and madam chair
madam chair you have a court
very good okay representative
less the question so let's get
on and so you can give us the
answer thank you matter and take
your members the committee
well
house conversation with almost
submitting for house memorial
fifty six so I am requesting the
at the
we conduct some meetings to get
stakeholder input regarding the
role of the border authority and
so they're new mexico I feel
that
there aren't enough they called
her voices that are there are
part of the process that the
participant making process of
the point of this is to get
those voices included in not not
just doing any county not just
luna county or or his uncle
county but any in all interested
parties that have a stake at the
border as far as economic
development is concerned
so i'm requesting that the
social council governments host
one or two meetings with
stakeholders so we can get some
feedback from so we can consider
looking at the border though
react to updated and to
modernize it as needed
already so with there do you
stand for questions I start
proposing
manager I do have an expert I
have mister jerry bacheco is an
expert on
do you have a substitute yes
okay.
And we.
Thank you.
The.
So can I get a emotion for
discussion on.
The substitution.
The.
The.
The.
Thank you matcher.
I stemple questions but before
then manager i'd like for my
expert when it's mister patrick
or to meet to make a few
comments.
Yes good afternoon mister pichec
of glad you're with this today
please.
Thank you for
your
thirty years the states most
important entity that it has at
the border
started my career in nineteen
ninety one the united states
was established by the border
development act and I can tell
you the whole history of how the
the more authorities cricketed
without any budget that the
medium
had a governor of case you know
the head of the bonus thirty
four while until we finally
institutionalise it and there's
been very long changes in those
thirty three years to the border
I think it's a good idea to see
what can be done that could be
the border of the morning and
get communities more ball and
allegedly the war so I think
this is a a good step.
Thank you miss mister was that
it.
Yes that that's it certainly a
a representative a lot I need to
kind of clarify the history of
some of the functions of the
border forty I will be happy to
do that
appreciate it already
manager just it reference really
quick mister pateco is
the executive director of the
border interest of association
and he has been in the area for
many many years and he's and he
knows a lot of the in and out of
what happens on their soil I
depend on him in his expertise
on this I just wanted to let the
committee know who who you us
thank you appreciate that
already
do we.
All right so do we have anybody
here in favor of this house
memorial.
Anybody opposed
nobody on zoom okay then let's
go to the committee for a
questions.
Madam chair I would do pass on
husband more real.
Mr chairman
okay we can go to
representative.
No no no
we're working we're taking a
questions from the committee.
And we did accept the the
substitute for so we're at that
place so we're at the place of
questions from the committee and
i've got representative
martinez.
Thank you matter first of all
I know you said that we were the
point in this session who we
didn't have the twenty four
rolling amendments but how about
a whole committee stop
well so at that place in the.
My second question is
what's the purpose of
this memory
it seems like a like a local.
Issue within the within the
border authority
can you tell me why we're
right on memorial to
is in an internal issue
this is what you know on an
entire border issue because it
seems to me like it's an
internal issue
and the memorials kind of being
portion so the legislature could
fix what's going on inside the
authority
madam chair representative
quite my apologies for this
without
oh pretty much all the issues
that we bring our our local
issues I in my opinion yet we
are have to keep for for our um
or districts and the people in
our districts this
medicare and representative is a
study I want to find out what
other people think what other
stakeholders think what other
landowners what are their
business people think because I
feel that
there are many voices that are
being left out so that's that's
a reason for that the impetus
for the for for this for this
memorial I want to be able to
convene the meetings and get
input from the stakeholders and
then come back to the interim
committee is to to talk about
the issues that are happening at
the border how we can improve
those issues with everyone's
input and eventually the goal
would be to introduce
legislation but that all depends
on how these meetings panel out
and what the kind of feedback
that I get from the stakeholders
thank you marine chairman
representative latest for this
is
this is not internal to the to
the authority because I toward I
toward down there this summer
and I think mister but check was
doing it incredible job down
there and the the growth.
That is happening down there
economic
growth and then the exports I
was shocked at how many
companies are down there
so I guess i'm just just a
little confus.
I mean I know every issue is
local issue I agree with you.
I I just i'm not
understanding the.
But only with that thank you
manager thank you representative
dunkin
thank you madame share
but i'm too representative on
page two
lane twenty four you talk about
addressing these issues.
And so I wondered if you could
tell me what these issues are
specifically if you if you
wouldn't mind
manipulate representative the
issues are is that I I have
participated in a stick holder
meetings uh this past year in
the in the area with with
concerns and I was approached by
several landowners or would you
stakeholders who haven't been
rampant included in the process
or haven't been consulted by
mortar authority or anyone in
authority so they came to me
with this concern yeah why wide
wire decisions being made
without our input you know we
have input you have valuable
insight in what's going on yet
we own property here we have
businesses here yet we want to
be part of the conversation and
so
it hasn't it hasn't happened and
as it happened so I felt that
that this method in this vehicle
were doing this we'll be able to
give those other landowners
those other stakeholders other
business people the opportunity
to come to the table safely this
is these are concerns this is
what we would like to.
Think manager chairman
representative so.
Let me only frame that question
a different way and and tell me
how close I am how far I were
madame chairman representative
so
you know cities have various
departments we were planning and
zoning department for example so
are these folks frustrated in
and they didn't feel like they
were being treated fairly at the
planning and zoning level.
And so now they're taken up to
the mayor level
bencher representative in
that that's a good analogy
yesterday I would say that's
that's that's one way of
describing it you know for
example I know that the city of
solemn park has been left out a
lot of these covered a lot of
these conversations regarding
the decision making that's being
made as far as infrastructure as
far as job creation things like
that so it's not only
madame chairman representative
of private persons or private
business owners but it's also
the only biggest party that I
have that is left out of the
conversation so yes right but I
would agree with that analogy
that young they're appealing to
a higher authority to get the to
get to get to the table to have
a seat at the table
think about him chairman
representative so have they
violated anything in the
planning and zoning act.
So to speak so that meant that
would work going up to the
mayor's office manager
representative to I wouldn't say
a violation if excluding people
as violation then yes back for
the most part I think that that
being able to work with the
other state holders and and I
have no intention of
a excluding the border thirty of
all the the play a very
important role in this but I
feel that
that way including these other
stake holders we'd be able to
get a much clearer picture of
what's happening as far as
business and economic
development in commerce at the
border
thank you madame chairman
representative
so
let's take this one step further
then madam sure represent him so
somebody
mister missed over here is not
happy that the allen is is
is.
Getting to develop his property.
Are we are we going into private
property rights now and somebody
ticked off about somebody else
sticked off
manager representative no excuse
me the authority of the border
thirty does not extend to that
that's more of a county issue.
So that's not included in there
than madame chair representative
benefit but are representative
yes that's that that is
something totally separate
that's more of a county zoney
planning the zoning issue or
municipal planning is only issue
as opposed to the author of what
falls under the border.
They can matter term represent
then i'm really confused about
where what were away were here.
Their folks that are not being
talked to.
That feel like they've been left
out of the process
but have they had their time
with the planning and zoning the
border authority whoever that
into the is have they had their
their case before them
representative to a
representative of no that's why
i'm here.
Thank you madame chairman
representative what's keeping
them from having that discussion
with the border authority that's
a very good question i'm glad
you asset so the border thirty
they don't advertise whether
meetings are happening
they don't keep record on their
on their website as far as
minutes as far as access to the
meetings so
the way I see it like for
example they were here the first
week they were having a meeting
up here and santa fe the first
week of the session that we were
here and it wasn't advertised
there was a no there was in a
public notice there was anything
mentioned about public meeting
taking place to senate fay with
the born authority so if if it
buy by doing something wrong or
wronging a certain individuals
is if you cut him off or not
even give him access to the
information or access to the
meeting then in my opinion yes
that's wrong and they're leaving
people out on purpose
thank you madame chairman
representative are who funds the
border authority medicare
representative we do allegedly
trade o.
Thank you madame chairman
representative that I would
recommend that we cut their
funding until they follow the
law there's an open meetings act
and they've got to follow that
open meeting very very simple.
I'm being very serious b.
They can either shoom or we can
cut their funding until they
start following the lo.
Don't however that we need to
create another.
Kingdom just saw somebody can
get the answers they need
your eye i'd recommend you cut
their funding thank you that's
all all the questions I have.
Thank you representative
representative hernanders thank
you madam chair I actually just
have it kind of a clarifying
question i'm.
Okay
line fifteen says including
members from the legislature
should that be appointees from
the legislatu.
Are you going to go to.
Because that's what it's asking
for now manager representative I
have no intention of sitting on
that board that's kind of what I
was thinking because yeah sounds
like a fight you don't want to
get yourself into.
So thanks thank you
representative that's a good
catch it our just if if the if
the committee would be a
meaningful I I would I would be
I wouldn't be all over you open
to making that minor change but
to go to the deeper into this
representative I think right now
we have manager just all
appointees from the governor's
office and I feel that it's
important that we had
legislative appointees still as
well just my very similar to the
what the colonial
circumstruction board house fair
and actually just one other very
small question I I know nothing
about the cells central council
of governments
I did not that that existed
until I just read this do they
have I mean do they have the
bandwidth to they have the
funding to the of anything to
pull off a study like this up
manager and purpose interviews I
spoke to the director mister
jeremy and he said that they had
you have the the the capacity to
to take the sign we're also
coordinating with
with the call director from the
southwest cog and there they're
both they're both willing.
I'm sure I think you represent
it
that I did little.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you.
And has not been updated since
madame chair representative yes
that's correct.
Thirty three years ago.
Last thirty three.
Of.
That actually extend to the
rest.
Those companies going
I was happy to hear.
Within the state of new mexico
and so.
It appears that.
The.
Correct manager representative
manager yes absolutely there's
going to be it has to be
collaborative.
We want to get everyone's input.
The.
From.
Yes a representative of medicare
so what I would like to see as
far as the initial gathering it
would be to include obviously
you know county representation
municipal representation I would
also like to include private
business
private individuals who have
overall property or have a
businesses big I want I want as
much input as I can to
to to get is good this
information that I can so we can
make proposals I wouldn't go as
far as to including the school
districts because there is there
they they they cover those areas
they educate the children that
work in the the children of the
parents at work in those in
there in the industry so there's
there's many many.
Stay holders people individuals
can you represent his elected
officials that could be part of
this that that that can help me
and help mr potential and the
whole region just move for.
Thank you.
Thank you so I I guess I have
some questions about
representative i'm sorry
representative mason
you were being quite over there
well you wouldn't look at
your medicare representative
like the
mr dunkin earlier thank you the
buddier this thing gets in my
brain like ever
our time getting wrapped around
it so well this council of start
with the
thought you're warning the
council of
south central council of
governments done and is the air
of the core of counties.
As it done and is the only
mother's on the border in the.
Manager representative that's
correct yes so what we have
people that don't even have a
stake in it on the
in this conversation that's kind
of were gill gets me all model
that you love it the people that
have the best of interest at the
so it sounds like it should be a
county.
The course sent prices not
incorporated so they are
strictly a county initiate
they're not
subdivision thought they receive
any money that will have to be
through to the county right.
Madam chair and representative
yesterday they would receive
funding through the county
what it what's the make up of
the board now is is that it was
at a government governor of
bonded
up manager representative yes
it's it's a government
governordashappointed board what
is what are the political cases
but they on the board she says
you're on there
madame chair representative
that's a good question that's
what I would like to know
you don't sell like to me that
we should be talking about some
kind of built restructure the
border.
Amongst you know I need it
the may have been cut elector.
Will be a good scenario like of
our soul conservation districts
or something you know were
actually have three people at
large at example spotting you'll
have them the county avoid
somebody.
The.
It'll people that actually are
gonna you know I just don't
think it's a legislative type of
you know you know I don't know I
know in adequate I don't think
we want the legislator come over
there and tell us what to do in
our county you're not that they
don't anyway but I mean but not
in this thought it at this level
of you know I mean we all have
it along together but the
senator
solwar.
The.
The.
Why
I still at the point why you
know it the bit I can see maybe
we need to get involved in
restructuring.
The actual border authority
but I don't think it should be
done by people that don't even
order
but two callies that only been
on.
The.
Should be a county
accounting maybe what's the
closest down there.
Madame
representative i'm sorry we can
is was that
what's the closest incorporated
town in the county there is the
more than one town in the county
or yesterday that would be the
studio solemn park suddenly part
yesterday I read that.
So the little m.
But I mean they're the is that
the county see that the county.
Memter representative of the
county seat would be a loss
cruises
yesterday all that.
Good deal a lot like I said i'm
sure
i've listened all of it
and the
block allen said this the
deposit got out of we had the
committee over there this.
The summer and you know it's it
looked like he was really good
good outsiders of the there's
lots of progress.
There will be lots of building
on all the like the border
authority was
was they were want more things
and and I think they need it I
mean that's a that looks like a
place that we could
stay and improve at the
infrastructure is correct
there's a lot of place in the
mexico it's the case.
I just don't know
I want to be the one.
The other what does.
But anyway that's all I don't
know what it will do they think
you represent a manager if I can
respond.
I I
represented I did have a bills
hill house bill three or seven
thousand culture restructure the
border authority
and it spelled that on there how
to
how many legislative
appointments are would be
represented from speaker the
house minor leader house per
center protect my daughter
either senate better I kind of
retracted that because I wanted
to get more input from the
stakeholders to see what what
they needed of what they thought
was important sort of me just
trying to dictate to them you
know this is what you're going
to do so I I can pull back on
that manager representative
because I really want it to
involve more people in this
process and a bit but my
intention was with hb three or
seven to restructure that board
and to make sure that we had
legislator representation on
that board
the there the that is the
situation again in the board
area the right that that I work
with on a nearly daily basis
manager and representative is we
have several different entities
including the county of
musicality the border does show
association the.
The the border thirty and they
all work in conjuction and the
cruelther the water utility and
everyone works in conjunction
they all work together but where
it were where there is a
separation is that
the border story in its in its
mission is meant of help
facility.
Infrastructure is supposed to
facilitate
economic development in the area
and I think what's happening
madame chairman representative
is that the county's having to
take on more the border just
also she isn't having to take on
more the the water utility has
to take on more as opposed to to
having the the border authority
you can all help guide these
projects forward.
The.
Thank you madame chair and thank
you a lot of bringing this up I
just have to really quick
questions so i'm looking at
where my looking page to you
alliance twenty one and twenty
two it misses the border
authority is not authorized by
statute promigate rules so are
you proposing that we update the
statute to allow them to promote
gate rules or is it just a
statement of fact that they may
not do that for themselves
manager representative it's it's
a fact right now they're not
able to do after themselves and
if I can after conducting these
meetings and finding out that
the stakeholders would want them
to to be able to promote rules
then I would definitely add that
to to the legislation as far as
the restructuring of the border
authorities concerned because I
what I want to do is I don't
want to take power thirty away
from the worst already I want to
empower them and I want to give
that that ability to do that
excellent thank you very much
madam chair insurer letter and
then kind of piggy backing off
that and page three lanes six
three eight
about recommendations for
legislation and I just want to
clarify that like
recommendations for legislation
are just that right it's just a
suggestion for legislation that
could increase transparency and
what is it accountability thank
you so tonight a rule that
they're recommendations have to
be turned into a bill and that
bill has to be presented in
there in the session it's just
here's an idea for legislation
that we think would be helpful
increasing our transparency and
capability is that correct
medicare representative that's
correct and so that's that's one
of the other reasons why I want
to conduct the study or these
meetings with these folks
because that way if order
thought he can correct itself
and do what they have to do to
be more transparent accountable
to the to the community to the
put to the fox and state to us
the legislature legislator as
their investors.
I think that that will allow
them
if they can adjust their what
what they do in how they're
working
how can I see this
administratively without having
me to interest this legislation
if this madame chair
representatives if this memorial
can accomplish that that's even
much better in that way I only
have.
Very much man church a lot of
that's all I had.
The.
I just want to just to clarify
so I think and many of us were
at the meetings over the inner
that the the borders where so
much of commerce is really
happening in the state is that
correct manager yes that's
correct and so
I think with your memorial it
really helps to clarify some of
the definitions of what the the
border is already should be
doing is that correct manager
yes okay and so there does seem
to be some breakdown of what's
actually happening it sounds
like there needs to be some
updates on websites maybe even
bored members that that are they
haven't that are happening it
did haven't been purchased.
Don't manage her
to to clarify you want an
example on the of the board
members themselves don't know
another supporters but just some
of the modernization that maybe
needs to be happening in order
to clarify the rules to make the
reason that this memorial is
important to go in so that you
do when it's time to do a bill
that you've had these meetings
that have clarified some of
those the problem areas so
you've got a cleaner bill for
for the future yes ma'am true
that that's that's the ultimate
goal of of of the more than i'm
proposing because you know I
think there are so many partners
into representative dunkins
point you know there's so many
partners and everybody
has their own idea of what they
want to see and that that's why
I believe that by studying this
and asking questions and finding
out what they want we can enable
the border authority to to
better to better facilitate
these type of things
it's a better out to be more a
leaner meaner animal that can
that can accommodate that ever
changing our knees at the border
because there are so many things
are happening down there and the
things are cheating so quickly
that are that they can I want
them to become adult enough to
be able to to adapt and change
for these things a good example
that madam church so they're
working the border stories
working conjunction with your
tea for the border excession.
So a border authority is
faciliting that they they
started doing the the the public
hearings are doing they're
working with the with the
planners to see how can they
bless emblem best implement
this.
And
they're the working with your
teeth or getting or thinks
they're getting everything done
and i'm thinking to myself why
can't we do this with other
things why can't we expand and
and I spoke to one of my
colleagues yesterday before
yesterday and transportation or
she was asking for a study for
highway eleven in luna county to
create to improve highway eleven
credit by pass
from the away from damning onto
I ten and that was a project
that popped into my head as it
this is a perfect project for
the border for they could have
taken it on they could have
collaborated with the teacher
make sure that that that that
this projects must forward
however I I believe now in the
current state the border though
is so concentrated only on santa
center what happens in south of
the restaurant that I believe
that luna county and his all
mechanies are being neglected
because there's this is a
perfect example that that the
border authority could have
taken the son and helped.
The representative it helped the
the process working with dot to
make sure that they get that
funding or to to facility that
funding to get that those
improvements that they need
thank you already well I don't
have any more questions in the
but that did clarify this
clarify it for me a little bit
do we have a
sorry representative matthews
yeah
apologize little behind the
curve and maybe this already got
asked before okay but i'm just
i'm just curious if is zero.
Uhm the border thought he is the
american side and is there
it just does it is there a
bought a mexican border
authority that works with the
art border authority madame turn
representative yes but that with
on the mexican side there are
three entities so will be the
city the city of a highest it be
the.
It would be the it would be too
there would be and then and then
the mexican federal government
should be the the local
government which is the studio
the state government which is
too hour and then the federal
government.
And man share representatives so
are border story
in the world of equality of
organizations is is it eagle to
all three of those.
Just trying to
mention a representative now
that it's very is very
attractive we were very
attracted in new mexico and we
don't have a III believe we
don't we as a state done invest.
As much into the board
authorities we should because
the border thirty and I should
also have an office of mexican
relations as well and and to my
knowledge they don't.
Thank you manager
representative I that was that
was.
So any other questions from the
committee since I passed by two
people so to make sure that so
chairman I know that you had a
emotion before to still want to
make that motion
okay.
Madam chair I move do not pass
in house memorials fifty six but
it do pass on house commerce
many substitute for house
memorial fifty six and thanks
for the cheaper
okay that emotion and is and the
second patriot take the room.
Representative and you know yes
representative dunkin no and i'd
like to explain mobile.
Representative hernandez
no and I would also like to
explain
representative lender
representative little yes
representative lunchtime.
The.
Representative martinez
nope.
Representative mason.
Representative matthews.
Well having missed the first
part of the conversation
intrigued
but i'll go ahead and vote yes
madam vice chair.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair final tally is five
boats yes for votes no.
A due pass but I have two
members that would like to
explain their vote
representative decent think
manager
reason I voted knows I don't
think this is a correct vehicle
I think we have the ability to
to do other things as state
legislators that we could have
done now I also believe that
that you're going to be coming
back next year with some stuff
that that we've talked about
this year and so
I just don't think this is the
right vehicle I don't think
you're going to get what you
want out of it and we will have
to make a change to the board
or.
Thank you representative
representative real quicker
I voted no mostly for the fact
that I don't think this was far
enough I would love to you
brought up a bunch of points
that I don't think you're
covered in here I want for the
border authority to be
completely fat like to be fixed
to do all of the call things
that you said and all the things
that I know are needed for down
there I don't think that this
goes far enough to get what you
want so
I will be supportive in the
future if there is changes
hundred percent.
An economic driver
but I just don't think this is
quite far enough
I think you represent it but you
do you have a do pass today
so hopefully you get the results
that that you're looking for
thank you manager and and i'm up
into discussions with it with
anyone because III value
everyone's and put on this thank
you thank you already so as it
right now
we're looking at a monday agenda
but we have been told that we
were getting a set of bills
