This is a call.
All right if we can start with
real call.
Representative.
Present Representative dot.
Representative that is here
Representative let that.
Representative will.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Mason.
Representative Matthews.
Madam vice chair here.
Share.
We have a quorum all right
Representative you like to
present your bills thank you
madam chairwoman I think you
committee for hearings today I'm
experts on zoom on it we should
be of Sherman whose with Nuveen
green capital she's the head of
public policy new products I
have Michael yaki with Petros
pace finance he's the senior
vice president and counsel they
could be brought in.
And I also have a committee
substitute as well we can
discuss that.
What does the.
Thank you we have that the
motion to move your committee
seven.
And that should be a dot two two
four nine seven three point one.
Representative just give us just
a minute to get that handed out.
That.
It is thank you madam chair
thank you committee to HB to to
date the committee substitute
was developed in consultation
with the county is in a number
of others to make sure that
we're covering the requests and
concerns that we're hearing
coming in what it does is it
creates a program that allows
for the financing of a improved
energy efficiency or or clean
energy improvements to
commercial buildings throughout
the state the program that would
be created under the economic
development division or
department it allows the funds
be collected through counties
and sets of an agreement between
all parties the financing body
the county the property owner in
the state and should the
facility sold the county would
continue to collect on through
the new owner through the
current process that would
happen under already undertaken
on it allows for the buildings
to take on capital intensive
energy efficiency programs and
really with no out of pocket
expenses just kind of gets added
on to their normal bills that
they already pay the way that
they typically are structured
there's thirty three other
similar produce in thirty three
other states they're similar
programs and the way we they're
structured we were looking at
them is that they're typically
passion a positive programs from
day one and I'm happy to my
experts elaborate on that as
well it's a completely voluntary
program it's a market driven
program and it really is
supports commercial development
and so I believe it's a it's
economic driver for a few
reasons of three or four they'll
go through one eight increases
private capital of the state
there no public or tax dollars
that are that cost there's no
with fiscal impact to the state
or or local government as we see
on as if I are pointed out it
may have a slightly positive
impact to the to the revenue but
to to the the budget it also
creates a value add for New
Mexico businesses and looking to
attract new businesses so I'll
give you an example up in quest
of the county was able to make
your business center carbon
neutral they get venture vision
C. pieces and they the title
question which is two thousand
people.
They were able to attract
prospects which is a job creator
in that area and they they've
been driving very well now
that's possible through
different incentives that they
had created but what that we're
looking to do is increase the
ability for commercial.
Business owners the commercial
Two silly owners are whether
they be industrial facilities or
business parks anything like
that to be able to create those
opportunities for themselves and
then it also
What it also does is it.
It increases the opportunity for
us businesses that have yes G.
programs that they're looking to
four different to move to the
state so I'll leave it at that
I'm gonna go to hand over to my
experts with brief remarks if
you don't mind allowing internet
Sherman to give a statement and
then Michael yaki.
Right I thank you madam chair
representative are you all able
to hear me.
We are.
Okay and tastic thank you so
much for your time today my name
is Genevieve Sherman and I act
as head of policy and you drugs
for new building green capital
we are a funder of these
commercial energy efficiency and
also water conservation projects
through C. pace programs around
the country our firm has
invested well over a billion
dollars in these projects
throughout the nation and we're
very hopeful to see this program
come to Mexico and exactly as
madam chair said the way this
program works is it enables
through a voluntary program
which may be adopted by counties
for commercial facility owners
to also voluntarily I'm secure
financing through a firm like
ours or any other finance here
that they choose to work with to
fund an energy efficiency
upgrades of their building water
conservation upgrade or clean
energy insulation examples of
projects we funded in the past
sort of looked at for example in
New Mexico would be a hospital
that's looking to make critical
energy efficiency resiliency
upgrades to their mechanical
systems or a farm that's looking
to go from for example a flood
irrigation to a more efficient
drip irrigation system to a
developer who's coming into New
Mexico to to build a new hotel
all of these are examples of
commercial facility owners or
developers that we utilize the
C. pace program to access a
lower interest rate in a much
longer term of financing
compared to conventional.
Lente programs they can work
through to make the cost of
these capital improvements much
more affordable what we've seen
in the thirty three states that
have this program is that C.
pace is it this special
assessment financing program is
a tool in the tool kit for
states and local governments to
drive economic development
through and increasing access to
capital for these types of
projects and for businesses that
want to locate in in places
where they can find buildings
and and we have them to be more
energy efficient or powered by
clean energy it's a program that
helps to create jobs and through
creating these construction
opportunities and finally it
benefits property owners through
providing them with more
flexible access to capital to
implement these projects I just
wanted to close with a couple of
stops from a neighboring state
that were very active in
Colorado as an example of the
economic development and energy
budget that state has seen
Colorado has had this program
now for well over five years it
has been responsible for several
hundred million dollars of
financing across hundreds of
projects across the state and
over one hundred and twenty five
million KP to use of energy
saved each year just last year
there was nearly a hundred
million dollars invested in
projects in Colorado including
the construction of a new near
net zero resort Act keystone
mountain and energy efficiency
retrofit to the Denver tech
center and and energy efficiency
retrofit of the U. S. Olympic
and Paralympic museum so those
are all examples of the types of
projects that you would expect
to see in New Mexico were eager
to answer any questions or
concerns you may have thank you
madam chair.
Thank you the new likely OCU
briefly if you don't mind sure
thank you.
Thank you very much Madam chair
my name's Michael yaki I am the
senior vice president for policy
and programs are just based
finance were also a capital
provider that lends money in
this area we've also done over a
billion dollars worth of
financing across the country our
very active across across the
state across this nation and I
been personally involved in
helping working with
legislatures across across the
country in terms of setting up a
commercial based programs for
special assessment financing are
you have here in H. B. two two
eight I want to thank
Representative Serrato for her
leadership on this just very
briefly because my colleague
said said said it all this is a
one hundred percent voluntary
program it is all private
capital we have worked with the
counties to ensure that we.
Not only minimize but eliminate
risk for them there is no public
money no public credit at State
we have done in a way to reduce
any administrative burden that
might fall upon counties and
cities in New Mexico this is a
very specialized type of
financing our biggest barrier
really is education a property
owners to get this going but we
foresee that the court if you
see the growth and special
session financing across the
country States new states are
coming online every year last
year there were four this year
there second built in different
legislature's that we're hoping
will be successful in pushing
through.
and it is something where is it
effectuate it that's just the
public not just the idea of
pricing and seem to create
economic development to help
building owners property owners
do projects that they couldn't
do before because the cost of
financing a new air conditioning
or new water storage system I
was too expensive but it is it
is also about carrying out the
public policy of the state this
will help reduce energy.
Reliance on the grid this will
help broaden if the deployment
of solar this will create ways
to save water in New Mexico all
through all through the private
sector in the kinds of buildings
that you would want to see the
sticker so we are very pleased
to be here supporting
Representative Serrato we're
here to answer any questions and
thank you very much for your
consideration of green special
session financing to make it the
thirty fourth St in the United
States thank you very much.
Thank you madam chairman that we
stand for questions thank you of
do we have anybody in the room
in favor of this bill please but
show there is show of hands okay
anybody in opposition.
Okay we'll start on the right.
The left has to the my left hand
side of the room with the.
Those in favor the bill.
Kevin.
Thank you madam chair members of
the team committee my name's
Katherine Christiana number
interest from this for New
Mexico counties we first of all
want to thank the sponsors for
working with us on this
legislation they really have
been so gracious and making
changes of concerns that the
assessors affiliate brought up
as well as the treasurers and
have removed overly burdensome
requirements from the
legislation in the substitute
that you have before you today
thank you so much we stand and
support thank you anybody else.
Right Madam chair members of the
committee Marla shows registered
lobbyists for name.
Commercial real estate
developers and we stand in
support of this legislation we
want to recognize that but we
want to build more energy
efficient buildings we
recognize not only is it to
build better for the economy
into the agreement the economy
but also many times for the
bottom line House Bill to twenty
eight improves equity gaps in
development to adapt and
recently converted to this to
buildings this new funding
mechanism will assist in
improving of built environments
and better respond to the that
Smith's and clean energy yeah
thank you for the opportunity to
express our support for house
bill two twenty eight and we
encourage it's passage thank you
for letting anybody else in
favor.
We've got two people on soon.
Larry being here in the.
Everything.
Eric Rodriguez.
I'm sorry slurry bank.
Okay thank you madam chair we I
Representative juniper capital
juniper capital is a equity
company that does private equity
in the hospitality space we
currently own a asset in Santa
Fe County called bishop's lodge
we acquired it last year we've
invested well over a hundred and
twenty million dollars on that
investment and we're we're very
proud of the outcome of it and
how it looks and and the
business that it's doing we have
a a loan coming due this spring
and early summer that is very
punitive to us based on the
current interest rates and we
have been in conversations with
the C. pace community about
refinancing that loan and the
opportunities that we see up
substantially reduced rates to
enhance on our asset into
further expand our energy
efficiencies and our our quality
product is is very monumental I
have used the C. pace program in
other states and other
announcements very successfully
I think it is a great tool for
developer and for a builder like
ourselves and for a long term
owners on this is long term
capital that we're very excited
about and we hope that the the
bill will be passed in in in the
state we stand in support of.
Thank you next Eric Rodriguez.
Madam chairman members of the
committee my name is Erica Lee
yes I am the Dona ana county
treasurer who for years now
Mexico treasures of billion has
opposed any pace related
legislation for several reasons
including lack of consumer
protection measures for the
residential rate side
however a primary concern really
is more on the administrative
side of what these pace loans do
both commercial and residential
and that is really the
fundamental structure of the
program and how it is
implemented and that's by adding
a tax lien on the property tax
bill and having a county
treasurer collect that tax bill
so our concerns are for our with
the pace lated legislation that
a county treasurer should not be
collecting for private lenders
as it threatens the integrity of
a tax bill pace legislation also
competes with property tax
revenues and also hear that tax
lien is co equal to I don't know
on taxes that was a huge concern
those are the reasons why we
would be concerned normally
however what the substitute bill
before you eight eight H. House
Bill to twenty eight does is
addresses those concerns as tax
collectors
it forwards the leading to the
capital provider therefore we
being the county treasurer from
collecting and adding it to the
tax bill therefore not competing
with other tax revenues for a
county municipality or our
schools
In addition it what the amended
version does before you today is
it repeals prior solar energy
improvements special assessment
acts.
Which includes residential pace
and that is always been one of
our biggest concerns about paces
the residential side we're
pleased that the sponsors of the
bill and their staff and their
teams have worked with us on
this so we so we have gone in
from a a post position to more
of a supported decision because
of these changes that are there
before you today.
Thank you.
Amy Miller.
Thank you good afternoon madam
chair and members of the
committee committee my name is
Amy Miller and I'm speaking on
behalf of the renewable energy
industry association of New
Mexico we have more than sixty
members here in our state this
bill has a few benefits that
we'd like to point out first of
all it's a new financing tool
for businesses that can wants to
save energy state water which
ultimately helps them save money
that they can invest in other
things in our communities and on
their businesses second of all
it really supports a growing
economy here that contributes to
economic development through
purchases of supplies equipment
services from local businesses
and ultimately the hiring of
employees of contractors and
construction companies that do
this work based on those and
other reasons stated we fully
support this bill.
Thank you.
Anybody else here to speak on
the bill.
In opposition.
Okay let's go to the committee.
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you madam chair
I just have a couple of random
questions
So Representative Serrato can we
talk about the loans and the
fact that my question is why it
why would this loaned or why
does this loan need to be
seniors all the other eight
including the mortgage on the
property thank you madam chair
thank you Representative we did
change that and the committee
substitute and referred to one
of my experts to kind of talk
through thank you no and I
understand he says it's a very
long Madam chairman if I can
place on Genevieve if you like
to kind of describe the
difference in this bill verses
the committee substitute verses
the Original Bill in terms of
the lean order.
Yeah.
Thank you madam chair
representative this committee
substitute is clearly written to
state that these special
assessment financings are junior
to all real property taxes and
any other governmental
assessment co equal taxes the
special assessment financing
amount that is paid each year is
senior to a mortgage lien that
is one of the special features
of special assessment financing
however I this bill along with
best practice all over the
country is to require that
before any special assessment
financing is executed any bank
or mortgage holder and T.
secured by that building must
provide their affirmative
written consent to the special
assessment Mansingh that is a
requirement for every single
project and that ensures that
the bank agrees and has under
written that the project is
beneficial for the property.
Thank you madam chair
representative that was my only
question.
Representative.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair
just it sounds Representative
says like you work with both the
treasures and the assessors of
failure and done what they
probably ask you to do on the
language there and so speaking
is no county treasurer that's
important.
What I'm gonna take you know
imminent tell you a story here
and tell me how this unfolds so
I have a piece of property
that's three in a thousand
dollars and I decide to go into
this financing.
And in the midst of that I die
and I'm estranged from my
family.
What happens to the excess tell
me what happens then it does it
go those sales like in the state
because the state's gonna have a
lien on that as well for taxes
so tell me what happens to this
part of it thank you madam chair
thank you Representative for
that I will refer to my experts
who well I mean I thought I did
have a word with in their
experience has worked so again
can turnover Jenna be Michael.
Thank you thank you.
The.
Thank you madam chair
representative so the answer to
your question is that the state
and the counties are.
A lien for taxes as you said
that exists at this program does
not change that this program
creates a new security on the
property so as long as property
taxes and all assessments and
mortgage payments are paid I'm
nothing would happen without
property in the event of you
know the property owner staff if
for whatever reason they became
on rate and and that property
was now a delinquent in their
payment of taxes and assessments
to the county and the county is
right Sen authorizations to to
undergo its obligations to
enforce its own liens on this
property would be completely on
touched by this program that
that remains exactly the same
this program provides the
assignment bility of the special
assessment dancing leading to
the capital provider that funded
the project so similarly they
have the ability to go and to
enforce a delinquent payments
for one year's assessment that
is not yet paid but similar to
other special projects the
balance of payments that are not
yet do you are not considered
delinquent those stay with the
property and would be taken on
by a subsequent purchaser of the
property.
Chair representative so how does
that work yes
ABC company bought that and they
no longer wanted that asset on
the home these you can take that
as an awful not interested in
whatever that asset was how.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for that question
one piece of this that is
important is that she eligible.
Improvement is permanently
affixed it's on page two aligns
eight and nine of the committee
substitute is that it is
currently fixed energy so they
could not remove it from the
that the agreement is already
set up.
All right thank you madam chair
thank.
Representative vanities.
Thank you madam chair thank the
presenters
I I realize difficult is during
the session to get the new
committee substitutes and so
forth to just in time we can
read it and time and this is
sort of that.
It goes like this this was real
sick and this one is not so much
and we've had some explanation
of the difference it would just
be nice if we can get a
substitutes in advance because I
have a hundred questions I was
going to practice and not only
got a couple.
Maybe that.
Of the and I think the questions
of we were along the lines of
the question but the lead
priorities
but I also had a question.
Summary I I it was in the for I
believe it was it was talking
about changes that were made in
kids and teens.
In three oh three and other
kinds of rules and other kinds
of
That financing things that were
supposed to be very helpful.
And the first said that the
market considered these changes
actually but.
Other words state definition
useful because the market would
not go with them so I'm just
curious as I read that.
Do you have any concerns that
the market will provide this
council workable.
And.
If not why not.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for the for the
question I wanted to my experts
in a second again just with
their their real lived
experience with this however
what I will say is that this
should not affect the kids into
is we would actually discussing
this over.
Well we're on the floor earlier
working and helping the kids
played into this and because
it's just on the financing works
we did not see that as being a
concern in the same way that it
would still offer again low
financing would still be an
incentive for people to do these
upgrades on I have to head over
to to Genevieve or Michael if
you want to go to more.
Specific interest at.
Madam madam chair
Representative this Michael yaki
I the question is a good
question
I think what's important is that
you have to.
Companies that are involved in
this in this capital market
program that bin Gerry
helpful to Representative
Serrato in drafting this
legislation we reviewed it very
carefully hello we look at it
and we are very confident that
it satisfies all the capital
market needs that we would
require in order to enter this
market I in fact you for courage
or some of the property owners
who already are eager to get
into this market and this
legislation will authorize the
necessary tools that we need and
local governments seen it or to
make this work and we are very
confident that the bill as
drafted right now of will allow
us to enter the market and begin
making of these types of
financing available I would just
point to a state of.
Washington state I has a very
similar statute it's programs
were launched in June of last
year and they've already done
nearly two hundred million
dollars worth of financing a
right off the bat we this is a
good statute if it satisfies the
markets we're ready to go we
appreciate your concern and
support.
And if I may madam chair
Representative a little further
as well that also pointing to
Colorado which has a fairly
strong to program as well they
also consistently use that
special assessment financing
which I think if we go back and
forth thing C. pace and a
special assessment but it's
effectively the same thank you
thank you madam chair.
Presenters Representative
I do have two more questions the
interest rates are high.
will lease loans the fixed
interest rates or will they be
Thank you madam chair thank you
for that I I'm gonna go back to
this again I apologize I just
think that again the real lived
experience helpful
Jennifer Michael like to testify
or comment on that.
Thank you madam chair
representative that interest
rates are are typically fixed
and their fix for the full term
of the special assessment
financing which extends over the
full useful life of the
improvements that are actually
funded that's one of the real
benefits of this program I'm so
similar to what you heard from a
property owner and builder that
testified in support this
program allows them to actually
spread the cost of these energy
efficiency and water and
improvement over a much longer
period of time that makes their
annual payments lower and they
are typically able to access a
lower interest rate and then in
today's environment so it really
does help to make these energy
efficient or clean energy
projects very affordable for
them in a way that they it they
otherwise.
Madam chair at thank you very
much for that answer
just two more questions
In the beginning
and chair representative.
I thought I heard somebody's
excerpts I thought someone said
that these are only now for
commercial buildings and not for
the state of.
Jex that work in the original
bill is that correct or not.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I think what
you're referring to is the
difference in commercial pace
program and the residential pace
program and what this does is
removes the Representative pace
program there was a that I will
be honest that was a a difficult
decision that my fellow Sanchez
I came to have our it was in
consultation with the counties
they felt that it was an under
utilized a program at this time
and that this would make it
easier for them to implement one
that that may actually get some
traction.
And chair representative and my
last question is do you all have
any estimate.
For these loans to the state and
what the dollar amount.
By the capitol.
Put into New Mexico as a result
of this.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative for the question
I'll take a little bit less and
the to my experts if they have
more analyses of course yep are
only looks at how it affects the
you know our state budget so we
don't have from them what I will
say is that in talking to
economic developers in the past
we have a dire need to develop
call commercial property in the
state we do not have enough to
attract this is what we have at
the size that we would like to
so you know understanding that
we need to be encouraging more
development and giving
incentives to on increasing the
audio track the news of our
facilities I think.
You know time will tell how much
you would actually going to
increase that that interest I'm
happy to turn it over and I know
one thing I will mention as my
experts mentioned we do a small
population but two two million
folks so the other states
economic pointed to larger so I
don't know that any other
estimates of how much how much
capital it would increase in the
state.
Thank you madam chair
representative it's it's a very
good question even states with
smaller populations have had
great success with this program
and since the program tends to
support individual.
Objects like the ones I stated
in my testimony so for New
Mexico's existing commercial
buildings we have already spoken
to facility managers of
hospital in Los crucis of office
building in Albuquerque New in
Santa Fe and there is ample
interest in utilizing this
program to renovate existing
buildings to to operate more
efficiently but there's also
enormous interest from the
development community in
utilizing this program to either
purchase vacant facilities in
New Mexico and rehabilitate them
particularly historic buildings
to be put into use as for
hospitality or mixed uses as
well as to develop new
properties ground up this is
particularly important for
developers who are pulling
together all of the capital they
need to build a new facility for
example a hotel in the state so
I I agree that time will tell
exactly how many dollars but
we've we've seen that states
with small populations will
authorize the program has seen
projects happen immediately as a
result.
Thank you madam chair so my
questions thank you.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you.
Senator Strato I just I just I
have.
One question that may lead to
another.
Just trying to wrap my head
around why.
I think I understand why you're
running this bill what I don't
understand is why are you tying
economic development into it why
not let the counties and both.
Because it seems to me like an
unfunded mandate for EDD's.
so just kind of wondering what
the time is to that madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for that question
and I do understand the concern
that you have to think that like
to point out is that over the
interim our group is working
with economic development
department on you know a lot of
some of these proposals answer
some of those what will end up
being in the guide book that we
have set forward in a timeline
for that has been part of the
conversation Department taking
place on the second thing that I
would like to point out is it
believes in the a fire they
mentioned that they can be
contracted as a as the
coordinator you know by the
counties to do this and so that
that expenses kind of it is
anticipated to be taking care of
the cost of the loan and and all
of those elements as well so
they could you know receive
that cost from from that element
the reason why is it and from my
perspective is that you create
ease for the counties and
municipalities across our state
you know we know that our
counties have.
Different levels of experience
with different programs and
those that may want to engage
with this kind of program having
the assistance of EDT would make
a significant difference and it
again a lot of economic
development that we see an old
historic building streets from
my perspective at least you know
I think of this is my districts
all the to all that you know
like I get to work in Clovis a
long time ago on their main
street the history there you
know really a providing that
opportunity to revitalization
and had a for a program that
would be a little call of no
cost you know as well a little
faster than overall but that
would not be out of pocket costs
for that should say.
Thank you madam chair
representative so.
There's not a there's not
appropriation to the shoulder
the counties with the tort this
as kind of
In order to pay a certain sum of
money just.
I was each county office into
this program.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for the question
I apologize I might have
confused a little bit so for
example should Santa Fe County
decide to opt into this program
the cost of the loan and the
development of the loan would
include the cost of implementing
the program coordinator for
example and those elements as
well so that's got that's built
into that.
Thank you for that madam chair
representative so what you're
looking for us uniformity across
the board thank you madam chair
thank you Representative yes I
think assistance as necessary.
Okay thank you madam chair
representative of.
That was the question that I had
so I appreciate your answers and
if I may madam chair
representative the committee
substitute it remains a
voluntary program just I know
the rest of the case that yes
treated and questions thank you
madam chair thank you any other
questions from the committee.
What's the desire the committee.
And
Is that so we need to talk
about.
Excuse me.
The that the committee.
I do pass on the committee said.
Right.
We have to I'm sorry it is not.
that we
Yeah do not pass H. B. two
twenty eight and that we did
pass a committee substitute for
House Bill to twenty eight.
We have a motion a proper motion
and a
second act please call the.
Representative and in order to
yes.
Representative docket.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez yes
Representative let the.
Representative little.
Yes.
Is out of lunch from yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Mason yes.
Representative Matthews yes.
madam chair yes.
Madam yes.
Madam chair of the tallied and
those yes.
Zero of.
Have a.
AS of Bill.
Thank you.
It
is.
All righty so this is that four
of housekeeping
Representative Representative
Chandler has asked to roll house
bill twenty five and so our next
bill is house bill twenty eight.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
We want to start as the the US
Madam chair
I have an amendment but I I done
ask the chair is I get allow me
to
on the amendment at the end of
our presentation after doing a
presentation madam chair that's
acceptable thank you thank you.
Madam chair
I also have
Handouts that I'd like to.
Share with the committee and
I'd like to draw your attention
to the first hand up.
And this one kind of has of the
minimum wage.
Of all fifty states and its
territories.
And what I have at the bottom is
that the army our state minimum
wage at twelve dollars an hour.
And in the US and in this
territories fourteen states have
higher than twelve dollars.
And thirty five states are lower
than the twelve dollar limit
that we have and for states I
share the same twelve dollars
that we have and the statistics
would be lopsided if we were
looking at twenty nineteen which
is when we passed the minimum
wage up to up to percent fifty
to twelve dollars an hour so our
minimum wage is really gone up
exponentially throughout the
years last four years the second
hand out basically shows you
some of the states that have
indexing in their minimum wage
and currently we stand at twenty
states that have indexing.
in the last handout basically is
the formula for how we arrive at
indexing the state minimum wage
to a cost of living.
and for that
on the on the table to the left
you ought to have what the rate
of inflation has been and the
index has been for the last up
to nineteen seventy eight and
and I have my expert that'll
basically the well into this
last and up after I do my
presentation.
But the.
Madam chair
house bill twenty eight is.
The minimum wage annual cost of
living increase.
Bill.
Our bill.
Does not increase the minimum
wage.
Base pay for example from twelve
to thirteen dollars from twelve
to fourteen dollars from twelve
to fifteen dollars from twelve
to sixteen dollars our bill does
none of that.
It's a straight across cost of
living increase type of
legislation.
based on on the consumer price
index and madam chair based on
statistics from the workforce
solutions department of which
are minuscule believe it or not
when it comes to minimum wage
workers they estimate and the
minimum wage worker madam chair
is a person that earns twelve
Bucks an hour.
It only it only covers those
individuals that are twelve
dollars an hour.
And then our state according to
workforce solutions department
they're approximately under
sixty two thousand of these
minimum wage earners twenty nine
percent of that are in the
hospitality and food service
businesses.
Only one percent are in the
health care and social
assistance
secretary in nineteen percent
are in the retail trade.
And madam chair.
the amendment that we put in the
labor committee
What it did and you can see that
the amendment kind of is almost
as as big as the as long as the
the bill but what we did with
the the labor amendment is that
the.
We we change the date of the
initial and subsequent cost of
living increases from July one
of twenty twenty three which was
originally in the bill.
And we extend that out to
January one of twenty twenty
four.
And.
The reason for that is that one
it kind of gives a businesses a
little bit more time to kind of
But in the piggy bank you know
the expectation that they'll
need to kind of do this increase
starting January one of twenty
twenty four the other reason why
I changed
the initial and subsequent cost
of living increase from July one
twenty twenty three to January
one twenty twenty four is that
that coincides with the kind of
incremental growth that we did
with the twenty nineteen piece
of legislation that increase the
minimum wage from seven fifty.
Two twelve dollars
incrementally madam chair and by
that I mean that that twenty
nineteen legislation up which I
was one of the chief sponsors of
that.
We did on January one twenty
twenty we economic seven fifty
nine dollars and twenty twenty
one January one we went to ten
fifty.
On January one twenty twenty two
we went to eleven fifty.
And on January one twenty twenty
three just a month and a half
ago we went to twelve dollars so
our twenty nineteen legislation
essentially and that.
January one twenty twenty three
a month and a half ago.
And so might extending the cost
of living increase to January
one of twenty twenty four one
side with this yearly
incremental growth to the
minimum wage and the.
Madam also
I wanted to our.
Also that right on the bill as
amended.
What it does again on January
one one twenty twenty four and
on Jan we want to see subsequent
year the minimum wage is a shall
be increased for the cost of
living also madam chair we are
also increasing tipped employee
minimum wage at twenty five
percent of the right.
increases of the state minimum
wage
So what I mean by that.
That means that whatever the
rate is that we're increasing
that we're making the annual
cost of living.
to say that it's it's
Sixty cents.
Or make it fifty cents.
The the the increase will be
fifty cents.
To the base.
And the base right now is at
twelve dollars an hour but for
tipped employees we're taking
twenty five percent of that
increase that would go into the
base.
Thank you twenty five percent
and at that to the minimum wage
for tipped employees which is
that three dollars an hour.
Currently.
And again we got to that three
dollars through this incremental
growth manager.
Of the twenty nineteen
legislation.
What we went on January one
twenty twenty we went to two
dollars and thirty five cents an
hour again this is the tipped
employee minimum wage maybe for
that that affects the restaurant
industry January one twenty
twenty one we want to two fifty
five.
I'm generally one twenty twenty
two we went to two eighty and
then January twenty twenty three
January one twenty twenty three
we went to three dollars.
So our bill.
Again look at increasing the
minimum wage for tipped
employees starting January one
twenty twenty four but it's only
gonna take twenty five percent.
Of that.
Increase based on the indexing
that would go into this this up
basically for minimum wage and
and you could see that currently
we have a twenty five percent
ratio in terms of the state.
Standard minimum wage versus the
tipped employment and wage.
There's a twenty five percent
differential or so that's what
we're basing also the the in the
cost of living increase when it
comes to the that tipped
employees and the manager of
the.
The increase in the cost of
living.
I shall be measured by the
percentage increase of the
consumer price index.
And the.
Learning period for determining
that index.
It in our bill is from September
to September.
And on November first as stated
in the bill the workforce
department will post on their
website.
The adjust the minimum wage for
the following year.
So.
November first the people I work
with the department manager
posts is.
Post.
The the
the adjusted minimum wage for
the following year and giving
the businesses ample time to
kind of budget in.
what that increase will mean to
the to their workers.
And the.
Madam chair of the indexing.
Of our state minimum wage is a
win win situation.
for both our workers and our
businesses.
Annual increases enhances worker
morale.
And increases workers buying
power.
Thus stimulating the economy.
Madam chair as for businesses.
It is a timely barometer of that
knowledge gene the annual
productivity value workers.
An annual increases eliminate
the sometimes unmanageable wait
spikes that come around every
ten years what are minimum wage
increases.
Madam chair.
The four ninety four twenty
nineteen and the the when we
change the state minimum wage we
have not done that prior to two
thousand and nine.
Where we went to a seven dollar
and fifty cents a minimum wage
so you could see that the way
that we change anymore legend
our state is usually through
these ten year cycles and what
ends up happening is that our
businesses are kind of.
With the Lammy in terms of
having to make these kind of
unpredictable and unmanageable
wage increases you know kind of
overnight and madam chair.
Also COVID kind of created a
paradigm shift.
In recognizing that we cannot
take.
Our lower rate workforce for
granted.
And how the value of work.
Of a janitor or a dishwasher.
Or hotel made.
Is just as important as that of
a CEO of a major corporation.
And you can see what happens.
That would with what happened
during the COVID at the epidemic
is that.
That.
Kind of value work.
That kind of acknowledging the
annual productivity value of
workers was really highlighted.
And it showed that.
That we as a society.
I have to really kind of across
the board be fair to the whole
working sectors of our of our
economy and not take any one of
the program it.
You know and
Madam chair
I'd like to now yield to our
Clinton Turner with the
Legislative Council services
these are economist.
and by that I mean that he's the
economist for.
The whole legislature I just
happened to kind of a seek out
his resources in terms of
explaining the formula on the
indexing that we're using for
legislation Quinn speaker
Representative and madam chair
as Representative Garcia said of
Clinton Turner your fiscal
analyst for the Legislative
Council Service and with all LCS
members we have to give that
disclaimer that we're not ever
here in favor of a bill or in
opposition of the bill we're
slowly here to provide any
technical assistance on
explaining the bill for you.
So the what Representative
Garcia is asked me to explain is
just the formula that you'll
find in that subsection
that when a sickly it says
something very simple to adjust
by inflation they have to define
exactly what that means you can
do that a number of ways and
specifically in this bill it
will take you are starting
minimum wage of twelve dollars
always use that the formula and
then take that current the most
current previous year CPI which
is just a number and divide it
by that starting CPI backward
and we're looking at twelve
dollars so if there is one
percent growth that CPI is an
index it started out about a
hundred it was set to be a
hundred back in nineteen eighty
two eighty four now it's about
three hundred so that one up to
three hundred and three if
approved by that you take three
hundred and three divided by
three hundred at one point zero
one times twelve you get a
twelve dollars and twelve cents
a minimum wage and the need to
use that exact same formula say
twenty years from now CPI that
index just that number went from
three hundred to six hundred you
take six hundred divided by
three hundred sec it to you by
two times twelve and twenty
years from now your minimum wage
could possibly be twenty four
dollars that that's just an
example with some forecast of
what might have been in in
decades to come so if there's
any questions just what CPI is.
Which definitions used in Nasser
that formula I'm happy to do my
best to assist the committee.
Madam chair a I don't know why I
had cleaned gonna join me thank
you.
I just the simple in that type
of guy madam chair but that
manager that takes is to the
amendment that we bring forth.
Yes you want to move the
amendment to section.
Up for discussion thank.
Representative Lundstrom.
So to to explain that and then
okay madam chair.
The R..
The to to number on the bottom
is two two five one seven five
point one.
And
Madam chair simply put.
The amendment to house bill
twenty eight are.
That's a cat.
Of four percent.
In determining the annual cost
of living increase.
To the existing minimum wage.
For example.
if in twenty twenty four the
inflation rate the index is at
five percent.
For purposes of increasing cost
of living to our minimum wage
workers.
We would use the four percent
cap.
And
that's how the cap would look
function and operate
And this ammendment Madam chair
and and this is real
significant.
This amendment as a compromise.
Worked out with our business
community in particular the
restaurant industry.
Of which I wholeheartedly
endorse.
And the reason for that madam
chair is that the four percent
cap.
Give a reputable increase.
To our minimum wage workers.
And on the other hand and at the
same time it sets a manageable
increase to our business
community.
And the madam chair
This amendment is historical
that the doctor.
In that the business community.
Has community has committed.
To publicly endorse and support
house bill twenty eight.
In my twenty six year tenure and
as a minimum weight champion.
This is the first.
Where we are seeing the business
sector.
Standing behind the minimum wage
reform measure.
And madam chair.
This is a cause for celebration.
You know what that chair I stand
for questions on the amendment.
Thank you there are questions of
the committee on the amendment.
Representative Lund.
Thank you very I did have a
question on the damages are.
What it does I'm looking at them
and I'm.
You are just in New Mexico's
minimum wage increase charge.
Twenty twenty three this bill
which is on.
Not be a year.
Hello.
The line will be calculated for.
Madam chair
And Representative Lundstrom
that's correct it be calculated
at four.
Representative at
chair Madam chair representative
this is based on one forecast by
the end of twenty twenty three
could be slightly less this is
the forecast I I. H. S. global
insight and publicly available
to point to as one of their.
Yeah this forecast that's very.
That would be impossible to
understand by charge yeah I
the last four thank you.
Representative seven issue
actions are on the amended
version of the bill.
Page four lines if you do like
to talk about.
I will not Representative is
what is the.
I'm not against it I just wanna
make sure we're doing.
Madam chair and the person on
this what was the question so
you're.
On the amendment.
Page four lines that.
Mexico.
That was website
We're talking about any employee
employed in fact.
Two years just doesn't the.
Representative Eli
that.
The.
There's a committee so I'm
certainly the less than.
chair
I don't quite understand what
the never mind I would like to
receive my question I have an
older version of it okay thank
you madam chair resentment is
there anyone especially
equipment.
What is the.
The document and save their
second.
Representative.
In order yes.
Representative Duncan yes to the
amendment.
That is yes.
Representative Lente.
Representative little yes
Representative Lundstrom yes.
Martinez yes on the amendment.
Senator Mason yes.
Representative Matthews yes of
the advice chair yes in a
minute.
Just yes.
those reserves.
Question.
Thank you have amended bill
thank you madam with that we
stand for questions.
What did you say.
Public notices this is.
The New Mexico station for ever.
Seven.
And.
And on that point we are
actually going to do public
comment so those in favor of the
bill thank you see by a show of
hands.
Those in opposition of the bill.
Okay so we will start on the
right hand side of the for in
favor.
Get in favor.
As yes.
Chairman good afternoon.
This house is.
This.
I
think.
In labor and here today.
That
education.
Is.
And that.
That is.
Online I
I.
Like the user with inflation
I yeah this is the right.
That we use in.
For.
Thank you anybody else in favor
of the bill like to speak.
Anybody in opposition.
Abstract right.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Charlie Morton is registered
lobbyists for New Mexico
business coalition.
This is coalition has several
concerns regarding the
legislation on January of twenty
twenty three the in the minimum
wage increase to twelve dollars
an hour they reached over what
was previously forty percent.
Small businesses that remained
in operation of what that was
struggling to recover lost
revenue our question many have
left the workforce every time
which is cool that they the
business or this forced to raise
prices and all businesses to
raise prices so there's not in
this recovery.
importation of maybe SFC which
of course but the end up
spending the other shape and
surface so the net result is
really zero last edition this
apostle would increase minimum
wages to be among the highest in
the nation.
Our state like ours this for.
Thank you very much thank you
anybody else in opposition.
There.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is legion will
and I represent the New Mexico
petroleum marketers our members
are small business owners every
city in New Mexico and the last
four years have been very good
at the pandemic we have a place
at a forty year on interest
rates of twenty or.
Systems or the cost of the
healthy up healthy at the
workplace Act and
and and minimum wages that sixty
seven sixty processes twenty
nineteen for those reasons we
believe this is a tax on those
small businesses.
Williams thank you anybody else
posed.
Madam chair members of the
committee your Rivera registered
lobbyists for New Mexico for
years ago like all New Mexicans
New Mexico agriculture producers
are still struggling to find
ways to absorb the new twelve
dollars already many of our
state's producers must take
thank you for jobs in their
operations and to make ends meet
that producers that I represent
are price takers and have
relatively no control over a
whole game for commodity prices
are dictated I don't.
We do appreciate the extension
of bills there's more room for
improvement to better serve our
state's farmers and ranchers
mentioned agriculture three
point more than twenty three
thousand jobs the contributes
three point eight billion to our
state's economy increasing the
minimum wage beyond the
increases already in place will
result in a loss of not only for
businesses lots of manufacturers
processors distributors and
those involved in the value.
A lot of the kids this will
result in the loss of jobs for
many New Mexicans and for these
reasons I respectfully.
Thank you compositions are.
Chair members of the committee
tax status to obviously Mexico
Chile Association speculation
offices in the bill the speed
with our membership may not
state this continued increase in
minimum wage and of course our
membership to move towards less
labor intensive crops and and
while this may sound like the
sky is falling statement this is
exactly what we're more members
were acts have members are now
moving to the last labor tax
problem because of the proposal
this legislation amongst others
and so with that we stand
respective opposition thank you
Mr president madam chair members
of the committee that Jason
Espinoza ritual this Mexico
Association for Home and hospice
care there the Mexico concerns
about the legislation mostly
because our members are Hospira
facility providers right most of
their revenue from Medicaid
dollars you have no control over
the price that they can increase
or decrease based out the state
controls every person.
Alright Sir is that as we see
minimum wage increases of the
last four years also paired with
increased mandates like state of
paid sick leave the issue of the
proposal for paid family medical
leave.
Those are not cooperating with.
You know in the proportional
increases for Medicaid
providers.
Adoption services particularly
in rural New Mexico of our
officers.
So we are working on legislation
in the Senate the trap we all
want to bring to the forefront
any conversation about minimum
wage increase needs to be shared
with the conversation the state
is willing and willing Amanda
itself given those increases
healthcare providers to
nonprofit organizations to
provide social services across
the state as well chart topper
facilities which state also.
Right so we do have this
problem.
Thank you Mr Clinton.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is JD
beagle of speaking to today all
have greater out of the chamber
of commerce speculate posing
this legislation are.
Our minimum wage jobs one up to
twelve dollars an hour which is
a sixty percent increase and
issue like this that indexes the
minimum wage to inflation is
really can be viewed as an
inflationary housing measures so
you're taking an inflationary
pausing measure and indexing it
to inflation and as as we
pointed out I miss the timing of
this is it's just not
opportunity with all of the
other cost increases that of
which is that are facing the
small businesses other chamber
believes that the current status
quo the quorum court process
that we use to raise the minimum
wage is we let the legislature
races we let small businesses
adjust to it and then when it's
time to come back and we sort of
do this all over again madam
chair and that's the way the
chamber believed to be a better
path thank you thank you anybody
else.
You madam chair.
Right.
At the same time as you work
with is ensuring that our
mornings or.
It just active this January.
All orders.
We have to.
Sure reimbursement rates.
Shop here at home.
Other opportunities mentioned
actually.
That are.
Thank you anybody else yes Sir.
Sure that.
We're
your.
Or.
And workers it is rather we have
it here.
Years of the.
Sure.
Because of the.
I.
That is why
The
manager is.
Directions well I I would you
would
with increases of where all of
our representatives of course.
There is
one thing that is members.
Thank you have.
Thank you everybody else was
just state.
Members of the committee members
of the team.
We've got to know.
Bill we.
Mr late.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee my name is bill
Lee president CEO the gal
McKinley County chamber of
commerce we respectfully stand
in opposition to the minimum
wage increases outlined it HB
twenty eight and while we
appreciate and generally agree
with the negative impacts to
businesses that have often been
enumerated and been mentioned
here today I would also like to
point to the fact that for the
employee a minimum wage increase
is no panacea it has been
determined by studying minimum
wage increases that for every
dollar increase in the minimum
wage the total number of workers
schedule to work each week
increases twenty seven point
seven percent while the average
number of hours each worker work
per week decreases by twenty
point eight percent so on
average these changes translated
into for extra workers per week
and I fewer hours per worker per
week meaning that the total wage
compensation of an average
minimum wage worker will
actually fall by thirteen point
six percent the average number
of hours worked not only reduces
total wages but also affects
eligibility for benefits
eligibility for retirement
benefits decreased by twenty
three percent for every dollar
that the minimum wage has risen
eligibility for health care
benefits decreased by fourteen
point nine percent as minimum
wage increases businesses
strategically adjust when
approaching their employee
scheduling practices to reduce
the number of hours of workers
are eligible for benefits
additionally real data shows
that increasing the minimum wage
has led to less consistent work
schedules a one dollar increase
in the minimum wage corresponded
to a thirty three percent
increase in fluctuations in the
number of hours worked per week
at nine and a half percent
increase in fluctuations in the
number of hours worked per day
and nine point eight percent
increase in fluctuation of shift
shift start times making it
significantly harder for hourly
workers to coordinate job
activities with their personal
lives belum balance multiple
jobs and ensure long term
financial stability all in all
the data proves that the
combination of reduced hours
eligibility for benefits and
schedule inconsistency.
That resulted and it's just a
one dollar increase in the
minimum wage added up to an
average net loss of over fifteen
hundred dollars per person a
year and this is assuming that
workers were able to use the
reduced hours to work a second
job and it's an assumption which
may not hold true for many
employees for these reasons for
the health of the small
businesses and for the people
they employ we urge you to vote
no on H. B. twenty eight thank
you madam chair.
Carl up.
Good afternoon madam chair and
committee members it's Leri
Sonntag here I'm speaking on
behalf of myself as a small
business owner somebody is
involved with the better to get
tax echo projects also on the
members of ego which is the
executive association of greater
Albuquerque makes up about a
hundred twenty five business
owners and CEOs that have hiring
and firing.
The ability.
Note that the three things that
the CEOs about our the lack of
people that are wanting to work
at any amount.
Certainly the inflation and the
price of everything is
increased.
And third government mandates
that are stifling their ability
to stay open.
The Billsponsored mentioned
there's been an incremental
increase over the last three or
four years and validated wages I
would suggest that exponential
in addition from at all.
Amounting to almost five dollars
an hour and wages the on scene.
Expenses that go along with
this our workers compensation
rates are based on the amount
of.
Hey that people get unemployment
insurance rates are also based
on the amount of paid people yes
so mandating increased wages on
the front and have any
consequences on the back in.
I would encourage you to allow
free market to determine wages
have not health not passed house
bill twenty eight thousand and
thank you.
Thank you.
Demi Moore.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee demi Moore
president and CEO of the greater
Las Cruces chamber of commerce
we stand in opposition to this
bill for all the reasons you've
heard before you heard from the
statistics there's been a sixty
percent increase in minimum wage
over the last few out few years
it is have on small businesses
and I won't bore you with more
read repetitive information but
with respectfully ask you do not
pass this bill thank you very
much.
Thank you.
Anybody else in the this she is
speaking.
I will go to the committee I
have that.
Is that a Mason first on the
list.
That.
For the money.
first thing.
I figures didn't quite come with
yours.
You said like in years there was
fourteen states.
Higher the for the first slide
so that's like paying.
At the which is very close but
we're.
Right and so there's a thing
states that have our minimum or
higher that right which.
About.
That's correct the number five
states that are lower that's
correct.
Madam you know one thing I'd
like to say those outside of
that is
There also were in the top.
Well there was a payment wise is
our cost of living and that.
We are lady at the other end
were locked.
Six thank.
From the what was I like are
possible with the new study for
index is ninety four were the
highest one.
How YA was a hundred and eighty
four you know so you know what
I'm saying is we need to our
places they the compensate for
where you live everybody in the
United States.
We're fortunate here's what I'm
sorry.
Then in the number six think
about the cost of living some I
have supposed little less.
Somebody in the water California
and New York.
Or whatever.
I figure why was what I've got
I've got.
You are at the highest cost of
living have signed them wages
with.
But anyway.
Going forward we would.
We are.
You very well that but one other
thing where this very within the
year estimation here is minimum
wage and cost of living.
Minimum wages Bob.
I do.
Relative to the cost of living
wages entry level all.
Not.
Zero point it for that.
And
business at every level you know
if you rise in value I worked
high school.
At all if they can't produce.
Twelve dollars thirteen dollars
an hour.
For playing.
I K. R. so we're the state one
of the other side we're we're
fighting inflation I have to go
up a lot of promises.
And
In order to compensate for the
rising price.
The.
I have a question.
Many we'll talk about small
business how many small
businesses.
The last two or three years ago.
Madam chair representative Mason
I I don't have that I just have
to that.
Forty percent I small business
well.
So we have four percent less.
At you don't believe that this
rising in prices is going to
call for let us small business.
Hello I.
Chair Senator Mason
I I I don't believe this
legislation are really
negatively affects businesses I
think it enhances businesses.
Bye acknowledging the product to
the value of its workers.
And and at the same time
valuing their work.
And I think the you know all of
the growth of a business it is
determined by the team approach
of its employees at the very
highest levels the very lowest
rate levels.
A great.
Madam chair.
Because they have great that
what what is it is for the but.
If you say we're only affect the
metal ones I.
But if you think that you.
Thirteen dollars device first
what is the one that I just
realized for.
I you know as business on I have
to incrementally increase.
Everybody in my workforce.
It is not fair right.
Those that the.
The girl has worked for me for
two years all rights for my
dollar I have served on so it
rises everybody wants.
But I don't really have any more
questions that is needed that's
not thoughts on the bill out of
the way Madam chair
representative thank you much
thank you madam chair thank you
SMS.
Thank you expect that
Representative Matthew.
First question is.
The last.
That does that and
that and.
That is large.
Madam chair
yes it's a.
That percentage
In.
Madam chair you know I'm I'm I'm
not that good in math but.
workforce solutions department
madam chair representative
stated that we had proximate
hundred sixty two thousand
workers that were running five
thousand I mean.
Our top twelve dollars an hour.
And all of that I have to break
down in terms of twenty nine
percent being a hospitality and
food service twenty one being in
health care and social
assistance so it is if ten years
ago but the numbers to.
to that in terms of what twenty
one percent would be a hundred
sixty two thousand.
Chair representative of the
state and madam chair just of
the using those numbers that
would be that thirty four
thousand New Mexico workers
in the healthcare industry were
getting.
China
very important.
On the.
For.
Businesses and having.
A little.
The.
Chair Representative Matthews
this is the extent.
Of the data that the workforce
department has.
I just tourists loop.
Of data.
That would include it more
specifics to the effect that
you're addressing your question
madam chair.
But this is the ex that this is
the extent of data that they
provided me.
And and the and and basically
their system isn't.
Here.
The kind of going into the weeds
so to speak madam chair of of
some of the really needing
gritty that which that would
really be helpful to her.
Mexico.
Chair Representative Matthews I
wouldn't know that.
But when we were running the
In the nineteen piece of
legislation we felt that was
more of a of a funding issue
than a minimum wage issue.
and I had numerous
meetings with the governor and
the governor staff and advocates
of these entities that you
mentioned Madam chair.
And and there was no wiggle
room.
Coming from the administration
in terms of being able to when
the state is issuing these
contracts that take taken to
take take into consideration.
That the increase of the minimum
wage to these employees.
And that so I can guarantee you
that well I can guarantee you
madam chair but I can say that
maybe that's that to answer your
question maybe that hasn't
happened for sure within the
last four years.
And it hadn't happened up to
twenty nineteen so beyond that
or before that I wouldn't know.
But you have a good question.
And I hope that I wish that my
bill manager would be able to
rectify that but I can't.
This is a straight.
Us the living index for existing
minimum wage workers receiving
minimum wage.
And I mentioned I feel for your
predicament.
Because we went to bat for that
sector time and time again.
Representative.
Top of the line.
Way more other workers.
That is
All.
And the question is how we
they're all working.
When.
The the the.
While working next.
And they.
Most.
And.
And sure I agree with you it's
not fair.
You know but some of us have
gone to bat for that population.
I amended my house bill thirty
one in twenty nineteen to
include that secretary.
It it got taken out in the
negotiations so it's not that we
haven't tried we have.
You know but this bill is not
specific to that.
You know in terms of cooperating
you sectors in terms of of
of of of or allowing funding for
for those sectors in in the
contractual agreement scenario
with the state and chair.
And here is and yeah I
appreciate.
J. average.
What is.
The new way also.
Madam chair
I'd be considerate.
I'd like to see madam chair how
it would fit.
In terms of what we're trying to
do.
You know with.
Basically the indexing.
And if and if it's if it's.
Within the realm of our bill to
do that I'm willing to kind of.
You know look at that and have
the.
Drafters.
Just see how that would fit in.
you know to that legislation.
Representative and
We are looking at.
Others related articles.
Not at all and.
Age or.
As a possibilities generally
what was going on.
Do not
The.
This is.
Absolutely and.
All the.
End up on their.
Advisory.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you madam chair.
Division
You know I was I was trying to
look at these all this small
business Simon and.
That direction talk about this.
Well so Representative Matthews
is.
So I don't know assisted living
on at two point five million
dollars on the ground I got a
healthy healthy healthy name
and.
every month.
And get ready to build another
one.
Everything is increased
tremendous.
I cannot take a Medicaid patient
one if I'm going to make a
profit in my cell.
That's how bad they are and so I
manage to raise and everyone
online please makes at least
fourteen hours or more brown I
ask if I'm a different employers
on a different company and I'm
asked to do this.
What what do.
How do I go about making sure
that hi can I there's only so hi
George.
So what we do how we go about
sure you can charge that private
pay more than we can how do I
solve that.
Madam chair representative can I
I don't have an answer for that.
I mean that's X. specific to
your nature of business and
You're the one with the answers
he.
You know the answer to the
question Representative.
Stated that this is going to be
good for all businesses and so I
tried to wrap my mind around how
that is going to the company
cannot raise rates anymore can
increase the cost and pass it on
the the guys come in there I
apologize for the war live at
home what.
Madam chair representative and
connect I'm not I'm not familiar
with.
Kind of the assisted living
Scenarios.
In terms of impacts from
patients or customers or.
relationships dealing with
drugs goods etcetera etcetera
I'm just not that familiar madam
chair with but that type of set
up and I I can be will specific
in terms of answer your
question.
Sure and it could be for
anything that's my concern is
that I will be hiring.
And your mom and pops what
they'll be doing is is Mr Lee
said awhile ago you need
answered all the questions that
I had
either I won't be hiring the and
more on the morning everybody's
wages are hours per week and
then all the kids out of the and
these are all employees jobs
they're they're not having to
run houses on our so.
That's my concern department
will not be able to do this and
this.
Thank you disease.
Thank.
Representative Martinez.
Madam chair representative
Garcia
Each.
I have a three year to NASA the.
In the years I've watched you
fight for.
Different issues.
One of the things that I don't
understand.
Is.
When we require government
agency.
To take on a project.
Don't detach appropriation.
We always with why are we.
What are we doing this on funded
mandates.
And.
For private.
Industry.
The government forces a minimum
wage increase it's an unfunded
mandate on that small business.
I got a couple of calls this
weekend from small businesses in
money.
District.
That.
Basically asked me okay one
gentleman said I have eight
employees.
You vote for this and they
forced me to raise wages.
Is there something that
Billwould tells me which one of
those employees I mean fire.
Because they are not for the
the.
Increased costs.
It.
The norm.
Restaurants.
Try these invested every penny
that he has into this business.
And we strive to provide jobs
for.
High school kids but he's also
trying to find jobs for some
people don't have.
You know education is not hiring
people with masters degrees.
These are entry level.
What I own a small business I
never paid minimum wage I don't
even remember thinking.
I have to pay at least this.
Talk about Madam chair
representative.
Valuing that employee.
Well how much value do you show
that employee when you tell
them.
I'm taking you from thirty five
hours to twenty five hours all
right is.
All the cost of living.
But I can only afford to have
you here twenty five out.
Philosophically I have an issue
with.
Government mandated minimum
wages.
Like I said when I had my screen
what I had or run small business
I would hire madam chair.
What I thought that job was
worth.
Whether it be a driver the sales
person.
And.
Or secretary.
Rate what I feel that the job
was working.
And I used to say you know
people would come to me and say
I leverage.
I can't afford to do that range
right now.
But I have a friend who I think
might pay you a little bit more.
You can take that job.
So I think these unfunded
mandates on small businesses.
Budget by just I have a
philosophical issue with that.
I was very interested in your
opening.
To hear what businesses and got
behind this.
It seems like the restaurant
association.
because you agreed to one of.
But everybody else.
Against it watch.
Business.
Madam chair representative
raising wages also raise the
cost of living.
We've seen that.
It's what's driving inflation
right now.
You pay more you pay more.
You have to charge more for
services.
Raises the cost of living.
My question to you.
Madam chair representative.
Is how.
Is there a mechanism that we
could come up with to actually
help that small business.
We could pass a bill.
Create an unfunded mandate.
We need to do to support that
is.
Forty percent Madam chair
representative.
Forty percent of small
businesses close during the
COVID according to a
representative please.
What are we doing to build a
business.
Support those businesses I agree
we need to value those
employees.
Madam chair representative I
raised three sons and I always
told them.
I don't care what you do for a
living.
You work harder than everybody
else.
You're going early work late you
to do whatever they ask you to
do is to do a little bit extra.
Madam chair representative of
product my son's that they're
all success.
Because they have that.
Attitude of nobody told me
anything.
All right what and.
Three eight money.
good fortunes.
My question Madam chair
representative.
Is.
What can we do to support that
small business so they can pay.
Eighteen nineteen twenty twenty
four dollars on.
Me as a businessman if I had a
valuable employee that I did not
want to lose and was a asset I
would definitely pay them enough
to make them happy.
Thankfully nobody in my employer
or less.
Simply because I wasn't payment.
I think we should allow small
business Madam chair
representative.
To set those standards
themselves.
I am a firm believer in the free
market economy.
That just.
My friend representative Duncan
has a business and I have a
business right down the street.
And he's a competitor.
And I have good employees I am
definitely going to pay them
enough so they don't go.
Worked for Mr.
I think that's the way.
Our economy can thrive.
Again Madam chair
representative.
What can we do to to support
that small business.
So they can afford to pay these
rising wages.
That's kind of a loaded
question.
But.
I've never voted down the
increase on the data.
I've never voted against the
budget to mention.
I've never voted against
initiatives on apprenticeship
programs.
Ever and I never will.
Maybe these later projects are
kind of upper income type what
they're helping businesses grow
and prosper and they're letting
the.
The callers into the middle
class.
You know so you know
specifically.
This is one Avenue of helping
the small businesses.
Is to complement the workforce
at the bottom end of the
political.
You know and and that's not to
say that that that initially in
my focus hi.
You know I've been championing
the minimum wage historically
that's why when I see a business
coming for say we stand behind
our bill is topical.
Because they see the essence of
what we're trying to accomplish
with this legislation.
That has to be all encompassing.
And that's what we're trying to
grasp at with this legislation
trying to be all encompassing
when it comes to business growth
to business needs to employee
needs.
How and and not trying to kind
of be a little.
The lowest rate of our workforce
which are the minimum wage two
hundred sixty thousand some
people.
You know and
and they deserve the same.
The same respect miss madam
chair and.
I know the same cutting you
know.
You know that that we give the
CEO and the board of directors
and.
The top skill.
sectors in the in that company
or corporation.
And I and and that's that's
chair what I saw in the COVID.
Was where we started to realize
that there is this secretary of
employees.
It has been belittled.
That has been kind of down tron
has been marginalized of COVID
just brought that to light and
so you know we can't keep
treating that workforce in that
respect in that manner.
You know because they become
unproductive.
They just go in the clock in the
clock look at the look at the
clock and don't put any in value
into the job.
Into growing up for the the
business.
You know and that's what we're
doing with this initiative.
Trying to give businesses an
incentive.
And trying to kind of foster
that spirit of hope.
In the worker in all of
contributing to the to the whole
of that business growth and
development.
Madam chair so I hope I came
close to your question.
Madam chair representative like
like I said of one we state that
I have a lot of respect for you
because.
I walked the halls of this
building as an advocate.
For twenty years.
And I could always count on you
representative to to run a bill
it was going to help.
Minimum minimum wage workers
madam chair I but I don't see.
In your bill how we or offering
assistance to to the employer.
Without the employer we could
have wage of fifty dollars if we
don't have employers it's not
going to have.
Madam chair representative that
has.
This does not mean that are of
value that young kid coming for
his first job.
Two three level job.
He should be proud of the work
he's doing.
But minimum wage.
I wrestled with this especially
since I came to this side of the
desk Madam chair representative.
Why do we keep saying that
minimum wage is or.
Is a living wage.
Those are two separate issues
Madam chair representative.
Wage in my mind is that high
school kid who's never had a
job.
Wants to learn some skills.
I will higher that minimum wage.
I feel for the people of if you
know there.
New to the job market and
they're having to work two or
three jobs to make a living.
I feel for the I've I've worked
two jobs before my life.
It's not easy.
That was a choice that I made.
As a small business I just don't
see how.
Me having to raise the.
The cost of money service that's
going to benefit anybody.
Madam chair representative.
I completely respect you.
But I I just cannot support this
is really.
Madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Hernandez and.
Thank you madam chair and I just
have a short comment.
Took a lot of time with is very
powerful statements
Three range of businesses must
have gotten together a bit busy
this weekend because I got a
bunch of calls from from people
within my city and my district
as well
and they're worried about
minimum wage increases right now
there.
Still not over with COVID put
them through with being shut
down there is some of these
businesses restaurants that have
significant debt hundred twenty
five hundred and fifty or more
thousand dollars that date that
they're trying to figure out how
to.
How to pay back in there faced
with rising.
Cost of everything inflation
trying to get product and you
know I understand as somebody
who used to run a restaurant
with a hundred or series of
restaurants with the about a
hundred employees you know what.
What this looks like and how
they live and what they need to
let you know.
But I think that we're just
doing this too soon and I I I
understand that.
That you know.
Minimum wage and our the workers
at minimum wage you know we need
to support them as well but we
are we are we are trying to do
this increase too soon while
these businesses are hanging on
by the path.
and I this is just one more
thing that they're gonna have to
face that I don't think that
they can overcome.
And so.
I will not be supporting your
bills that I do appreciate you
for always sticking up for this
group of people I really do.
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
read this for doing that.
Act at times and my colleagues
at the same we do have a labor
supply issue with our insurance
and we the entire nation is
required for this item it's very
easily cease to the workforce
needs increase you see very low
wages
negative effect right because
we're paying for all these other
things as a state it was a good
externality on state we pay for
all these other costs associated
with these very low wage.
Hi my district a lot of working
parents who work multiple wage
jobs
Santa Fe we are a tourist town
we have a lot of stuff going on
so to need possibility to get
the education to move up to to
change levels things like that
there's there's a lot of those
things that.
Also the other side of it and I
know that increasing the number
of state decreases the number of
people who are living in poverty
there is a correlation is not
causation believes Water.
Also I would not want to make
clear pack number.
So that's that's not what I'm
looking at the my concern with
this bill and others that
occurred in the state on the the
CPI is being four is based on
our markets and cities across
the country
three I could be wrong so
training but I I don't want to
live with you have to the CPI
would be eight point two percent
at that level but if you look at
the western region more like I
what six point two again it
could not provide a first New
Mexico notes on that two percent
as of this concerning that that
ship
One of the most out of one of
its also conserve you welcome
back to so again that that
difference over time the other
over that I'm concerned with the
is the amendment to a degree
because cabinet four percent
over time will act up for
workers right that is that you
know you have this last year
that was they're they're not
getting an increase of four
percent they would have been to
Spain next year that means it
would have that point nine
percent and they never really
get to catch up the reason that
concerns me is that I I think
you're both looking at this from
CPI perspective is so important
and how we need to be moving
forward how the state workers
because.
Workers are a cost and worker
and and everything else because
of their costs and so very
little weight isn't I think you
really should be determined by
the legislative body it should
kind of be determined by what's
happening out there affected
workers affecting otherwise and
I think this is where it could
read as recently as of this but
creasing it by that that which
makes a difference my concern
about CPI's bill one that might
be too high because it's time to
higher loan amounts that what
what are affecting us here and
then to is that there's there
over time will be an increasing
gap that we won't necessarily
catch up on that we may not see
it in here but maybe over twenty
years and have to come back the
legislature zero curious what
your comments are not our
thoughts that you may have about
this.
Madam chair of researchers
impact on.
that's why kind of.
At to address your your first
concern which had to do with the
the what we're using as a as are
their armor of which is the the
CPI urban.
And
you know plenty kind of lab
right on that but that that
particular
index captures a lot more.
And all I yield to kind of
a plan to address that.
Representative Garcia in madam
chair and Representative Serrato
I can answer pieces of that of
those questions that you had
the the one question would be
how much of the population when
we say Irvin R. I think a lot of
people's first reaction be
that's not New Mexico
New Mexico and more the most
normal definition is about
seventy percent what they say
urban that's roughly what the US
is about seventy percent maybe a
little bit more so we're
actually a little bit less urban
than the average of the whole
United States and when the
the CPI is calculated the
attempt is made to sample the
smaller areas mid sized areas
large areas
they don't capture every rural
area because they don't capture
the most rural markets but they
capture what they think is
ninety three percent of the US
population so
that probably means that the can
combining this index think
they're capturing somewhere on
ninety percent of New Mexicans
I'd say the sample small places
like Paris Texas or what to
North Dakota for the prices in
the house
if you know what where those are
or in the western region they
sample one they said sample
Moses Lake Washington State but
then a lot of the larger metros
are involved there is a western
specific CPI there's also a
mountain specific CPI
and calculating indexes the
that they often recommend using
that mean one with less sampling
their month to month those
smaller ones eventually almost
always move very closely with
that.
Tional
the.
Housing is about a third of the
CPI or shelter whether it's
rents were your parents or your
housing and sometimes those
markets move in different
directions so for in the western
region we the point seven Cisco
housing prices Honolulu housing
prices San Diego housing prices
Seattle housing prices
but if if we're we would not be
pulling out prices that are
surveyed Amarillo at all in the
western region there's just
there's a sample that gets
sample there and month after
month after.
Something in an Oklahoma city
that it sent to so if if that
speaks to only two parts of that
question I hope that helped but
thank you for the no more chair
in the process of aren't on.
At.
The way that the directors
Richard R. cap.
Is that that excess is and last.
You know it rolls on to the next
year.
And so that's the good that's
the balancing act of the the
cat.
And for example
is saying that the that the
index for twenty fourth for our
period which is September to
September.
Yes four point nine.
And and without the cap.
It be a four point nine percent
increase our annual increase.
With the cap.
it's a four percent increase and
say next year's index comes in
at one percent.
The annual the annual the cost
of living increase.
For next year would be one point
nine percent because we're
capturing that not that that
nine percent that that wasn't
that wasn't included with the
cap.
So that's the good thing about
the cap is that the increases
are never lost they kind of roll
back into the following year and
even though I may not be it may
not reach four percent but at
least there's that minimal
increase I still sat still in
play with with the index madam
chair.
You madam chair thank you
Representative next for for the
for sites thank you I I
appreciate that that's very
helpful I'll just because of the
fact that how did that.
Chair mission table.
The table the second.
I work for the state we can get
and.
Educ to call the roll.
Representative and in order.
Hello to table.
Representative don't get yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative that.
Representative little no.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Mason yes I.
Representative Matthews.
And vice chair no to table.
Madam chair at a table.
Madam chair the values six votes
for you just for one.
Representative the table don't
think you madam.
