association on page two of the
bill there is one change and
this is the only change in this
bill a page to like twenty we
are changing striking the seven
percent of the money.
You're right twelve percent of
the money to the owners of the
staff.
Madam chair that is the only
change we have at this time in
this bill the reason that that
is taking place is we want to
incentivize.
Tell you in the owners and more
owners to bring their horses to
New Mexico make those horses
registered with the New Mexico
horse breeders association every
time the in New Mexico the
incident this incentive position
that is offered through the
breeders association is
outstanding other states are
starting to copy what we are
doing that we need to raise the
rate on what the owner of the
stallion is paid to be more in
line with what other states are
doing and then this agency
barber has anything else to add.
I think you've covered it all
right madam chair we stand for
questions.
What is that little sound
effects.
They are what
are.
Do have one.
No.
I think you're doing it for
dramatic effect will was Madam
right.
All right thank you
what is would you like to add
anything or do you want to wait
till we go to questioning
absolutely perfect okay is
anybody here in favor of this
bill.
Anybody here in opposition of
the bill.
Anybody and.
Okay then I'll go to the
committee.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Ezzell.
It is yes.
In the state
of his life the learning
experience.
What I.
Other workers.
Our
main services.
What exactly.
The.
I.
Okay madam chair.
To be eligible for these awards
and awards that are presented by
the New Mexico breeders
Association obviously you have
to be a member of the
association in your course you
have to be registered through
The New Mexico restaurant
association.
There are sales in New Mexico
representatives of that is one
of the primeros sales in the
United States and it's called
the New Mexico New Mexico bred
sale this past year they sold
two hundred seventy one.
New Mexico bred horses were
offered for sale which brought
in a total sale prices three
million nine hundred forty three
dollars.
Also at the Labor Day sale in
return so they have what they
call the open sale but there are
quite a few also New Mexico bred
horses that are sold through
that particular sale as well.
If you own a more.
That is not in New Mexico right
at.
But you want to enroll her in
the state of New Mexico to be
eligible for that after
especially if you're going to
revert to it New Mexico
stallion.
You have to get through the
process of getting her enrolled
in the program to the New Mexico
horse breeders association she
has to be domiciled in the state
of New Mexico to be eligible for
that the stallion that she is
bred to has to be domiciled in
the state of New Mexico was
well.
What we are doing here by
incentivizing that stallion
owner to bring his.
Stock.
His forces into the state by
raising the percentage rate is
that the added bonus for that
reader because any any the
progeny from that stallion in in
the New Mexico bred mare that
places first second or third in
the need the races whether to
New Mexico bred race for an
open.
That incident is still clear the
percentages are paid out.
And that preacher that's genuine
and owner does get.
Award twelve percent from the
brace if this bill passes from
the breeders association really
it's only seven percent and that
is the only incentive for static
owners and they only get an
award first place of the owners
in the breeders get awards for
first second and third place so
we're just and we're also just
trying to be competitive with
other states like Oklahoma and.
given their stallion owners
around sixteen percent of their
award distribution.
The additional the smallest
percentage back.
At.
The thing we have some really
great stallions.
We need more we don't have a
great selection and.
you can only read so many times
to the same staff.
So we're really trying to get
new stallions to come here.
In a lot of people from other
states actually bring their
marriage to New Mexico and
participate in our program and
they have a lot to the economy
of New Mexico.
Really want to keep it going.
Make it strong and madam chair
under the line item which miss
barber to state about.
People bring in their mayors in
thank still have to be
registered here but there is
that clause in the breeders
association him for that they
are out of state owner.
If she is a registered New
Mexico bred after she settles
after she is come for pregnant
they can take a back home they
have to notify the breeders
association that she will be
leaving the state it just
station period for more as
eleven months that more has to
be back and help me out here how
many days prior to the public
just before the baby's born and
I have to verify that that more
is back in the state and there's
the the.
This is a five hundred dollar
fee to at four you're more out
of state.
Writing thank you madam chair to
see what we have the expertise
here.
It's it's a wonderful program
and we are one of the best in
the country so we're very proud
of it.
Thank you Representative
Matthews.
Thank you madam chair thank you
all for the presentation of I'm
just going to share a short
story about my great expertise
in.
cattle not cattle our.
Our staff our is our breeding so
when I practice law.
Representative fella who only
of disability down by Reno so
and he was reading he was trying
to get together this huge group
of broodmares.
And
And so we hired a guy trying to
be very knowledgeable but had to
select the forces divide the
broodmares to buy and so that I
wouldn't want to hundred
questions two hundred broodmares
except there was a little bit of
a problem one of them was a
building.
And.
And in my client begin to really
question the felons of
qualifications because he at
once we realized it was guilty
he turned it back to you and get
the money back but then I came
back here anybody can.
Yes.
And then
So and I I thought the real
clues to dispel it probably was
not the best person to do this
his first name was to help.
She's not making any of this at.
anyway we I ended up we ended up
education and now try to patient
revered federal District Court.
Total lost as we want and I have
that's all I know that for
years.
All right.
Thank you madam chairman and one
with yes with.
This bill is the political to
quarter horses and thoroughbreds
as well as of those that's all
madam chair appreciate it thank
you anybody else have any
questions thank Representative
thank you thank you madam chair
I just quick questions that I
it.
To sit down there by
Representative is that what she
said she needed expert witness
on yes we madam chair madam
chair the way this
Representative Representative
dot comprised it did he wants
that did he want me to have it
set up your thank you.
What.
Have a question.
Is there any other way that
works.
can you read.
I.
In my life right.
Yes there is.
Thoroughbreds are the exception
to what you we're fixing to talk
about they have the lives right
by the staff there cannot be any
embryo transfers there cannot be
any Siemens use and everything
else yes the quarter horses can
thank you plus a quarter horse
mare get multiple follicles out
of with for that she might have.
Three or four babies racing in
one year okay.
And that's through artificial
insemination yes they did it to
protect the stallions more often
than not there is a
Be nice here I want to be too
graphic
Substitutes advocated issues and
they do collection.
And the met from the stallion.
Thank you madam chair so would
that's about it.
these numbers out there in the
state.
Yes.
I have a couple questions so
Representative how many New
Mexico bred stallions are
currently registered in New
Mexico do we madam chair I'm
going to.
Turn it up to miss Harper she
does have that information madam
chair sorry for the improper it.
That we have about two hundred
and sixty registered New Mexico
stallions at this time most of
them are backyard stats and are
not commercially bring.
baby twenty five thirty are
actually.
Reading.
Multiple mares every year we
have a quarter horse that need
Big Daddy cartel is our
at that point that he probably
did that under two year and and
madam chair when if she's
talking about that particular
stallion he's listed in the top
ten in the United States as far
as being overall just tell you
that there is it with the with
with the monies are bye bye.
Which is a pretty big deal for
New Mexico.
And so my my last question would
be asked how much money would be
generally included in the twelve
percent proposed pay at.
Yes ma'am I do that that
information is K..
On the twenty will the incentive
right now for what the breeders
to pay into the New Mexico bread
rice or an open race.
it's twenty percent okay in
addition to the person that is
one first place pays up for New
Mexico bred to keep the money
these are just for New Mexico
bred horses.
It's a first place New Mexico
bred horses sixty three percent
right at that twenty percent in
state second place is twenty
four percent the third place
thirteen percent that's right
down there in the first place
was is not a New Mexico bred
they still played second third
place on the incident.
That's all the questions I have
is anybody else what's the
desire of the committee.
Actually.
Then they of madam chair and and
presenters would you agree that
I'm still the best farm the
house of representatives.
I will not for of the.
Avid the vote make it is a
chance that.
Thank you.
It is that the committee.
This okay sec and.
If you take the wrong.
Please.
Representative anymore.
Yes as much as I want to need to
start off and I.
It was good if you could talk.
Committee were always he was
last year yes
Representative yes.
Representative Hernandez
Representative Lente yes
Representative little yes
Representative Lundstrom yes
Representative Martinez yes
Representative Mason yes
Representative Matthews Intel
yes.
Last year yes.
Yes.
Some of those years zero.
Are any catches up but.
Your members thank you very
much.
Thank you also you.
All right
Representative Eli House Bill.
Four ninety three.
I
you.
Thank you thank you have the
back mentor committee.
And we have before you when you
substitute bill for.
Economic Development Committee
substitute for House Bill four
ninety three I just want to
double check to make sure that
everybody's received this up.
The number manager.
It's two two five seven nine
four point two.
All right let's talk about the
sept.
Thank you so move I move that
the server discussion.
Thank you madam chair and I
would have I am expert witness
introduce yourself.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee on Mary
Kay route I am a registered
lobbyist for metric with a
company that would love to bid
should this go out to our eight
I also I also am up for the
former director of the
environmental health division at
the department of environment
and under that umbrella with the
cannabis and hemp zero as well
as OSHA so we worked very
closely with the RLD working on
rulemaking and that's how the
seed to sale thing kind of came
across my radar thank you madam
chair and with that said I just
say that this is an RFP for
anybody to be don I'm just
asking for expertise runs more
this is the information.
Can't hear me.
Thank you madam chair
gems not go over briefly what
this then you committee
substitute does what it does.
And having worked with the it
does it have to be back for me
and also working with
RLD previously I'm making some
of those adaptions to the bill
we have before us.
This issue that requires that
cannabis can control division to
use a maintain a C. additional
cannabis tracking system system
requires a cannabis control
division to maintain a dashboard
other divisions website with
comprehensive information
regarding cannabis activities
throughout the state including
but not limited to compliance
check records recall records and
records of minors in possession
of cannabis online method for
submitting and not miss tips
related to licensing violations
compliance checks supply chain
activity and the only thing we
changed into the substitute was.
From the regional substitute.
Was
Page two.
Page one excuse me
Line twenty five of the regional
substitute to page two one one
was taken out.
And that was it at the
conclusion of the track and
trace.
So we're tracked ineffective on
June thirtieth twenty twenty
three that was taken out.
Of the substitute Madam.
And now reads without it.
The.
Have questions.
Representative medication.
This
that is why otherwise I wouldn't
do it.
So we started this I think is
We're not gonna take.
Talk about that in that I see
that we do have
The superintendent online and so
she will be allowed to have it
to to weigh in as well so I just
want to make sure you knew that
would be for respect so this
using Representative which is I
please continue all just for fun
the change I remember service.
Seven nine four point two yes
Madam.
The.
this thank you madam chair of.
Questions
What is probably your.
It's I'm here Representative
they were neither are working on
the initial bill they had input
in we change it to come up with
a substitute because they
thought that it would require
More work from there agency to
conduct the on site visits so we
we we do start to that
restricted from the bill and
they're neither in favor nor
gets it at that time.
Sure there.
Madam chair representative at
the time that I was working with
them yes Representative do we do
have a representative
Representative from RLD
it's it's like he wants to say
something at this point.
Yes my madam chair of the
committee
my name's point talking to the
right place Representative.
My name's clay Bailey from the
deputy superintendent RLD with
all due respect and thanks for
the time to stand up and talk to
you for a minute we appreciate
what Representative standing
water interest is more concerned
with the condition you straight
no disrespect intended toward
Representative RLD does not
stand in favor of this bill this
time you go through some of if
you'd like me to or.
So lets them yeah what are you
talking about.
Well the Curtis at regulation
according partially CD to
maintain tracking system of the
state to state and there's three
places in the co into rural
which already in statute it's
also the currently currently
issued cell system in place for
the department shares with part
of health cannabis programs
licensee's use the system to
track cannabis for the CCD and
to track medical patients sales
for the department of health
requirements for licensee to use
the currency to sell system are
built into rules adopted by CCD
some of the things the C.
additional Candace Candace
products include chain of
custody transportation
department to plants batch
numbers based testing recall
retail sales distribute
distribution free cannabis at
our campus drugs and transfer
canvas cannabis products the
department also has a website
Kandace report online which is
called Kerr optician glued the
following locations of
dispensary plane Count data
sales in the number license this
is an involving the following
password that the baller
Department is always willing to
take suggestions from that
information as you well know
order first real here this we're
learning we're growing as we go
we're taking comments from the
public and we're trying to
better what we have out there.
we started in the FIR the
currency association contract is
held by the department of health
they have it right now it's
going to expire the the middle
of June or the end of June
sometime mid summer our
apartments are in the process of
designing buildings go for to go
out for RFP to do a contract
that's incredibly important to
us at the department of health
is part of this our goal is that
hopefully that we work in
collaboration with them that we
have a system that both medical
and the recreational can use
together and we can share the
cost between channel that we're
open in expanding the
information required whatever
tracking as we said it's a move
all the industry force there's
things we're gonna need to add
to the dashboard things through
the industry's gonna ask for but
with that that's the reasons why
we're in opposition to this this
common line as I said absolutely
no disrespect me toward
Representative.
Thank you.
Huge my name is pulling.
Yes.
I don't share.
Okay
we.
The madam chair.
This bill.
The requires use of tracking
system.
Madam chair representative yes
we already do have that I
believe there want to expand
upon some of the the
requirements in it but we would
love to retain that back into
the rule making things changes
as a growing industry other
states have evolved things don't
always stay the same and when
you put it into a statute you
see what you have to do to get
back out you come back when you
put it in rule making you give
us the the authority to make
rules and we can do the role in
the rulemaking but when you put
in statute if anything does
change we will be back up here
you know as industries involved.
Madam chair rotation.
Sure.
Requiring the state agencies.
What is.
Watch.
Madam chair representative she
liked that were.
Senator.
It.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for the answer
what we're trying to do is to
yep put some guardrails and to
put some more information and
general you would in other in
many cases and is you mentioned
can go to school but this is
actually legislation that is
been model from Colorado other
states so I would say that it's
from their experience and from
our current place where we are
as a new industry that this
would be something that would be
useful helpful and making sure
that we get to a place and get
to better management and
planning of how we have the
state information available I'm
sure.
Sure.
Sure this is.
Are you asking.
The website.
She's not working to the action.
Madam chair representative as I
just said this is this is
something that is being proposed
to this legislation.
Sure will be in the.
The this website we will.
That's correct Mr chair.
Sure.
So.
These are.
To bring more of the the the
just.
Madam chair representative thank
you for the question I've been
in contact with them since the
onset of of this bill and they
work at me as I mentioned and we
check out the substance of the
proposed committee substitute of
previous.
Why we had the first committee
substitute madam chairs they set
the excessive number of mandated
annual compliance checks is it
we took out of the initial bill
And and that's something that
they had a problem with it so we
we complied with their requests
so we've been working with them
said I'm coming today in all
honesty I don't understand Madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative.
The motion there's all.
Nation the office.
All.
Slide.
Madam chair Representative
Representative that was also
asked I guess I I forgot to add
that last part on the change in
the current substitute that was
taken out as well as it as it
was indicated as a question.
Sure working let's see sometimes
there's a lot of the.
US.
Your.
Madam chair representative your
money helps.
The for the thank you madam
chair thank for the question and
I think this question came up
and I don't I don't think we got
to the full answer of it last
time but the initial start up so
to speak that is I think was
like five million dollars was
given to for the initiate that
the staff which meant of the
industry so that would be
included Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative yes
as it has to do to build base
currently existence it will be
going to our city.
Representative recall.
It will be the.
Come up with this offer.
Representative Representative I
think I did do a little online
research myself hi I found I
think for
businesses that that currently
do this this work currently the.
The contract is with the edge of
Business called bio tract tract.
Is it the while I.
Jobs and your.
Use the website transaction.
For.
We need more.
I.
madam chair Representative do
you have the capacity to do this
I think they'll do and I think
that's not not here there I
think that we need to just
ensure that through the the
process that they do include
these the user Management
Requirements.
Sure Representative.
Your actions with what company.
That.
Madam chair representative
metric.
That one.
I believe the R. one and I can't
recall the other two but there
there's the very limited
This is they're doing this
because of the then communities
I guess of the industry.
It.
specialized.
I'm sure this this.
Statues model that would
hello chair representative yes.
Chair representative on.
Chair.
Your orders for your you.
Madam chair representative the
scope of work is already in
process I just spoke to the
canvas acting director date
they're in the process of
writing the script works in
scope of works
she completed and then we'll
send it over the.
Contractual side in short or if
P. which then allows scope we
came up with which then allows
other companies in the company
that meets the criteria to be it
and their chosen through a you
are biased she waited.
Sure.
Share your.
Your school.
Madam chair representative they
are.
They are in twenty states where
they choose their just a multi
state operator and there are
other companies plenty of other
companies out there.
Yeah.
Right.
Working on.
Much for tax dollars in order.
national.
You obviously.
so.
Want to see.
The problem also.
madam chair one.
One last question is in this
location.
So.
I just knew here transformation
asset a cannabis is madam chair
the cannabis control division
would be able to include this
the statutory requirements for
the C. additional tracking
system and the request route
promote for proposal there are
R. F. P. as mentioned would be
soon issued
as a contract for the.
For which they have now is a
buyer tracks C. additional
tracking system and as its soon
to expire apparently the.
The requirements would that
we're asking for would not be
include not necessarily be
included so there's no there's
no guarantee that they're going
to you know receipts and
respectfully seems to include
any of this information.
Work on the rules.
In statute that people.
Sure.
The whole world the.
That Madam chair representative
as others completely chew and
this in no way inhibits them
from adding or doing other
things that they want this is
just give him some some
guidelines of of what others are
doing that have been successful
engine.
Chair.
Thank you madam chair.
Chairman of the.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Martinez
asked all my questions
but I I had one at thank you for
spending on everything and and I
had to for your expert you'd
mentioned that your company
requires metric and I was gonna
ask you who you work for and and
I just observation when when you
introduce yourself you'd also
mentioned would love to apply
for the R. F. P. and you stick
your head like why would you say
that almost in a way right so I
I thought now is there to make
sense about why this is all
going to.
Which makes me a little bit more
concerned about why we're here
so thank thank you madam chair
if I may respond to that that
that is by far not the intention
of I would say we need some
expert information and as
mentioned by Representative
Martinez there are very few
industries that have that he
that unique information on how
these tracking systems work so
if there's that that that is
that is five four not here or
there and currently the
contractors by a check into.
And our he would take care of
the issue of who they would
choose to to contract with madam
chair thank you.
These.
Of their.
Impact.
All the action.
Yeah.
Twelve.
At the.
the statue that.
The.
At all your options.
Your.
Because it.
Right.
For the.
Thank you.
The lack of.
What.
That you have yes.
All of the.
The legislative issues
affecting.
Madam chair representative I
think what you're getting at is
is having that information
available and how quickly it can
be responded to think through
conversations that that's what
we want to do this bill so that
we have a a quick response and
and an understanding of quality
of the product Madam chair
representative.
There
you for that.
That I think is that.
And.
What.
I like.
that you get a lot of that.
Madam chair representative the
data and the the.
The purpose of having the
database and and information the
tracking system for which
specifically your talk about to
get a quick response and to to
make sure that if there is any
kind of recall that that recalls
taking into serious matter suit
see for instance if it's if of a
bachelor product is tested for a
micro organism that is toxic
which could happen then that
reporting would be essential and
it needs to be reported as
quickly as possible so what
you're asking for our other
regulations.
And this and getting more
information having the data
actually helps our GPS and helps
or those those that regulators
those that would have to be this
enforcers of speak to have a
quick response as well Madam
chair representative.
That.
Local what are the.
The.
The.
That are.
Is that.
The.
Right.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I understand what
you're saying and so the
response in general and that is
in the legislation going towards
those.
Those regulators and having them
officers and enforcement in
places that we need more
numbers.
Thank you madam chair.
Problems that.
All of that part of the whole
process is three five.
Get out.
and.
All right smaller.
But after.
Representative will
be here.
The the question.
Madam chair Representative.
It would have started have to be
in place of April of last year
when sales went in and took
effect Madam chair
representative.
In.
Can.
It.
Right madam chair I'm and as you
have the worst in the those are
the that's what we're adding to
that so that would be what's
missing.
I'm not sure what you're looking
at exactly madam chair so I
can't comment.
Of the.
And then.
The use.
To.
Are you on the bill chair on the
substitute bill.
Thank you.
My question was what.
That thank you that there are.
Fiscal year
What I was asking is
Representative and here is
from the legislative this year
what you're not be.
So madam Representative so all.
They're very good they're
basically doing chain of custody
as mentioned before of C. to
sail and that information we
went over that during what I had
previous expert here to go over
that with this does as you're
reading a page two lines are in
line eighteen I believe is that
correct so the compliance check
records every call records and
records of minor in possession
of cannabis provided that the
website shall not include the
name of any minor an online
method for submitting anonymous
tips related to licensing
violations C. compliance checks
including the number of
compliance checks conducted by
cannabis establishment type.
Sep two the number of under age
compliance checks three the
number of under age sales
violations madam chair.
This is not being reported
current and check.
Sorry.
Thank you.
You madam chair.
Madam chair.
I'm still here with the problem.
So.
Meeting in the family's life
change.
Need to is that.
Madam chair.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair this would not be done by
the the company this would be
done by statute as it is as
we're working on currently so
this would be.
page two starting line eighteen
Subject to subsection eight BC.
And and in the page three line
to.
Up page three any page three
line to.
and here.
Senator is the.
The HSD is arguing.
And and I would just adventure
that.
These these are things that that
help us and help in reporting
understanding this information
for better compliancy and
they're doing it yeah the the
right the basic requirements
from the initial statute Madam.
Madam chair here.
Other than the thank you.
The.
Yeah right what are in.
Madam chair Representative know
that there's not a complaint
it's just the evolution of
wearable better practice and
your.
Yeah.
Check.
These are.
Hi.
The HSD things are.
Madam chair representative we're
already doing a lot of I wish
that were open we do the scope
of work to do more there are
some concerns like
Page three lines two and three
if the number of under age
compliance checks a number of
under age sales violations
that's a law enforcement thing I
don't know how at this point we
would have the authority or how
we would even put it how we do
it I mean we don't have the
authority of law enforcement so
I would have to figure out some
way and I may be wrong but as
far as I know that's what I
understand.
I'm not sure.
More responded.
We.
Thank you.
Thank you the the.
H. three.
All of the issues.
Line eighteen.
It
is usually being.
Land on the.
Madam chair representative I
can't answer to that I don't
know everything about the canvas
Division it's something that
like I said earlier we'll talk
we're talking to the the
industry we're looking at how do
you all the again the concern is
when you put stuff in statute is
trying to when you do the ball
so I can get you the answer to
that I just don't have the have
I'm sorry chair.
that dollars.
The.
It is.
There are always.
That is.
Changes yes.
The HSD okay.
And.
That is yeah
why this is.
How.
Thank you madam chair again
we're this is an involved
evolving industry and based upon
better practices from other
states say I ventured out and
trying to figure out what we can
do better for our own industry
so that we are doing a better
traceability management and
planning for our for our
industry and also you as
mentioned and I just like to
make comments
Madam chair I met on the last
comments from the gentleman from
our all day this is it they did
this to the data base types of
systems this is did you have the
capacity to have this type of
information to be given.
And so it's it's been a it's
been done in another state so
therefore our it would be
statutory statutorily prohibited
and was not even flag by GPS or
any other agency a law
enforcement agency so I just
want to make comment on that but
this just gives a better place
madam chair Representative
Matthews gives better leverage
gives better management New
Mexico and in tracking and and
getting information out to the
public madam chair.
Here.
And.
And many states.
yes.
Thank.
That that serve are very I
wonder.
Thank you.
In.
Right madam thank you problem.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative about I
understand maybe you're you're.
I would say you're frustrated
but just trying to get a hold of
and grant with information it
really is
It's really a new industry and
as we're it's very significant
to each state and how we played
out and what we've done and how
we we started the industry and
through the years of debate over
this and we are where we are
right now and we're just trying
to do a better compliance you
better information process and I
would just say to the FDA right
now is looking at of the types
of information and have a
updating their reporting and
moving to the types reporting
with you.
Different types of of food that
haven't been really look at but
it's it's it's for us to get
ahead of it I would say get
ahead of information making sure
we have it at an accessible to
The public.
And.
The.
This
is.
In statute.
just thinking that.
Companies.
Yes it is.
Thank you.
Development group.
Madam chair representative of
this wouldn't out and hit the
rulemaking this just says that
these are these are some we and
we do it with other other things
issues give some guidelines to
say we want this information to
be included whenever you are
updating or doing anything else
in this regard to the database.
Here.
It is.
It is not is not.
Details.
The overall goal I see this
is your little one you want to
know.
There is.
For that reason I'm.
Thank you.
It will question the.
Beijing.
Yes.
Right.
Sure we all if.
That with you.
You on this.
She would like to see.
Madam chair and representative
yeah we I'll be more than happy
election we're have to shut down
the sponsor legislature to try
to work through all this
Obviously a one of the
conversations that were had and
will need to get some of the
people but I do believe we can
set down we can actually with
some of the stuff.
After I.
Make that eighteen other law.
Representative would you be able
to
Madam chair representative I
thought I was and we were on
then we're on the same working
page up until today services as
I stated earlier I don't
understand what change their of
their mind and that's what we
were that's what I was doing in
in accomplishing this and I
think a lot of this conversation
would it would have been
alleviated yes Sir madam chair.
Yes Representative chair if this
doesn't pass you are.
Madam chair representative I
work with all agencies in which
I have a bill that effects there
agency madam chair but yes
absolutely.
Representative.
There
are.
the.
a.
Conversation thank you.
It is this process.
a.
The server Act.
The part of this
He is
here.
yes.
The the there's there's.
House Bill.
Yes
I
appreciate that.
This you are active.
Madam chair and and thank you
for all the the working the
conversation today really again
and surprised to from our LTE
that they came forward with this
concern today I was working in
good faith with them and I just
wanna make sure I have that on
the record and I'm sure you are
correct there's there's
regulation and then there's a
portion but by no means with
this this would be any kind of
enforcement but the the the
duties of RLD's is for the
regulation and this would create
more regulation and I would I
would kindly ask the committee
to if it is there you will the
chairman committee for us to go
back and then work with our I'll
do some more than I would take
that into great consideration
and and happily do so madam
chair.
After you have.
Madam chair I am asking to the
bill at this time seeing that
this is this is covered by you
know I would like to get to the
bottom of of the conversation of
what actually change their mind
thank you madam chair.
The.
I.
Thank you madam chair Bridget
the tax.
Thank you for.
this is.
That
Right.
Thank you so much chair members
of the committee recognizing
that we are part of all that
stands between you and a hundred
the party.
This is these are up with that
simple to forty seven does it
are updates to the uniform
licensing act.
And in the a uniform licensing
act provisions that we have I
hear we
I go through and verify the
process to make sure that
applications are complete and
and what is to happen for them
to be complete so they can be
expedited that point and how to
make sure that that there's
communication with applicants
it allowing for expedited of
licensure as well as hearings
permitting of virtual remote
hearings and recording by
digital technology in here for
licensure hearings change the
dates for actions related to
those hearings
allowing for services pension a
license
in certain cases out and and
what is not been involved
allowing the RLD to go for the
the responsible agency to go to
a preliminary injunction and
other cases and then a long four
yield such suspensions as a
final agency action and
in addition to Representative
Castellano also have
the deputy director of RLD here
director
Trujillo was planning or
superintendent is it up for the
tree was planted to be here but
she had an out of town health
engagement issues and take care.
We are.
That is in favor of.
Was this just a regular.
I have a video.
Question.
Thank you very much madam chair
I hope you all enjoy the party
tonight.
Have.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Senator Representative I'm
speaking with one of our our
folks absolutely critical
looking at to the committee
substitute amended that's the
version in case anyone has but
the page one thing like that
yes.
Yes to to to to numbers two two
five five one eight dot two
that's of the act.
Thank you.
Right so the.
It was.
You're at your.
okay
Madam chair and have.
Senator.
Representative at all.
is it is it is a it is just.
It looks like this is an agency
bill is in HSD.
Madam chair and Representative
Matthews it is the S. eight gets
dropped when you do a committee
sept.
And madam chair I have senator
and representative Mr Bailey
I know that you have a number of
well at least where that I think
there's another amendment to the
uniform I. syncing act that you
are.
the sponsor of and for is that
this bill that's what I'm trying
to pinpoint madam chair and
Representative Matthews that is
this bill this bill in its first
version I think I know what
you're looking for its first
version had a section towards
the end that the help with
compacts that was dropped in the
Senate Judiciary Committee sept.
Madam chair and senator thank
you I appreciate that
clarification so this this would
have nothing to do with compacts
is that correct Representative
Matthews that is correct.
And I.
Madam chair Senator I just feel
like I need to ask is this have
anything to do with something
else that I might be really
interested.
Madam chair Representative
Matthews is a gnostic on every
other issue yeah just.
If.
Thank you thank that's our
question.
Representative.
on page seven.
One city.
What I like.
S. and moody's.
If you use it at all.
Thank you Mr.
First headlines you.
For.
What is the.
Certainly madam chair and
Representative Martinez
so so there's there's two
reasons for what is it's been a
long time since it's been raised
the other is that the thousand
dollars or anything close to
that just simply was not seen as
a deterrent for unlicensed
activity I want to clarify that
this is a fine or penalty a
civil penalty that is
that is exclusive to people who
are
operating without a license.
Madam chair Senators there are a
lot of.
Madam chair and representative
images there there there is and
and I'll I'll turn one
particular area that is not
under RLD but is under you know
for my sincere and and I'd the
one missing structures of of the
willing is that is that are the
is the main user of the
committee but not the exclusive
use of the ruling
and in contracting basis
actually contracting without a
license
if if I don't have a license and
appellant is a thousand dollars
I'm gonna make more than a
thousand dollars from somebody
so it's just cost of doing
business.
J. but make enough contractors
here Santa Fe we see a lot of
this going on you see guys that
have worked for me that I've
moved on and without a license
are contracting where us that
our license have to pay them
working go to see some I think
pieces of thousand ought to them
is a drop in the bucket so I
think that's why this larger
economy reform.
Sure.
Representative all of that.
Jobs.
Is that related cost and all in
the long term
so madam chair and
Representative ridges when when
Representative.
Here does a job his job gets
inspected if I operating without
a license I'm not gonna call
these factors.
And so and so this doesn't come
out until the the shut in this
of my work and check.
gets revealed and and and the
people are left having a lot of
money and not have to pay having
to hire Representative to fix my
work.
And pay more money.
And and then they try to file a
complaint against me because
they're just probably upset.
And you know.
That's that's Representative.
The reality at the end of the
day the consumers on issues
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator and representative Tom
there seems there's some things
that are very consequentially
different there's something the
team just linguistically
different I know typically when
we look at these uniform
licensing uniforms bills it's
because they are in compliance
with our they their own loss in
lines of across the nation is
that the same case in this one
as well madam chair and
representative this Russell
first like I used to universal
coverage and and so one of the
things about about the from Los
eight they provide a good
template up to the very states
I'm afraid of the things there
are some things however that
over time we learned work or
don't work in our state.
Thank you madam chair Senator I
just mean I mean I was looking
into the languages and language
and the languages
And it's just it's so it just
seems very
Do you for example.
There is like the one that was
for the fifteenth.
They just seem like a difference
of.
Yes it is a one page fourteen
of line eighteen.
Originally said the resolver
moving the member or members we
remove the or members I'm just
curious if I guess it doesn't
just the basic work plans we
just feel like that those very
like small meticulous pieces are
better policy for the state is
that.
We're proposing here.
Madam chair that is that is
correct.
Okay especially the.
Sure we've got a committee.
Substitution and.
What all of us have I was just
given a.
This is.
Madam
chair of this.
Madam chair representative of
the so this is the Senate
Judiciary Committee substance
and then there's a floor
amendment that was made and that
is what will be in the blue she
was Department.
Yes and that's five one eight
point two I.
That's the.
It is the R. two five five six
so to put one is apartment and
madam chair representative
Duncan the the floor amendment
which which we took as a
friendly amendment it was under
the
was the the
where we're able to do a a a a
cemex as well as a services
mention of somebody's ability to
practice.
Three different reasons
blessings three different
reasons why could December
suspension.
the this is the second and
third.
As it was was it drafted
involved something were judge
was already involved the the the
first one was that someone was
posing a danger.
And and the concern was but
that's just to the view of the.
What better bureaucrats.
And shouldn't we checked with
the judge before we actually
stop somebody from practicing.
And that's what we did there.
Yes we enhance the due process.
Thank you.
My understanding is that was the
and questions that were missing
so we are getting copies of that
book.
Okay.
At.
Yes Representative still wants
to go.
I.
Okay.
The fact that and here.
And I spent seventy seven.
Your and a half hours ago
regarding.
Being cheated by unlicensed or.
Is
Not.
It had to do this before.
The town.
Increase the penalties at all
for people who are either is or
practicing the water their
locations for.
Senator track in the show to
show up and take it down
payments would.
Is this been.
This is now a stronger.
Madam chair representative
for eighteen T. from the
administrative this is the one
thousand to ten thousand dollar
fine from last activity the the
license stuff we're still
working toward that this and and
a basis I think we talked about
more than once was on licence
activity in representative
Duncan was asking earlier I have
just C. ID that's that's all the
deal with his own life and
activity and they are busy and
that's just for construction
industry yes ma'am the to ten
thousand dollars when Hanson and
get past costs divisions to work
really hard.
Chair.
Here Representative fifteen.
Section.
Representative powers.
I more to that applies to the
licensees and.
You have
and they attach my resume
receive.
By that's probably right.
Licencia.
Complaint Madam chair.
And it's found that there's not
a basis for.
And is the requirements in the
department.
We need that from any cost.
And other than.
Right there.
This is like
Madam chair.
There is a story of life service
charge with find
after
education I didn't do it in the
DA issues how are you investing
in this is a very strange.
Asian.
And I'm not going Madam chair
representative Matthews.
The OD of whether it's possible
or impossible is uniformly
which.
Uniform language.
Cheers.
Is that.
Cause for the riverwalk
commission madam chair
representative.
Thanks.
Where are we required to follow.
Madam chair and representative
Matthew it would be considered
somewhat odious if we were to
discard it
however the other thing is is
that they're not required to do
it but they have the power to
to.
and share.
At.
This is the of the department of
labor and certainly don't
somebody as long as you don't
want to.
Sure that is the same time
seems go way over.
On the other side.
Answer whatever I've.
Yeah an inventor that is is you
know the that is existing
language up would and it was it
came into the state through the
when we talked it over licensing
act
the changes were simply making
is is to be consistent about
talk about licensee an applicant
or non license person.
So we're.
Here I'm.
How long.
Yes
It.
For agency responsible for
enforcing laws to.
Have this in their losses.
I will quit.
And madam chair we we we're just
simply concerned about the the
difference miss that someone
would have to live with that
point.
Nation.
The last.
Representative Lundstrom.
You madam chair we would like to
this bill
on sidelines.
The that.
But I don't know the.
Not just on the region's the
Senate.
The best.
Review on.
This year.
So.
Representative and in order.
Yes.
Okay yes Representative
Hernandez.
Representative let's say.
Representative little.
Representative Lundstrom.
Yes Representative Martinez yes
Representative Mason yes.
Representative Matthews.
Reelected.
Leisure madam chair yeah.
Tallied nine points for yes.
Observers a committee thank you
very much applications look
forward to seeing everybody at
every discipline.
And.
Problem.
We have.
Thank you.
That.
To.
We have
Senate bill sixty eight
said she stepped in
Senate finance and has asked me
to put it on.
Judge that would pay that
because.
Yeah.
We.
Or.
The two.
Thank you for appreciating.
Senator you'll present your
bills the madam chair members of
the committee whenever there's a
change of title documents need
to be a result and they need to
be notarized however this often
creates a problem with somebody
trying to get up there
insurance sector the trust of
and so this simply allows that
women in into this specific case
where car is totaled.
That we will leave the
responsibility of the the
documents having to be a result
of the be submitted
electronically and we relieved
of the requirement of the
normalization on any.
Related to the top part.
Right right do we have anybody
in favor of the.
They have anybody oppose the
bill.
All right here.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is red one
restaurant lobbyist.
Insurance is.
we are the our members are the
insurers pay install loss
situations these improvements to
the state statue of us able to
loss of disposable for a.
Sure so we're very much in
favor.
Thank you.
Hello.
thank you madam chair Scott
Scanlon registered lobbyists for
for Copart so just the scenario
you get in the and collision
your car's totaled you might be
in bad shape you might be in the
hospital whatever and so in
order for the claim to move
along from your hospital that
you have to find a notary and so
this bill just simply allows one
phone call of electronic
signature
and off you go it also in terms
of the department we will still
find the tax and Revenue
Department hard copy so there's
no additional
burden to them and thank you
madam chair right if anybody on
the same Madam right and
comments or questions from the
committee.
Representative Martinez.
Madam chair representative.
Just chill out.
Not confused about this this
just has to do with one of the
tools poll.
At chair representative
practices.
So you would just.
On your phone to track signature
set that off.
Representative says what are you
gonna DocuSign.
Chair
Senator so.
This actually makes it easier
for the.
That just lost.
The market is what competition.
Legislature's website.
Representative at.
if you have a language that's
just what.
Chair and.
I.
He is.
Hi.
In.
The
chair and representative of
Matthew so what up what part is
is total the owner has two
choices what is they get
accepted a settlement from the
insurance company and continue
to drive that with a with a
title that says that salvage and
that they're not and and that's
they're not able to transfer the
title to someone else without
them understanding that salvage
or they can make effectively
sell the vehicle to the
insurance company.
For the for the total total
amount.
This this bill deals only with
that sectors which it doesn't
deal with the south which
situation so so in that case
then if I decided to get a
different vehicle I know choice
begin different vehicle up then
then up the title of the vehicle
because the trucks come.
I love this and other news
answers.
That one quarters.
The result is is.
The work is.
In the cells and Asian.
What is that.
Issues.
What you may.
All.
We have the.
Or.
All.
It would be the.
Hi
the other two.
This is here.
Madam chair Representative
Matthews will have zero impact
on that particular situation in
my car gets stuck in a flooded
let's say there are four
different zero second half.
the first is which would be what
will come in as I basically felt
the car to my insurance.
The second scenario is hi
publishers Committee yeah I
think I can still make it work
the Trust Company says what we
can't guarantee that part of
more and so that it becomes a
salvage title and they in they
inform the
and we do have the and that gets
added to the title of that
vehicle with that pin number
that's option.
So it is still on the road that
if I choose them to sell that
vehicle I would choice of either
being honest about the salvage.
Create a fraudulent title that's
then the articulation.
And.
For the for the situation what
we if I don't colleges covered
it all.
I get somebody to make it look
like it's running for eight
fifteen minutes and I thought
that vehicle right but but but
in those latter two into one of
those those two are touched by
this bill because this bill I
will uphold it to the insurance
company they have the title they
have the vehicle they dispose of
that.
at the pursuant to their
regulations and and then that
that vehicle taken off the road.
As long.
Thank you
any other questions the
committee.
So.
The second.
All right.
Representative and then on yes.
Representative Duncan yes
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente.
Representative little yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Mason yes.
Representative Matthews.
Madam chair yes madam chair yes
madam chair I
zero one three eight four.
What what I'm not my bill didn't
even look at a single note.
Well I actually do.
At.
All
right.
One.
Right.
