Representative bank post.
Here.
Representative Hernandez your.
Representative Johnson.
Here.
Representative Martinez.
Here.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Here.
Representative.
Sure apple.
Your.
Representative Fajardo.
Here.
Representative Serrato.
Here can you hear me.
Thank you thank you thank you.
Vice chair Figueroa.
You.
Chairman my instance.
Thank you and I am here and so
we have a quorum thank you madam
secretary
if we could lead in a Antoinette
de hill this is my up.
Expert witness on one thirty
four.
And we'll go one thirty four so
the way it would work is if you
wish to speak on a bill raise
your hand.
What we'll do is we'll call
those in support those in
opposition I don't think they'll
be any public opposition one
thirty four so if you want to
speak on one thirty four raise
your hand.
When you do speak to the
committee we we on mute you on
our side then you on mute
yourself on your side and if you
can if you're technology it
allows please a.
allow the video so we can see
your face so you would on mute
yourself to the video and then
address the committee will
probably go to a of a timer on
the Public banking act.
Depending on how many folks want
to speak we want to at least
have an
I cut it off at an hour of
public speaking on the public
banking which will start around
three but anyway I'm gonna turn
over to my vice chair who who
will be chairing this portion of
the meeting.
And then call on me when you're
ready madam madam chair.
Thank you Mr chairman.
If you are reading and your
expert witness is here go ahead
and present house bill one
thirty four.
Thank you very much madam chair
audible members this is house
bill one hundred thirty four the
reinvigoration of our sports
authority some of the some of
you may recall be before the
before the Great Recession and
there was a division within the
department of tourism.
Call the New Mexico sports
authority well guess what madam
chair members it's still good
law it's still on the books it
is our a legal duty to fund it
and it is the legal duty the
executive to carry out its
charge up but it has not been
funded for over a decade and so
so we this bill.
As a one million dollar
appropriation to the division
to hire staff to do research to
to bring people together to have
per diem for a public of public
up committee
so it is an appropriations bill
however the statute we do want
to change some of the some of
the statutory configuration of
of the current law there is a.
An amendment that I'll be.
I'll be talking about after the
after the public comment about
me just talk about four story
for about two minutes the
The sports authority is whatever
we wanted to be under current
law it it it organizes events in
the in the guise of sports
tourism probably the the
greatest achievement of the
sports authority before it was
defunct was the creation of the
New Mexico bowl which is now in
its I think sixteenth or
seventeenth here it's one of
only a handful of goals that
played last year and this year
through the COVID crisis and
it's nationally televised on a
Saturday afternoon before
Christmas on ESPN so it's a
great one day tourism
extravaganza as well as putting
New Mexico on the map the sports
authority work with local
entrepreneurs coaches athletic
directors teams leagues to try
to get more professional and
amateur sports in New Mexico as
well as amateur and professional
you events such as of golf golf
tournament softball tournaments
tennis tournaments of what not
because of our weather because
of our proximity to Texas
California because of New
Mexicos just overwhelming love
of sports I think this
divisional play a key role in
reinvigorating our communities
after the pandemic as well as
giving our young people the
opportunity to develop their
skills and and there and all the
things that sports that teaches
people particularly team sports
to succeed as you know madam
chair of young women who
participate in team sports is
statistically proven are more
likely to open a business is
more likely to
it lowers the percentage of them
being victimized by sexual
assault being involved in the
abuse of domestic violence
relationships and really helps
the the educational goals of all
participants of but but
particularly women so anyway
with that I'm gonna turn it over
to the deputy secretary of
tourism who's with us today this
Antoinette B. hill.
To work on the amendment to talk
about the sports authority and
then we'll after public comment
will up.
Isn't the amendment.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative.
And madam chair can you hear me
OK.
Yes ma'am we hear you well okay
thank you I apologize for not
being available to be on camera
had some technical difficulties
and so didn't have enough time
to reset the settings on my
phone
but thank you anyway I'm so I'd
like to start by saying that
thank you to the representative
for allowing us to collaborate
on this effort
as he mentioned the sports
authority has been on funded for
over a decade and without any
dedicated staff and so as a
first step to assessing its
viability the TIRS apartment is
providing input really to
modernize the statute.
as we like to tout and we speak
to we take a disciplined
approach to all of our programs
and to understand the sports
authorities true economic
potential we would definitely
need to do and infrastructure
assessment to identify how New
Mexico can be competitive in
attracting and growing sports
tourism research that we have
not yet done
we understand that our
communities across the state
that would benefit that and
there from from this effort and
we know that there are some
communities who may not have a
strategy and so therefore that
over encompassing all
comprehensive approach to of
full effective successful
strategies would still need to
do and to be developed I'm.
The tourism department's
priorities are outlined in the
executive budget which includes
funding existing our FTEs
existing FTEs excuse me and
expanding to program programs
and launching are year round
marketing campaign which now
includes the LA flame market so
we know that this will support
New Mexico as a whole including
rural communities when we have
that marketing and M. campaign
out in the in the world so with
regard to the amendments all
division programs are aligned
with the amendments here before
you and we are creating
consistency across all the
programs in the tourism
department I'm so one item for
example you'll notice in the
amendment is the number of
members of.
Secretary I'm gonna ask you to
hold for a second I'm discussion
of the amendments because we
have not moved that for
discussion yet and will circle
back around to that after public
testimony that's right thank you
so much madam chair.
You have any other comments on
the bill at this point not at
this time thank you okay thank
you.
No manager would forward to to
public comment and
quick discussion on on the
merits of this fantastic
division thank you.
Thank you Mr chair we will go to
public discussion if you are
here and the soon or in person.
To speak in favor of house bill
one thirty four would you please
raise your hand in the attendee
list or let the room attending
now in person.
You are here and will take a
minute to let everyone raise
their hand.
All right miss Montoya if you
would a new folks and announce
them and let's hear some public
testimony in favor of house bill
one thirty four.
Thank you madam chair.
I'm going to move over.
Senator Kerry at I apologize if
I mispronounce last name.
To Tesco.
Sandra please you yourself and.
Give us your testimony.
Sandra are you there I am here.
All right welcome let's hear
what you'd like to say about
house bill one thirty four I I
was thinking that the
Public banking was going to be
at this time so if you could
remove me from that from this
right now thank absolutely no
problem.
Next in line we have Darren
Thomas.
Ms would you like to go on to
who's next and let me just
clarify for those in the
attendee room we're taking
public comment in favor of house
bill one thirty four which is
regarding the sports authority.
I promoted Ford McCartney.
But.
You can use up.
Mr McCarty.
You might want to and you
yourself.
Sorry sorry about that I madam
chair I meant to speak on the
banking bill of house bill
seventy five.
Thank you Mr McCartney will look
forward to it then next up is
Montoya.
Megan McMillan.
My name is making money and and
the secretary at that New Mexico
gains we are amateur sports
foundation here in New Mexico we
are part eight a larger group
call that National Congress of
state games it is where you and
adults compete and different for
every weekend during the summer
between may and November we have
the largest basketball
tournament in the state.
Adding the sports authority and
we're finding it again would be
really beneficial to us one of
our goals long term goals with
visit Albuquerque is to get the
National Congress of state games
in New Mexico kind of like with
the senior games was in twenty
nineteen and eight.
This bill and we lost you okay.
It muted I'm.
We would really like to host the
National Congress of state games
in twenty thirty or twenty
thirty two which would be just
like that senior games just for
you all athletes of all ages and
IT department funded like this
would really help us in that and
after.
Thank you next miss Montoya.
Next we have Martin what's.
Yes can you hear me.
We're doing New Mexico sports
thirty is been something that
was that needs to come back on
the table and and it really
helps is bring in national
defense and hopefully we can
bring in nationally televised
they're promoting tourism The
New Mexico and I think it's just
something that really helped The
New Mexico games I was part of
for ten years so I really
believe this is gonna be good
for the state if we can bring it
back.
Thank you Mr what's.
Madam chairman we have Andres
Trujillo.
Everybody has there been doing
today.
I'm so I am in the first off I
am in support of this bill I
think it's super important for
our sport community throughout
our entire state
for those who do not know I'm
kind of the quintessential
sports on your of New Mexico
born and raised here I'm
actually one of the original
founders and former owners of
the Duke city gladiators
pressuring football I work with
yes King radio one once and the
team as a sports host play by
play promotions director and and
I look here you're not perky I'm
also the executive director of
the New Mexico games and may
again spoke really a lot about
what at this could do to help
the New Mexico games and the
Mexicans been around since
nineteen eighty nine so this is
something that can really help
bolster that that you do get the
tourism because we do get a lot
of athletes that come in from
out of state that stay in hotels
that that come here to come and
join New Mexico for for with
this beauty and everything
that's great about New Mexico so
this is really important for the
New Mexico games I think making
cover most of everything there
but I'm also the owner and
operator of the New Mexico
runners majoring a soccer league
team we've been around since
twenty eighteen and and we're
New Mexico's first and only
majoring soccer league arena
soccer G. and so it's super
exciting arena soccer and this
this could help our our
organization as well we're one
hundred percent New Mexican
owned and operated
and that you know with with the
the sports authority being there
to help facilitate our sports
organizations from the use all
the way up this is this is super
important and so definitely want
to just put out my support for
this and you know I know
share my SS is doing a great job
in the sports world so kudos to
you Sir and that so yeah so this
one.
Thank you Mr Trujillo.
Madam chair Terry Cole.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Terry Cole I am the president
CEO for the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce we support
the establishment of the new
sports authority one that is
more active one that has a
broader mission and one that
will work to attract all kinds
of new athletic teams leagues
and events to our state this
work will not only create
meaningful job that provides
additional recreational and
leisure opportunities to our
residents and can attract
visitors from elsewhere as a
chamber we talk all the time
about competing economically
with other states for jobs and
new opportunities our sports
economy is one piece of that we
do have some concern about how
exactly the snow Authority will
be governed it's not too clear
to us and we think it should be
governed in a way that makes a
depression and address but
overall it's a great concept and
a helpful effort that we support
thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee.
Thank you miss.
Madam chair Roger will need.
Yes Sir we can okay thank you
good of pleasure to be here by
the way my name is Roger holy
we're going to nonprofit here in
Albuquerque thirty six years
just a little bit about myself
I've been not involved in the
UNM Lobos football rocket longer
serve only church in chapel now
under David dollars right for
pro the networks use medical
accommodating I'm also part of
mountain west wire which the
regional blog site is connected
to USA today so I understand
media exposure and I have
nothing but positive things to
say about this I think this
would be a tremendous asset to
New Mexico I don't think I go
anywhere in the next we're
sports is not light at the high
school level at the collegiate
level this is some positive got
flags along Moscow baseball
tournament R. J. there's just so
many things that that's this can
go into but I'm all for this I
hope hope that gets funded obits
reestablished to govern right
it's something that's a non
political but it's all about
athletes and sports and I think
nothing but positive can come
out of this thank you.
Thank you Mr all in.
Madam chair Dave Simmons.
Mr Simmons we're not hearing
you.
This way if you want to go on to
the next well Mister Simmons
figures out some tech issues
will circle back
So I have dars T. H..
Yes.
Hi I'm sorry I apologize my.
I think I'm having video
problems are in it put the wrong
name of their own during Thomas
this is a short thing I I
probably represent the other
side of being in support of this
but I come from a different
perspective I'm not from New
Mexico but I've been working
with you guys in New Mexico and
specifically this year we're
gonna be working for the second
year with the Connie Mack World
Series which is in New Mexico
that for the last fifty six
years what makes this unique is
and where this fits in just with
everything that you guys have
said.
Yes this year we were able to
bring CBS sports to broadcast
this in the broadcast this
the idea though is that it takes
a lot to get them to come in to
to do something like this and by
having a sports authority you
have the ability to attract
certain opportunities you
normally wouldn't get and the
agreement we have right now with
CVS that we're looking at is for
three years to come come here
and do more so we're hoping that
this this opens provides a whole
new opportunity for bringing new
content out of state Mexico and
and sharing it with the rest the
country especially when it comes
to amateur sports because
without organizations and
without
stated foundations like this
with the sports authority in the
state you just don't attract
that kind of business and you
couple that with the New Mexico
film credit that kind of thing
in that attracts both media and
your and and the sports idea and
and I like with the last you
said about the fact this is a
very a political type thing
everybody everybody gets to have
a common it's a commonplace and
in sports and I think you guys
have a beautiful state I love
being out there working and I
think this is an incredible
opportunity scope to get this
done.
Thank you Mr Thomas.
Share this the title is one nine
one five five.
Please introduce yourself but
give us your testimony.
In person.
One nine one five five we are
not hearing you you might need
to and you yourself.
Madam chair.
Yes this is not one one nine one
one five this is Jason Weaks
asked me to and you.
All right Mister weeks you're
up.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee Jason Weaks racial
this for New Mexico hospitality
association
sports tourism is well
established in other states and
growing here in and we can do to
help facilitate that emerging
industry is something that is
important to do for the state
and the diversification of our
economy tourism the huge part of
the economy already and should
be a bigger part so we
appreciate this bill I think the
spots for bring it forward and
want to support this legislation
thank you.
Thank you.
This month I just.
Let's try to see if they've
Semans.
Number.
Hi this is Dave Simmons are you
hearing me yes Mr Simmons.
I am the president and owner of
a regard roofing and solar we
have fifty five employees here
in Albuquerque.
The last five years we have
removed eighty three restaurants
and hotels motels.
So.
I am speaking in favor of one
thirty four.
Because I believe it's strictly
economic development yes there
are great sports events here in
town and there could be a lot
more across the state.
But this helps my clients
restaurants and motels do better
and they'll buy more routes.
So I'm speaking to the economic
development so please pass the
bill.
Thank you Mr Simmons.
One nine one five I can unmute.
For for.
Well.
Sh one nine nine one nine one
five five.
You apparently.
Please introduce yourself and
give us your testimony my name
is Ben and I'm here for the
banking.
Thank you Mr how the then we're
going to move you out of the
panelists presentation and we'll
call you back raise your hand
when we are on the bill house
bill seventy five okay we are
now doing house bill one thirty
four.
And there seem to be some
testimony from room three one
seven.
And.
Care.
Great.
That you all had a great.
Estimate that very.
Good afternoon madam chair can
you hear me yes Sir we can
please introduce yourself thank
you so much madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Steven hi yes I'm aware of clerk
of the house of representatives.
I became very interested.
In the economy World Series the
number years ago and and.
What brings many many tourists
to New Mexico and many families
that spend entire vacations
here.
When I heard the representative
of my answers but is being back
in hoping to bring back the.
Our
fiscal support for the New
Mexico finance authority I
contacted him and let him know
that I am totally in support.
Of what that would do for New
Mexico and bringing back.
Literally thousands of people to
New Mexico for all kinds of
supports.
Clean industry these the legal
lot of money in the state of New
Mexico and I appreciate you
madam chair of this committee
taking my testimony today I
strongly support The New Mexico
right now dori thank you so
much.
Thank you Mr RDS is there
additional testimony from room
three seventeen.
Right now there is here
committee no more money.
Thank you.
Madam chair we have one left in
the the attendees Mr Steve
Davis.
Steve Davis.
Yes can you hear me.
Yes.
Welcome Mr Davis.
Well good afternoon first of all
Steve I'm Steve Davis program
that owner program that works
and gentleman Thomas your
testimony from him we're working
with them.
To go to we did the World Series
last year and proview those like
seven hundred eight hundred
bands are here in this little
something this much needed for
the state of New Mexico to get
more.
More sports.
In the state of New Mexico or
lose a lot of money that goes
out of state because we're not
we're promoting the athletes and
use our resources to bring more.
Programs to stay in New Mexico.
And so I approve this.
Bill one thirty fourth.
Thank you Mr Davis.
All right.
That is public testimony in
favor of the house bill one
thirty four there's a couple
more.
R. three more hands have
appeared all right Amy eight
Pullman.
Joe o'neill.
Mr o'neill.
Okay that's.
We'll go back to Mr o'neill
David Solomon.
Yes thank you for having me.
David Solomon I am a director
for a soccer club I'm in
Albuquerque but we have athletes
all over the state and I can
tell you that I support this
wholeheartedly two weeks ago I
got back from a trip and I can
tell you that I had twenty
families travel to Phoenix.
my cost for about.
Eight hundred nine hundred
dollars then because my my food
and my hotel and so we probably
had.
To probably a hundred and ten
families the travels and so
again we have to travel to
Arizona Las Vegas in Texas
because we can't get the
tournament draw that we get that
those states are getting
currently because the support
just isn't there so I
wholeheartedly support this
we have a great.
Hotels create menus
it is time to before thinking
for the kids.
Thank you Mr Solomon Mr o'neill.
o'neill.
We are not here you you might
need to and you your cell.
All right.
Mr I'm sorry we can't hear you.
And I apologize madam chair I've
I've tried to mute but
unfortunately I have been able
unable to thank.
At six feet all right I can do
is ask.
Well we have one more hand
raised Mr Dick Johnson in the
attendee list.
I have promoted.
Mr Johnson.
Everybody.
This is Dick Johnson the past
present Mexico sports hall of
fame.
We back this bill whole
heartedly.
Two fold reason to also that I
was a member of the board that
help from the Coleman vision
tournament for over twenty years
the women's professional
tournament which we no longer
have.
there is a lot of interest in
doing that turn it back good day
women's or men's tournament back
with our oral turned over
seventy five thousand some of
the top players in the world
played into and others a lot of
interest for that
would be very excited to a.
To have the.
Mexico sports authority come
back wholeheartedly thank you so
much for your time.
Thank you Mr Johnson let's give
Mr o'neill one more tribe Mr
o'neill would you like to and
you yourself.
And I am sorry Mr o'neill we
seem to be having technical
difficulties we are not able to
hear you
let's try.
Going opposition.
Is there anyone in the attendee
room and the attendee list or in
room three seventeen you would
like to speak in opposition to
house bill one three four the
sports authority.
Please raise your hands.
If you would like to speak in
opposition.
And then we'll go back to the
sponsor share my sense.
Thank you very much
if I may take the liberty of Mr
Joe Neal is the.
One of the owners of one oh one
point seven the team that yes
pan sports radio station in
Albuquerque ago statewide and
incidentally is up brother who
who we lost this past year his
brother Brian o'neill was one of
the directors of the esports
Authority back in the day so
we're really happy that that Joe
Neal jumped on the soon madam
chair there is a of the tourism
the W. secretary.
Worked on an amendment what I
did with the statue was just
kind of kind of change some
wording and kind of brought in
the the perspective the tourism
department has amendments to to
my bill which amends the statute
and I like to preserve.
If we could move for discussion
I can present that amendment.
Thank you Mr chairman I have a
motion to discuss the amendment.
Move the amendment for
discussion thank you and it's up
there several members this one
is a point to to to.
Three zero three point one two
two two three zero three point
one.
And by the folks listening at
home we have a.
The shared file where we you
know we go paperless a shared
file where we grab amendments
from up from our virtual desk
and it's at that second from the
bottom second from the bottom to
two to three oh three point one.
And there's one she.
Let's give everyone a second
pull it up and I'm looking for a
second moving for discussion
the.
Thank.
Thank you thank you thank you.
All right thank I think everyone
has that if you would please
let's discuss that amendment.
Thank you madam chair so it up.
It strikes some of the the
proposed changes and in my bill
goes back to the original bill
with.
With certain exceptions it it
shrinks the the committee from
twenty five members.
Yes twenty five public members
to US six so if you look on a
paragraph eighteen.
Correct paragraph eighteen
online I'm sorry on page three.
Strike line twelve through
twenty five and inserted into
their of six we're gonna change
that
two nine two two insert in lieu
thereof nine.
And and the amendment just kind
of clarifies the duties
modernizes the help smart
continue to modernize the
statute and takes takes away
some support for this language
in the bill and with that will
stand for questions.
All right that we're looking at
point two two two three a three
point one correct correct with
one with one simple word change
and paragraph eighteen that
moment I'm proposing now is is a
in lieu thereof nine public
members more nine.
Districts.
Madam travel to the action of
the amendment.
That is the option of the
amendment as amended a second.
And the second was from
Representative their nonsense.
Chair if I may Representative
Martinez that includes nine
correct the nine member board.
Yes yes madam chair Mister thank
you.
Discussion on this.
For any opposition to.
Adopting the amendments.
With a nine member board.
Saying no opposition you have an
amended bill thank you madam
chair with that will stand for
questions.
Thank you.
Many.
Madam chair when appropriate I
move the do passes amended.
But appropriate I second.
Thank you representative will
hold that for seconds.
She.
At W. secretary
sponsored did you have that W.
secretary was discussing
amendments earlier and I held
are off would you like to do
that now.
I think that was what I
presented chair.
Thank you madam chair all the
Division programs aligned with
the amendments are there before
you we are looking to create
consistency across all the
programs in the tourism
department and I know
Representative you had a
question for me prior to this
hearing with regard to that
number
so I'm probably may have to get
back to you on that but an odd
number of make sense I would
just want to make sure that we
have consistency across all of
our commissions and authorities
within the agency.
Thank you W. secretary.
We have a.
Motion FOR do passes amended
that has been seconded agency
Montoya would you call the roll
on house bill one thirty four do
passed as amended if I if I may
madam chair apologies
a committee substitute is being
typed up as we speak we may be
able that we may have it in
front of us by the time the
public banking bill is done.
or if I would done it I think
one or two times before it the
committee's comfortable of
moving.
The committee some of our even
though we don't have it in front
of us the committee said would
incorporate the amendment
because there it is.
Multiple paragraphs but I'll
defer to the committee thank.
Representative said that the.
Madam I'm sorry I did have a
question is my career my hand
today on it is adjacent to that
so we want to.
You know finish the conversation
twenty seven hundred and eight.
Let's have your discussion now
may affect the committee set up
I am just curious I I did see
that there was another amendment
that was on the table about
adding
you order representation and
others was that also included in
this ammendment on that's
currently limited from through.
The agency where you are muted
I'm Madam chair of center set up
though no that was my planned
amendment given the some of the
advice we got from the from the
F. I. R. I put in little league
baseball but I the clerk to the
put in soccer football swimming
things of that nature so it was
getting a little too convoluted
so.
I'm we took the direction of the
W. secretary and just created a
nine member board with no.
Specificity they are no specific
restrictions but but the
department is cognisant of.
Of of of my wishes and and and
having a broad based boards.
Great thank you.
Okay Mister chair we're gonna
pocket the motion and.
Circle back and see if we have a
committee set up after the third
bill today we should get it at
that point we'll take action on
this two passed if we need to
thank you very much.
Thank you and back to you Mr
chair.
All right thank you committee on
of all members of and thanks for
the patience of the folks in the
attendee room we wanted to
public banking last so that so
that no one's in any hurry or
there's no cut off time now will
here house bill seventy two let
me a text Representative McQueen
he's in a.
Is it House Judiciary and so we
need him to.
To come over to house commerce.
space ticket gross receipts.
Representative McQueen
Representative Harper.
Let me text Representative
Harper Representative Harper if
you're in the end to end
attendee room.
Please
please raise your hand.
And they are both there of the
testing Representative Harper is
in a claim please raise your
hand will move you over to the.
Up on the Dyess.
For the room.
The table facing the diets.
So for the folks waiting on the
public banking this this hearing
will pry last about three
o'clock three fifteen maybe.
And then we'll hear up we'll
take the lengthy public comment
on the public banking act and
then now.
You know during that hearing.
I stare at you stated that you
solve Representative McQueen
somebody somebody said they did
I personally did not see his
name I did his hand is raised.
Wonderful if you could please
move on.
Matthew McQueen.
great welcome Representative
Harper Representative McQueen
house bill seventy two you have
the floor.
Do we need any expert witnesses
brought in on your behalf.
Percent minus the rest is in
might have panelists are might
just be allowed to speak you're
a panelist without without
video.
We can see your name and we can
hear you but we cannot see you
you are a panelist on our side.
Okay now I think I'm a panelists
now you're panelists with video
wonderful welcome Representative
McQueen.
Thank you Representative
Maestas.
Yes this numbers maybe house
bill seventy two is not a new
tax.
It's an existing tax ever
clarifying.
So the reason I just as you I
I'm sure you're all familiar
with the spaceport.
In the substantial investment
that the state of New Mexico and
local communities have in that
property a few years ago there
was an exemption passed to
exempt
wanting operating in recovering
space vehicles are payloads.
In anonymous.
Tax Year.
A request to the revenue ruling
from the state taxation and
revenue department and in a
ruling for twenty dash nineteen
dash one which was issued in
June of twenty nineteen the
state taxation and revenue
department determined that
people were basically payloads.
In I personally don't think
that's correct and I think this
is an activity that.
Normally would be taxed should
be taxed
and this is part of why I think
the state invested in.
over two million dollars in the
spaceport was to generate
economic activity.
In this particular act now
economic activity if the ticket
sales are not taxed.
It's it's pretty big how it's
gonna have a beneficial impact
in New Mexico because I I think
the majority these tickets will
be sold to people outside the
state it's unclear how long they
will stay in New Mexico.
and certainly I would expect
that the year their overall
spending in New Mexico.
is gonna be far less than the
price of the ticket the I think
the ticket started out at two
hundred thousand dollars each I
think there are currently four
hundred fifty thousand dollars
each so you can imagine what I
don't know what the tax rate is
but six or seven percent of that
mixed.
Would be a you know at least
some return to the state of New
Mexico.
Representative chair my SS I saw
Representative Harper walking
down the hallway he looked like
he was you on this phone I would
love to defer to him the for him
to make if you were comments.
Chairman can you hear me yes we
can hear you.
Thank you madam projects for the
zoom on the phone but
Yeah I appreciate the
opportunity present house bill
seventy two before you today and
it's a it's an interesting bill
I think chairman we did a great
job comes explain the background
why we're here I agree it's a
little strange to a rule that
people are payload.
and going back and doing some
homework on this very much this
was not the intent of the
legislature may pass that
legislation people were never
considered to be
payload when that was passed and
signed into law.
but I guess are the two things I
would share with the committee
why I think this is an important
going west on on this.
first.
It's good tax policy.
We.
When you look at what our
elements of the tax policy
neutrality adequacy
You know being able to be
administered these kinds of
things.
When you look at good principles
of tax policy one is that you
tax was actually everything.
And you tax it at a low rate.
And this allows for
the.
Rents for aberrations economy we
have government to winners and
losers and some people pay more
taxes paid last so so I strongly
believe we should be taxed
everything doing a low rate.
but secondly and and I think
this is even more important
you know the New Mexico
taxpayers have paid I believe
was two hundred twenty million
for spaceport.
And for many years rate.
Ten million dollars a year in
maintenance and upkeep costs I
think now we have partnering and
and some of that cost is
recovered I'm grateful for that
but we are still paying four
million dollars a year.
In other chief of staff and
maintenance of the spaceport and
and I think it's it's time for
us to see a little bit of return
on that investment this was
gonna be a big economic
I'm in our economy.
So I I I think those who are
going to be purchasing these
tickets
I don't think it will hurt them
to pay an extra seven
point eight percent part we was
the tax rate there
I don't think it's gonna hurt
Senator in extra so point eight
percent knowing that that's
going to go to the communities
that really a sacrifice the most
especially
go back county of those that are
here at who are people signed on
for a an increase in the gross
receipts tax the to fund this
work
I think it makes sense that we
would help them
receive a little bit back on
that yes.
So that.
Thank you for the opportunity
and
also I'll turn it back over you.
Representative McQueen did you
have anything you want to add or
any expert witnesses wanted to
speak.
Thank you madam chair we don't
have any expert witnesses with
us today I would like to just
add one thing.
You know I understand what the
state made a decision to make a
substantial investment in this
and it's it's it's intended to
be economic development.
It strikes me as.
Well it perplexes me let me say
that way that we would invest
over two hundred million dollars
in building trust that facility.
Then also decide that the
activity for which the facility
was intended needed to operate
tax free.
I I just you know at some point
there's we gotta get back around
to the Economic Development
portion of this project in in
and I don't think this was
intended as Representative
Harper said to exclude of what
we call space tourism.
so we're just trying to clarify
that takes taxation revenue
department
Revenue really.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative.
Committee.
So I'm college as we need to do
public testimony let me be clear
our public testimony we have a
lot of attendees here for the
public bank bill which is how
seventy five this afternoon
right now we are on house bill
seventy two.
Which is.
Taxing.
Or clarifying attacks around the
space tourism.
And if you are here to speak in
favor of house bill seventy two
please raise your hand in the
attendee wrote.
If you are here to speak in
favor of house bill seventy two.
Please raise your hand and Miss
Montoya please pull people in
and announce their names.
All guessing.
Thank you.
Can you hear me yes welcome Mr
guessing.
My name's Paul guessing on
presence of the Rio Grande
foundation were free market
policy research think tank in
Albuquerque dealing with
policies all across the state
New Mexico we've long been
concerned by the finances both
spaceport America and its
various tendons this legislation
seeks to clarify that receipts
from tickets sold for passenger
spaceflight are indeed subject
to the G. R. T. and gross
receipts tax receipt in the
amount of deductions must be
reported to the tax and revenue
department at Rio Grande
foundation we're not.
Big fans of new or higher taxes
but when the taxation and
revenue department uses overly
broad definition of tax
deduction for launching space
vehicles by tenants the state
subsidized so facility we
believe that the legislature
must clarify the intent of their
laws this legislation would
provide clarification to taxed
Rabb the ticket sales for
passenger space flight our
subjects G. R. T. those are tax
receipt should be distributed to
state local governments for that
reason we support this
legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr guessing.
Madam chair we have Paul Gibson.
Yes thank you madam chair and
committee members and thank you
for bringing this bill forward
Representative McQueen
it just seems absolutely I'm non
break no no brainer that you
would want to support this to a.
Clarification.
Four hundred thousand dollars a
ticket would mean thirty
thousand dollars G. R. T.
anybody with four hundred
thousand dollars to go into our
space is not going to balk at
thirty thousand dollars going to
the state government and the
state is already invested over
two hundred million dollars she
continues to invest money in
this why are we subsidizing
flights into outer space by
ultra wealthy individuals I
support this bill thank you very
much.
Thank you Mr get sent.
Madam chair we have page nine.
Members of the committee my name
is Paige night with New Mexico
voices for children here to
support house bill seventy two I
want to thank the sponsors for
introducing this bill because it
is sensible tax policy given
that it broadens the base for
the G. R. T. by simply
clarifying a service that should
indeed be taxed and also
improves adequacy and equity in
our tax code with the tickets
for commercial space flights
currently at nearly half a
million dollars consumers are
well see here and they can
afford to pay this tax and
contribute to the financial well
being of local communities they
do not need an incentive to
purchase tickets as demand is
showing to be stronger ready so
thank you for your time and
please do passed house bill
seventy two.
Thank you Mr.
Madam chair we do not have
anybody in room three seventeen.
Thank you for your do we have
anyone in the attendee list who
would like to speak in
opposition to house bill seventy
two.
Clarification of taxation around
space tourism in opposition to
house bill seventy two.
All right miss Montoya I see a
few folks please bring them in
and then out them.
Thank you madam chair I was also
just notified that some people
walked into room three seventeen
right as we made that
announcement.
and I favor let's finish the in
favor please go to room three
seventeen and have those folks
introduce themselves.
Former U. R..
Hello madam chair members of the
committee of Charles good marker
R. I do speaking today hoping
that you will vote for this bill
I do work with New Mexico voices
for children you heard from
pages an expert on the bill
I just say that the the equity
issue is so glaring here and I
commend the both the Sanchez for
sponsoring it this bill house
there's.
I would just be unbelievable to
me that that that people paying
that much money for take it.
To space would not have to pay a
tax to the state of New Mexico
we have to so many other common.
Common everyday exchanges thank
you very much.
Thank you Mr Walker is there
other testimony from room three
seventeen.
No madam chairwoman berry now
many more speaker during the
seventy members thank you they
were going to the zoom attendee
list and remember we are on
opposition to house bill seventy
two.
Madam chair we have W. more.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me.
Yes miss more welcome thank you
give me more president and CEO
of the greater Las Cruces
chamber of commerce and on
Friday of this week we passed a
resolution in opposition to
house bill seventy two virgin
galactic has been here in our
state since two thousand nine
have contributed highly and has
a proven record of commitment we
feel that passage of this bill
would be detrimental to a
critical growth industry in our
region and state New Mexico will
be the only one of the few space
states not to have this that
deduction but if at the bottom
of the need for space
competitive now is not the time
to deter commercial investment
in the state thank you madam
chair committee members.
Thank you Mr mark.
Madam chair we have Casey and
bladder they're on.
Hi there.
I am invited to ride and I need
new space New Mexico.
Which is eight organization are
built to grow the space industry
New Mexico we represent over a
hundred space companies that are
operating in the state and
We are we do oppose this
legislation right now the you
know the commercial space
industry is set to is expected
to grow over three point three
trillion over the next twenty
years that's an eight hundred
percent increase in our other
states such as California
Florida Colorado have tax
provisions chair track and
retain the aerospace company
companies right now virgin
galactic has been committed to
New Mexico they've moved
operations they've been
employing hundreds of people
high skilled jobs and spending
tens of millions in capital
expenditures and basically
funding the gross receipts tax
from their operations so we just
were told you know governor
Lujan twenty twenty two
strategic plan identified
aerospace industry the critical
growth industry and she talked
about making this the business
friendly state and so basically
if legislation like this goes
through work continues to tax
the growth of the state industry
then we will be watching this
huge expansion in the commercial
space global.
Growth from our neighboring
states you know we need to be
part of the solution to make
this a business friendly state
and so we don't need to be taxes
that are going to help grow this
industry thank you.
Thank you.
Madam chair Jennifer whether.
Good afternoon madam chair and
committee members my name is
Jennifer Weber and I am here on
behalf of the New Mexico chamber
of commerce in opposition to
house bill seventy two the
chamber's recent economic
competitiveness analysis driving
New Mexico's future identified
four key economic
competitiveness factors business
climate workforce in education
infrastructure and innovation
capacity New Mexico must take
better advantage of the state's
innovation assets including
emerging technologies such as
biased science space and
alternative energy and if you
just heard the governor's twenty
twenty two strategic plan
identifies the aerospace
industry as a critical growth
industry this industry provides
a strong technology industrial
base for the state high paying
jobs and attracts other business
to the state.
Policies policy should be put in
place to encourage growth and
innovation not stifle it for
these reasons we ask that you do
not move house bill seventy two
thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Adam chair and walk ins.
Ms Watkins please you yourself
we're not hearing you.
This month I have go ahead and
call in the next.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
Amazing thank you I do not know
how to turn my video on so and
projects for the glamour shot
you get you all are seeing but
thank you madam chair at the
opportunity to speak my name is
Theresa Bella I'm the VP of
government affairs and research
operations for virgin galactic
I'm also a newly minted
astronaut having flown to space
from right here in New Mexico.
The exemption H. B. seventy two
seeks to eliminate diminishes
the state of New Mexico as a
competitive state to do business
in the original exemption was
one of the factors considered by
the G. in choosing Mexico as our
commercial base of operations HB
seventy two we'll see New Mexico
fall behind states that have tax
provisions and incentives to
attract and retain aerospace
companies like us.
Finally we are not a tax exempt
company having paid millions in
taxes since we came to the
region two thousand nine and
this is not a tax on consumers
but attacks on the company
bringing business and jobs to
the state we currently employed
more than a hundred eighty
people salaries are paid above
state averages making these
highly paid hi tech highly
skilled jobs as our continue and
as our company continues to grow
with plans to support four
hundred space flights per year
we expect to hire many many more
people.
Any future ask not whether
they're here I work for them as
a scientist conducting research
or as an educator will come with
our families and our friends and
our colleagues and we spending a
week or more in the state.
And since twenty fifteen we
spent more than fifty five
million in the state building
operations we use over hundreds
in need seventy five New Mexico
suppliers no long term plan
seeks to expand our
infrastructure operations but
this is about more than one
company this bill sends the
wrong message to other companies
in any industry looking to
locate and do business in the
state and we should not deter
commercial investment in the
state and in our future.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Madam chair Terry Cole.
Madam chair
my name is Terry Cole and I am
the president CEO of the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
I stumbled there for bad I was
trying to
release my video but I can't at
any rate we are stand in
opposition to the bill today
madam chair we promised as a
state to keep our G. R. T. off
of spaceflight activities
believing for years.
This is a very competitive
industry one that's relatively
new growing and fragile and we
don't think we need to add G. R.
T. on space flight fares right
now it's not as though this
legislation itself needs a lot
of money one way or the other
but it does send a signal
regardless and we need to get
activity at the spaceport slowly
left off first we are encouraged
the committee members to oppose
the bill today and I appreciate
being able to speak thank you.
Thank you miss.
Madam chair we have Jason Weaks.
Thank you madam chair members of
communities Jason Weaks
registered lobbyists for the
Albuquerque Hispanic chamber of
commerce and New Mexico
hospitality association both
organizations stand in
opposition to this legislation
really this is about creating a
predictable tax structure that
we stand by and sit in New
Mexico if we remove this
Will be as as others have said
one of the only states that
engages in losses and and space
tourism that imposes a tax like
this on those operations we want
to create predictability let
this nascent industry get off
the ground thank you concert
massive benefits to our state's
economy both in terms of the
hospitality dollars generated
and other point of economic
development for those reasons we
stand in support thank I mean
opposition thank you.
Thank you Mr waste.
No more opposition in the
attendee brown is there anyone
who wishes to speak in
opposition in room three
seventeen.
Madam chair currently we have no
one in room three seventeen but
we didn't have to more join us
and.
The attendee panel.
All right please bring.
Marco Gonzales.
A good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee Marco
Gonzales and the rest of this
for virgin galactic I don't have
anything to add from what the
other side but I did want to
mention to the committee that I
was authorized to say if they
didn't get on that The New
Mexico spaceport ambassadors
also opposes legislation for the
reasons stated and also the
space states associations in
opposition thank you madam chair
members of the committee.
Thank you Mr Gonzalez.
Madam chair and walk in the
park.
Thank you madam chair I hope my
that goal difficulties have been
overcome and you can now hear me
is that correct we can miss
Watkins please thank.
I think chairman specific and
what fans I live in Santa Fe
I've been a member of
ambassadors FOR spaceport
America since the beginning it
was founded to promote the
growth of New Mexico's aerospace
industry many states are
desperately trying to take
advantage of the medic growth in
the space industry these those
states with existing space space
sectors are increasing the tax
and other incentives they are
providing to the space industry
because make no mistake madam
chair committee members space is
the future there will be space
planes there will be increasing
space commercial business
opportunities this is absolutely
the wrong time for any
disincentive to growing the
space industry in New Mexico we
should rather be increasing our
efforts to grow that industry
and the support the growth of
spaceport for that reason I
stand in opposition to this bill
thank you so much.
Thank you miss Walken's.
And Mr chair you are here would
you like to take the question to
the committee.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the public.
Anything else Representative
McQueen written our proposal
back to committee.
Thank you chairman SS just to
respond to a couple points I
want to make it clear that we're
not taking away in exemption.
It was never granted.
In the the statute that is in
place which remains in place.
Exempts
launching.
I bring recovering space
vehicles in payloads.
It was not intended to put
passengers.
Here do interpreted payloads
include passengers were simply
clarifying that so we're not
we're not taking something away.
That was granted.
In I appreciate you know the the
economic development incentives
behind the space for I would be
interested in knowing more
about.
The economic activity that's
being claimed I I know that a
virgin galactic claimed a
hundred eighty employees I would
love to know how many of those
are in New Mexico thank you Matt
Mr chair.
Thank you Representative McQueen
Representative Harper members of
the committee.
Mr chair can you hear me.
That part of Culbert Mr Chairman
I move to table.
I'm not gonna accept that that
motion at this time because
there I believe there is some
debate but I will go back to.
Once debate is concluded.
That is a non debatable motion
but it and and you can use it to
cut off debate but.
It is usually more talkative
than than we are right now
members of the committee.
Okay great I have a few comments
so anyway I want to just thank
the representative for bringing
this forward and and for the
clarity.
Because the bill is strangely
worded it doesn't specifically
exclude.
So million passengers it it uses
the word up payload so also my
payload speech in a sector will
go back to committee
representative part of.
Mr Chairman thank you so much
for me it's more of a COVID I
just have some more room with
the bill I am always and I can
I'm always try to be consistent
and and where I stand when it
comes to legislation that that
is proposed I'm not a huge fan
of the spaceport I think think
everybody knows that I've served
for ten years I've I've never
understood why we have it
but the same time you know we
made a deal where this L..
Thank.
we need to deal with
You know the individual is
before I was elected it was
before my time I had no say in
that I I don't appreciate it I
don't like it but the same time
this was a promise made you know
we had bills that have that we
have done you know changing the
the corporate corporate tax
structure back in all of these
things and if we continue to be
as a state where all of a sudden
you know we're saying one thing
and then we're going back on our
word we're not going to be a
business family state and that's
my biggest concern with this
legislation I'm I'm not the
biggest fan of the spaceport
Dowell Representative Dow I know
is on the other side of that.
But I just don't like as not
keeping our word is a state and
that is my biggest concern and
so it's more of just a comment
chairman then a question thank
you.
Thank you Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative McQueen and
Representative Harper and and I
thought you know the spaceport
was built before my time and
perhaps if I would have been in
the legislature I've I would
have voted no I definitely was a
citizen in Sierra County when
these deals are made and at that
time you know my work is the
final populations I was so so
disappointed to see how many tax
exemptions were given I don't
think was fair and I thought
about rich people flying into
space and and I didn't think it
was fair but it is the deal that
was made it was intentional it
was transparent and if that
Richardson and folks for that
we're here they would say that
that was their intent it was
their intent I remember the
community conversations this is
the way it was passed and so I'm
I'm a huge fan of the space
industry and our space port is
part of that that two hundred
fifty dollar investment was made
long before I think anybody on
this committee's time but it was
an investment that was made we
do have a capital investment it
happens to be an investment that
lends itself to us being part of
the fastest growing economy in
the world in the world and we
listen to people speak about why
they're opposing this bill and
for me it's as simple as what
Representative Fajardo said we
kept our word and the message
that will go out around the
world is that New Mexico has no
stable environment environment
for business that we change our
commitments in the middle of
investments in the middle of
industry research and
development and and and it's
it's a bad practice for us one
of the things that is keeping us
from going as a state is are
inconsistent with our regulatory
environment people need a
reliable steady regulatory
environment so they can make
investments in the state and
this will definitely spend send
the wrong message to the folks
who are investing billions I
like five hundred billion
dollars a year in the new space
industry and I know just because
it's.
In my backyard by the way most
of these jobs are in Los crucis
they are not in truth or
consequences but you asked there
the one hundred eighty employees
a virgin and I'm I'm I'm not
even like a huge virgin van but
they are New Mexico based
employees.
And those are the base pay I
think it's I heard it was around
sixty thousand dollars with
benefits they have not only that
but the the the fiscal impact
report.
And I'm not defending virgin
trust me and I I wish the
contracts that were put in
agreement with virgin and the
state New Mexico were different
we were here when it happened
but I know that they that's a
hundred eighty highly skilled
jobs in the state of New Mexico
they've spent thirty million
dollars in capital expenditures
and twenty five million dollars
and supplier payments at
dispatch just contracts with New
Mexico suppliers and so the
fiscal impact report is not
quite accurate or in the number
of jobs and that they've created
for our state and anchor thank
Senate so it's it's hard it's
hard for me to be here
justifying version because we've
made a huge investment in space
port but it's more about just
keeping our word and letting
people know that we're open for
business and I sure hope that
this bill doesn't move forward
because it's just the wrong
message for us to be sending out
to folks that are ready to send
some Destry thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Representative added
on this.
You Mr chair
I see just have one question for
either one of the sponsors is
how many of the other
commercial.
The space point in the nation
impose a tax on the space
flight.
Do you.
Representative McQueen do you by
any chance have an answer for
that.
Mr chair Senator and and as I do
not know the answer to.
All of
and
then as I might be able to
answer that.
so my understanding is that to
date there are none that charge
attacks but we also need to
recall in New Mexico.
has a different tax structure
other states and maybe three on
that I just wanna say.
All of you who know me know that
I am a huge.
Science space nerd right I mean
I can quote you Star Trek to
from start to finish work for
work right.
I my news feed my Google news
feed is splattered with stuff
about SpaceX and I am so excited
that in my lifetime request
people on March.
I love the space industry and
also anyone anyone would argue
differently.
I thank you.
The statements that were made
about keeping a promise.
And we're going back on a
promise.
Are not correct those of you who
knew
The efforts that tax reform our
tax code
striking out every exemption
action credit.
I made a point to lead and those
that had been made promises to
not pull the rug out from under
them and put a crazy long likes
fifty your sunset on right.
what's happened here.
Is this this was not a promise
made this was not an
understanding look at the timing
of this tax and Revenue
Department ruling.
Was two thousand nineteen.
Right now when the spaceport was
product you know what I want and
all this happened in the early
two thousands.
and and I know chairman Maestas
is talking about we're payload
we don't put the work payload.
Payload is in our state.
exemption our state statutes
referring to actual rocket
payloads.
To have some taxpayer we don't
know who officially passed the
tax revenue department to make a
ruling essentially.
That would allow passengers to
be considered payload I I first
I think it's kind of a census
that I would be considered a
rate.
so if anything the timing of
this and the way that the
executive kind of went around
the legislature should give us
all pause understand this was
not approx.
so I understand your question
was of Hernandez that we would
become the first state to do
this compared to the other
states that's a fair question I
understand your point.
But this is I'm not going back
on a promise and if any services
the executive.
I am probably going around the
legislature and the should have
been a legislative question.
I I appreciate your answer
My question was not so much
about the promises made because
I didn't I'll be honest I didn't
get that far into.
Into the space for when I was
researching misspelled my mic my
worry is is that we have spent
so much money on building the
spaceport and now we're right at
the cost of you know actually
having space flight.
The space flight for people to
come spend a lot of money and.
Texas has you know blue origin
and Denver's getting ready to
open their spaceport and if we
impose all of a sudden G. R. T.
on this tour is tourism space
flight then we are once again
putting ourselves behind the
states that is not what I am
worried about so I appreciate
your answer
From both of you thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you Representative
Hernandez anyone else
from the committee thank you
once again Representative says
so as I was saying a minute
some.
Someone was asking me that a
will was was it a promise made
by state government or was it
not the gentleman is correct
Representative Harper the
statutes uses the word pay low.
And payload is exempt from tax.
The department of taxation
revenue interpreted hello to
equal passengers and that's been
the law and that's essentially a
commitment so to speak by state
government whether it's
executive legislative or
whomever I don't know when that
interpretation was made what was
made back in over two thousand
five two thousand six or whether
was made you know in two
thousand fifteen sixteen when
the when the flight started.
to come to fruition but that's
the situation we have now
this is a highly highly
competitive industry it's a
cutting edge industries into
shows the forward thinking of.
The folks that that that
invested in in the spaceport
that invested in in in the in
the development this private
sector because it's it's virgin
galactic isn't the only company
you know so so I'm torn between
taxing everything.
Which I think is fundamentally
good tax policy and maintaining
a governmental commitment so as
to not.
To send the right message to all
businesses that that you know
that this is the place to invest
is the place to that the state
government provide stability and
predictability for for business
investment I think that at this
juncture of price leading toward
toward the latter policy.
You know argument I think that
if and when this is taxed I
think we should consider I don't
think it's time we now
representatives will do respect
I think when and if we do taxed
passengers it can be it can be
phased in we got to ask
ourselves what about the local
tax keep in mind virgin galactic
for example is taxed in Dona ana
county.
R. and the local folks who would
directly benefit from this tax
are are asking us not to do this
so there on the ground they know
this economy better than we do
they know the tourists that are
flying with their families what
not and whether the tax would
would lead to less.
I don't necessarily believe in
and less ticket sales but maybe
the delegation of these.
Of these passengers would would
be less I don't know that but
also we should consider also an
excise tax.
I know that my monopoly board up
has a luxury tax some of the
stuff they of monopoly board of
the state of New Mexico does not
have a luxury tax but we have
excise taxes in which hot higher
and commodities are less for
example vehicles or or four
percent things of that nature so
maybe a phase and maybe a
specific excise tax.
But I think the
The the volatility of this
market is such that that I I
just don't wanna going to mess
with it at this at this juncture
members of the committee.
Mr chairman to table.
We're going to forgive me that
there was a table in motion
earlier R. as a partial Culbert
do you is our next six after
tabling motion at this time
representative of dollar except
that as a second with your
permission please call the roll.
Thank you thank you chairman.
Representative Dow.
No.
Yes the table sorry.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes.
Representative gables yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
What's.
Representative Thomson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes.
Representative Serrato.
Yes.
Figueroa.
Chairman my instance.
A yes to table thank you
representatives
The information in the
presentation.
Thank you chairman.
All all right I want to thank
the public's patience with
regards to house bill seventy
five the public banking act.
Representative Roybal Caballero
and Senator Steinborn.
Let's so let's get the let's
take a don't don't and keep the
webcast going we're gonna take a
two minute
Recessed.
To get R. Sanchez in the room.
So we have a the committee
substitute for house bill one
thirty four we'll get that on I.
as quickly as we can.
I just want to if you see a Jeff
Steinborn or but these are a
couple of those in my screen
it's purple thanks for raising
your hand risen or locally at
all and then when up Senator
Steinborn raises his hand but
would bring him in and just as a
panels.
So Mister chair all there you
are I I couldn't see myself as
the panelists yet.
Do you hear me.
I sure do welcome okay I just I
don't know what's wrong
There's nothing wrong I just got
your video you're you're here in
the room with us here on can't
okay.
So I don't so you see me but I
don't see you all.
I don't know what you see
Representative but we're we're
live in where webcasting you're
in the you're in as a panelist
good enough picture video.
or we don't have that's what I'm
trying to tell you I'm not on is
the panelists because I can't do
anything with my anything okay
the secretary check your email.
Thank you.
I just thought.
Okay.
Who.
So I don't know if the Senator
is on I know he was trying to
get in.
He'll be on a minute we're in
recess all right I'm sorry okay.
Take a breather.
Mr Chairman I'm here but I don't
see the video option for me
either momentary all righty will
we'll get it squared away we're
in recess for one more minute.
And then the house.
Welcome Senator welcome
Representative Roybal Caballero
and welcome members of the
public to house bill seventy
five the public banking act want
to thank all the emails and
phone calls I've received we're
gonna hear from the sponsors on
the bill we will then take
public comment because of the
amount of public comment we're
gonna restrict folks to a minute
or so I do not shut off the Mike
but when your minute is up
finish your thought and move on
try to make different points
than other speakers because
folks a waited so patiently
we're gonna have the proponents
of the bill or or those in
support of the bill speak first
so for those who want to speak
on the bill would raise your
virtual hands and with that
we'll turn it over to Senator
Collett and Senator Steinborn
welcome.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
committee and thank you to the
public.
So the senator and I are here
again and I will begin and then
Senator on I'll defer to the
senator as as you all know we've
been before this committee and
thank you for your vote in a
positive way to get it out of
committee last session and we've
been
all of us have been watching the
fantastic news about having all
the financial resources that we
do have and we've been blessed
to have right now however
we all also know that recovery
funds will end by mid year and
with the pressures of
alternative fuels and fossil
fuel revenues everything will
begin to decline so this is I
are coming forward with on house
bill seventy five which is an
apt to enact the public banking
act create the public bank of
New Mexico and it creates a
state banking fund as well as
making an appropriation the
concept Mr chair and committee
of having a state public bank is
not new on it we've been in the
legislature before and in fact
in doing a little bit of
research and on the Senator can
help me with details of thank if
need be but I know that there's
been several attempts prior to
myself being here and I think
even prior to the Senator of
bringing forward the public
think that now more than ever
well it makes because of the the
economic conditions that we're
faced with and the fact that we
will be
Around mid mid year it's
anticipated we won't be
experiencing the greatest amount
of resources that we currently
experiencing for a number of
reasons and so that's why this
presentation of this bill makes
timing much more on imperative
for us to move forward in
finding ways to
enhance and increase our
investment capacity and more
importantly than anything Mr
chair is on our resources and so
with that Mr chair I will turn
over my introductory remarks to
the Senator.
Welcome Senator welcome thank
you very much Mr chairman good
to see you could just see the
rest of the committee and.
Mr chairman and I think this
bill is an interesting segue
from the last bill and they have
two things in common which is
that when we created the space
port we realized we need to take
some chances in the state.
We need to create new
opportunities we need to create
economic diversification.
This is an opportunity is a good
idea the public bank Mr chairman
and committee is a big idea New
Mexico to leverage our resources
are funding our public funds for
public benefit in ways that have
been proven through however long
the banking industry existed in
this country and surely they'll
be on this call.
It sure is verifiable this idea
is viable except the difference
is we get to Representative we
get to leverage those funds to
grow our principal to grow are
interested ultimately to carry
out because of purposes and if
if the state of New Mexico I
want to say that the bill it
took a long time to develop the
bill because obviously it's
important that we security
Mexico's resources that there's
checks and balances that there
is transparency there is
prudence see that these funds
are managed by top notch frankly
finance professionals and not
politicians
you know that we share those
concerns but I want to say that
this public banking to know
before you.
Lose all those safeguards it
includes all those ambitions but
it most importantly it yes
things were already doing in New
Mexico today it just does it
differently.
Today New Mexico over the last
few years with this pandemic we
have given I think five hundred
million dollars this bill has
under intent we've given I over
think five hundred million of
the New Mexico finance authority
to make loans mind you not money
that we're getting we're getting
a substantial rate of return on
a we're able to leverage for
additional loans but we're
already we're already in the
business of giving public money
to a public institution of
medical.
We already have a state in this
state that literally invest
billions of dollars with the
public board.
This public bank kind of and it
includes both those ingredients
it we get to make loans although
it's very clear and I think a
piece of tickle to establish is
very clearly to be any it will
not compete with local banks
that will work through local
banks it will not make private
transactions the that's all
delineated in the bill that will
support community landings but
it will be an additional tool
for New Mexico to invest in our
economic development capital our
public capital ultimately our
state and
and it's in in yes it involves a
new idea but it it it does so in
a very measured really small a
relative to the big allies of
funding that we've given in the
last few years to the New Mexico
finance authority so with that
look forward to answering
questions in the debate thank
you Mr.
Mr chair we do have two expert
witnesses will be joining us
today and one is Angela Merker.
And the other is Harold Dixon
okay well you know we should
have got them and to.
Because we have like twenty five
hands up but sorry for the names
of state the names again and
will bring them and.
And our current it's a blue M.
A. M..
Icon okay Mister Kurtz coming in
and who else
here old Dixon.
Mr Harold Ickes and give us a
moment we'll.
Will bring them in another.
While you're doing that Mr chair
may I just add one further point
before we all go to questions
and that is that there's been
throughout the year significant
improvements on this we've
addressed as much as we could in
on addressing all the points or
as many of the points that we
have been questioned about
and this particular piece of
legislation is even further
refined and hopefully includes
those and we you know in my only
point is that the opposite there
has been a great deal of
opposition I would only
encourage that the opposition
pay close attention to the
changes we have made and how we
have addressed their points so
that we don't hear necessarily
and not to close out any
discussion but if there are any
new points of clarity that we
need to offer and we that would
be make this
discussion today much more
helpful I appreciated thank you
Mr chair excellent points what I
introduce your guests and and
you still have the floor okay
thank you Mr chair so at this
point I'll go ahead and call on
Angela record to make a brief
presentation followed by Carol
Dixon.
Please identify yourself when
you're with.
Angela Merkel.
Yes I'm sorry for the technical
issue
Mr chair of the committee
members thank you for this
opportunity to join you today on
the house bill seventy five
I'd like to highlight that
especially over the last year as
the representative noted we've
taken
additional time and
attention to develop of pro
forma the financial business
planning and expanded that
independent and I sent that to
each of the committee members
earlier today that gives
some additional detail about how
this fifty million dollars in
capital can grow into the on.
As much as a hundred just under
thirteen million dollars by that
seven here of the operation of
the bank we really do see that
with this one single
appropriation that we can do
what a bank does creating credit
that expands the
lending opportunities in the
state's finance system to
support stronger economic
development especially in ways
that current programs may not be
fully addressing so I look
forward to your questions later.
Thank you so much miss marker
for your work on this.
I'm Mr Dixon welcome.
Welcome thank you thank you for
having us here today we
appreciate certainly your time
and everything that you.
Put forward in getting the
public banking on the on the
agenda
I am a retired I just retired
recently from as president CEO
the last twenty four years of
state employees credit union and
also served as the chair for the
New Mexico credit union
association.
So look forward to hearing
professionals as well as and
been involved in the committee
for the last couple of years
during this so during this
process so look for your
questions thank you.
Thank you Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Thank you Mr chair we go ahead
and stand for questions.
Wonderful thank you and please
that you're you're experts will
stay in the.
At the table with you so to
speak and we have approximately
twenty five or thirty members of
the public they're going to
speak in favor of this
legislation so what we'll do is
we'll announce your name will
bring you in as a panelist of.
We will you you on our side then
you on mute yourself on your
side you can do the video but
apparently it it takes a while
to do the video so so let's
start you have about a minute or
so
If we up we're not gonna time
you on the screen because then
that kind of dominates the
webcast I'm gonna.
In the.
Me and someone also be timing it
will tell you.
Forty five seconds one minute
you know and then because of
other people's time thank you so
very much Mr Dave we lock
followed by Sally stable.
Mr Whitlock Mister we lock up
we'll get you a moment Mr Sally
sable followed by Elaine Solomon
welcome disable.
Just go to check the audio on
your on your device agency able.
Your unmuted on our end.
Well hang hang tight miss this
Elaine Solomon
I believe I am unmuted can you
hear me we sure can thank you my
name is Elaine Solomon I
appreciate this opportunity I am
a volunteer with the alliance
for local economic prosperity
and I volunteer working for
economic justice and prosperity
in New Mexico for almost two
decades.
Public banking at is is a
conservative bill and I hardly
supported.
This bill is forward thinking
and it is conservative to plan
ahead.
The bill offers a way for more
New Mexico residents to be
successful entrepreneurs and it
is conservative to make full use
of our human resources and
support them.
We have state department heads
who don't have adequate funds to
thirty five.
To fulfill their mission it is
conservative to provide them
with the full support they need.
Clinging to what is familiar is
expensive and we can't afford
that please vote for house bill
seventy five thank you thank you
Sullivan this sable followed by.
Paul Gibson.
Is an attendee.
Missy will we'll go to now
unmute yourself.
There you go.
Good and yourself and say well.
There you go.
I think we can hear you.
All righty no worries was able
Mr Paul Gibson welcome.
Welcome thank you.
Mr chair and committee members I
want to thank the bill's
sponsors for bringing this bill
during the last bill discussion
we heard people comment upon how
New Mexico requires full thank
you bold ideas.
Well in order to fund those bold
bold ideas you need to have
revenue or you need to have
money to invest and the public
bank would provide a great way
of leveraging New Mexico direct
resources in order to make those
investments in bold new ideas of
the bank of New Mexico North
Dakota has been owned and
operated for the benefit of the
people of North Dakota for
ninety eight years and the AP
reports that in twenty seventeen
the bank of North Dakota
recorded its fourteenth
consecutive year of record
profits with a hundred and forty
five billion dollars in net
earnings from north Dakota's
help North Dakota maintain a low
employment rate large state
government budget surpluses
robust network of community
banks and high credit
availability even during
economic Mrs this is something
we need in New Mexico thank you
very much.
Thank you Sir now here from
For now County.
Treasurer Nancy Bierce welcomes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Nancy
person I am Bernalillo county
treasurer as well as chair of
the New Mexico counties
treasures of Philly at
representing all thirty three
county treasurer's.
at this time I can say we I
support our house bill seventy
five.
And while the affiliate has not
been able to come together to
vote on that so I have the
support of many of the county
treasurers some of the things
that we think about that you was
legislators have passed that we
think house bill seventy five
would help is that community
solar project is that house bill
one thirty two that just passed
Saturday out of the committee
about reducing percentages on
small loans we need those small
loans it's evident New Mexico
eighty five seconds maybe that
and also as a county treasurer I
know we need loans for people
who have lost their jobs during
the COVID to pay their property
taxes these are some of the
reasons why we support house
bill seventy five and I
encourage you to about yes thank
you thank you great to see you
Miceli sable.
For some reason the state what
we cannot hear you you may want
to jump out and jump back in and
we'll get you back in policies
Mr Hamilton brown followed by
Rebecca just so are you on Mr
brown.
Can you hear me now I sure can a
great
There's a tragic irony in New
Mexico re rank worst in the
nation for pre K. to grade
education forty eights in child
poverty fourth worst in income
per person and at the other end
fifth in drug addiction per
capita and in ironic contrast we
rank third in the nation in the
wealth in our sovereign wealth
fund all of that thirty five
billion dollars is invested in
Wall Street in twenty twenty the
land grant Fund paid out to the
state roughly seven hundred
eighty four million dollars I
think for education with those
billions and million sloshing
around and apparently not making
much of a dent in our horrible
state rankings this bill is
proposing to take a meager fifty
million dollars eight five
seconds to start a public bank
to determine whether increasing
the availability of economic
capital to members of our state
will increase our per capita
ranking from fourth worst in the
country to something better I
sure hope the community the
committee passes this bill out
thank you.
Rebecca just so are you allowed
followed by Jane.
Thank you Mr chairman.
And members of the committee.
Okay can I am a member of the
alliance for local economic
prosperity the public bank is a
game changer for the economy of
New Mexico it would help
community banks credit unions
and community development
financial institutions multiply
and thrive by lending to them at
a lower rate it can do this
because it has low overhead
costs the state saves money by
not spending in a retail
services or shareholder
dividends Pueblo bank is not a
competitor of local local
lending institutions it is a
partner it would create virtuous
partnerships that will design
loan programs address public
benefit targets so just food
jobs and clean energy community
mass of North Dakota by the way
there state public band which
which has been around for over a
hundred years.
Date every child in New Mexico
will wake up happy and healthy
future.
Thank and help us realize that
dream please pass this
transformational bill HB seventy
five thank you.
Thank you.
J. Nash followed by a.
George and Dorothy gamble.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
can you hear me yes ma'am I'm J.
Nash a resident in Los crucis
New Mexico and I'm here to speak
in support of HB seventy five I
want to see a public bank in our
state because it would make it
possible for local finance or
financial institutions
throughout the state and
especially here in southern New
Mexico to make loans for
projects that will truly help
our local community members we
know from the experiences of the
public bank in North Dakota that
a public bank will create small
business expansion which is the
backbone of our local economies
here in the southern part of the
state it will stimulate
entrepreneur business
development and expand
affordable housing which is
badly needed in our area it also
provides working capital loans
for small business operations
and can also provide additional
funds for public infrastructure
in lieu of bonds all these
things would make a great
difference in the quality of
life for our working families
here in southern New Mexico.
Thank you please introduce
yourself the.
You're listed as George and
Dorothy yes can you hear me
chairman absolutely.
Afternoon chairman by just and
honorable members of the
committee where Dorothy and
George gamble volunteers for the
alliance for local economic
prosperity and supporters of HB
seventy five before comment we
made several trips to six
counties in the north central
economic development district to
learn about the social and
economic needs of these
communities there is no doubt
for more visits that there needs
for investment are significant
more proof of this is in the
October twenty twenty one report
The New Mexico economic
development department entitled
and power and collaborate that's
exactly what a public bank of
New Mexico would do it is time
to empower local entrepreneurs
food producers small farmers and
ranchers renewable energy
advocates educators and health
providers with investments to
turn ailing communities into
thriving places to live a public
bank of New Mexico also
contributes to collaboration the
financial flexibility of
community banks credit unions
cities counties and tribal
entities is made stronger
through partnerships with the
public bank this is exactly the
kind of collaboration called for
in the report in power and
collaborate those are actions to
move our shameful ratings and
family and community wellbeing
to higher ground we need a
permanent funding to empower and
collaborate and the New Mexico
public bank does just that thank
you for your wisdom in action to
move HB seventy by forward.
Thank you sure ensure maker
followed by Gail.
Hello.
Miss you maker good no you
yourself okay thank you Mr
chairman I'm Sharon shoemaker I
live in Santa Fe and and of full
time supporter of the H. B.
seventy five I'm also a member
of the alliance for local
economic prosperity and what
appeals to me and I come from
Silicon Valley so I'm used to a
place where there's a lot of
opportunity for start ups and a
lot of risk taking and
innovative thinking and I'd like
to see New Mexico have that same
opportunity when you look at
that North Dakota bank they have
fifteen different loan programs
for agriculture twelve for
business those are the programs
that have been tailored based on
the community's needs in
partnership with community banks
and credit unions we could be
doing the same thing here
tailoring programs to the kind
of opportunities that that we
want to put for whether it be
renewable energy or value added
act economics and agriculture so
I hope that this bill passes and
moves on to the.
X. stage because it's it's long
overdue and would Representative
would give us an opportunity to
build on our economic strains
thank you.
Gail tell I got followed by
blue so far kalo.
And the committee.
I would like to thank you for
this opportunity to speak.
I live north of Aztec in the
four corners I've made my career
in New Mexico is an educational
administrator.
But before that time when I
wanted to go to graduate school
and earn a doctorate I was a
citizen of the state of North
Dakota and the bank of North
Dakota let me student loan money
at a wonderful right the plans
aren't.
For that right now but.
The fact is that New Mexico
benefited from my twenty four
year career here because the
bank of North Dakota was willing
to lend me the money at a rate
that I can handle and pay back
the other point I would like to
make is that what this bank will
make profits.
idea behind the bank is that
profits are not as important as
meeting the public good in the
state so I sincerely hope that
the committee will see clear to
pass the bill out positively
thank you.
Thank you Luisa barcarolle
followed by Sarah manning.
Good afternoon committee and my
at chairman my masters in
committee my name is the word
Louisa Markkula I live in
Albuquerque I am a longtime
volunteer with public thank you.
I support public banking the
past in this current set
session.
The bank would diversify our
economic funding portfolio our
current portfolio includes well
respected credit unions and
community banks however because
of their bank policies they are
unlikely to provide more high
risk loans Public banquet in
reserves and sustain our funding
portfolio.
With partner with credit unions
and community banks to opt to
offer more high risk that
important loans.
New Mexico can become a more
sustainable and healthy
community when our lending
portfolio offers equitable
access to all New Mexicans
equitable access to finances.
Yes sign of a thriving
democracy.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr manning followed
by.
Jessica S. one.
Thank you chairman
my name is Serra manning I live
in Albuquerque in house district
eleven and I also am a member of
the alliance for local economic.
But not Affleck
HB seventy five creating the
public bank of New Mexico is a
pro bank bill and I know that
sounds strange are to people who
feel that we would not be a
macro bank but we actually are
the most recent
The third quarter from twenty
twenty one report of the Kansas
city district to the federal
reserve reports that they find
that in most of New Mexico
thanks hello hi the quiddity
which means they're sitting on
their money and they have low
losses which also means that
they're making very conservative
of loans what we think that the
public bank will be able to do
for our community banks and
credit unions and CDFI is help
them with the risk of when of
the public think would either
partner with them up on loans or
making a deposit into their of
banks they're actually
increasing the banks local banks
ability to make loans and the
end result of all that of course
is its pro business and pro jobs
and the increased money flowing
to our communities
G. R. T. taxes those communities
receipt so it is a win for
everyone and we really do want
to pass this bill out of this
committee thank you very much.
Thank you when.
Hello I lost kind of I have been
a strict time keeper but I'll
tell you when there's a minute
up in a minute and a half of
there still.
You still
Seventeen folks waiting to speak
this just because one welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Chairman my Estes on behalf of
agriculture cooperative network
which is a network of
sustainable farmers in the
middle Rio Grande Valley we
strongly support house bill
seventy five to continue to
create sustainability and
empower and collaborate with our
students are.
Workers and organizations or
institutions earn our great
state of New Mexico.
Senate support of house bill
seventy five thank you.
Thank you ward McCartney
followed by a steep wise bird.
Mr chairman and committee
members I'm in support of HB
seventy five because investing
in New Mexico would create jobs
help local businesses.
And advance our infrastructure
all it has to do is look at any
town or city everyone sees that
many of the most prominent
buildings are banks.
Why are we New Mexicans ensuring
that money instead of Wall
Street investors the public bank
bill and our owning our own
electrical generation
distribution always would help
role the economy here in New
Mexico thank you.
Thank you steep wise bird
followed by Gary Payton.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members the DP and
them rural caucus and three
fifty New Mexico rural advocacy
stand in strong support of HB
seventy five a public bank of
New Mexico would support rural
community banks and providing
lower interest loans to
businesses and communities that
are key drivers of rural
economies for example loans
could help farmers and ranchers
acquire refrigerators and
storage facilities other project
products do not spoil while they
wait for market.
Loans could also help farmers
transitions to more productive
in climate friendly regenerative
practices and implement
innovative technologies like
agriculture K. X. expanding
health care and child care are
two other critical rural needs
that community banks might be
willing to address if risks are
lowered by the support of a
public bank and these would
ripple have ripple effects
through the entire rural economy
thank you so much thank you Mr
Gary Payton followed by.
J. L. at Hotmail.
Mr chairman and committee
members my name is Gary Payton
with the coalition of
sustainable communities New
Mexico the coalition comprised
of the elected leaders and staff
of the cities of Albuquerque Los
crucis Santa Fe Santa Fe County
Los Alamos County.
In standalone resolutions from
our members city councils or
county commissions or in their
legislative priorities
resolutions in advance of the
sessions are members of
enthusiastically supported a
public bank for the state of New
Mexico as you've heard such a
bank could enhance economic
development for our cities and
counties and a host of ways
renewable energy affordable
housing agricultural development
food security eco tourism
broadband expansion health
clinic upgrades and much more in
short the public bank would keep
New Mexico revenues in New
Mexico for tailored projects are
cities and counties seek for
their citizens please support HB
seventy five thank you very much
thank you Mr Payton and as you
know the sonics shall rise
again.
Two we don't at Hotmail please
introduce yourself hi all invite
bottoming hi this is Judy
Cormier I'm hoping you can hear
me okay.
Can you hear me we sure can okay
I'm sorry hello I am a retired
senior executive of compliance
and risk management in the east
coast banking I relocated to New
Mexico about nine years ago I
was part of the original task
force of the Senate they task
force and stayed on with the
looking at the task force or the
committee for state public
banking the only comment I want
to make because I can't add much
more than what everyone else has
is COVID created a new
perspective for a whole lot of
areas including an effective our
infrastructure and our
protective processes within the
city in the state
one of those was supply chains
and selfsufficiency those who
were able to sell so be self
sufficient had a less of a
harder time than those who were
relying on supply chains from
elsewhere I think the public
think will allow us to develop
our own industry resources
expand jobs to and the expertise
of those jobs within the state
and help increase New Mexico to
become a destination of choice
for living and working and
attracted more of the expertise
that we don't have today by
virtue of not having the
industry today thank you very
much for that in the state
absolutely Bob Mang followed by
Eric stark.
thank you gentleman my us to
send committee members my name
is Bob Mang I am a retired
entrepreneur and currently
volunteering for the alliance
for local economic prosperity.
And I'm what just that there's
the advantages of this bill have
been pointed out by many people
already I want to just mention
one other thing that I think is
very important and that is that
the appropriation that this bill
us for for fifty million dollars
to capitalize the bank.
Is all the bank is asking for
but and it would allow all the
by bank rules that will allow
the of the forty five seconds.
To
the loan out as much as five
hundred million dollars so it's
a better way of leveraging of.
New Mexico's.
funds in a way that we are not
able to do today and it would
support the economic development
departments empowering
collaborate.
Thank you very much I urge
everybody to on the committee to
please support HB seventy five
thank you.
Thank you Sir Eric stark
followed by Clift in Chadwick.
Thank you chairman Maestas.
And all members my name is Eric
start and leave in Santa Fe work
in Santa Fe and Albuquerque I'm
the president of the small
business it's called pandemic
chair hospitality we do business
in New Mexico.
We need and depend on community
banks as our businesses
rebuilding.
Hotels and resorts that have had
trouble times of closed and in
building we make some
independent and in making
independent hotels and resorts
we're adding another fifteen to
twenty percent to the local
community that isn't going to
the central investors of brand
names.
Because we work with independent
hotels it's community banks that
have the ability to consider
funding for us this bill will
strengthen community banks and
the public bank that you're
considering is a banker's bank
it's going to support those
community banks that then make
it possible for us to find ways
to grow the local communities
that we're looking at.
I would urge you to consider
that the public bank of North
Dakota.
Supports eighty nine community
banks currently we have some
thirty four community banks yes
GDP is eighty nine percent
greater than north Dakota's so
you can see there's a huge
disparity there could be taken
up in assisted by the public
banking concept thank you for
considering this bill.
Thank you to Chadwick followed
by folks in room three
seventeen.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members my interest in
local prosperity comes from my
work with local business over
thirty years including my
membership and services the
executive director of the
Albuquerque association of
independent business New Mexico
can benefit from the public bank
of New Mexico by shifting
revenues out of the too big to
fail banks where they are at
increasing risk of being lost
through TV TF bank's global
investment and derivatives and
the like then the ability to
leverage our revenues by lending
through credit unions and CDFI
is using performance metrics
based on New Mexican prosperity
rather than the profits of TV TF
bank shareholders holds great
promise for a more just and
equitable access to capital and
funding of projects that will
increase local economic
prosperity urge you to please
advance house bill seventy five
thank you very much.
Thank you folks in rooms three
seventeen again we turn on the
COVID three seventy we're we're
unable to do that.
Okay folks at three seventeen
please.
State your name.
Good afternoon my name is Athena
Christodoulou chair committee
members I am representing and
the other wanted progressive
caucus and myself as an
entrepreneur.
As I wanted progressive caucus
were very happy that this
community
complement of a bank will
support for table housing and
community solar projects in
communities as an entrepreneur I
know that with several start ups
the most and surmountable
challenge was getting capital
here in the state of New Mexico
it has been keeping us from
diversifying our economy and I'm
looking forward to having a
public bank the seat amount is
correct the plan would not
compete but complement the
community credit unions and has
a purpose the safeguards have
been carefully set the time is
right to invest our money in New
Mexico not Wall Street because
we are by with and for the
people and we need to invest in
the claim dividers economy and
take a triple bottom line
attitude of people planet and
profit please past given at H.
B. seventy five two passed thank
you.
Thank you another person and
three seventeen please introduce
yourself.
Chairman Laura McCoy affordable
County treasure and I used to be
with you all several years for
the legislative treasures chair
a lot of people worked
diligently on this bill with the
overall intent of investing in
New Mexico ridging the gap of
inequity of our small business
owners and others provide
expansion of funding
opportunities for underserved
businesses and reduce predatory
lending practices this is a
great time to discuss this
option to diversify our economy
and funding sources I know the
idea is new and it may cause a
knee jerk reaction but we need
to have the discussion you need
money to make money we currently
have that Stokes the treasure
box have nine billion dollars
right now hundred and ten
million is just a little.
Investing in our own state
people and businesses it's
important to being able to
diversify our old income I'm
asking all of you I know that
there are concerns presented in
the FIR summer relevant or not
collaboration I definitely know
something we need to talk about
more but I urge this body to
keep this conversation going and
passed on to the next committee
so that we can make this bigger
and better we need to stop
thinking so small in New Mexico
start thinking big and start
investing so we can be first on
the top of all of the good with
the bat thank you.
Thank you Mr Montoya for your
remarks anyone else in page
three seventeen.
No there's no one left to speak
for rural thank you Jennifer.
Cry cry followed by Kathleen
Burke.
Sorry.
We sure can thank you chairman
is this on the honorable
committee members thank you and
thank you Representative at
rivals a gyro and Senator
Steinborn.
Now I'm Jennifer and I'm a
retired professor living in Los
crucis.
Can I add something that others
have already said probably not.
But so many of us are here today
because we want you to know
there is or where the public
banking act throughout the state
you have an opportunity to
support innovation invest in the
public bank and in our state so
please pass HB seventy five
thank you again.
Miss Kathleen Burke followed by
John when you just.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
vice chair members of the
committee thank you I am
Kathleen Burke I'm a residents
of Bernalillo county I'm also a
member of the Albuquerque
indivisible the allotted
progressive caucus the league of
women voters of New Mexico and
retake our democracy.
I wish to amplify the comments
made by others here today in
favor of this measure it's such
a fantastic step toward
selfsufficiency in our state
there are so many good reasons
already said for supporting this
measure and I hope that all the
committee members will give this
measure and do pass today thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you John windows followed
by Leslie the kind is what six
more speakers.
Mr chair members of the
committee and thank you bill
Sanchez I previously had the
opportunity to lead one of the
larger portion Las Cruces New
Mexico and I'm a past president
discount chamber of commerce I
appreciate the job you have in
front of you today our economic
recovery the pandemic
the competition from two very
aggressive state between us New
Mexico there between New Mexico
Arizona Texas.
And the migration especially of
young adults to other states
Right now this is exactly what
we need H. B. seventy five I
think this bill with many of the
reasons that many of the
speakers again you want to use
our economic ecosystem please
move this bill forward I support
HB seventy five thank you Sir
Leslie let kind followed by duty
Matthews.
Hello
as you said my name is Leslie
the kind thank you chairman and
committee members of the
committee I am from Santa Fe I
was a dentist here for about
forty years and as such of
course I was a businessman and a
member of the chamber of
commerce
and I'm
thanks for rural all the reasons
that everybody else it but one
of the one of the reasons that
really appeals to me is that
is not of a bank is driven by
profit motives of Madam state
million more sensibly and will
be buffeted by the the big
reasons the market of.
In the twenty oh and the two
thousand eight when our
Committee or commercial banks
collapse of the North Dakota
bank which people have with
reference help keep North Dakota
of Business people on an even
keel and as an old man I love
the deals so please support this
in the past this bill forward
thanks.
Thank you JD Matthews followed
by Paul Gibson.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee my name's Judy
Matthews I'm with New Mexico
working families party I'm here
in support of the public banking
bill I want to thank the
sponsors Representative Roybal
Caballero and senator Steinborn
you know for keeping this
policy potential going on for
years and I hope that the
committee will give it a due
pass today for many of the
reasons that have already been
set so thank you and appreciated
do pass thank you.
Thank you Paul Gibson followed
by leave us Salim.
Yes Mr chair thank you for the
opportunity I've already spoken
one so I don't want to take
anymore time I would like to say
that I'm speaking on behalf of
about two thousand recurring
might receive supporters and I
certainly hope you pass this
legislation on it needs more
discussion and I do not think it
anyways threatens community bank
system experience with North
Dakota has illustrated thank you
very much thank you Mr Gibson
Preciado to let eight million
followed by Margaret gray.
Hi Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Layla
Solomon I'm a resident of house
district eleven and I'm
advocating for public thinking
in New Mexico for several years
now ever since I first learned
that our tax dollars are
deposited into accounts in huge
Wall Street banks many of which
have been party to fraud
scandals and which finance oil
and gas pipelines private
prisons weapons manufacturing
other harmful industry instead
of paying fees losing profits
these Wall Street banks and
having no say in how that money
is invested we can keep our
money in the state reinvested in
infrastructure education and
other things actually contribute
to our economy rather than have
a mission of enriching
shareholders the state would
have mission of serving New
Mexico and it would be
accountable to the people to us
to New Mexicans so to me this
issue of democracy and
accountability in here to
support this.
Thank you Margaret gray followed
by pound Roy.
Can you hear me we sure can
thank you Mr
thank you Mr chair committee
members on I move to New Mexico
almost forty years ago and I was
an international thank you for
New York City and work with one
of those companies that takes
you to use when they provide
bond funding financing I've also
been a nonprofit consultant and
executive here in New Mexico.
Mexico for many many years and I
know that we need to growth
capital to provide for the
projects that we need in many
areas and so on as a member of
the Santa Fe community I ask
urged you to past H. B. seventy
five thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Roy followed by
Paul o'connell.
Mr chairman and committee
members thank you very much for
the opportunity and we so
appreciate house bill seventy
five and sponsoring the public
banking initiative forward and
as a large group of a very
diverse group of people working
together this is the second year
in New Mexico for an agriculture
policy council supported this
legislation and the idea of
having a public bank system in
New Mexico we believe this
because we think it will be a
very strong and admission of and
economic opportunity for farmers
ranchers from Travis of those
who work in systems work and all
across the food system and
really encourage everybody to
support the spill and take it
will be very good per treatment
costs in Mexico thank you very
much thank you Paul o'connell.
Thank you.
Yes Sir.
Okay.
Good afternoon.
For H. B. seventy five the New
Mexico public ranking Act.
I am here southern New Mexico
Los crucis I worked for twelve
years the World Bank in
Washington DC are in many ways
New Mexico's live many poor
countries we work in.
Raw materials that are produced
in the state
conserve minerals and others in.
His.
The economy.
Two outstanding public
universities or in our no longer
being on here.
Last crucis.
I also.
National arms Los Alamos and
Sandia.
There
should be response.
One reason is not happening.
There's.
Small branch of militant groups
or small populations draper
correctional.
That we would have what is so
hard and so I feel very strongly
about that and
Thank you let's see anyone else
was to speak in opposition
anyone else wish to speak up
forgive me forgive me in in
favor any proponents of the bill
was to address the committee.
Miss more great did you already
speak.
This market greater Jordi speak
I've already spoken and we're
going to take your hand down.
And now we will hear from the
opponents of the bill good
enough of raise your hands.
The opponents of the bill you
guys will get a minute or so
let's just see how many of you
there are.
Let's see.
There's there's about fifteen or
sixteen of you
I'm gonna call out.
We'll go down the list make sure
to.
Call folks so we made deviate
from the list a little bit what
we hear from Mr Paul guessing
followed by Chris Moran.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my
name's Paul guessing and
presents the Rio Grande
foundation a free market policy
research organization based in
Albuquerque dealing with New
Mexico policy issues we oppose
the idea of a public bank simply
put because you have one
supposedly successful example
nobody in New Mexico really
understands public banking of
these of the North Dakota what
is happening there it's much
easier for us here in New Mexico
to understand the successes of
our neighboring states Arizona
Utah Colorado Texas all of them
do basic things well that we
don't do they don't have a tax
structure of the chases Business
out they don't have regulations
do the same this is about we
need a bank to succeed as a
state this is yet another way or
governments that is simply put
unnecessary we need to do the
basics before we even consider
an ambitious fraught with
potential fraud and challenges
banking structure added on to
all the government we already
have in the state thank you very
much for your time.
Thank you Mr Chris Moyer
followed by our whole.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Chris plan
I'm with the independent
community bankers association
New Mexico the independent
community bankers association
New Mexico does not support the
creation of a public bank and
opposes house bill seventy five
today's robust financial
services industry here in New
Mexico is comprised of community
banks regional banks credit
unions community development
financial institutions and other
non bank lenders including those
operating in the bin Tax base
New Mexico community banks play
significant role in the space
providing access to credit and
banking services throughout the
state there are thirty three
headquartered home on community
banks for New Mexico employing
around twenty eight hundred full
time employees with over two
hundred twenty eight locations
around the state community banks
play a vital role in ensuring
economic growth is robust and
broad based reaching urban
suburban and rural communities
of all sizes and in every region
here in New Mexico their
relationship based and provide
funding based on the
characteristics and needs of the
customers and local communities
in times of need community banks
demonstrated their willingness
and ability to support customers
that rely on them for their
credit and funding needs as
financial first responders in
twenty twenty and twenty twenty
one New Mexico community banks
approved industry is over
seventeen thousand small
business loans totaling one
point seven billion dollars to
the paycheck protection program
overall through the duration of
the program forty three thousand
six hundred fifteen PP the P.
loans totaling more than three
point six billion dollars in
funding provided to New Mexico
small business businesses
through the financial system
there is one fundamental
question that should be asked
and answered and that is what
market failure or gap exists
that would require the creation
of a public bank to fill the
void there's been no dish
demonstrated public policy needs
supporting the creation of a
public bank we have no liquidity
problem here in our state and we
do not have a lack of community
banking institutions and other
financial institutions ready and
willing and able to provide
funding and banking services to
the communities in Mexico and
with that.
We stand in opposition.
Thank you Mr our whole well
thank you very coal.
Mr chair can you hear me.
Your.
Mr chair members the committee
thank you my name is are called
a registered lobbyist with
century bank century bank has
been serving the great state of
New Mexico since eighteen eighty
seven with the vision of being
New Mexico's community bank we
currently have locations in
Santa Fe Espanola Los Alamos
Albuquerque Rio Rancho New Los
crucis with local ownership
local board members and over two
hundred employees.
Today century bank stands in
opposition to house bill seventy
five supporters of this bill are
claiming that this could
fundamentally change New
Mexico's finance system for the
better we respectfully disagree.
Owners for a public bank of
asserted that such an entity
would not compete with computed
community banks but instead
would work in partnership
participate in economic
development loans for businesses
we do not view the proposal that
way and it is not a system one
by our bank for the community we
have concerns about what we
believe are yet to be addressed
issues such as how would a
public bank be able to operate
in the long term without access
to the federal reserve discount
window for short term lending
purpose with such an entity have
access to related federal
payment systems our industry has
questions also as to whether or
not this bill is in direct
conflict with New Mexico
constitution's anti donation
clause one and a half minutes
will services be in direct
competition with the New Mexico
finance authority and if so to
what benefit.
Mr Chairman I want to end and be
respectful of your time and say
that we had I think we've done a
good job we've been deploying
capital and makes it available
PPP loan loans.
And we are committed to
continuing to provide financing
for New Mexico families and
community business thank you Mr
chair we ask you to oppose these
bills thank you Mr hole so that
was two minutes I'm gonna give
you a warning a a minute this
try to keep it with the minute
men and a half
there's less speakers on this
side so but by all means just
keep it under a man and a half.
Mr recall followed by Jesse why
it.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Terry called on the president
CEO for the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce I'd like to
emphasize two points made by the
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
in twenty eleven when they look
at public banks is centrally the
report said that stage one
should be able to identify the
specific market failure that a
public bank what address and to
study ways that existing
qualified public agencies might
be able to meet their needs and
stat this is wise advice for us
today in New Mexico it's unclear
what problem this legislation is
seeking to solve what has the
private sector not adequately
provided that the government
jumping into the business of
banking is the only and best
solution we urge the committee
to reject this legislation thank
you very much.
Thank you Jason why it followed
by Ron Shuttlesworth.
Yes Sir can you hear me OK.
My name's Jason white on the
president and CEO of western
commerce bank in Carlsbad New
Mexico and also western bank of
Clovis.
Many of you are aware of
Weinstein's definition of
insanity in my opinion a public
bank is a good example of this
definition as the majority of
these that have been tried and
failed.
This bill is politically
motivated it's goals to take
taxpayer money out of our local
communities and consolidated in
Santa Fe politicians and special
interest groups believe they're
better stewards with this money
at the local communities or
community banks.
Public bank proponents claim
they will partner with community
banks only strengthen them but
to my knowledge there's not a
single community bank in the
state Mexico that interest in
partnering with the public thank
you a public bank is a solution
in search of a problem and I
respectfully ask that you vote
against this bill thank you
thank you one minute so you can.
Are you anything you want but
please do not speculate with
regard to the motives of the
Sanchez around Shuttlesworth
followed by Michael Martin.
Good afternoon chairman and
members of the committee.
Appreciate your.
Hosting this.
For.
The.
Previous.
People have been stated.
The opposition point extremely
well so I'll turn.
Go off script a little bit just
talk as a taxpayer is some of
the proponents of mentioned this
use of.
As an Avenue for them to.
high risk loans.
And
loans that the bank will be
partnered with community banks
however as a taxpayer I'm
thinking this is more likely.
Request to put together a
venture capital fund.
Thanks.
Other Canadian financial
institutions are not capital the
intricate.
And so this is gonna put
taxpayer money at should
actually more risk it is right
now and is a result I would.
Urge you to vote against this
bill it makes no sense to me
which were when I.
Thank you Sir Michael Martin
followed by demi Moore.
Mr Martin.
You have the floor going to
check your mute button and
things of that nature.
What you're testing your might
go we'll go with two
misdemeanor.
Thank you Mr chair a committee
member's demi Moore president
and CEO of the greater Las
Cruces chamber of commerce all
echo everything that everyone
just said we stand in opposition
to the creation of a state
public bank we feel that our
region in our state is well
served by the community banking
industry and other programs as
identified earlier in the
conversation there is no
justification for a public bank
and this was approved by board
on Friday January twenty second
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you.
Mr Michel Martin.
Mr Martin let's let in a brawl
road record followed by Carlson
tied.
Yes the world record thank you
very much for the Mr chair and
members I'm in opposition to the
stage for the seventy five and I
hope you will be as well just a
couple of points from the
taxpayer and citizen.
I I'm concerned about
transparency
under a bank under federal rules
has a bunch of privacy
requirements and I'd be very
concerned that things are going
on with public money that has to
be kept private in ways that of
the existing
Organizations within state
government the that are doing
economic development have to do
them in a more public way the
FIR which I read this past
weekend nine pages of a lot of
questions from your state
experts on these issues many of
them very important and critical
and I don't I think this
proposal is just not ready for
prime time and the anti donation
clause issue whether even
comports with one minute nine of
section fourteen there's so many
issues here and the North Dakota
bank example just doesn't play
there's many things that go on
in North Dakota that are not
in this bill thank you very much
and I appreciate your
consideration of the closing
bill.
Thank you Mr Carla Sonntag's
followed by Brett.
The million no.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm
Carless on tech president and
founder of the New Mexico
business coalition we represent
hundreds of businesses and
thousands of New Mexicans our
focus is to make New Mexico a
better place to live and work.
I appreciate the Sanchez work on
this bill but New Mexico
business coalition respectfully
opposes house bill seventy five.
Our current banking system in
New Mexico is handled very well
our community banks have over
two hundred and twenty locations
throughout the state there
safely.
Providing sixty percent of all
small business loans and more
than eighty percent of all
agricultural loans one of the
keys I think to their success is
that they are integral parts of
the community they know the
needs of the community and they
know the people that live there.
What's really important about
these banks is they have their
own assets on the line they're
not putting New Mexico taxpayers
on the line for the loans
they're making if a loans that
they're the ones that will
suffer the loss.
Thank you for your consideration
we urge you to say no to house
bill seventy five.
Right dimensional followed by
bill Lee.
Yes good afternoon chairman can
you hear me sure can okay good
afternoon chairman Masterson
committee members I'm Brett to
millions chief financial officer
for first American bank here in
New Mexico.
You know the idea of creating a
public bank has been thoroughly
studied multiple states
municipalities such as
Washington why Maine Vermont
Massachusetts New Jersey in the
cities of Los Angeles Seattle
San Francisco Oakland and Santa
Fe of conducted feasibility
studies on the creation of a
public bank.
As a result the public bank has
not been established by these
entities are municipalities the
studies all the different nature
have not resulted in the crack
in the creation of a public bank
because it has been found to not
be economically feasible and
because of that and putting New
Mexico taxpayers.
Mexico's those dollars at risk I
stand in opposition of house
bill seventy five thank you.
Thank you believe followed by
Theresa.
Thank you chairman my Estes and
members of the committee this is
bill way president CEO of the
calculate county chamber of
commerce or chamber stands in
opposition for reasons outlined
already today and in the
interest of top time Mr chairman
I want to be brief and just say
we support all of those things
that have been raised in
opposition we also raise the
question of a possibility of a
violation of the anti donation
clause and possible of state
amendment to the constitution
being needed for the creation of
a public bank and we encourage
the committee to look closely at
the very well defined
significant issues outlined in
the FIR as well as what NMFA had
to say about the creation of a
public bank thank you so much Mr
chairman and I appreciate your
time you and the committee in
your service thank you.
Thank you Sir to reset please
introduce yourself followed by.
Michel Martin.
Thank you chairman my SS the
members of the committee my name
is that is some of the non
present personally Mexico
banking gaming you know without
the access to the federal
reserve sit payment system as a
public bank would be shipped
severely limited in its ability
to process payments in a timely
manner or have access to the
budget short term liquidity
funding program that federally
insured institutions are granted
there are currently several
government or pause I
governmental agencies in New
Mexico that provide access to
lower cost funding for community
infrastructure improvements for
example the state treasurer's
office The New Mexico economic
development department The New
Mexico finance authority The New
Mexico mortgage finance
authority The New Mexico small
business investment companies
you know community bank stepped
up and help the businesses
during the pandemic crisis of
twenty twenty with the payment
protection program and all are
banks of stepped up and help the
our business communities I was
as the as a role as a community
bank in is to help our community
and that is what we do we stand
in opposition to H. a house bill
seventy five thank you.
Thank you let's give it a shot
Mr Martin's.
You have the ideal working on
your device.
Shouted out.
All right Mr more we're going to
angel Rayos followed by judge
fanning.
Mr Chairman can you hear me.
Yes.
Good afternoon my name is
Andreas I'm president CEO of
central bank in Taos New Mexico
the chair will celebrate fifty
three years serving tells County
we stand in opposition of the
creation of a public bank for
all the reasons that have been
mentioned today and certainly I
want to point out that the
during the pandemic central bank
played a significant role as do
many community banks supporting
the access and reliability of
funds to business and individual
customers we funded over thirty
million dollars five hundred
loans to to our community.
Which saved and are protected
about three thousand jobs there
are no market gaps of failures
that exist that would require
the formation of a public bank
New Mexico Canadian banks are
meeting the needs of New Mexico
consumers and small businesses
we are maintaining a well run
financial industry in our in our
State that is safe sound and
prudent with the access and
reliability delivering funds in
the market place a public bank
rate poses significant risks
related to corporate governance
issues the idea of not having
FDIC insurance or collateral is
ation for deposits is is a
significant risk and the idea of
assuming more risk at lower
rates is not a prudent banking
practice so as I've listened to
the testimony today what I've
heard is ideas that are
troubling in that the proponents
would be running the institution
that is generating more risk
with little return that is not
good banking not to mention in
the state we have a very
prominent role more we have
multiple government because the
government agencies that provide
services to support economic
development housing and other
investments we strongly oppose
this bill and would ask you to
do the same thank you.
Jed fanning.
Well it by Michael Martin and
then Debbie Shaffer.
Mr chair you able to hear me.
Yes Sir.
Good afternoon sure my assistant
committee members I'm jet
founding president and CEO of
citizens bank of Los crucis to
the question of the need for
public bank please consider the
fact that not only are community
banks in the state already
providing over six billion
dollars in loans the statewide
loan to deposit ratio for
community banks is fifty six
percent that means our
collective banks still have
sufficient liquidity alone
roughly another six million
dollars seven otherwise there's
no shortage of laudable funds
this is more about difference in
demand New Mexico is
consistently had one of the
lowest loan to deposit ratios in
the country and so I would ask
that you bear in mind that there
are sufficient funds available
and community banks that for
many years been providing needs
through those funds I would also
ask that you pay special
attention to how the proponents
of the public bank have argued
that loans can be made at lower
rates while having underwriting
that assumes more risk tolerance
and the bank could be profitable
the combination of higher risk
and lower interest rates does
not translate to profitability
which makes the projections for
the public bank questionable.
Along those lines I would point
the committee to the fiscal
impact report it's been
referenced several times a
couple of highlights from that
is the estimated revenue
conclusion from that report is
quote.
And minimal likely negative.
There were comments from NMFA
state treasurer's office and the
state investment council that
other really doesn't appear to
be avoid and that it doesn't
justify the investment so
stepping away from that fiscal
impact report I want to remind
the committee that community
banks across our state have for
many years been making our
communities better by loaning
deposit funds back into the
markets they serve.
There are many other pressing
needs the minerals are fans
attention and resources and I'm
sure you've gathered that from
that report and the comments
that a new state owned bank
until it reaches breakeven would
be lawsuits funded by state
dollars so I'd ask you to please
consider how the downsides far
outweigh the upsides and urge
you to oppose the bill thank
you.
S. Debbie Shaffer followed by
might.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Yes please introduce yourself.
Yes this is John Anderson I
represent the New Mexico bankers
Association commissioner for.
Tuned in for may at your she
looks a lot better than I do so
if I might just take a minute.
And express our opposition to
our house bill seventy five
We believe that the implications
are creating a public bank pose
risks to New Mexico tank
taxpayers I would potential said
potentially Madam state with
significant onboarded costs
replicate are highly competitive
regulated and federally insured
banking system that exists in
communities across the state.
Starting your.
Bank would consume public funds
and I believe that we talked
about fifty million dollars for
capital but there's an
additional sixty million dollars
coming out of treasures land
which I assume will be utilized
for operational costs that could
be is for other needs such as
health safety and infrastructure
needs and community development
instead of offering financial
services which are already
provided additionally by
taxpaying private sector banks
operating in a highly
competitive market.
We think that it would be very
it would be heard the sponsors
of this bill take a look at the
FDIC and work basically.
To look at what it would take to
started you know back in the
state now mentioned two or three
things one has to do with the
constitutional legal regulatory
process to reconsider and we
agree with the other opponents
of this bill there is and I
donation problems and in the
absence of getting and obtaining
FDIC insurance who will be the
regulator that will basically be
overseeing the.
State Bank we have every reason
to believe it's going to be next
to impossible it's not even
greater than that for FDIC
insurance to be able to be
procured by the number two thank
you in lieu of their we would be
utilizing all facing greater the
state much like in the north the
card plan so thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you for joining us let's
give it a shot Michel Martin but
in on mute your salt shaker
device.
Want to thank you Mr Martin for
joining us here today sorry we
could get the technology linked
up Mr Martin for the record is
CEO of western bank.
Thank you Sir so anyone else who
wishes to speak in opposition to
this bill.
All righty thank you all no
members of the committee.
Representative Representative
Dow.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you to the sponsors
for bringing this bill once more
I I you know I've I've heard
presented before and I've asked
some questions I guess where I'm
still wondering is.
What this bank cannot make
direct loans your.
Is that correct Mr chairman
Senator Steinborn no we go to.
Mr chair since the
representative asked me the
question that is correct so
they're they're really up.
They really are well with some
exceptions that they cannot make
private transactions so they
really are bankers bank and if
you'll go to.
If you will go to page nine F.
in the bill.
You'll see where it says.
That
The bank basically make
transactions originated by local
financial institutions so so
they can create for drugs that
can serve certainly
individual or commercial
interests but if the bank board
determines that but only through
cemex where okay so what is that
if if I could ask folks to mute
if you're not talking.
Mr Dixon Mr walkable thank you
Mr president I yield the floor
thank you thank you Mr chairman
so then what is it that these
loans can participate in what
loans can folks participate in
that they can't currently do you
through NMFA as I see.
Other state entities what's the
difference.
Senator if you'd like to answer
that go right ahead.
Okay thank you Mr chair
representative
so it can you can cover really a
range of subjects in a range of
Tatchell clients from maybe
underserved new businesses.
Expanding this is any less than
I I think we heard from some of
our banking executives to call
that they have secretary of who
they will loan to a certain rate
of return we know that there's
sectors even established
businesses who have gone through
periods of time where they could
they had no access to the
capital I'm thinking of builders
during the economic downturn in
two thousand eight two thousand
nine for example so I think on
one hand it can serve certain
commercial entrance on the
others we can absolutely fund
for public infrastructure
similar to what we do through
NMFA and others and the reality
is that we may come to find if
we take this step that the
public bank is the more
desirable place to land that
funding because we're getting a
rate of return on it we're then
able to we're then able to
expand access to capital based
upon that principle as opposed
to traditional revolving loan
fund so it's kind of a range of
services and I think it will
fill some gaps and
So hopefully that answers your
question thank you thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
representative or senator when
you talk about the rate of
return you said we get the right
return who gets the right of
return and and how is that
measured if it's not at
interest.
Mr Chairman representative
interest is exactly what I mean
is that is that it is a bank
they will be able to there will
be are you know our rate of
return on a lot of these loans
and so but again it's it's a
commercial it's a it's a in some
cases a product that will go
through a commercial bank so to
be shared revenue in that sense
it'll be sure something that
would become very popular if we
did it with commercial banks
because it would be another
product that they could sell in
those circumstances but yeah
when I say rate of return I
literally mean rate of return
from interested then.
Being able to that have expanded
capital to even do more with
over time okay this is New
Mexico the only depositor.
Madam I'm sorry Mr chair
representative fiscal agents of
the government would be the only
would be the only depositors and
that is also in the bill itself
says that.
To be a subsidiary of the State.
So Mr chairman and senator.
So this how are the state funds
how are the funds and deposits
protected.
Mr chair representative very
much like other funds that we
that we appropriate quite
frankly same way state
investment council funds there
state Sen whether New Mexico
finance the half a billion
dollars we just gave to the New
Mexico finance authority it is
basically the funds that we
guarantee as a state government.
And that's and that is the way
this would be done and I want to
be very clear it's it's
different then.
You know FDIC back deal this
would be more this will be
closer to the New Mexico finance
authority in the funding we give
them alone this would be closer
to the state investment council
they be backed up by the state
of New Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Senator does the does the
New Mexico finance authority in
the loans we get out to they
have a criteria that's different
than what you intend to what you
envision here.
That's a really good Mr chair
representative that's a really
good question and I would
anticipate no it back what I
like about this bank more
frankly what I like about this
bill in front of you is it
establishes lots of criteria
that we don't have frankly that
I'm aware of in law for the New
Mexico finance story that you
have that has to follow banking
principles of procurement it has
to be follow alone being
chartered like banking
institutions
It that it will have
transparency and oversight and
so it's I think that correct the
criteria will be professionally
managed resources with similar
best practices but I think it
will definitely be more
entrepreneurial and a lot of
ways it will codified what we've
done over the last few years
with the New Mexico finance
authority recognizing that New
Mexicans needed more access to
capital kind of codified as kind
of a permanent.
Institution with even more
entrepreneurial attitude.
Mr chairman and and senator we
appropriated I heard million
dollars as follows very low
interest loans Representative.
Sixty million are allocated.
It is and that was one time
money we we did with COVID money
so there's no risk to New Mexico
state taxpayer dollars Mr it's
that we don't know how much
dollars are being printed we
don't know I mean there's so
many unknowns to to backing
those dollars but it wasn't the
New Mexico tax payer dollars
based on state revenue that was
risk that money can go out the
door.
And it had very very broad.
Loan requirements I don't even
think there's a consequence for
not paying it back and hundred
sixty million went out the door
so what I guess I'm just.
I'm trying to understand how you
think.
How do you explain that we're
leveraging something when
the only depositors are the New
Mexico state taxpayer.
Well we're leveraging and
because we are able to loan
based upon the process which is
one of the ways to bank a bank
works we're making a right of
return on our money rather than
necessarily depositing that
money in a bank somewhere and
they're making the right to
return I was shocked to find out
that with our holdings are
financial holdings and in the
financial sector sometimes you
may be losing as much as forty
percent of the money
appropriation in fees that was
just shocking to me to learn
instead we get to hold that
capital in our institution we
gotta make it by the way I I'm
glad you brought up a hundred
ten million because that shows
the demand I mean in and of
itself during what was a tough
term what was a tough time that
hundreds ten million in demand
show how much need there was for
capital out there by the way the
bank in North Dakota also when
they had extensive what flooding
help to meet their states need
during tough times in a way that
you traditional
financial institutions could.
So I know the in the FIR they
talk about all the different
states that did a feasibility
study trying to do this and
decided not to and one of the
there's a couple municipalities
Los Angeles but I also see the
Santa Fe conducted a feasibility
study and concluded that it
wasn't feasible to move forward
did you guys what were the
reasons that that Santa Fe
didn't move forward.
Thank you and I with the
different Angela on that Mr
chair representative thank you
that's what I was going to do
thank you Senator.
Thank you
Chairman and thank you for this
question.
Reason that the feasibility
study and Santa Fe was
Came to the conclusion that the
the city that was the bank
wasn't feasible for the city was
because the financial holdings
of the city at that point
didn't generate enough of a base
to develop the capital and our
liquidity for the bank.
but they didn't recommend at
that time that the state
proceed with
the the consideration of our
state public thank and I want to
correct something that was
stated earlier by one of the
opponents the number of
feasibility studies going on
around the country is actually
quite extensive and there are a
number of those states and
larger urban areas that actually
are proceeding with their
implementation plans for public
banking California has
legislation that permits up to
seven regional public banks and
New York City in New York state
are moving their soul long along
with a number of other locations
And so those those studies are
actually moving forward and all
of this much of this activity
has come out of the.
Response to the recession and
the concern about.
What is the safety of the on
Wall Street banks and isn't it
better to maintain control of
those monies in the state in
contrast to turning them loose
to Wall Street so I wanted to
clarify that thank you for the
question thank you thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative and Senator I
think that's all for me chairman
thank you.
Thank you Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Dow took a whole
bunch of my questions so I
actually just have to laugh
so Senator and Representative if
if the public bank is not going
to be at the edge FDIC insured
like a normal bank wouldn't that
ultimately shift the risk from.
The you know bank funded
insurance fund in the FDIC to
the New Mexico taxpayers is that
right.
I would say Mr chair
representative that is that is
correct it's it's it's kind of a
different animal because of the
nature of the deposits it's not
you're not dealing with small
loans under a hundred thousand
or ten thousand whatever the
FDIC limited to dealing with St
Boston some kind of a different
instrument just in the same way
that are in the state investment
council funds The New Mexico
finance thirty funds are not
FDIC insured Representative said
it's it's a different animal and
this would be insured the same
way those are.
I mean it thank you for the
answer Mr chair and senator it
it makes me nervous but I I
understand why it's needed to be
done and then the other portion
of it you know what I was doing
some research
is.
So I can say this I have I have
a quote here from Harvard study
but that there was a Harvard
study not not very many years
ago that was done and the quote
just says the the higher
government ownership of banks is
associated with slower
subsequent development of
financial systems lower economic
growth and in particularly lower
growth of productivity it really
it really sounded and it goes on
to talk about how political
your interference and political
pressure because it is state
funded bank really.
That does the opposite of what
you know you guys are trying to
do with things so how how can we
ensure that that political
interference political pressure
won't happen if a State Bank is
created it it that's something
else that makes me nervous.
Absolutely and I want to take a
crack at it and then I want to
if I can Representative Roybal
come the other Mr chair like to
defer to Harold who whose
finance expertise the expert
witness to I think once we
address some of the questions so
this is a subject that we really
worked hard on in the bill how
to make sure that it was managed
by finance expert so this was
something that I think you can
feel good about this part of the
bill does which is if you go to
page seven of the bill.
You will see that or starting on
page six actually section B.
that the the main person running
the bank is the CEO who has to
have there's a whole list there
of experience they have to have
including successfully managing
a similarly sized or larger
institution and then they higher
risk officers well so it's
professional financial people
who are managing managing at
beyond that there's a whole lot
of conflict of interest
provisions transparency
provisions removed reporting
provisions that will hopefully
make this kind of an optimized
model you know years ago we have
problems with the state
investment council and others
when it was politicized you go
back a ways we improved on all
that and now I think most people
would say it's highly performing
financial machine the gets a
very good rate of return so the
key is that you want to manage
by professional people not
politicians we agree and and
that it be basically Monica you
know managed competently with
the Mr chair if I can I'll turn
it over to parents for a few
brief comments.
Mr chair thank you
Representative Hernandez thank
you for the question that is I I
will tell you that was one of my
big concerns when I initially
got involved with the public
banking is my gosh were the last
thing we need is politicians
running a bank in New Mexico.
And I understand and so I I
think the provisions that are in
the bill certainly certainly
allow for professionals to be
running the organization and
then they oversight from board
of directors is not is not just
state
state personnel but also array
of folks from outside the
community professionals there's
a good mix of of of both private
and public sector in there and
so I think those those concerns
are obviously there but I think
there's been there's been some
some some thought to mitigate
any risk in there and.
Okay I appreciate your answer
thank you both and Mr Chairman
I mean the the portion of this
that makes me nervous is that.
Senator what is this for so on
page three that brought a three
on top of for
all of these members of the
boards you have one two three
four members of the board are
appointed by the governor and
I'm not trying to beat up on
this governor this is any
governor who happens to a point
it's it's that political
pressure.
That that could come from that
being being kind of.
Servant to the governor to be on
this board and so that you know
I appreciate that you know
everything with the CEO and that
they have to have the experience
that stuff.
Positive but the fact the board
is still appointed by the
governor and and the governor
makes me it makes me nervous
you know and so I actually just
have one one other question is
you know we have community banks
here that obviously you know can
can do this and keep one of the
things while I was researching
was a public banking in general
because I didn't I I didn't
grasp the concept but still
needed additional research was
that a lot of people were
talking about keeping money in
the state and out of the big
Wall Street banks and taking the
money and lending it from from
our state and and blending it in
another state or playing the
stock market or you know
whatever the Wall Street banks
to so we have community banks
here that you know they're
they're thing is to take
deposits here and keep the money
you know here landed here help
build businesses here so why
isn't this a program that.
Local community banks can't
handle why why is it necessary
and you may have already said
this why is it necessary that we
have the the State Bank when we
could just.
Rely on the community banks for
this funding.
Well Mr chair I think it's
because this bank is able to do
so much more than a traditional
bank whether it's serving
underserved entrepreneurial
class.
Whether it's serving public
infrastructure so he has just
broader product brat but Herrell
do you want to add anything to
that a representative with both
of him you know I will before
Herald but I want to say that.
I think the key here Mr chair
and representative is that we're
building upon
and and resources so it's not
one or the other but it's how
one complements the other and
how one assists the other works
with the other in partnership in
order to be increasing the
access to capital which has been
very limited to those local
communities into those small
economic development ventures
and so if we can remove my hat
from seeing it as an either or
it's not and that's why it what
makes it difficult for people to
be able to envision because it's
not an either or the public bank
is set up to be able to leverage
to complement to work hard work
in partnerships to expand on
those shared resources and to
make
lending of more broadly
accessible to those that have
non traditionally been able to I
mean those that have been a I'm
able and considered
nontraditional
on recipients of Lente in order
to start up in your business in
order to exist in a small rural
community in order to provide
you know and the list goes on so
if we just change the way we
look at things and instead of
looking at them competitively Mr
chair and either war and start
looking at how we can expand our
state has been poor for far too
long our state has not been able
to access to capital on in a
broad way which is why when the
pandemic came in the state we
had to kick in on so at such a
greater length that I with that
thank you to say if I haven't
done a study on it in other
states that had.
Different demographics and so
that's what I would say before I
turn it over to Mr did some Mr
chair go ahead Mister Dixon.
Mr chair representative of a
You couldn't have said that
better I I think there are I'm
it it gives this is not an
either or it gives us some
alternative and so my my best
example would be the SBA
programs small business
administration so today there
are the two largest lenders in
New Mexico are out of state so
it just tells me there is a
demand for alternative financing
on so well banks and credit
unions certainly have a niche
and you may have an image of
what you finance things you're
your bank your institution is
comfortable finance.
Let's look at some alternatives
in those alternatives being your
maybe it's outside of the realm
of what I would normally do so I
think that's for the public bank
can come in and say you know for
instance I I think a lot of
banks credit unions are very
comfortable looming against real
estate is a known entity I can
appraise the it is it is easy to
understand so marketable for
remarkable piece of collateral
but when I come in and say gosh
I'm I'm trying to started dental
business or massage business are
trying to take tables and chairs
of the Quitman that's not as
readily marketable yeah have a
good business plan have no you
know and maybe have a bit of a
track record of of performance.
It's a collateral that my
financial institution is not
necessarily comparable with so
let's go to the public bank
Whistler person backing there's
some support guarantees the
state that will help support
that we know this is I mean
these these loans are still
approved by the bank the public
bank is really in the background
check help help support that
hello hello.
Kind of you know push that along
in order to bring more capital
to businesses Mexico so it is
alternatives to to what we're
already doing and enhances them
and certainly built on what we
can do today.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr Dickson
thank you so much for your
answer I actually have one more
question that came up kind of
one we were talking
And so okay so in that fire you
guys are in the FIR and says
that or the bill that you're
asking for a hundred and ten
million dollars of seed money
will we at a later date need to
add more seed money to that.
from let's say the general fund
for instance as we go along if
there's if there's the need I
mean is this something that's
going to come back for our is
the bank's going to be set up in
does the legislation set the
bank up so that it's want to get
that hundred and ten million
that it is that it's going to
use that
that it won't go outside of
that.
Mr chair representative in the
bill the bill doesn't determine
doesn't answer that question
it says that we're going to see
that with this particular
investment as delineated in the
bill it's really a starting
point from a fiscal standpoint
and we have three billion
dollars or whatever it is in any
one time out deposits from the
state treasurer is a really
small you know putting a peak
you to financially speaking into
creating this system it's a lot
of money obviously but no we
don't determine that I would
believe that it would be.
Successful and we might want to
do that but also of course it's
an instrument that will grow
it's just like any savings
account it'll grow based on the
principle you have and how much
you have to work with right so
we if it's working really well
for us we may choose to open up
open up the
You know the deposits into it
more or direct more deposits and
frankly thank you North Dakota
Lee directs much of the finances
of the State Bank I mean they're
fully M. leveraging.
Leveraging the whole deal so you
kind of get out of it we put it
is a good start for us.
Mr chair Representative I think
the there were some additional
handout provided to you that
refers to seven year net income
total equity kind of a chart
that shows how the anticipated
growth is expected so that the
yes of course we always want to
be open to as a senator said
increasing deposits however this
chart shows you how well on we
we can it can build on just what
is being requested thank you Mr
chair.
Mr chair and senator and
representative thank you for
that answer so I might I promise
my last question
so we have you know a bunch of
revenue now which which of the
Senator.
Referenced what happens when our
state when we have a a year like
twenty sixteen when we have to
start figuring out what to call
it is is the public bank
something that we can that that
we would.
I want to say go up go after for
rap for for to make up downfalls
but I mean is it something that
that at some point that would be
an option that we that we could
then take money out of it to.
To make a deficit.
Senator do you
this represents the I would
believe the short answer to that
is yes with a big Astrid.
As a financial and as a
financial institution you know
you need to maintain
you need to maintain a certain
amount of that capital to secure
and you know back up all your
financial activity right C.
obviously can't go into that but
at the building public dollars I
think that investment of public
dollars is still owned by the
public we're not giving it away
we're creating a new public
instrument we're putting that
money into it so yeah we could
we could call that back but with
that they gastric attached to it
so we would have to be fiscally
prudent.
Mister chairman Senator
representative and Mister Dixon
thank you guys for all of the
answers I'm I'm still very
nervous about a lot of parts of
this but I do appreciate all of
your answers thank you.
Thank you Representative
Martinez.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Senator Steinborn and
Representative find go yet and
and experts for the time I'll
try to be brief and and very
pointed and and please with your
responses to the same I know a
couple of us have a meeting to
get to here shortly
first of all
I've I've been
well versed in this issue of a
public bank because I have
constituent that I've been
working very hard on this for a
long time and so I feel like I
understand it
relatively well it's it's still
a bit of a little bit nebulous
in some areas but I feel like I
do have a solid understanding Mr
chair
Let me ask you a few more
questions real quickly here
Kandace bank can the public bank
provide.
Personal loans.
Mr speaker and and
Representative the public bank
is not in the position to offer
individual loan since that's the
same as personal gotcha yeah and
the reason I write bring this up
is I'm thinking of of other
bills that are out there on on
small installment loans for
example and we oftentimes hear
from from folks in the industry
that this is going to drive that
industry out and and I have been
thinking why why isn't like the
NMFA for example providing that
support to to to folks to make
small loans up speaking of the
NMFA a place that I think is a
little bit nebulous for me and I
think for others as well is what
is the main difference between a
public bank and the NMFA and
Kenny Public bank exist within
the NMFA or can the NMFA be the
public bank with some tinkering.
And that's for whoever wants to
respond.
Mr chair Representative similar
to a public bank because of both
public institutions we we just
our NMFA to make loans so in
that sense there now in the
banking business having said
that this is a better model
because this is actually
chartered as a bank and you get
certain benefits of the bank
that you don't get with the
district traditional revolving
loan program could exist within
NMFA sure K. but this has a
governance structure of people
that are tailored towards this
you have to ask yourself is that
you know is that worth it to do
that because we're of course all
comfortable with NMFA but you
could
but then I don't think you would
want this to be a program of the
NMFA.
Because then you lose some of
the benefits of a bank.
May I jump in please.
A quick answer to is that the
bank probably couldn't reach
ordered under that kind of
structure it would need an
independent structure and
And it would be more likely that
purpose of the NMFA would go
under the bank's charter in
contrast to the other way around
it really would take
some really specific compliance
and regulatory requirements as a
bank in contrast to the
authority with revolving funds.
Thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr chair so
so because we have a public bank
were to be established you could
take the NMFA and hold it under
the public bank versus a public
bank existing within the NMFA is
that is that my hearing that
correctly.
Again I think that
We haven't gone in depth on
looking at that but I think that
that structure could be
traceable
In just a way of combining that
expertise of and the benefits of
both structures.
Okay very well thank you I think
I heard this be addressed maybe
not but the board of directors
and I'm looking at the bill now
are they are they paid to serve
in that role.
Mr chair representative the
answer's no.
Okay.
That's something you might I I
in my opinion it you might
consider taking that through how
that would work just because it
seems like if we're going to
have.
The public banking institution
that is essentially over seen by
her volunteer citing that races
a lot of questions for me I mean
us being about your legislature
we know how complicated that is
so I I would I would think about
how maybe
providing I don't know I mean I
I I I I haven't given it thought
that it deserves but how we
could make those positions
Either full time or somehow war
tied to
To government to public to the
public peace of the bank to
ensure that it is being run in
the best way possible
somebody Mr chair.
Mr Mr Chairman representative if
I may quickly just you know with
the public thank as described
with the directors and chartered
remember they have the business
of operating the charted thank
so they will have
I think that flexibility in
determining making those
determinations once chartered
because that is part of any
conversation any bank that's
being chartered is exactly how
to handle or how to work with of
the board of directors and what
goes with that in its capacity
as an entity so I just offer
that that that it's not closed
it is open because it's up to
the to the entity itself is how
I would imagine thank you Mr
chair very well thank you thank
you for that response
representative of.
Somebody mentioned in the
opening that you know we should
take sort of this leap of faith
and sort of re imagine how how
we think about banking and
that's what makes is compelling
for me
again there's a lot of stuff
that that is maybe listened and
but I'm not really sure how we
would work in practice
but I do know in speaking with
my constituents sort of the main
driver behind is yes to get
Public resources.
to be deployed in a way that
have maximum maybe have maximum
maximum impact not to say that
the current system doesn't do
that I mean I do think that the
community bank certainly are are
in those local communities of
community banks are sometimes
the only game in town and it is
a game in town that is very well
respected and and that provides
a lot for those communities same
thing with our credit unions you
know same thing even weather
bigger banks you know I think
everybody has a role to play.
But when it comes to being
creative
with lending for example I find
the traditions additions to be
we have to have some pretty
serious shortcomings right I'm
thinking of like an early
learning center with all of the
money that is going to be going
into the early childhood system
many of those early childhood
providers are going to be in
private settings they're not
going to be in a school they're
gonna be in private settings and
how are they there they can get
capital outlay.
The problem we can really get a
bank loan because they've got to
have some collateral for you
know for those of you that I've
gotten like business loans are
pretty difficult to get
sometimes if you don't have a
whole lot of back behind you and
quite frankly I don't think
there are people banging on the
door trying to invest in early
childhood centers at least not
yet maybe the future they will
and so you know that's a space
that I think deserves to be bank
and whose banking that space.
I don't I don't know that anyone
is.
Mr chair representative I just
want to say one of the cool
things thank you for bringing
that up is this bank has a whole
community development component
and it speaks to that as lending
criteria and also Senator the
board are people with community
development background so I
think they get to take on that
public policy mission of
deciding where the wind maybe
it's affordable housing maybe
it's food security maybe it's
childcare so you brought that up
because that'll be a key benefit
of the bank.
Right you know the other space
that I think of all the time is
is the leading to nonprofit
organizations nonprofit
organizations that have funding
sources from private
philanthropy for example they
may get a five year that that
comes in your one on paper years
two three four five are in the
red because he got all the money
at the beginning they don't
really show it at the end and
for those folks who get a bank
loan it's nearly impossible
unless unless the the person on
the other side of the line it
has knowledge of how nonprofits
work for example so
that's why I'm voting yes today
I think that the different
dynamics that we see in our
communities that I see in my
district
I think deserve
these are to be addressed and I
think that the public bank
concept
does that.
I think that there's more work
to do along with the concept to
think about how it connects to
the NMFA to think about how it
connects with with private banks
but I do think that that be part
of of status and some called it
earlier I I think it's worth
really really looking at
seriously because I think that
in a place like New Mexico that
is
you know a lot of people call us
for I don't think report all we
have a great deal of land we've
got three natural resources
we've got tons of money stashed
under different mattresses that
we just haven't really figured
out how to deploy this is one of
the ways in which we deployed
those resources for the benefit
of communities across the state
then so be it thank you Mr chair
I want to take too much more
time I appreciated thank you
Representative and Senator for
your presentation.
Thank you Representative set up
the.
Thank you me.
Yes.
I thank you Mr chairman thank
you to the sponsors of this bill
I'll keep it brief and about two
two and a half questions on so a
lot of what you all have been
talking about just actually
after Representative Martinez
speaking about it was this idea
of impact investing right that's
that's a bit more aware of it
the ideas you know helping to to
move money not only to grow
businesses but to to for social
good and community good and
there's a look for you
investment firms that work with
local communities they expected
communities to get together ten
million dollars extraterrestrial
larger amount even less than
five million even a hundred
grand which for some of our very
small communities is a big push
and then that they do is they
leverage their can connections
across the country are
everywhere anywhere and get
folks to invest in that
community so that community like
moda or like Kwesta would be
able to pull that money together
unfortunately for a lot of our
communities that that
opportunities exist would this
public bank be in a position to
lead to those sorts of funds to
a community itself.
Mr chair and representative
absolutely that's exactly what
this Public bank is
positioned to do and that's
exactly when we talk about
creating a pool or or leveraging
a pool sorry leveraging a pool
that's what we mean by
leveraging those resources and
that's what makes this
particularly important
especially in light of what
Representative Martinez Mr chair
just mentioned about
deploying looking at where under
the mattress and all the
resources that we have what we
have the pool to to look at and
this pool with in fact a lend
itself in prime position to help
these communities and I'm
speaking also wearing my
nonprofit for over forty five
years I was a director always of
nonprofit organizations and one
of the hardest things for us to
do was to look for financing
when we went into from being a
community based organization to
a community development
organization there were no
resources available to those to
our for our projects that we
wanted to undertake in order to
do neighborhood revitalization
so absolutely thank you I don't
know if anybody else wants to
add to that thank you.
Thank you for that answer
Representative will chairman
along those same lines would
these funds also be available to
use when when you're when you're
looking for federal grants for
example you oftentimes have to
show a match of some sort and so
showing that that simple with
these funds also be available to
organizations community groups
to be able to to get federal
funding to that as well.
Mr chair and
And representative I don't see
why not and I I think even more
so because the filling the gaps
is where we've had the hardest
time to ensuring the matches in
the past in fact whenever we
went after other organizations
that I directed and was CEO of
we always had to be able to do
that match of the federal
government is famous for
offering money but requiring
twenty five percent or more in
matches and that was also an
area that we were unable to
fulfill and you know it's
something that that would be
within the purview because what
makes this a public building so
attractive is with the senator
mentioned in that is that it is.
Positioned to be a community
development thank and in those
are the kinds of things that
fall under the operations and
decisions of the community
development plan thank.
Thank you chairman thank you
Representative briefly and I'm
hoping you all can addresses
briefly early on in your
introduction you mentioned that
there were some differences
between last year's bill in this
year's bill to kind of take care
of some of the concerns can you
summer I know.
I believe it is the right those
little bit briefly on on how the
bill is slightly different than
last year's.
So Mr chair Angela do you want
to take do you want to go with
that briefly highlight the
differences between.
The bill last and whomever else
wants to thank you certainly
thank you and Chairman
representative the key
differences are that the
capitalization the fifty million
that we're requesting does not
come from the severance tax
fund.
that proved not to be a feasible
way to
To develop the capitalization
because of the.
Return requirements are of the
those permanent fund investments
so the request is for general
fund allocations and then
The.
that's the biggest difference
that we have in the the.
Thank you so much.
Pardon me because they know if
you were to go ahead.
You are you done with that with
your presentation yes thank you
thank you Representative and
thank you chair thank you
chairman thank you for that was
were last question all I know
this bill as of a few times but
I'm just curious have you done
any studies with the different
departments or agencies about
how this would shift how they
work together or what their new
responsibilities were or how
this all works and not real the
cost additional pieces like
that.
Mr chair representative yes so
there's been a lot of dialogue
with all the affected agencies
serving conversations with the
state treasurer New Mexico
finance authority economic
development department the
governor's office
I know in July has you know
they've they've done a lot of
pro forma analysis on the bank
itself and with conservative
estimates with.
Renowned financial leaders like
some of whom are experts today
so.
The good thing also is is that
the bank itself will underwrite
the expenses of of the
operations of the bank so we'll
create a fund will deposit it
and then out of those proceeds
will fund the operations of the
bank as well as the staff of the
bank so.
Thank you those are my questions
I appreciate your all time
industry and going through this
with me you know I I I kind of
had a long time same size
Representative Martinez worked
some of the details do filtering
of US and I think that I can
hear you know the nervousness
that comes up because of that
but there is an opportunity to
grow hello just always growing
more capital the state is just
something I'm I'm very invested
and so seeing how we can do that
with the part of the positive
impact would be great thank you.
Thank you Representative part of
a second time.
Thank you chairman actually my
first time on this bill.
Okay thank you.
No worries I'm just a quick
quick question I know where
where things came late for the
fifty million dollar
appropriation is that in house
bill two.
Mr chair representative not yet.
Okay and how are you okay thank
you my only question.
Thank you Representative Roybal
Caballero Senator Steinborn have
a couple questions I just want
to take a moment to just thank
you tremendously for the for the
work you've done last year on
soon limited interim committees
this year on zoom and then
bringing it here in the thirty
day and then the tremendous
advocacy by the folks here
online as well as out there in
the committee it's a monumental
task process and legislate for.
to carry on such such great
institutional change so you know
we that the glass is half full
no question about it and and
this momentum is not going away
but just a couple of questions
what is the what is the address
of the bank.
Mr Chairman that is a great
question and it's a to be
determined but it will not be a
physical will not be a physical
storefront thank like a normal
bank so.
Thank you of thank you a.
Senator Steinborn so what the
what do we have a location
within state agency as G. GSD
identified up a location that
can house you know twenty thirty
employees.
Mr chair representative I don't
think it'll be twenty or thirty
employees to get to get started
with but yeah I mean we we will
clearly have to work with the
work with the state government
figure out some office space I'm
sure probably based out of Santa
Fe I was fantastic is there a
limit I know that the
operational costs are gonna come
out of the fifty million Senator
Steinborn the is there a cap for
a limited or a kind of a budget
within the budget to get the HSD
the.
If if if I you know I can call
the State Bank an agency to get
the agency up and running.
Mr chair no there's not a cap
set in law if there is a
starting point of to staff of
positions that are higher CEO
and and risk officer chief risk
officer and then we empower
through the legislation the CEO
to hire staff
they then have to prepare budget
for the board that budget that
has to be presented to the LFC
so there's there's a there's
oversight there's controls but
no there's not a cap on
administrative expenses are
within the banking fund that
will ultimately fund the
operations Hey your thank you
and there's not a cap in the
statue but there's there's those
checks and balances that you
mentioned at the as we move
forward along with the
development of this bank the
In the up is it and I think Mr
answered this but was this it's
not in house bill two yet.
so is a top five answer in his
to this committee etcetera and I
noticed that it's not in the
yeah for the focusing on that
the Development Bank was not in
the executive recommendation
it's not in the legislative are
LFC recommendation.
Of folks who are not on the
finance committees are doing are
darnedest to influence that
process House Bill to you know
it hasn't passed the house is
already being is being proved as
we speak and so you know from
being a former member the house
the greatest idea in the world
could influence that process
because it's such a huge bill it
takes hours and hours approving
to make sure every decimal point
is correct and so House Bill to
as debated as of yesterday or
whenever I think they're going
to give it the final ones order
for eight o'clock in the morning
anyway it's not eligible to goes
over to the Senate side we're
not a thirty day session with
massive massive responsibilities
in this is the world you know
So
So if this bill doesn't make it
out.
Which it would you know which I
don't think it will make the
finish line this thirty day
session I as you know chair
economic policy committee I
commit to you having a full
hearing on the on the the nuts
and bolts not just a policy good
idea bad idea but the actual
inner workings there's gonna be
a new house a co chair of a rest
at revenues tax stabilization
Policy Committee and Chris
Chandler and then obviously LFC
we need another thorough hearing
LFC to move this along next I
think that there's going to be a
new there's there's a treasury a
campaign going on one of the
candidates local twists spoke on
behalf of the proposal there's a
an assessor campaign going on a
train general camping one in
which the non incumbent is
prohibited from running bye bye
constitution in addition to the
state lands governor's race so
my point is it's we just get
this out there on the campaign
trail get some commitments from
folks and have someone in the
executive branch champion this.
You know to make it happen
obviously the legislature you
know in fairy tales the
executive what to do but we need
we need an exact is a meticulous
happens to to step up for sure
lastly if someone were to
introduce a bill saying.
We're gonna have a we're gonna
create a state agency that's
going to manage nine million
dollar nine million acres of
state land thirteen million
acres of mineral rights and
essentially of managed to the
penny multi billion dollar
kabbalist entity.
It would be left out of town the
people people because every name
in the book well that exist
currently in the state of New
Mexico scholar State Land Office
you know this isn't this isn't
you know
The name with the ISM this is
this is economic development is
a this is access to capitalism
this is the access to capital
for businesses for small
government because because we're
under the with the with the
Center San Juan Representative
Representative Roybal Caballero
the earth a shifted underneath
our feet since since March
sixteenth twenty twenty in which
like you said fifty million
dollars was now appropriated and
doled out by by the finance
authority we have
We have over thirty billion
dollars being invested by S. I.
C. we have three point seven
billion dollars and and build
back better money's coming to
the state
I mean this is a whole New World
in which we know that in
learning from the Great
Recession throughout the past
ten twelve years you government
must play a role in the
development of the economy in
New Mexico us to make some
serious decisions the next five
ten years whether it's going to
grow or not and I think this is
a key component of that growth
but given this late hour in the
in the.
With regards to the thirty day
session there's just hours and
hours and miles and miles to go
before we sleep centers I may
not be able support this
particular bill today but I
definitely want to work with you
get across the finish line so.
With that members of the
committee.
I will
I suppose that no folks don't
want to take action that.
Mr chair I.
All righty so there's.
The table Representative Dow a
second by the end.
Well a second by Representative
Powdrell Culbert channel as a
non debatable motion.
We will
Please call the roll.
Thank you chairman.
Representative Dow yes the
table.
Representative Fajardo yes.
Representative think most notice
able.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes to table.
Representative Johnson.
Yes the table and I'd like to
explain my vote.
No to table.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes to table.
Representative Serrato.
No to table.
Figueroa.
She's she's.
Chairman my instance.
Yes to table so Senator I'm
going Representative Roybal
Caballero that bill has been
tabled for the time being I
believe it was six to three will
get a committee report out.
when I just can't thank you
enough for your work and and not
just just keep pushing.
Thank you.
Before we adjourn a to explain
her vote Representative Wonda
Johnson.
And we have to go to one thirty
four but to explain her vote
Representative Wonda Johnson.
Representative September
Representative thank you thank
you chair and thank you
Representative and senator for
bringing this bill forward I
just wanted to share a fun fact
I used to live in Bismarck North
Dakota my wonderful wonderful
people friends and community
and.
And course pricing country and
the home of our sacred Atlanta.
And while I give a shout out to
North Dakota and its unique
success to creating this their
public thank I have to hear
concerns from my constituents
regarding the concerns of this
bill especially in FY are so
that is why I agree no and but
it doesn't mean I don't support
the overall goal of our state's
economy.
And providing those funding
opportunities so that is what I
wanted to say and thank you.
Thank you thank you very much
Representative center before we
adjourn the committee substitute
for house bill one thirty four
has been online for over an hour
why don't we
What we up.
There was a motion to produce
pass as amended at yes the
gentleman resin which is to
withdraw that motion if you will
and will open up for.
Another motion.
I had to leave.
Mr chair I move.
Two two X. do you pass on these
amended the substitute bill that
we reviewed and approved and on
earlier.
House.
One thirty four.
If I heard it was a.
My internet was fading out so
what I thought I heard was a do
not pass on house bill one
hundred thirty four but I do
pass on commerce committee
substitute for house bill one
thirty four that was that motion
was made by Representative Dow
seconded by Representative
Fajardo please call the roll.
Representative Dow.
Representative heart of.
Yes.
Representative Gaydos.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes.
Representative Serrato yes.
Representative Dow.
Yes.
Representative Gaydos.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Vice chair Figueroa.
Chairman my instance hello yes
so that that can be submitted as
a do pass it is up for the
record it's point to two to
three six eight point one eight
point two two two.
Three six eight point one.
There was a.
Thank you all for a great
hearing thank all members of the
of the audio or the audience
members of the public are for
joining us we will be back
Wednesday at one thirty.
We are adjourned thank you.
