Representative called Culbert.
Representative doll your.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Dow.
Representative Johnson.
Madam secretary Representative
Johnson is waiting to get in.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Johnson.
I see her.
Okay.
Yes here thank you sorry about
that no worries.
And chairman Maestas I'm here.
We can't hear you thank you so
much
so good enough I am here so we
have a quorum.
We may have started a few
minutes before fifteen minutes
as I announced on the floor so
what and mark Weber is not here
as excused and we will go to
Senate bill two we we have a the
house prime sponsor of
Representative McQueen and as
you recall we you know we had a
for a.
Debate and we communicated
telepathic glee on let's go out
and do it formally now I'd like
to propose an amendment one six
four dot one.
The number in the lower left
hand corner is two two zero one
six four point one and what it
does is it just basically.
Removes the Senate floor
amendment
Which backed the Senate finance
committee member and just treat
everybody equally saves a little
bit of time and on that taxed
Representative staff and the
alcohol of control beverage
alcohol beverage control staff.
so at this time I I move the
amendment to.
To send a bill to.
Have a motion and a second
hearing no debate please call
the roll.
As amended no I just on the
amendment okay on the amendment
thank you.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Dow.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative was yes.
Representative Johnson yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Culbert yes thank
you.
Representative.
The yes.
Madam chair of the get on.
Yes.
Chairman Maestas yes are you
have a unamended bill
Representative McQueen members
of the committee.
As the.
As B. two is amended.
We have a motion passed as
amended on Senate bill two.
I second that motion Mr chair.
We have a second us seeing no
debate please call the roll.
Representative.
Tomorrow Representative Dow.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative enables yes
Representative Johnson.
Yes Representative Mart√≠nez.
Yes.
Well Culbert.
Representative both.
Yes.
Representative Culver.
Madam chair to get all.
Yes.
And chairman Maestas and I both
yes and what we go back to
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Yes thank you.
So you have a do pass on to the
house floor and and I've never
been more persuasive and adamant
Representative thank you for I
know that thanks for being here.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee.
All right check and see
Representative is up is it in
the room Representative Cook if
you could raise your hand areas
with the blue.
The little blue us the CDC will.
And and Representative of cocoa
who when you do jump and I'll do
you need in.
Let's see there's
just.
Yeah.
Chairman and committee members I
need Jeannie Bates and Jimmy
Bates thank you Sir for raising
your hand we can provide you
quicker.
Always good to see you so that
we are on.
And thank you Representative for
allowing us to to jump you this
shouldn't take very long that we
were not in a rush for your bill
House Bill three hundred and
three welcome Representative
Cook good to see you take it
away.
Thank you Mr Chairman good to
see you and and committee
members as well mmhm.
House Bill three oh three is a
liquor bill that relate Sliq
control and basically just
before I put it real quickly
over to Mister Bates it at just
that prohibits anybody from
getting another person money or
other inducement to.
By certain liquor products so if
Mr Bates could take over from
there he can explain the reasons
the process would be a better.
Thank you Representative.
Mr Chairman representative good
evening I'll try to make this
very quick the purpose of this
bill is to close the gap which
currently exist in the liquor
control act.
And we're wanting to close that
gap so think about
Representative Cook care to
legal for me to still is
television and it's illegal for.
For you to be able.
Television.
Control written right now it
falls very close to the A. T. T.
B. and there are a list of items
that wholesalers brewers
distillers are allowed to
provide to retail accounts and
Sir what is A. T. and T. B.
please alcohol tobacco and trade
bureau that so it's a very
similar regulations at the
federal level thank you and yes
yes thank you Mr chair.
Some examples would be
advertisement if you own a bar
or a package liquor store I
can't pay for your advertising I
cannot give you as a whole
salary I can't give you
barstool tables big screen TV's
for your account.
I can't give you a text box for
draft beer I can't find your
cooler to stalker package bear I
can't give you a long I cannot
secure a loan for you I can't
give you cash those are all very
good rules the problem though is
that there's nothing in the act
that prohibits the retailer from
receiving any bills inducements.
So currently the way the act is
written.
Members from one tier can
actually benefit from the
illegal acts members from
another chair.
And so we think that that is
simply wrong and and and defies
logic come looking to close that
gap so our ask is pretty simple
if it's illegal for me to give
you something then it should be
illegal for you to receive it.
With that I would stand for any
questions.
Thank you Representative thank
you Mr Biggs and so House Bill
three oh three as new material.
And it's two subsections in the
let's go to members of the
audience.
And let's see is there anyone in
opposition go to the opposition
first there seventeen attendees
for those folks.
What you zoom or on the webcast
there seventeen attendees what
and raise your hand if you wish
to address the committee in
opposition to house bill three
oh three first up will have miss
Allison Smith welcomes me.
Good evening Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Allison Smith registered
lobbyists The New Mexico
restaurant association we
respectfully stand in opposition
to this bill simply because we
don't feel this bill is actually
necessary it is already illegal
for the wholesaler to find the
the inducements the the the
information and we feel it would
be better for us to be able to
work this through our membership
and alert our membership to this
fact in order to help the
wholesalers in that regard so we
don't feel this bill is
necessary thank you for your
time.
Thank you for being here anyone
else in opposition anyone wish
to speak in favor and I wish to
speak in favor.
But in raise your hand.
Mr John Thompson welcome welcome
Mr chairman can you hear me we
sure can thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is John Thompson I'm a
registered lobbyist for national
distributing southern wine and
spirits in admiral beverage
corporation Mr chairman when
when Mr right speaks about the
tears I guess I'd like to
elaborate a little on that New
Mexico operates under what's
known as a three tier system
meaning supplier something
Budweiser distributor thank
premier distributing and then
retailer think any outlet gas
station grocery store or
restaurant what Mr Bates's is
alluding to is that two of these
tears are included within the
statutory provisions and and one
here is missing that being the
bottom third tier the retail
tier this year this bill would
wrap everybody into the law
trying by the same rules Mr
chairman we support the bill and
and asked that that that you all
as well thank you.
Thank you Mr Thompson next
ternary Hedrick.
Unmute yourself.
Okay are we there yes we can
hear you okay Mr chair members
of the committee lobbyist for
more distributing we online with
what is stated from John
Thompson and we just want to
level the playing field and make
sure that we're all playing
fair and honest thank you.
Thank you very much anyone else
was to speak in favor anyone
else so for the record there's
fifteen folks.
In the attendees up here with us
in the Dyess of Representative
Stansbury and Representative
Rubio will go to members of the
committee.
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative for being in the
bill
me some background maybe or
contacts what kind of crimes
three is happening here that
makes this necessary.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative.
It's it's necessary because
right now there's a door of
foundation that is open.
And wholesalers are solicited by
retailers for these types of
inducements.
And retailers feel free to do
that because it's not illegal
for them to do that.
But it's allowing them to ask.
Wholesaler to break the law.
We would like to see that door
of temptation closed and not
given one opportunity or
inclination to color outside the
lines.
Mr chair Mister right thank you
understood I think that answers
my question although.
Drafting questions might be Mr
chair representative cook if.
These things are already in lost
somewhere else for the other two
tiers how come we didn't just
add the word and retailers to
that section of law rather than
adding an entirely new section
what was the logic behind that.
Mr chairman and Representative
good question and I don't know
the answer to that I don't know
if I was around or not but I
would bet if I wasn't the Mr
Bates was probably around at
that time because I've seen him
up there is long as I've been up
there so let's ask him.
Thank you Representative thank
you.
Mr chair.
Please this was a guidance we
receive from Legislative Council
hide to agree with that much
simpler distant to the third
tier in existing legislation so
there's ample it talks about all
the different licenses my
thought was just the summer here
Representative that we had
retailers to that but I'm not an
attorney and the attorneys felt
in the bill drafter felt this
was a more
yes but more clean and correct
approach.
Thank you Mr chairman thanks
again mysteries Representative
that so those are all my
questions thank you.
Thank you very much couple
questions that exact same
question
I had the fortune or misfortune
of having a painfully go through
the liquor control board this
year month.
It's horribly written it's it's
a snow criticism of anyone else
but ourselves as lawmakers so.
We really need to just rewrite
it even if we don't change
anything we just need to rewrite
it so we've got sixty dash eight
eight dash one.
And the bill drafter wants to
propose sixty dash eight eight
dash one point one so that's the
way the doctor wrote up
I don't have the ability to work
Smith at this point but here's
my question how does it in the
real world how does that happen
if if if your distributor up
restaurant bar if you can give
me something but I could receive
it how do I get it how to how
does how does this stuff
transparent real world.
Thank you Mr chairman gentleman.
Some some folks choose violate
the law Sir principal and
sometimes it might be an
employee of yours it may not be
fully aware all the way to
provide training and sometimes
folks just choose to violate
that law.
Because.
They make a bad decision they
get put in a position where
they're asked by a customer
maybe it's of a friend sometimes
a develop relationships over a
long period of time and they
choose to make that back
decision violate the law.
I understand so under current
law Representative Cook
mysteries under current law the
restaurant can ask.
And then the wholesalers you
know doesn't want to lose a
client putting about spot and
can choose to break the law or
not this would prohibit them
from us.
Correct.
What would this do with this
with this prohibit under the
law.
Mr chair that question from your
Representative Cook up for you
Sir okay thank you
yes that would prohibit the
retailer from us and also
prohibit them from receiving
these inducements fantastic and
then over hopefully a shorter
period of time but over time it
will become the culture industry
and this stuff all hopefully
stop happening that the.
Yes Mr chair that's correct in
the yes your memory but I think
it was three years ago I
testified before this very
committee and an effort to
police ourselves as an industry
and we asked the committee to no
longer allow instant redeemable
coupons in New Mexico for malt
beverages that's because they
were pretty broad based a coupon
fraud happened at that time we
were not able to police it it
got so bad that one retailer
might go into another's account
still has coupons and and and
going reading them and so we
came before this body and asked
that we no longer allow fire
season state New Mexico that did
pass the house and Senate and
was signed by the governor.
has gone away we no longer have
a problem with coupon fraud and
this is another example of us
police in ourselves or
something's going on and all of
the best intentions there are
still some bad actors out there
sometimes on the retail side
sometimes on our side we would
just like to clean this up close
that window of opportunity that
window of foundation and
hopefully we have the same type
of results that we had when we
lemonade I our season the state
and and thank you up
Representative Cook Mr rates and
I are cities for folks listening
at home instant redeemable
coupon thank you and then also
provokes a so this this that
section a law was written in
nineteen eighty one the famous
nineteen eighty one chapter
thirty nine liquor control act
it was amended as you said two
thousand fifteen chapter one oh
two members of the committee
representative of set out the.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
to the sponsor of this bill I'm
just curious you know how would
this actually work in real life
so how do we do we have an
ongoing force this you know
other penalties hello those
penalties be determined for
example that was at an employee
that you know doesn't know the
full background verses and owner
of an operator of the of the of
the.
Gas station or would you.
Yes Mr chairman and
representative thank you for the
the question in.
And and realized how does that
happen now all three tiers the
supplier the wholesaler and the
retailer would all have skin in
the game so to speak we would
all be subject to fines and
revocation of license and I'm
not sure if the director of
of ABC alcohol beverage control
isn't on are not we have spoken
to him in the director has a
discretion on how I would
address as he and is told us he
would look at suspension or
fines up to ten thousand dollars
for a first offense.
Mr Mr chairman and
and that Representative and I'm
sorry so that we provide up to
ten ten thousand dollars
regardless that was for example
the owner of the.
Or I'll and an employee of this
document.
Mr Chairman representative of
that is my understanding that
both folks involved in that
transaction would now be
culpable from both folks would
be exposed to fines or of or
suspension of license.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
think it's under.
Thank you Representative
Gallegos thank you I think most
of my questions have been
answered with the exception of
two we have the capacity to
To monitor this if it were to be
implemented.
So Mister chairman and the
representative of all take a
stab at that.
Really would get back I think to
the industry again placing
itself and if there were some
like violations out there we can
bring forth but quite honestly
when I think when that
foundation is removed and all
three tiers.
Are are now at risk.
The asked that we're getting
today just simply go away.
And honestly don't feel is going
to be a problem long term just
like you know coupon fraud is no
longer a problem.
Without someone soliciting
inducements we're not about to
be offering them and and I don't
think now that through with this
classes and retailers have skin
in the game they're not going to
be asking for it again what
they're doing today is not
illegal and I guess if I were
not sure I might be doing the
same thing I could get a free TV
and I want to get a free TV but
by all of us having skin in the
game it takes away the
temptation would I don't suspect
retailer knowing that their
license could be suspended or
they could be fined up to ten
thousand dollars I doubt
seriously as soon as this
becomes a legal they would have
asked in the first place.
Thank you Mr chair that's all I
have.
Thank you thank you members of
the committee Representative
have set up a second time all
forgiving before we go to a
motion Representative Powdrell
Culbert thank you Mr chairman.
I'm still not real clear
Representative.
And.
So I think if.
US if you ask me for TV.
To carry it and I'll give you
that TV so that you will carry
more product in your store is
that what we're trying to
eliminate because I'm I'm
sitting here listening I'm still
not clear.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative that's exactly
correct the the reason the
letter control act has as a
trade practice section the deals
with inducement consignment
sales a few other prohibited
items under the A. T. T. B.
regulations on the ball states
including ours Merioles is to
prohibit one wholesaler gaining
advantage over another by
providing inducements and you
might imagine Representative
here that.
The owner of a small
establishment may be years
you're strapped for cash and one
of us goes in there and I said
Hey buddy I'll give you this
check box but I want to don't
carry my beers NMSA will get
high not well now I've given you
an inducement the trees Alton
and exclusion of another whole
cellar not so violation of the
state and federal trade practice
law will gap we're trying to
close that make sure that all
three tiers are held to the same
standard okay.
Okay thank you Mr chair I
understand now.
Thanks for the question.
Thank you representative
Representative said although.
Thank you Mr chair I move it to
pass second we have a due pass
motion on house bill three
hundred and three hundred three
a second by Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Please call the roll.
Hello.
Yes.
Representative Dow.
Yes.
Is a no.
Yes please
yes.
It's a yes.
Thank you thank you.
Representative.
Yes.
It was just.
Johnson yes.
The agency.
Yes Representative Culbert yes
Representative bill yes.
Madam by stripping it off yes
thank you Mr chairman Maestas
yes and so Representative Cook
you have a do pass on our house
bill three hundred three thank
you Mr chairman and committee
members thank you all thank you
all.
All right let's take a breath.
And then we shall go to
And that is the.
Does the minority but the
minorities and I make a motion
at some point you want to and
now at the end of the meeting
regarding one thirty four.
I guess we'll do it again hello
remind me remind me okay great
house bill one hundred.
Two hundred and house bill two
hundred ninety seven
Representative Rubio welcome you
have the.
Let into the virtual committee
room.
Where we have James pull we want
I don't know if he's in but he
will be my experts Mr pogo if
you could raise your hand thank
you Sir it's the status of the
policy so let and civic Policy.
And that's that strong expert
okay.
I lost a policy they're at the
tech at okay range.
Good.
Representative Rubio anybody
else no that's it it'll untested
so house bill two hundred ninety
take it away awesome thanks so
much chair and thank you
committee members I am
introducing house bill two
ninety seven and and just to
provide you a little bit of
context before all the details
is that in twenty nineteen we
introduced legislation to really
ask for an appropriation to pay
for a study that we would hope
the department workforce
solutions would be able to
facilitate
Unfortunately that the
legislation did make it through
because we ran out of time but
because we had to earn your
money we were able to to make it
happen and what this study was
essentially looking out was how
do we work within our
communities to figure out how to
implement really the statewide
outreach programs to educate not
only are population on a
timeline for a transition to
clean energy but also really to
look at a very diversified
economy outside of just energy
and so we were able to pass this
we were able to get the study
paid for our department
workforce solutions under the
leadership of secretary mccamley
and the University of New Mexico
with again the Sanchez as the
lead on that as a researcher
ended up doing the study last
last year it's a minute in in a
minute adamis in the midst of
COVID and and we're did this
really powerful study and so
much of what the recommendations
came out of that are now the
framework to what we are now
calling what is house bill two
ninety seven and so James will
be why is my expert who has been
along for the ride on the last
couple years really guiding some
of the conversations and also
really sort of helping me and
others to to try to get this
legislation moving forward and
so I'll hand it off to Jane's on
to give you some more
details on on what the study
came up with the recommendations
and what what that looks like
with into the house bill two
ninety seven.
Thank you Representative Rubio
and thank you Mr chair welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is James
COVID one I am the policy
director for the center for
civic policy and I'm happy to be
here in support of two ninety
seven the workforce and economic
prosperity Act and I want to
thank our sponsor Representative
Rubio and all of you in the
legislature for the support and
hard work being done to address
the significant economic needs
of communities across the state
especially during the dual
economic crises that we've
experienced this last year
important to note center for
civic Policy convenes the power
for New Mexico coalition which
is made up of community groups
who are experts in grassroots
organizing in communities across
the state these organizations
include some awesome Pueblo need
though New Mexico Confed NY that
U. P. old ACV NM and on the
policy side policy solutions
Institute and C. C. P. S.
Representative Rubio.
Mention we are organizations
were heavily involved in the
advocacy for the department of
workforce solutions study The
New Mexico clean energy
workforce development setting
which as Representative Rubio
mentioned ways accomplished in
your money through her health in
twenty nineteen and roll down
and during the height of the
pandemic and so
I think it's important to note
that the way that this.
Bill is structured in the bill a
comp excuse me H. between ninety
seven and will ensure that
aspects of that study will be
implemented ensuring that we
begin to develop a roadmap for
economic diversification and
head down a path that leads to
economic prosperity for all New
Mexico excuse me for all of New
Mexicans the bill accomplishes
this by creating the war for
workforce and economic
prosperity Council which is
administratively attached to the
Economic Development Department
and co chaired by the
secretaries of economic
development and workforce
solutions members of the council
also include relevant state
agencies tribal representation
members of disproportionately
impacted communities and also
relative to relevant industry
representatives.
Google is required to develop a
statewide framework which is
also can also be referred to as
an economic inclusion strategy
strategic plan for developing a
clean energy workforce and
furthering at economic
diversification which will
include rural rural seeking
greater inclusion of minority
populations throughout
procurement through purpose
using through procurement
advantages and organizational
oversight
an additional annual reporting
and those are all
recommendations they are in the
study that we're referring to
here.
I see New Mexico clean energy
workforce development study.
Is really a snapshot of what New
Mexicans were going through your
during the height of the
pandemic and during the lowest
point of the oil and gas one and
what we heard from New Mexicans
is a young New Mexicans want to
stay in their communities but
they lack access to training and
education programs rural New
Mexicans who were laid off or
furloughed this last year said
they feared the new industry
would not be built in there can
in their communities.
So in conclusion the workforce
and economic prosperity Act will
begin to address these issues by
creating mechanisms to address
the depression challenge of
developing an economy that works
for all New Mexicans the bill
includes important definitions
of focusing needs of
disproportionately impacted
communities for high road
employment and long term
economic inclusion in the state
sustainable economy and it
ensures that those
disproportionately impacted
communities tribal communities
rural communities and
communities of color have seats
at the table as the state works
to solve these issues thank you
Mr chairman and committee
members I stand for questions
with Representative Rubio.
Thank you the thing else
Representative Rubio
representative Stansbury.
Chairman yeah before I handed
off to Representative Stansbury
I just forgot to mention which
is something I think that's
super critical that is really
the reason why this issue is so
important to me is because I was
born and raised in the Permian
basin I was I I I was born in
Roswell grew up in lake Arthur
which is just north of Artesia
and the majority of my family
still lives there and so part of
what I have learned over the
course of the last five years
that I've been serving in the
legislature is that when a lot
of conversations are happening
among industries and monks
environmental groups a lot of
times the workers who are on the
frontlines of these industries
are really left behind when it
when it comes to these
conversations and so what I've
been learning a lot about all
and and what this bill intends
to do is to really uplift the
voices of the folks who are
being directly impacted by what
I believe will be a transition
in eventually and so I I would
hope that folks would look at
this as an opportunity to to
keep our minds open around the
potential that New Mexico has
not just in terms of the our
energy prospects but also in
terms of really re imagining a
different type of economy that
is in just about energy but
something that is much more much
much bigger than what we've all
can even dream about and I think
that from the the conversations
and the surveys that were done
through this study through the
department workforce solutions
and the University of New Mexico
I mean the fact that people have
this imagination for something
you is actually really exciting
and and I really want to just
amplify that for for the for the
for the folks who are who are
listening I I will hand it off
to to representative Stansbury
if she has any comments and then
we can open up for public
comment.
Welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm just
here in support and solidarity
and to lift up the voices of the
incredible people in our
communities that have been doing
this work on the ground so I
think it's it will be wonderful
to hear from the people in the
community that have been doing
the work.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Representative Rubio your.
You're good to go to the public.
Thank you thank you yes it's a
we have twenty three folks in in
the zoom audience when we go
with the proponents of the bill
does those who wish to speak in
favor.
Got a raise your hand within the
within the zoom software system
and then we'll.
We'll let you you know we'll let
you into the room so to speak
and then unmute yourself once
you're in the room we'll start
with.
Misconduct offered followed by
Andrea said on.
Well All thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Carla
creating how for and on behalf
of the center for civic policy
we sent in support of this bill
we believe that this legislation
helps us invest and Pat move a
path forward to industry that
will ultimately invest in our in
our communities and our
workforce we thank the sponsor
and we encourage the committee
to a past this bill thank you
very much.
Missin dress that I know
followed by the Ana Santa.
Good evening Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Andrea
just around on the executive
director at a late we stand in
favor of house bill two ninety
seven because it's a racial
justice issue in order to have a
transition to renewable energy
communities of color need to be
part of the planning process and
have access to the training they
need especially on tribal land
in in rural communities are to
benefit from the job
opportunities that are going to
come from this transformation
for this reason we urged
committee members of the
committee to vote in favor of
house bill two ninety seven to
ensure that black indigenous and
people of color are not just at
the table but leading when
decisions are being made for
their communities for themselves
and for their families we also
want to thank the sponsors for
bringing this forward as well as
the communities working on this
bill thank you.
Thank you agency or an S. on the
wild followed by Joseph and on
this.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and what Dennis on
the lead with the center for
civic policy and also a member
of the power for New Mexico
coalition HB two ninety seven
begins to set the right
foundation for the bold long
term work New Mexico needs to do
to make sure communities across
the state have a state and what
they need to successfully be
part of a new clean energy
economy and then you diversified
economy for New Mexico it also
ensures historically
marginalized communities across
the state especially rural
communities and communities of
color can diversify their local
economy and guarantees New
Mexicans are first in line to
prepare for the high quality
jobs in clean energy and other
workforce opportunities so thank
you for your consideration of
this bill as answers said this
is years in the making of really
thoughtful engagement by a
communities on the front lines
and for all New Mexico and on
the front lines of the energy
transition so we are excited for
this opportunity thank you.
Thank you very much Mr does
about non this followed by
Gladys so Senator.
Yeah.
Mr chair and
Members of this committee I am
the Dinesh Energy organizer for
neighbor but education project
and I live in Shiprock New
Mexico I have spoken to chapter
officials who have mentioned the
need to bring job training and
technical education for our use
and tribal community members
House Bill to ninety seven will
allow us to bring high quality
careers to our communities as
you know we need to move beyond
the fossil fuel extraction
industries and this bill helps
us by making sure tribal
communities have a say in what
they need to successfully be
part of the new clean and energy
economy it went when I explain
this.
bill to many community members
they are all excited to see the
the opportunities from this so
please vote yes on house bill
two ninety seven he had.
Thank you.
Thank you this class also
followed by on Martel.
And pardon me Mr chair eight I
believe there may be some folks
who are requesting
interpretation services and.
I see I see I.
I do not have that skilled did
we you do coordinate with the
missile test okay so.
Yes.
The option at the bottom of
there's room screen what has the
global interpretation so if they
click they can go into English
or Spanish speaking in English
and they want to translate to
Spanish just click the Spanish.
Speaking in Spanish and the
committee wants to hear in
English they click English said
at the fingertips of the person
that wants to translation thank
you so much can I help us all in
here to say that in Spanish
explained that two persons I'm
assuming that these folks spoke
speak Spanish yep Mr chair I can
I can do that it but at the
level legal can assist us going
into pursuing a LA but data who
is who but the idea is that I
the local a the model yeah he is
on the point is to put us on
that you please go ahead with
the month getting less Espanola
has been allowing this.
Yes so just give it a try Gladys
also with a global at a tele.
What a.
I'm
older version soon so she may
have to be promoted to panelist
please do.
It was just for folks at home
it's just a software distinction
between being allowed to speak
or being in the in the virtual
room where you see us like a
Michael Brady bunch.
Miss Gladys so Senator be and
Binh many that.
You wish to address the
committee.
But in on a on mute yourself.
Okay.
The.
Okay the number.
you know it is a member of some
of the county then going into
the space Senator Candace what
is that.
Propuesta middle name and they
get this we prevented from
committee that that thirty not
that I'm we wanted and we don't
know what I will do it then it
must when did that that I you
must deal with that but then we
will make you got a association
us might be got.
It remains up and miss me that
it's.
Welcome you know doing that but
don't yes yes dental testament
that that apple you know most
important visit acting I do me
is one of many that.
Thank you also just get it.
No.
I'm not giving me that the.
Once again begin doing most of
community that is came up with
that if you look at it and then
we'll take it on a laptop with
two bank does not mean they said
that the money I maybe that's so
this is the right kind of the
medical I'm is multi employer
I'm looking at the less you know
when I am with this money media
it but let us ask you.
When I was disconnected would
actually conduct a this
committee I think the study
coming does not want to see that
thank god on us but I might he
not only when he called Sliq
Senator that ring Jack is the
for men and are on side one does
yes in the almost and we got to
see.
Thank god one of the main thing.
The minister of the hour but the
issue that either only because
the McDonald's in New Mexico.
On that very much okay yeah
it'll candlestick yes it looks
like up on any of a stand yes
what is that is my opinion thank
in these days.
HM maybe those knowing they see
that you're gonna this one but
if you do members of coming up
with community have a lot of
good ask yes.
Thank you and and just for for
members of the committee it's
not the speaker that presses the
the Billboard that presses the
it but it's us the listeners so
what I did is I clicked the the
interpretation and I con and
went to Spanish or I'm sorry
went to English and heard an
interpreter.
Talk to me in English so so
everybody can just speak their
native language okay and then
I've been having this followed
by.
Khloe Jake.
Mr chairman and committee
members my name is nana Bennett
B. this I am the community
organizer and crack in Grant
County for cafe axion H. B. two
ninety seven would provide the
foundations for a bridge to job
expansion and diversification
within our community we can
honor our deep mining traditions
while reimagining an economy
that is inclusive of those
traditions and innovative in its
approach to the future
renewable energy sources such as
wind and solar require the use
of copper the leading industry
in Grant County bringing green
economy jobs and educational
opportunities that accompany
them would allow for true job
diversification and insurance
that our community will have
multiple industries that
complement each other and
provide overall economic
flexibility and job growth
within grant Luna and Hidalgo
County thank you for your time.
Thank you Khloe Jake followed by
Bill Jordan.
Now I go I see hope by thank you
Mr chairman committee for giving
me time to speak today my name
is where we take and I am a
citizen of the party nation of
Oklahoma and the hello and I'm a
lifelong resident of Albuquerque
I am speaking today and then we
have as an indigenous woman
alarmed by the climate crisis
the consequences of which by
parking low income communities
already indoor and will continue
to bear the brunt of if urgent
and sweeping actions are not
taken immediately I am proud of
the actions that the state and
this body have taken to address
the climate crisis and initiate
the transition to clean energy
the work is far from over in
this transition must be just and
equitable to all of New Mexico
citizens I just transition must
redress the harms inflicted upon
traditionally just said bandage
communities by giving them the
power and where with all to
determine how they will succeed
in a green energy economy I
believe HB to ninety seven weeks
to accomplish the fundamentals
of adjust to transition and I
would urge the committee to
appropriate to pass thank you.
Thank you very much Mr Bill
Jordan followed by.
I'd such this.
Good evening Mr chairman members
of the committee Bill Jordan
representing New Mexico voices
for children we stand in support
of the legislation you know so
often when it comes to economic
development we don't ask the
workers and the communities who
are being impacted this
legislation is focused keenly on
the workers their needs their
training their recommendations
with the inevitable changes come
into our economy we applaud
Representative is Rubio and
Stansbury we're looking for
solutions from the communities
themselves involving the workers
and the communities who are
impacted thank you.
Thank you very much Mr this
welcome.
Yet a shakeup to Chavis you
share it doesn't mean excellent
piece on a bus to Jean kites in
the edition J. Keyes on
induction LA go to help the
economy al you will miss at the
hello my name is also Chavis and
in employment for you will
Pueblo and the executive
director of an united vote and a
member of power for New Mexico
thank you for allowing me to
speak today HB two ninety seven
addresses a racial justice issue
with meaningful career
opportunities well diversifying
our economy and a diverse
economy is about making sure
that historically disadvantaged
communities have a seat at the
table so that we can envision a
stronger and healthier New
Mexico and you know honestly
it's the best way to move
forward for these reasons and
those stated previously we ask
that you please pass HB two
ninety seven double at.
Thank you.
Good introduce yourself that
you're listed as Heidi's almost
like soon followed by Camilla.
The woman.
yes but is it and they members
of the committee my number it is
credit to you so I remember us
almost X. Yanni for New Mexico
everyone and another Chavis your
where several with that
particular medicine for tennis
but I'm supposed to be on the
that we wanna Celestin on me
waking up in their most.
The act you know the number of
which are just yet that our
office but just to see our
you're welcome is useless New
Mexico senator that Roswell but
as to the Act meal topical
question is can we see our they
can this is at the heart of the
state the yes believe it also
has a powerful how do them which
is members us almost innocent
District SMX and follow and when
the sun is a let me that.
and members of the committee for
this opportunity to speak on
behalf of an R. D. C. and the
Sierra Club in favor of this
bill I'm representing the Sierra
club's thirty five thousand
members and supporters around
the state in favor I was born
and raised here in Albuquerque
and have used energy generated
here in our state for my entire
life and that's the basis for my
commitment to a truly a just
transition I want to especially
recognize and thank
Representative Rubio for her
foresight and dedicating junior
money to this study out of the
department of workforce
solutions that has led to
outcomes that are clear and
measurable and opportunities for
communities to create and
describe their own economic
future we're at a time where we
need to create a sustainable
economy that doesn't just happen
to us but that's created by us
and for our people for our
families and for our future so
we hope you'll vote in favor
members of the committee thank
you so much.
Thank you and welcome Joslin
kobus.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee my name
is Justin goals and
representative cross section I
want to thank you in advance for
elements of what you need to
speak to you about house bill
two ninety seven we need to take
immediate action to panic it's
crummy change and this bill will
be just depends on climate
change is already affecting our
health care land and water our
future be greatly affect it if
we don't take action passions
bill will not only help fight
climate change but it will
ensure a just transition for all
New Mexicans biz access want to
clean energy economy I just
transition in New Mexico will
benefit our communities and
accessing clean energy dust by
diversifying jobs and providing
more opportunities for our
people House Bill to ninety
seven were injured on Mexicans
benefit from increased high
quality sustainable dust
produced an agreement currently
it will also expand and grow and
family our state's economy so
they will so we were not only
rely on going into the oil and
gas industry we have to take
action please well yes on house
bill two ninety seven thank you
so much bustling thank you
Charles good marker.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee want to
thank Representative Rubio for
sponsoring this great Bill
Murray be what other people have
said I'm just gonna leave it
just this is bill is so
important it's so important
because we can't as we move.
Forward with the economy
developing a new economy that
sustains revenues for the state
but most importantly sustains
our people and the environment
we need to have the people who.
Representative and are members
of all the communities
participating in.
Rating R. course forward I thank
you very much please vote yes.
Thank you very much anyone else
was to speak in favor of the
bill.
Hi the welcome it says Heidi
someone section go to introduce
yourself.
Welcome.
Just gonna once one sec your
tend.
For the record okay one of the
US president and members of the
committee my number is quite a
good deal so members most axion
in power for New Mexico everyone
acknowledge having yup we
request that request a
particular element is supporting
us but I miss him the money that
you have a wonderful rest and
then all making for us not the
number one Chennai as yet of
office plans to see our you're
welcome if you look at the
center of what about us at but
but units committee hosted in
this to that but I used it of
the State this.
Yes there having someone just
accident this an established act
yes if I issue the.
In light of what this in the
simplest Act yes input
appendicitis yes one us of that
not the worst economic questions
and comments about this what was
the latest of which honestly
might cause this one going in
school what decided that the
best image that is the proposed.
What is an all make with this
committee what are less and less
less than was consistent and
addressed.
Thank you very much.
Anyone else was to speak in
favor.
Representative Rubio eighty one
S. number that's what up with
that late act it no in place
yet.
Renewable medical assistant that
one of the best you'll must be
back what the list that'll
definitely automatic I mean that
it is not able to get a little
cynical back going well you this
is not a lotus yes when I select
the act in one no in place yet
that sickle me incessantly in
yes one of us to participate
with this a year coming.
Laudable but I can Mr just call
me that is with one.
Going to school here that'll
nanosatellite when we took the
info going mystic I'm you know
for this is that a activate
those now in place yet they're
not this bill will come you'll
see people but it is not you
Madam those level machine guns
if not we'll get aside applicant
the sat and maybe on the empty
latest little stillness the
automatic us that anti sent us
when I when you landed Cologne
here but I missed a committee
that is the demand will not do
that then it is yes yes that I'm
that I'm blessed seven analysts
was plus you also eat that'll
reports list either because it's
simple thank you iglesias.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much anyone else
wish to speak in favor anyone
else wish to speak in opposition
are have concerns with house
bill two ninety seven and got a
raise your hand there's twenty
three folks twenty for folks in
the zoom.
Please raise your hand if you
wish to be neutral or opposed
all right fantastic so there's
twenty four folks in the Virgin
the virtual audience and then
the panelists were members of
the committee.
Representative a Johnson.
Of note we'll go to Martinez
excellence your hand on your
back Representative Johnson
please thank you Mr chair and
thank you representatives for
bringing this bill forward I was
reading the bill and I saw that
on page six.
Wait page seven.
Page seven.
It.
Section four I believe it's
number the subsectors action E.
number six subsection II.
I don't know if that's right but
anyway I'm gonna read it it says
support communities and
expanding economic opportunities
in ways that are culturally
appropriate and affirming and I
really appreciate this part of
the bill I think that
you know many times were
mentioned but this really four
says to see that the table and
we will be able to have a voice
your dad tribal tribal wraps.
And
you know thank you for including
our communities so that we can
help make decisions.
about our communities and our
economic contributions because
you know we do want to and and
we have the historical Navajo.
Economic ways of life that we
hold dear livestock farming
artistry and then we have our
local community colleges and two
year and a college and existing
tribal programs so that with
those entities you know I hope
that we can help shape and make
a contribution from the Navajo
rural inverse way of life and
and help our kids participate
and and modernize these
opportunities so I don't know
that's kind of what you were
thinking and sponsors but I just
wanted to say thank you and and
and let you know I appreciate
that part thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative
Martinez thank you Mr chair I
will do pass.
We have a motion for a do pass
by Representative Martinez.
There is a second by
Representative set up though
before we take that motion
there's more debate
Representative set up.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
thank you to the sponsor of this
bill our sponsors of this bill I
guess the question you know some
of that some of the reviews of
the legislation relating to that
the languages of it new I think
and it's and I I don't see that
as a boss I see that as you know
modernizing our losses catching
up with you know where we should
be and even even as
Representative Johnson pointed
out you know culture program
affirming is his new language
and I'm kind of curious I don't
know the the sponsor would have
contact with the state needs to
different conversation but how
does that that.
We modernize that language and
ensure that the intent maintains
is that a concern for the
sponsor of this bill at all you
know is is that is that
something that you feel will
grow into industry's getting
more perspective on that at all.
Thanks Mr chair thank you
Representative has set up a for
your question I mean I think
that yes this is absolutely new
language that we're we're trying
to really incorporate into
policy because I think part of
what's come out of the survey
that was done so over eighteen
hundred people were surveyed it
over the course of this D. W.
west any people who are on the
front lines of the frontline
workers who are either who
either worked directly in the
oil and gas industry or in coal
country up in the northwestern
part of the state and then of
course as as Representative
Johnson minced mention so many
folks of that were interviewed
throughout tribal communities
and so it is sort of a a
testament to what that study did
in terms of trying to be as
inclusive as possible I guess
the the question does remain in
terms of what how how this will
be rolled out and as someone who
is serving in the legislature
and is very much committed to
racial justice and equity issues
my hope is is that we we as a
legislative body need to make
sure that we that a lot of the
the spirit of of which this bill
was created that and written
that we we we continue to to
move in that direction.
Thank you so much Representative
renaissance or the like I
appreciate that respect I think
it's really helpful and I mean I
would anticipate that in some
ways you know should this move
forward on this this council's
committee this group would would
would kind of be a part of
shaping have languages really
interpret so I appreciate that
because I think we we will start
to see that change in our
language and how we're really
implementing as lawmakers as
well so thank you so much I
appreciate that perspective.
Thank you representative
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for the bill
that and workforce solutions
report is an amazing piece of
work but that together with this
piece of legislation.
Mr chair and representative is
the pathway a pathway forward to
some equitable opportunities in
rural areas students into the
mazing piece of work and what
particularly struck me about and
as
member also extrication
Committee and the teacher is the
breaking down of the silos
particularly in between higher
at between PED between workforce
solutions and Economic
Development Department.
Because those groups talk to
each other and share the
information about what is needed
for economic development and how
to get the work force ready is
is a phenomenal waits to get
things done and I it's right in
line with the education movement
toward meaningful education and
training kids even in the case
until system letting them start
to get certifications and and
get prepared for the workforce
that's in their community in the
workforce need and the industry
need in their community to
diversify the economy to you
know there's families and stay
in their communities where they
want to be
just.
Piece of work I have some
concerns Mr chair and
Representative about the
reactions from the agency
departments to we're gonna need
funds to do this that there
isn't an appropriation to
accomplish some of this work do
you have any concerns about
that.
Thank you madam.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative based on the FIR
I think we also ate part of
what's been incorporated into
the FIR which I think is an
accurate is that there and the
way that I read it anyway is
that they they're they're
proposing that the the study
still has to be conducted the
study is actually been conducted
so we're basically just building
a framework around the study
that's already been done so
technically there is nothing
nothing to
I mean and the the the it's not
nothing but there will be
minimal of there will be a
minimal cost to really moving
this forward and so I think
that's where
I think that's where I I'm
reading the FIR in that they're
incorporating the work that this
study which has already been
completed.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative I think EDD has
some current concerns about
their workforce and and ability
to carry the work as laid out
here and department of workforce
solutions just I'll need another
anti so there is there are
things that they're going to
have to build into their budgets
to accomplish this work it is
very worthwhile I'm gonna
channel the Judiciary Committee
and point out just a couple of
language things on page seven.
Line is five to seven.
Just a little
This is.
Where was state agencies to
implement economic inclusion
strategic plan that is the work
of the council.
And this is a long follow that
session actually starts on page
five.
Thank you for really last line
on page four the council shall
develop this plan the strategic
plan.
So that things that need to be
in the plan but number seven
actually goes back to what the
strategic council should do so
that should probably be
called out of their maintenance
on letter it should probably be
letter assn remember after that
the letter after that is just
the.
Language using and the
suggestion from one of the
analysts online eleven pay seven
line and eleven every year on
September fifteenth might be
better served by every year by
September fifteenth just because
September fifteenth might fall
on a Sunday or holiday or
something strange so couple
things to consider and I am
really impressed by his work in
the potential that has the
devils and the implementation
when we have to make sure rules
that we're trying.
Thank you Mr chair thanks
Representative.
Thank you very.
Thank thank you Mr chair did
you.
Yes.
Your hand is okay thank thank
you I am.
And wasn't sure I heard you so
of what I will ask is I wanted
some more information regarding
the funding Representative and
Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chair
representative
is there a specific question
related to the funding well you
know it seems like this is such
a the.
A good piece of legislation and
the FIR is talking about you
needing
We need to put funding in the in
by what you said is the study is
done and so the the.
We.
It's not your position at.
Would.
Junior funding be able to help
with some of that.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative absolutely you
know we were very encouraged by
this FIR and so we're certainly
very much in the same way that I
was able to help allocate for
the for the funds for the study
a couple years ago my hope is
that we can we can garner a few
more people to support this
effort in in the next few days
if if if if it's absolutely
necessary to do that.
I I will I will say in this is
to what Representative Figueroa
mentioned earlier that I did not
mention is that I have had
conversations with
EMNRD and with the economic
development department they have
received care wanting to work on
just transition issues and so
they have it right now the of
the river what is it called they
they've already but they're
they're already going out for
art piece so we believe that
that if in my opinion and and
these are conversations that
we've had with them that if they
were able to designate those
people to really jump start this
process that we can certainly
find a long term and sustainable
funding necessary to to keep
this going.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative I appreciate that
this appears to be a different
path for us to have
conversations on how we're gonna
defer diversify our economy
while protecting and listening
to our impacted communities and
I think that that's just such an
important piece and we've never
had
we haven't had those
conversations and actually the
ability to to make some of these
policy changes and so I'm very
supportive of your legislation
and what we can get it out here
tonight thank you.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you if any other committee
members have any questions have
a couple questions thank you
Representative Rubio and
Representative Stansbury for
joining us this this evening.
This is a
I mean this is like a
revolutionary bill I want to
thank you for all your work and
and and what it entails.
Of what relief puts a lot on the
on the executive branch I'm all
about telling the executive
branch what to do but
but this is like something that
up you know on the one of the
lateral executive right ones
that can Attorney General or
governor the governor it task
force on on
Retirees and the pair up of you
knows solvency issue and just
you know crossed it in on
provided strong strong
leadership for the rest of.
Our agenda on that what you're
doing is you're putting in
statute and making.
Various departments do things
various agencies do fans
So that's a tough one that's
terrible because you know we do
more of that tend to go building
to get signed and then the and
then you come back a year later
and fight with executives
regards to why it's not all
happening
so this is just the the sixty
four dollar question if I may
Representative Rubio what is
the.
The two chairs the to propose
chairs have you know if you
spoken to them and why are they
not here.
I'm thank you Mr chair
I I mean I think that I don't
really know why they're not here
but I do know that we have had
ongoing conversations with them
particularly around my own
conversations with them around
the work that I do on and
economic diversification as well
as what this idea could be for
like this is really something
that I feel that the
administration could really run
with because if anything it we.
We talk about economic
diversification a lot in the
state especially when it comes
to the legislature I feel like
communities who were part of the
framework for this live they
literally handed this idea to
the legislature to get it done
and so I feel like I don't
really use any more to talk
about how do we diversified like
this is the road map to get
there and I'm and it's led by
communities who work directly
impact and impacted and my hope
is that the governor will
We'll be able to.
So and as I mentioned earlier in
in in in my comments
Representative.
Last there's your money around
that includes health issue
really push these efforts
forwards so I I I have a lot of
high expectations and then and
and and really think that we can
really get them on board for
this fantastic thank you for
that and just to go over some of
the language before we go back
to resume addresses.
Motion so on page if you could
look at section three one of the
definitions are great the
definitions are great their new
to Tuesday statute
You know and there.
And some folks may have trouble
grasping them
You know you have the council
obviously you're in the in the
bill disproportionally affected
communities and inclusion I
wrote.
Resilience economy that's going
to section three and there's a
lot of shells and I love the
shells in here it says the state
shall.
Create economic inclusion
opportunities by implementing
the recommendations contained in
the.
In the state in the workforce
study of.
How does it how does that.
Manifest itself.
Thank.
Just a self within state
government how do you see that
playing out.
Yes I mean that is certainly a
great question chair and
I mean I I think.
Honestly I I I I just I I feel
like I have a lot of high
expectations on what our
state government can do and and
I think we wrote this
legislation with the the intent
of really.
You know it's it's it's a
homegrown it's it's it's
communities on the front lines
who have developed so much of
this framework that.
I mean we think that we are in a
crossroads at this point in the
in in in in our economy I mean
as as our expert James mentioned
earlier
this study that was conducted by
again Sanchez at UNM started at
the cost of the beginnings of
the it was at the in in the.
The aftermath of oil and gas
collapsing last spring and and
so even within even with all of
that that that was happening
people were still feeling
hopeful about the possibilities
and so I think that with this
issue around the shells
it's really
I think just it it's it's it was
just necessary to to put that in
because we felt that we don't
want this to just be a symbolic
gesture but something that
actually
has some.
I'm I'm off to it I guess.
Now thank you for that I because
yeah I know you could give a
whole
The possibilities are endless at
worst actually no imagining the
future and and and grabbing the
future of this couple technical
things in and out of the COVID
and all wrapped up on page four
so so bottom of page three you
have the voting members which
are fantastic because it's one
representative from each
department a lot of lot of our
state bills have the secretaries
stuck in these these meetings
without a a nobility to a point
now and you know an altered a W.
or whatnot but then you have
advisory members of advisory
members to the council their
opponent of appointed by the.
Secretaries workforce solution
economic development but then in
paragraph D. at the bottom.
Is nine twenty twenty three
state the council may create and
this is fantastic that because
you give them a nudge the
council may create working
groups on specific topics
a working group shall include
advisory members appointed by
the co chairs of the council the
the advisory members online
twenty two are they this can
they be different than the
advisory members on line I.
Thank you Mr chair I believe I
believe so but let me just
handed over to James really
quickly to make sure that I'm
I'm answering that correctly.
Mr chair yes I think that is
correct.
Thank that does not think you
may want to.
You may want to distinguish the
two if it comes up again
And then the help page page
five.
This is totally different than
most any other bill we've seen
you know I mean it's it's it's
really a.
It's really unique and very
creative so I commend everybody
because what state government
really needs is is is
organizer's you know with the
organizer's within state
government we need to state
government is whatever we
imagine it to be.
State government can do whatever
you know as long as it's
constitutional like if we you
know we're gonna quit when it if
we expand early childhood
development to every single new
born
You know we need to organize
this to go into homes and
families make folks comfortable
with with home visiting things
that nature I would ask take a
look Representative Rubio.
When you look on page six the
paragraph for on page three look
at the bill that represents sort
out those championing we passed
it through the house.
Seems like weeks ago but I think
it was like yesterday or the day
before yesterday.
dealing with the procurement
there's also a procurement bill
coming over from the Senate
Senate bill fifty three you know
if if the if the state
government has seven million
dollar budget half goes to
salaries have caused to
contracts with the sorry state
of our economy but the
contracts.
The vast majority go offered we
don't have stats on that we
don't have any stats on where
our procurement dollars go but
if we were to keep you know an
extra billion dollars in Mexico
it would it would increase our
you know goes to Mexico domestic
product by maybe one maybe one
point five percent so we that's
a key.
Want to just
dollars in state telehealth
while businesses that can do the
work either subcontracting or
ultimately doing those big those
big huge projects
So keep that in mind and then
lastly.
All.
Lastly I like the way it's
housed within the Economic
Development Department.
This kind of my philosophy you
know governor's role in every
eight years of and and and state
governments always just has to
be reorganized its use crisis
when a new what time timeliness
or not a coincidence have a
crisis situation when a new
government comes in the new
governor has a political agenda
up some have more of a robust
legislative agenda some have
less and some departments the
coffin and start cohesiveness in
some.
The the Attorney General and
when when he rolled into power
that the couple just system was
very dysfunctional any focused
on that as opposed to laying out
you know all of us to
legislative agenda but if like
the treasure the honor they do
the golf each came with economic
bills for us to to move and then
we we have only one column
interim committee dealing with
the economy and that's the
economic in rural development
which.
This committee and the chair of
the Senate.
Tax business and transportation
co chair take a look at our
house Joint Memorial to which
creates economic council
with
with members from the economics
department at New Mexico state
and Economic department at UNM
my point is is that we need a
consistent.
Economic advisory group so that
we can have the the backing and
and the know it all in the where
with all to push economic
legislation and and and you know
create jobs they some of these
things happen organically some
don't the developing above our
hemp industry is a great example
we legalize hemp some farmers go
to have but it really takes
those entrepreneurs with capital
to build the warehouses and
contract with the farmers we do
not have a hand processing
plant.
We're dealing with are like our
beef industry we are not have a.
Process plant in New Mexico
there's a lot of things we could
do here in New Mexico what's
tricky is Mexico's economy is is
based on things that of their
environmentally damaging you
know how as crude oil drilling
things that nature so how do we
how do we grow those economies
Macomb as clean.
All and then expand other
economies I think that.
lastly I mean past ten fifteen
years everyone talks about
building the economy through tax
breaks and that's from our
general general fund and has
really led to to economic growth
each town and county has a
economic development office or
or one percent economic
development officer and there.
Kind of their focus is like I
are bees and Alcon lead to help
and and using kind of the tools
in the government toolbox in
statute as opposed to just
building relationships doing
conferences bringing people
together trying to you know
focus on value added production
agriculture how do we develop
the main streets of our various
small towns you know
so we just need organizers on
the ground implementing modern
economic policies so I really
appreciate the work that went
into this and all the kings and
leaders that I recognize going
us here this afternoon
but it's really a I mean this is
like.
this ideas like a chief
executive idea that's why it's
it's so awesome and and so
needed because legislature we
don't have to go for it we have
to go for it we have to go big
and we have to just we have to
get this economy going if we can
go five percent a year for like
ten years straight we're we're
we're good to go our children
stay here you know of you know
if we develop and learn how to
teach our people and learn from
the plaintiffs of the Yazzie
petitions I mean we can.
There's no such thing as a New
Mexico who's on a successful
outside of state New Mexico
there's New Mexicans going up
all over this country because
there's something inherent in
being a Mexican that just just
makes us awesome we just have to
build our economy you know
increase our standard of living
and and heal our families and
these a generational aspects of
our of our life so I'm going on
I lastly I think
I love is the term.
You use the term.
Do you use a term that describes
very are you.
Disproportionately impacted
community.
You could even take that out and
just say New Mexico.
New Mexico.
When I say this when I read
disproportionate impact the
committee I it applies to all
corners of New Mexico
so we have to acknowledge that
and we have to build off of that
and we have to.
We have to heal from it and move
forward so I
Members of the committee of read
about the agency has a motion
for a do pass.
So I'll take forgot who seconded
I didn't write it down with
somebody second.
Second fantastic a daily call
the roll.
No.
Representative Dow.
No Representative Fajardo.
Representative was.
Yes Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Though.
Representative at the yes.
Madam chair to get a lot.
Madam vice chair.
Yes.
Yes thank you and I'm gonna go
yes you have a do pass continue
the conversation try to persuade
the chief executive maybe create
a task force on this specific
issue or if not
You know passed legislation and
and and and force it to happen
that way but regardless of what
happens with this bill this this
idea must a move forward so I
commend you guys for being able.
Thank you Mr chair the committee
members.
Thank you all and all right
great so so I'm going to members
I'm reminding members.
I don't know if representative
Adam on the spoke to about house
bill one thirty Fulfer.
You have a motion.
Anyone know the motion to make.
Mr chairman I move that we take
this bill off of the table for
reconsideration all right so
there's a motion to remove a
house bill one thirty four from
the table
and and and
I don't believe I don't know if
that was indeed the second but
all second it any any objections
so there's a committee sub.
What what is what is house bill
one thirty four I'm sorry I I
absolutely don't forget me up.
Mr Chairman tax bills on the
brain.
Relating to employment
establishing a program to reward
small business employers for
their adoption family friendly.
Policy we're kinda into the idea
of a critical of the text of the
bill
the and the resident doctor not
just went back to the drawing
board and has a committee set up
and asked us to commit to the
committee consider the committee
substitute.
That check okay thank you.
So I don't I don't I don't know
if the motion is a second but
all seconded is there any
objection to taking house bill
one thirty four of the table
and.
Reconsidering it
we will reconsider it now will
put on Fridays calendar.
Is anyone object.
Thank you all right
Well I'm gonna try to avoid a
Saturday meeting.
I don't think we're gonna go as
long on the floor next week but
you never know maybe that's the
speaker will allow a Monday or
Wednesday to start early and
close late but we level couple
bills Friday a couple on Monday
and then and then the Senate
referrals will start coming
over.
So thank you analyst prior hard
work and we are adjourned.
