Here Representative Martinez we
are.
Representative Matthews.
It is.
Will.
That settlement last year here.
Madam.
Mr R. Representative please
begin.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and we want to
start is that in the office.
madam chair house bill twenty
three.
Is about our background actors.
Also known as background artists
also known as extras.
And the madam chair
In the testimony from the
audience you can hear
individuals from the
contractors
that this is their first time
coming to the capital check.
So the real green in terms of
how they present themselves so
be patient that madam chair
Madam chair of the house bill
twenty three.
Background actors Act.
And madam chair members of the
committee.
We made the great strides
regarding the advancement of the
movie industry in New Mexico.
Our tax rebates are tax benefits
and loan programs are.
The best in the country.
Our state in many communities.
Our top three.
In the country for movie family
locations.
Unfortunately.
Our movie industry gains.
Have short sighted are back on
the actors.
House bill twenty three brings
dignity to this forgotten.
An important sector of the film
industry by one.
Providing standardized
compensation rules.
To improvements at safety.
Three improving conditions for
children.
Older adults and persons with
disabilities.
And by providing an environment
safe from sexual harassment
bullying.
And physical abuse.
I have with me.
Madam chair ruby Garcia she is
the president of the.
New Mexico background actors
Association with the large
membership.
And are you to continue with the
the presentation on the
significance of the legislation.
Welcome this.
Good afternoon madam chair
committee representatives and
president ruby Garcia the
background actors Association of
New Mexico.
Today we remember our founder
the late Bobby Shelton for her
birthday today and tomorrow
March or when you're passing as
we move forward with the legacy
house bill twenty three
background or distance I would
like to like me with a letter
that was collaborated with our
founder and myself.
An open letter to the New Mexico
film community.
Where community of New Mexico
back up performers and allies
who believe in the same
professional standards that our
fellow actors who work as
principal performers have come
to expect what working on sets.
Background acting is hard work
and it is important first step
for many talented performers as
they developed careers as full
time professional actors.
Furthermore assuring that
background actors receive fair
and equal treatment creates a
solid foundation for the
maintenance of high professional
standards for actors.
As film and television
productions continue to flourish
and expand in New Mexico
background actors must be
treated with the same
professional dignity and respect
Ansett as the rest of their
colleagues.
To that end we're asking
productions to adhere to a new
background actors house bill
twenty three that establishes
consistent standards for fair
compensation safety and working
conditions the growing community
of background actors in New
Mexico is professionally trained
and is equipped with the
knowledge needed to work on set.
That phone actors are tied up to
the same consideration and
respect as others working on
set.
We asked producers.
To agree to treat background
actors as professionals and we
believe house bill twenty three
will be a tool that can help
them achieve that goal.
The background actors
Association of New Mexico now is
asking the New Mexico field
community to support this
critical step forward by
supporting house bill twenty
three background artist act.
A yes vote for H. B. twenty
three will provide standardized
compensation rules.
It's disjointed payment
policies.
Nonpayment Reports withdraw
dramatically.
Production companies like Disney
Warner brothers paramount
twentieth century and in the
productions are held accountable
for their non payment
negligence.
These are some of the reports
that I received hazardous
working conditions sexual
harassment ADA violations
retaliation black this to this
treatment.
No payment issues all right the
cleaning lady love lies bleeding
to centers of you.
To this date Waco production Big
Sky production have outstanding
non payment issues to the tune
of eight months plus and
counting.
There's no accountability norm
no one forced me.
No transparency no one wants to
take this responsibility not the
state the film office or the
production companies we're not
looking for money.
Just accountability what is it
going to take.
A yes vote for house bill twenty
three.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative thank you for
your time Madam chair of also on
if we'll be could also reflect
on.
The association in terms of its
membership how long it's been in
existence if you could kind of
the indulge the committee with
that information Madam chair
committee representatives are
founders established.
The bill of rights about three
years ago.
We worked on it together with
our board we important
background actors association or
nonprofit I would secretly.
About a year ago she passed away
I took over as president.
And our mission is to educate to
mentor and train all New Mexico
background noticed.
Hi Representative a little under
ten thousand in the state of New
Mexico.
with that madam chair we stand
for questions.
Can I have a show of hands those
the this the recovery.
The location of.
Posted.
maybe we should start with the
most.
Exactly thank you madam chair.
My name the number of jobs and
I.
This.
The film offices opposes Act SB
twenty three and I want to make
it clear that the background
over the document well we
actually actually collaborated
with.
Shelton a couple years ago to
help
support the creation of it and
it's on our website it is today
and it's wonderful sacked after
actually in your bank.
Enacting that document would be
redundant in that by existing
that and workforce solutions
The bill creates
greater because these
that restrictions down for other
employees.
Including misdemeanors and such
and as such the building
Tennessee language of this
problem from our perspective
it's on reasonable and Avid
written a single production
could have hundreds if not
thousands of misdemeanors with
sentencing sentencing fine for
each of them.
I'm more thoughtful approach
might be might need to be here
this act after a payment
standards and penalties that are
currently affected industry
standard.
Language regarding the penalties
in this bill is far too
aggressive would absolutely
create uncertainty in industry
and with actions bringing on
projects here the bill proposes
adding language to the film tax
credit legislation as well.
Requiring the Austin definitely
paid for production could apply
for the tax credit that is also
we don't do we really have money
which will help and it's how all
financial obligations that have
been incurred in the state our
results indicate we do most of
the tax credit application
Furthermore this bill could
conflict with existing Netflix
anceta after a grievance in
contracts regarding that New
Jersey in New Mexico and I don't
think there's any where nations
that
So we have lots of the for the
failed state limit your comments
about one minute that way we can
make sure made mention because
it is it would be like to say
some others that have yes ma'am
universe yes Madam chair
representative thank you my name
is Claudia Baca for and I wanted
to speak from my heart that I
represent that people that are
handicapped because I know the
dust there but it has nothing to
do with portable sets you're all
set for game maybe you're on set
for a week when you get there
they don't have handicapped
parking and actually I've been
there where they do it they
actually put aside over for
director assistant director I
have a of the actor and I can't
park there so I have to work for
weight when we get to the
holding that they bring up last
for me and for you to go to the
second problem is the first step
on a bus is seventeen inches I
can't do it they do not have
handicapping.
Yes when I need to go the rest
of which all of us have to do
what I need to go to the
restroom I have to climb up to
with the call they reckons at a
claim for staff the six steps up
with this grated metal material
with a little cheaper than that
I can't do it and what time when
they have a full part for me to
do it I got to the top in the
board wasn't secure and I fell
down from the top yeah go to the
COVID tests and they have the
states there's been told what
you have to climb up well I
can't yes ma'am know what can
you crawl up.
Informal and so we see that
there is no cost nothing set for
somebody that is elderly or
somebody that is handicapped in
the the staff.
State parking there's so many
states but I have not been able
to watch because once again
were picked up in the bus.
Thank you X..
I don't miss Reese.
I will always reading over the
state next.
Advises that bay and for a very
long.
Through March the the.
Fans of the brand as well that
we just.
So with all the stress induced
by terrorism in northern New
Mexico Representative.
One bright light on the New
Mexico.
Which is growing beyond what hi
on.
We want to do it to the G. Ross
provides jobs.
From that are the thirty one
educators have we want to see
them continue act background for
myself.
But we do see real problem.
In many of these companies and
using however we was talking
about.
Others primarily this far as I.
The end of the day on.
These people eight because they
are what they are supposed to be
made but in many cases thank you
there are not.
Are there page so many months
later have they need to be able
to have the fingerprint have
then your mortgage it is
imperative.
One of the on this day well yes
just say this bill to the floor
part of what we show these
people that we may thank you
thank you it is eight weeks.
There are.
Thank in general.
Representative Kate you're
trying to be here my name is
Dale Anderson Fernandes and I'm
a professional real estate agent
of more than twenty five years
ago Land Rover is mark is very
familiar with many of the other
the second term sheriff of San
Juan County king Ferrari I am a
professional meditate realestate
but in my acting career.
I have a lot of times a lot of
money this is money money money
estimate that we can have an
entertainment industry.
It provides for all of us now
New Mexico I am the year for the
sales company I think you're
doing nothing.
You have no teeth.
You have no staff to act New
Mexico is a staff to it.
Eighteen that means you have a
right in statute we have
nothing.
But is not the point in New
Mexico.
We've also had very much of.
A lack of standards that in our
industry as background artists
you're all familiar with Russ.
And when rostrum in the news
last.
Action.
Albuquerque here in New Mexico.
It's New Mexico New Mexico's DNA
what about rest production what
would to rust held accountable
for.
In any one of us here.
It happened to thank god it's
not we have the same right to
return to our homes after we go
to our productions as we left
our homes in.
Just like you want to do right
we leave here you want to go
home in one piece I want to go
home to my family.
But if I don't have any
protection provided for me
thanks to a qualified state for
nobody accountable.
How many rest we can act.
Thank you.
Today.
Yes.
Yeah.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Joe range.
Her testimony for and against
is.
The movie industry in Mexico is
going to be.
Billion dollar industry.
Issue.
and she state that this bill
take money which is here.
Background actors Association.
She's fighting for the rights of
New Mexicans to get paid and the
rights of New Mexico in the
state once and.
Thank you what else.
Yes.
And please direct all your
festive as teacher your name let
us feature of comments to the
chairs of the committee not to
each other in the on okay.
My name is Roy Moore thank you
madam chair and other
representatives on the committee
I have a statement that I'd like
to read I just wanted like to
read from a friend of that was
working on a movie set here in
Santa Fe less than two weeks ago
regarding a very dangerous
situation that I think you all
identify with especially with
that recent headlines up in the
news
on Tuesday the twenty fourth of
January I was working for the
set of dark woods we were in
Santa Fe and the weather was in
the twenties I am creating in
this production but I was very
concerned about the cold weather
for the background actors I
checked on the background actors
around eleven o'clock they had
been there for about an hour we
had forty background actors for
that scene that we were to fill
would you check to see how
they're being kept warm they
were in a Hogan style portable
housing unit with four propane
heaters I I everything that was
I thought everything was fine
but then I checked in a few
hours later the place is not
seem to be well ventilated for
the portable heaters there was
only one door that would affect
close and I realize that that
would not be near enough in
relation for the heaters and
that the people could be
breathing into much carbon
monoxide I voice my concern to
the job Stewart he told me to
tell the paramedic when I told
the paramedic he got the COVID
people of state to bring in a
machine to test the air the
chair of the COVID people use
their CO two monitors and talk
to the assistant directors
turned out the CO two level was
way too high so they cut the
plastic out of the top poll of
the tokens and rearranged air
filters to drive fresh air and
brought it down to a safe level
this could be very dangerous for
the background workers it could
have been deadly I'm writing
this letter in hopes that we can
have better safety on the sets
before people are brought in I
feel training is needed for the
safety of background workers
this this bill that you're
considering we ask that you
consider very.
Hello that you would to approve
it in committee sent it to the
four have ratified as law show
that up to the it would help us
in so many different areas
paying safety of the disabled
whatever
So the the background actors is
probably the only element or one
of a couple weeks elements on a
movie set it is not represented
by unions and by you of this.
In this case are only
representatives.
Are you our representatives and
so we ask you to please take
this into consideration here
thank you.
Anything else.
Yes ma'am.
And then the.
And I think everybody would be
here today.
Anybody else.
Thank you so G. Jones go back JJ
appreciated Chairman
representative.
Talk about this morning really
keep hearing about things are
already on the books in
redundancy we have a lot of
losses states from their
convention that's on the books a
lot of lost and get while local
laws that should be is our guns
as far as of.
All members as far as it doesn't
get done what's happening is she
would not have those staff
reports like this it was being
taken care.
Has been taken care of I've been
in the business this particular
business for ten years.
And to say that it's part of
reduces out to get is the state
of the meeting people to no it's
not that it's a multi million
dollar industry with the
director has sold different
things going on he doesn't worry
about that that.
The bill Graham actors or lease
but this works but we have to
take care of ourselves if
nobody's looking of course we
have to find some kind of
regulation that has a deep and
that will state that okay we
will stand by you it you know
the disclosure regulations that
are being that are in place yeah
leverage regulations in place
all these regulations in place
but one is still constant we
still have the state things
happen so I implore you to
accept additional investors do
so that she doesn't have to come
here so that I can get you.
So that we can have some kind of
respect for the industry that we
are making a lot of money.
Thank you anybody else.
The committee.
If they
Lente.
Thank you madam chair.
Good afternoon for the sponsor
question
is there another industry that
has to be provided the past bill
of rights like this can you name
them.
The manager was that can you
repeat the question they're not
industry in the state like like
for instance the background
actors Association Mexico that
has provided the past bill of
rights like what you're looking
to do is there another industry
that has one.
Okay.
Madam chair
Legislation kind of tracks
Certainly not legislation that
that we.
Past
in the legislature that
identifies madam chair certain
sectors.
One was in two thousand and nine
of which I authored which was
the wait staff legislation for
minimum wage workers.
And that became basically on
model legislation for the whole
country.
That legislation has similar
penalties that we do in this
legislation.
it has certain cause of action
language.
as we do in this legislation.
So the legislation we're going
for manager is nothing new.
Another secretary madam chair
that we've done exclusive
language in terms of bill rights
issues is adding labors.
You know these guys gals that
you see in the corner four five
in the morning waiting for a
contractor to come by the come
up say a got this job for you it
will die right there on the spot
so we've done some protections
for for that sector as well so
yes Madam dancer question we've
done similar legislation to
other sectors thank you madam
chair and representative so this
is not a novel concept this is
something that you've done with
successful on that we will
continue your trend all
protecting workers in this case
the background actors
Association New Mexico second
question
Madam chair and representative
so the Film Office opposed to
this piece of legislation for
number of reasons and it was
brought up by the folks here
that's redundant sites OSHA.
S. penalties it is the issue
that I'm going to be offensive
to anybody but is the issue here
with the field office that
you're not doing your job or is
it with us not being able to do
a job of protecting you all
that's my question and you don't
you can answer that I'm asking
you.
Madam chair
Senator lent the
These complaints about
Nonpayment.
about set safety.
For example
Children.
Background actors being the same
dressing room with that office.
the issues with handicapped.
They've all been raised.
What the workforce solutions
department.
With the Film Office.
And they just turn the other
cheek madam chair.
That's why you know we have a
staff of complaints here that
the New Mexico.
Have.
that connectors Association has
compiled throughout the years
the six years they've existed.
And the and it reflects kind of
the specifics.
In terms of those violations to
these individuals.
But
that's why we're bringing this
legislation forward to kind of
put teeth into existing not that
does not basically lay out a
platform of action of course of
action and this madam chair I
know provides that pathway in
terms of specific course of
action consequences if these
actions are not carried out or
not implemented.
Okay so thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative so
at this point I I can take that
you've exhausted all your
options and remedies with and
and and this is for just Garcia
with
any any state office and that
and at that point you're here to
pass goes for this that it is
also everything you've done
everything you need to do and
can.
Madam chair representative Lente
I have exhausted everything that
I can do I have no one who wants
to help with accountability for
instance children dressing in
the same tents with adults.
Reports of non payment.
Continue as of this week I
received four reports coming in
it's a non stopping.
Reporting.
Issue I don't know where else to
go I've gone to the Film Office
I've spoken with them in the
past they told me their concern
was house bill two and they
would assist me and after
legislation with all these
reports where do I go.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative decision out of
the state.
Thank you madam chair
representative and is Garcia I
have a question just to.
the definition that you have
here background artists we see
that it does cover.
Stand INS and actors that maybe
I've set but not necessarily
appear on film
there are ten million each jobs
like really specific jobs that
have occurrences that that might
my particular question is in
reference to.
People who they themselves don't
appear on set but their property
appears on set and so they're
onset accompanying their
property what this bill for them
as well goals for instance but
because they have just the
person who owns the vehicle less
to states with their vehicle for
however many hours but they need
to fall under the purview of
this bill Madam chair
representative now.
The district.
Your last name but I yield to
Rubio has a lot of experience
dealing with the those
production issues.
Madam chair representative now.
Yes they'll background artist as
well they are expected to stay
with that vehicle throughout the
day whether it's eight ten
twelve fifteen hours yes.
Thank you very much madam chair
representative.
Yeah.
Representative.
Madam chairwoman of the
representative for rain for this
bill I do have a few questions
just about the penalties and how
that was developed I guess I'm
curious how are those penalties
in particular developed and I'm
also wondering if.
Your at all concerned that the
sheer volume that may come in
would.
Make it difficult to enforce.
Madam chair
Register at the.
You know if if.
If it's it's against the law.
Madam.
You know it's it's the
democratic right.
Of an individual to come forward
and pursue redress.
Of that one elevation.
You know and if there is an
escalation of of complaints.
The more the merrier because now
we have a formats and placement
here that really holds.
The production company in the
state accountable you know for
these violations.
You know if it's a safety
factors if it's issues with with
payment you know and and again
madam chair representative.
These this language that deals
with penalty is not anything
you.
We're taking a lot of what in
the in the penalty section
straight out of the wage that
bill and some from the day labor
legislation that we are in the
works you know for for many
years.
Madam.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for that response
that that makes a lot of sense
because I matching off and those
may come in is not just one
individual complaint or
violation of multiple at a time
just as those are set up on this
is this question chair
representative is working for
your your expert one thing you
had mentioned was the fear
blacklisting and you know I
friends that I've reserve into
this and our high school so for
background working cetera you
know like modeling and
everything and fear blacklisting
Israel they're the sacrifice
thousands of dollars annually
because they are scared that if
they reported work take it
anywhere else that will be
compensated do you feel that
this would would.
Violations would still go under
Undetected because of fear of
blacklisting or do you feel like
this would prevent that or would
this would help with the the
fear blacklisting
representative.
Madam chair.
Representative Serrato.
I have been blacklisted because
of who I am today and today.
And yes there are many
background artists out there
that have not filed reports
because of fear of retaliation
and blacklisting.
And this would help HB twenty
three would help prevent that.
This thank you madam chair thank
you Representative in your
witness for that I you know I I
see that but I understand that a
lot because especially in the
safety issues of the mention
here's well you know I think
what's really interesting is is
there is a need for penalties it
this is an issue with this
industry across the nation and
we want to make sure that with
the jobs that were encouraging
in our state are well paying and
this is also a labor issue I
have friends that were
background actors amount to
YouTube channels and Facebook
ads ads instead because they
make more money and they get
their compensation in a timely
manner so we want to keep the
labor supply of background
actors I think we need to keep
the head of the times are on
time thank you.
Madam chair representative rob
of.
if you'll you madam chair on
that on that question in terms
of
will be more people come
forward.
knowing there's in the
plantation but because the way.
That things happen.
to where people kind of
reluctant to move forward with
the page that we all.
Workforce solutions manager was
not accepting wage theft
complaints.
If you didn't have a checks the.
So that means that that there
was there was that the wages of
individuals that were paid in
cash.
So when we created that
legislation that allowed
complaints.
Just a flight complex madam
chair based on cash we live with
the theft was based on
nonpayment.
cash payments.
You know those complaints came
in.
By the dozens overnight mainly
because now there was a revenue
there was an Avenue madam chair
to kind of out that injustice in
some of these companies madam
chair up now to to like ten
thousand dollars in the Gallup
area a cash payment.
So you could see that the the
hesitancy I think what will be
needed diminished by
implementing.
Some religious or legislation
that we have before you.
Thank you Representative little.
This is.
K. R. K..
The.
Or are.
Madam chair representative
William to my.
Madam chair representative
little we are given a W. two.
When we report to said after
being booked for rural we feel
about your.
And that has a payroll company's
name and address on it usually
out of state companies are on
those answers but we do receive
W. twos.
Yes ma'am.
It.
Is that.
Enter I'm unable to my experts.
Respond to the Madam chair
representative little.
On adventures.
There's.
Small written words on the
payroll company.
Legislative nothing about the
time frame.
But is you know sixteen days
should be the time for you.
I have a week ago for instance
eight months since April twenty
twenty two.
That I have helped.
My background orders trying to
get paid from so.
They're not abiding by a time
for you to pay real time for.
And it's hard when you have to
contact a payroll company in
Burbank California.
There are mostly on the state of
New Mexico there's only one
payroll company in the state of
New Mexico and they are
excellent.
The others not.
Legislation that you have before
you we are looking at that
sixteen day.
in terms of of.
For timely payment.
Here that is yeah.
My apologies.
Forgot about that okay
so this bill as I understand it
Madam chair representative would
include I see the language for
to have.
Guidelines for payments to be
received and the potential
penalties.
Representative Jones in the
little thing to.
Representative Chasey.
I.
Your
question the problem problem
first all
So we have to ever ever other
workforce study.
Yeah we we have.
What will work for solution so.
The same debate.
That they should be that you
know about the little your
issues at all but the why are.
The state agencies that are in
charge of enforcing these
regulations not enforced.
Secondly what Lexus thank you we
have another set of laws that
they're gonna force them if
they're not enforced one.
Madam chair representative
Mason.
First for the question.
Madam chair representative
Mason.
When I received a report of non
payment from a background
artist.
I will submit a wage claim form
to them.
I will submit a job for from the
field office to them.
Workforce solutions have helped
me with Waco for instance they
had a investigating investigator
contact me.
And some back on orders have
been paid but the problem is
nothing is being accountable
nothing's being enforced.
It's a circle that needs to be
broken.
That they're Representative at I
don't know that what makes us
think.
We make another wall they will
enforce it.
Madam chair of this information
You know the law is the law.
And if you violation of the law
there's going to be
consequences.
And I think that's what we're
doing with this particular issue
I'm not non payment of said
safety and other concerns that
the back on the actors have
brought for.
And
my experience Madam.
In terms of kind of putting T..
Into legislation that is
dubious.
That is not implementable.
That has a lot of loopholes.
Analysts we Swiss cheese holes
and there is that once we kind
of.
Ifop.
Once we kind of put me into the
law we see a dramatic turnaround
in terms of enforcement and
that's were attempting to do
with this piece of legislation
based on prior legislation
throughout the years that I've
had similar problems similar
issues and when they come in
with a comprehensive.
Policy.
basically dealing with these
inequities we see a turnaround
in terms of implementation so
I'm fully confident that this
legislation
is passed by the legislature
that will Senate action on the
part of the wrist the
responsible parties to assume
responsibility and and and and
accountability in terms of
what's in the law.
chair representative that who is
going to force and force these
the regulations are.
Workforce solutions in the.
You know.
What's that we have that we're
not with different organizations
and force.
Right of this and I will use
Senator there have been for
these we don't say the.
Bill I did this to viable these.
You know there's but it right
cations against late already.
Is the just a little.
That is why one group.
As a different set of laws the
number of the work that.
And.
Why the lawyers the.
The film industry will face
stiffer penalties for
noncompliance that I would.
In another.
It says to difference that is
what I'm.
What are the.
And
You know I think all these of
the texture of but there should
be some way.
We have the we have.
The mechanism in the state valve
that should take care of.
The main like another set of
laws doesn't like anybody.
But many laws now that are.
Share that out because it'll we
should come up with some late
like.
Sure the industry that we have.
Or like the.
Workforce solutions I think
should be taken care of in the
conversation.
I just do my heart will go over
the this because I've dealt with
different rules that will make
them.
Accountable.
The chair I will not go the will
to go say walk up not.
So what the travel you know I
think everybody should go to
work they are you how much I
value the private but you the in
the conversation.
It is a I don't want to
Representative.
Budget balances on.
You know but there's lots of
walls.
And for site the I mean we all
have ocean regulations that we
have to follow and I can
understand why they don't
enforce.
Wives and others that the law
was able to force them they're
not forced ones.
They understand the.
It was I think that's all my
questions thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative one.
Thank you madam chair I'm not
may I have the
staff person to come up please I
have some questions.
You please come up.
It's down there yes
Representative.
The question I have is prior to
approving any type of incentives
for production company.
Are these.
Standardization for contracts
taken into consideration.
Prior thank you Representative
Lund Lundstrom chair members of
the committee
in answer to your question
before we Sir basically a
Complaints were late payments
logged I'm really and I've
talked about this and she's been
wonderful about telling people
to submit to this database when
there is a pay issue so we have
a digital database of this and I
absolutely that is checked
before any to film tax credit
application is moved to tax
revenue so they have to make
good basically on all these
complaints before you will
authorize a tax incentive
correct Representative okay it
seems to me that the way to to
get to the heart of this is to
actually have
Correlation of those receiving
tax credit Ms incentives to
those not receiving payment.
I'd like to have a better
understanding of that of that
pile of complaints that the lady
has here I don't know what films
are production companies is tied
to.
That it would seem to me that
This the the Film Office should
have available the set of
standard procedures for anybody
that's working in this field for
these background artists.
And that they're told
immediately if you don't follow
this you're not getting any of
our incentives it doesn't matter
if it's a tax credit or lead or
anything else.
And I would strongly suggest
that if you have any production
companies are currently in
To go into this bill if this
bill says that all incentives
earned all invoice every
incentive the state of New
Mexico offers if you don't
comply with our laws and our
workforce procedures I guarantee
you you're not gonna have a pile
of violations.
That is the way that you get to
the heart of this is when you
say up front everything is
knowledge void if you don't
follow our rules and our
regulations in the state of New
Mexico.
I happen to believe that that
film tax credit is way too
generous anyway I'm very close
to what that costs the state tax
echo.
And to think for one minute to
that they're not making good on
a payment to employees actually
sickens me.
For the kind of money we've been
doling out it boils down to
every one dollar they put in we
don't well three.
Issues are but I would strongly
suggest of all for this no with
this bill comes to the floor
that's the kind of closet needs
to be in here and I guarantee
you we won't have a room full of
people like this again because
they're gonna know that every
incentive every incentive
because they were set up by
based on the employment I know
if you guys will really realize
that or not madam chair but
you're incentivized based on the
number of people you apply the
amount of money you put into the
production which usually ties to
employment costs.
so it's it's incredible to me
that you wouldn't be paying
because that's how you probably
get incentives whether it's lead
up whether it's J. tip whether
it's film tax credit I mean
there's a whole host of
incentives that these companies
get.
So I would suggest that's a
clause like that be included and
I think it'll stop post taste
when somebody realizes they live
they lose all the giveaways of
the state of New Mexico provides
and get this all cleaned up
thank you madam chair.
That I do think you madam chair
all financial obligations are
paid by the production no tax
credit application shall be
given to tax revenue we're given
at all and that does include F.
cap which is need to and that's
the only other incentive we we
have jurisdiction over
so that is in statute and we do
enforce what is in our statute.
Right now if you look at the
general appropriations act we
all act field tax credit to
production companies in the
hundreds of millions of dollars
right now.
So I mean if they can these are
companies that obviously don't
need the money immediately it's
not going to be money that they
that they're relying on so to
You are states that they've
always had to have the money in
there to pay for this so they
can sit wait five years but
these folks can't wait five
years for it I just feel like
that needs to be stepped up and
if they fit if they know that
they have violated our standards
our labor laws and everything
will be null and void we could
take that off the balance sheet
to the general appropriations
act and I think that'll be a way
to get this stopped because
right now this is confusing to
me if they're filling out W.
twos that means you are an
employee of that production
company.
That means that your cat and
help the whatever the heck they
think they're going the way
they're going to operate you're
not employee of the state of New
Mexico your employee of that
production company.
Probably attempt full time
employment status because you're
not a contractor.
So you those employees
standards and benefits should
hold should because you're in
New Mexico and they're doing new
business in New Mexico so why on
earth would they be able to get
around that there are a lot more
incentives madam chair that are
offered to these companies maybe
this to maybe this Division
doesn't deal with it but I can
tell you there are many many
incentives that these companies
are are locked into.
I thank you I just think we
don't have the end of the day we
don't make good on those tax
credits thank them for being in
New Mexico and we use that tax
credit money to pay these
people.
Thank you thank you
Representative.
Madam chair I was prepared to
make
to offer an amendment.
to exactly what Representative
Lundstrom just addressed.
Because what we have on page six
of nine twenty one.
Is is addressing the heart of
what we want to do.
Not spelled out in in the way
that Representative Lundstrom
and I think that's what we want
to do so this the intent of this
We do have language the effect
that.
an employer back on orders that
is eligible for from production
tax credit pursuant to the film
production tax credit act
challenge me in writing to get
back on orders for all days and
hours worked as a condition to
be eligible for the film
production tax credit and I need
to first element here to
identifying who is responsible
for it for ensuring
the responsibility of for the
production companies in meeting
state statute so I have to
defined economic development
department in that section.
And then also add language that
I think Representative Lundstrom
the ability to and in the debate
on this bill and check.
Representative I think that this
Representative.
Thank you madam chair.
As a small business.
Take a tax cut to what I was.
Also over the years.
State.
After.
I have a problem.
Owns a business which.
All rights from.
And I don't.
I.
So that's my first I almost made
That.
Thank you madam chair that's all
thank you anybody else to have a
committee Representative
Matthews.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative and all those
in the audience for coming forth
in.
The different take on what may
be some of the problems with
this and it does maybe correct
or not certainly not a legal
opinion but as I listened to the
testimony and listen to what
happening in the wonder.
If
part of the problem was that
And one of my questions was who
exactly do the background
workers actually.
Contract with their workforce is
it.
This is it it may very from
location to location.
The the that.
Madam chair Representative
Matthews the production company
is the employer Disney paramount
Warner brothers twentieth
century.
And the indie productions as
well they are our employers they
are payroll companies to pay
yes.
Yes I did you say they are the
payroll company that pays you
sorry the production companies
Disney Warner brothers paramount
they all are are employers.
They have payroll companies in
Share have.
This year you know that
equalized to Senate contract
with and how is it works.
Representative Matthews we sign
of Belcher when we go to check
in.
The film for the day we are.
By the production assistant who
gives us an NDA to sign what
You have madam chair Mrs sherry
you fill out I. nines yes ma'am.
Choose the you don't fill out
Madam I'm sorry if you fill out
of.
W. twos.
I personally since or would ask
for whatever it is at the back
on orders.
And madam chair this is Cheryl
is there an actual written
contract this is anything about
when you are to be paid up with
the time period is for you to be
paid.
You.
madam chair
Is there
It let me back up just for state
in many chair do you have an
expectation of leading you're
likely to get paid.
Madam chair representative
Matthews we don't.
And
so madam chair this is here this
is all we we just don't have any
indication whatsoever this is
Hey your date you're supposed to
get paycheck right.
Madam chair that's in the is it.
Madam chair let me and I do have
a couple more questions
Your question is for
Representative have Garcia have
you talked to workforce
They were present under their
present here today but the
secretary was present and our
labor committee hearing.
we didn't have a conversation
on.
and no I haven't I haven't kind
of.
Directly personally
to the Department.
to kind of
You know what I'm on.
On record that we're doing this
mainly because of the inaction
of the department to address
these issues of complaints that
have come in by.
Dozens of not hundreds on the
Garcia I'm wondering why with
all these complaints
We're not going down the doors
workforce solutions and saying
go do your job.
What what why and and I'm
guessing again yes guessing that
part of it is that this is such
a new script for contractual
Nearly the relationship here and
there for workforce solutions
may not consider this to be our
problem.
And we are left with no one is
forcing them to these basic
rules payment requirements
accepted the film credit process
and these Representative
Lundstrom has so clearly pointed
out that's not an immediate
solution.
And my my question is have.
Madam chair representative is is
it possible that that's the
situation we have here.
You madam chair
You know
I think that this industry has
basically been short sighted
Madam.
Any because of lack of of
a standardized process in
dealing with these issues on non
payment madam chair set safety
environmental issues things of
that nature.
And
and
and that's what we're trying to
standardize.
Not payment process and it an
issues dealing with safety.
And health
in this legislation but most
important is that we we the the
legislation chair not only homes
the department accountable to
carry out the provisions in this
law but there's also a teeth in
this that holds employers
accountable.
Terms of of of of finding a fine
the the the the possibility of
cost action in terms of workers
I mean lawsuits and with with
the ability of of winning twice
the amount.
And
and this is language common
language in the other
legislation madam chair that
we've done regarding the labors
and also the.
Which that minimum wage workers.
So to answer your question it it
I can't be specific with an
answer Madam because there's a
lot of kind of moving targets
when it comes to background
artist.
And we're just trying to hone in
on one specific aspect of that
which is putting teeth.
Into these issues that are
rising.
From that sector.
Madam chair at I'm sorry I
didn't mean it.
Madam chair representative hi as
I read this I was trying to.
In addition for cement and.
I do think it probably needs to
be stronger.
Action it provides to.
in terms of and I like the idea
Representative commission thank
at a previous representative
Duncan debt Act.
Any any production company that
does business in the state of
New Mexico for its New Mexico
employees folks like these that
they have a local paper.
And that we give workforce
solutions need forty.
To
in force.
the.
The pay requirements set up some
requirements you have sent me in
here and make it very clear that
that's how this business is
going to be operated sure that
we don't keep running in this
situation.
Dozens of people laughing paid
for work in a way years they
even as business or service that
they don't even have an
expectation when they're going
to get paid.
And that's to me just the way
you should be doing business
I'm.
The other piece of this
is I just I think that.
One of the things that has to be
really clear in this this is
kind of.
This is going to pick it up page
seven.
You have your violations which
are misdemeanors.
You madam chair is a a person
and then and see if talk to that
person is so forth it's I think
you want to hold Madam chair
representative I think you want
to of the production company.
Responsible.
And not.
I'm not sure who you mean by a
person has to be should be the
employee.
And the players production
company.
And.
You madam chair Representative
you may also want to add
something in here for you give
workforce solutions the ability
to draft regulations
Set the parameters on that like.
These workers production
companies will pay its
background workers within.
Three days of work being done or
something so that we start to
have some teeth in this law.
Here.
Representative I just think it
could be a little bit tougher
action.
It's great to have a penalty but
as for proceedings that selected
time.
And it would be really nice to
say if you don't pay the state
the date it's.
in addition to being guilty of a
misdemeanor you're going to
encourage averages of tax amount
of day for every day.
Or something like that I think
you could take it could be and
chair representative a little
tougher on these folks just
looking at the staff the
compliance with you know all
these people sitting here I
think in and we're looking at
companies with.
Thousands of dollars.
I think we could isn't the to
the fire.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you does anybody else on
the committee have anything.
Make one more comment yes.
I think at the end of the day if
all New Mexico incentives are
clawed back.
Because they have not followed
our labor laws and our other
standards for employment I think
that brings some that brings to
the table and after this hearing
I think they'll be they'll be
some real interest in what we do
here because that that that
industry is really.
A lot out of New Mexico thank
you Representative.
So Representative these are my
thoughts I think that you are
being a champion green this this
piece of legislation to force
I thank you after listening to
the committee and
I think it could be bolstered
Act and I'm sorry I missed your
name could you enlighten.
Yes I said who are you with The
New Mexico film office so this
doesn't thank you for being here
I think
You all have a prime opportunity
to bring all the parties
together and make some really
good type legislation and this
is what this committee I think
wants to to do is have good
bills that come out of this
committee
I don't want to hold is that but
I I really believe.
One of the big problems it is
glaring to me is the department
of workforce solutions
we need to make sure they're at
the table and that they're going
to enforce the problems right
the violators because I think it
is as Representative Mason said
we can make through our lines
but if nobody's going to enforce
in the we need to tighten it up
where they have the authority to
make sure that they can enforce
that I think Representative
Lundstrom again lots of examples
of where it could be tightened
up and so I would like you all
to to meet and talk you had
talked about being that an
amendment do you want to talk
about
That will be is it something
that's ready for prime time can
we get it on and heard again.
Chair of the
I will do well whatever the
committee hires
Whether I will have that
amendment ready by Wednesday
twenty meet again can be
positive but I'll shoot for
that.
And if not the them away to
Friday but all that will have
something definite.
Sometimes
going to the Department is good.
But like with the the the page
that legislation that we ran in
two thousand and nine.
It was the department that had a
policy of not accepting claims
if if that was cash involved.
It was the department that that
had that was that hearing to the
policy of statutory limitation
of one year.
And they were hoping to in the
bill that we that that.
Basically extend that sexism
Tatian to three years actually
the department in want that so
again I'm only the approaching
Department I think we have a
good secretary on board.
I mean she made the effort to
come to me after the the the our
labor hear me and out for that
information and offers anything
she can do that's so we there so
the doors open and I'm willing
to do that and I'm going to
follow up with the Film Office
and also with the Economic
development department because
they're the ones that implement.
Or or or put the ball on the
rebates and tax credits and in
the amendment will address that
specific because I think
Representative Lundstrom really
hit the nail on the head so yeah
I don't mind when this bill are
the drawing over this bill until
we kind of put that amendment
together.
Eight that Representative
because I think this is too
important of an issue I
agreement to thank you and so
after at the request of the
sponsor we will and if you can
get with me as soon as possible
if you have any problems getting
workforce solutions to the table
please let me know will we'll
give them a call.
Thank you madam chair help
Representative we asked for
solutions for you very and so we
can.
I really like on.
We will do that.
Yes.
Yes the average that.
Madam chair representative
Mason.
I have received.
Actually the last year.
Percentage of non payment
reports.
For example we co production
there was eighty plus.
And that's not including those
that are hearing blacklisting or
retaliation that are not
reporting.
Each production company I have
anywhere from twenty to over a
hundred report.
Include not in.
For the.
For example one production can
hire up to three hundred
background for that term which
could be six months.
Have of those are non payment
issues.
If I may just say one last thing
the state.
I believe it's a workforce
solutions department does have a
child liaison that does go to
this in.
Film sets and checks on the
miners children that are that
are under eighteen that are
working as background artists
they have a state liaison that
does go to make sure that
they're doing their homework to
make sure that they the
production companies are taking
care of those miners if the
state had appointed liaison for
background artist that would do
the same has that liaison for
the child minders that would
take a week all my reports maybe
more than half of the reports I
receive on a daily basis.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
We'll be back.
Hi next bills H. B. two twenty
nine.
He quietly exit the program
please.
It was also.
No that's okay.
Twenty nine of.
Hi all.
Committee thank you for your
time.
Thank you.
And.
House keeping of HB T. twenty
eight how is in the process
they're talking about that bill
it maybe roled so we've got to
H. B. two twenty nine and so
with that Representative Lujan.
Thank you for being here.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee members first time in
this community.
Introduced a house bill two
twenty nine insurance adjusters
and Ron unz with me is my expert
witness for offices.
Your.
I
can hear you better with this
great.
So today
have with me of my expert
witness from the super I'm in
the office of the super
intendant of insurances Jennifer
contagious so who is the interim
superintendent of insurance.
And we also have here in the
audience between your Baca who's
a producer licensing bureau
chief at oversight and
businesses did his Seuss
producer licensing manager thank
you for being here.
So bring this build to today at
the request of the agency to
assist with cleanup and
modernizing statutory language
regarding.
What was it.
Staff adjuster independent
adjusters and the requirement
that they file.
Well a ten thousand dollar.
Bond with the office of the
super intended every insurance.
New Mexico is only one of a
handful of states it still
require this filing independent
adjusters are now covered at a
greater liability amount by the
insurance companies that employ
them with which makes that ten
thousand dollars
inconsequential.
This unnecessary filing
requirements not only accounts
for thirty hours a week of staff
time to process it also cross
agency approximately twenty five
thousand dollars a year in
postage to return unacceptable
bonds the engine the agency does
not generate any fees.
Of this bond requirement and
therefore the costs to return.
Is the financial burden of the
agency.
In addition.
Additional benefit to changing
this requirement is that it
would allow the agency to
utilize staff expertise in other
ways needed.
It would have it would save
thousands of pages of paper here
and free up much needed office
space the agency supports this
bill and has not identified any
opposition in industry or with
consumer groups to the
modernization of this statutory
language with that we stand for
questions.
Thank you Representative do we
have anybody in favor of this
bill.
It is.
Any comments from the committee.
Representative Matthews.
Chair representative at.
Did I hear you correctly that I
believe away with the cash box
is all that this this is how
it's going to save tons of paper
and Francis space.
I just don't quite understand
yes yes ma'am sure that it works
that is the issue so with the
processing of all of this of
this work is it costs about
twenty five thousand dollars a
year in postage alone and that
the space and I went to actually
visit the space and their boxes
and boxes and boxes of materials
for this practice processing.
Madam chair is boxes of money.
No money I would.
Be a different story of the of
the yeah not cash but the
paperwork.
And madam chair I've been a
isn't there isn't a paperwork
that goes with saying sureties
bond there is a number that we
for that I'm gonna defer to the
superintendent.
So madam chair representative
Matthews the cash bonds not
actually utilized at all it's
the security bond that is
utilized by at the independent
jester into we received almost
fifteen thousand a year in this
one category into an independent
adjuster is actually covered
under their contract by the
Kerrier so they're actually have
their liability this doesn't
take away the needs for public
adjusters who are independent of
anyone from having assurity bond
the right now.
Those fifteen thousand bonds a
year take up about half an
office base of us just keeping
the paper work on record takes
thirty hours a week from one
staffer to review them to make
sure that they're at the
appropriate bond being filed in
twenty five thousand a year to
send that all back in the mail.
File of.
And then madam chair.
I had no idea I I think that
maybe we could find a role for
you with the film industry thank
you for.
Thank you.
Representative Lundstrom thank
you madam chair I.
Please.
Representative and in order yes.
Percent of yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes
Representative.
Representative little yes.
Percent of lunch.
Representative Martinez yes
Representative Mason yes
Representative Matthews K..
Yes
yes.
Madam chair of the those are.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee members you.
The.
Eight eight eight eight is being
resolved.
Okay and that we'll we'll
