Eight three three oh nine
Representative Hernandez.
One second okay why we are
waiting we will go ahead and
take role.
Representative and in our new.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente.
Representative little.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez your
Representative Mason here
Representative Matthews.
Better vice chair.
Madam chair.
Senator you have a point.
Already got it chair members
committed we are missing and use
witness or.
You can hear me a hostile with.
Already
Representative Fernandes go
ahead and present your bill
thank you madam chair US
referred house bill through nine
which will.
Increase the maximum price of a
nonprofit organizations gaming
machine from a maximum of four
thousand dollars per day to no
more than ten thousand dollars
per day right completely
optional program for
yes W's American legions of my
mic there's for others a little
over forty of them in the state
One of the problems of the
running into the technology has
passed the four thousand dollars
a day now requires five digits
for maximum jackpots if they
want to buy new or new machines
that is the problem they're
running into a.
I'm
sorry.
Sorry on and everything.
Sorry
so the problem they're running
into is that the newer gaming
machines to requiring five digit
jackpot and not a four digit
jackpot and like I said this is
an optional program not a
mandatory program so each
location can shape
up to a ten thousand dollar per
day maximum jackpot and I will
let my experts tell you the rest
thank you yeah if you'll just
introduce yourself absolutely I
apologize for my lateness of my
shortness of breath my legs are
a lot shorter than most of yours
is building and I'm widely aware
when I take the stairs my name's
Richard day on the rostrum this
for our C. gaming one of the
distributors as Representative
behind me as well as New Mexico
gaming which is represented by
me and I'll echo the statement
of the Sanchez this bill which
great about amendments it tracks
statue with technology it also
is a may bill rather than the
shall bill.
When we when we decided that
that was probably the best place
to start we went to the
racetracks we want to raise as
well as the gaming control board
and we feel like this is
A good deal for everybody and
with that said to want to.
Produce.
Would you guys.
Okay I apologize.
Rhonda.
Madam chair representative I'm
Rhonda fell company with our C.
gaming.
Thank you.
Collided in clay from New Mexico
play Mexico gaming.
Madam chair Cody Cody join us.
From New Mexico gaming LLC thank
you thanks for being here today.
With that madam chair we stand
for questions already have so is
anybody here in support of this
bill today raise your hand.
Anybody here opposed to the
bill.
Okay you like to speak on the
bill go ahead and come up to the
microphone.
I am playing Jennings on the.
Department New Mexico place
commander I'm also the president
of the FMP which is the veterans
paternal nonprofit organizations
of New Mexico.
Happen nine thousand American
Legion members and all my there
in the duration support dish
thank you right anybody our.
Else in favor of the bill.
And I don't see anybody on zoom.
Okay anybody opposed.
Okay let's go to the committee.
Representative Matthews.
Chair
Senators.
What we want
to extend the hours because.
Always.
madam chair so it wasn't
extending it was allowing them
to go for so in statute
currently it's.
Noon to midnight wanted it to be
any twelve hour block during the
day that suited their community
passed so not extending but.
Changes sorry okay.
They have having a second one
I'm.
Yes.
So I mean I'm kind of getting
the impression that there is
some kind of a realization that
that there's challenges with
these nonprofit organizations in
terms of.
Making gaming profitable for
them is it right.
Misinterpreting this to Madam
chair representative I think the
impetus behind that argument was
that their operational costs.
That seem to be troublesome and
that's why this is obviously a
may bill revenue shall bill but
if there are is there deeper
question on operational costs
verses what the other bill that
you're talking I think you're
talking about more is two fifty
three I don't know if Cody would
I think you might be better
addressed
And.
We don't have a cop madam chair
we don't have a conflict with
that bill whatsoever.
Madam chair representative just
to be clear I just wanted to be
clear on exactly what your
question was.
it did that that is Madam chair
Senator that's a very good
question
my question is.
Getting.
Kind of vibes that maybe.
The nonprofit came operations
are not in the best of health.
And that.
Financial aid I mean it just
seems kind of a sense.
That they're having to make
changes because we want to
increase change their hours and
they want to increase the the.
The product and so forth.
Is is there a problem with first
all this is misinterpreting.
These bills reflecting maybes
couldn't some questions about
the viability of these
organizations is is gaming
organizations that's kind of
that's really my question Madam
chair representative I.
Feel like well actually the
G.R.T.  revenue for
the past twenty plus years for
the veteran fraternal
organizations excluding two
thousand twenty and twenty one
to the COVID
those organizations of average
just under two million dollars a
year per year you're the in
educational contributions and
the.
excluding twenty twenty one the
tax revenue for these
That are in fraternal
organizations has been just
under about one point three
million per year for the last
twenty years so I think to
answer questions they they're
very viable this is more of a
bill that will help improve the
technology of the machines that
we currently have we're going
through in a matter of attrition
with the older machines it's
equivalent to trying to find of
I know myself in Garcia gaming
both we use machines are about
twenty plus years old so finding
parts for those machines getting
very difficult
we feel like the software
manufacturers have reached out
to us and told us quite frankly
that they are not going to
produce a
a software program that pays
under four thousand just for us
we're such a small niche
and the cog of casinos that it
would be the not profitable for
them to even consider such.
and.
Madam chair representative so
the four thousand dollar top
wordpress was also passed in
nineteen ninety seven and has
not been touched since then so
this is really just bringing it
up to the times and matching it
with the technology that's
available to these nonprofit
gaming centers.
And as thank you Representative.
but there is comments in the
FIR.
The analysis yes hi are.
About this may put.
We increase it to ten thousand
that that would create a cash
flow string and vocational but
some of these organizations
organization of this that the
locations out of business.
I was but the other reason why
up to be like.
This that this industry might be
in a little bit of trouble Madam
chair representative yeah we
when we approach the gaming
control board we were very we
were very up front about are we.
Are we challenging the gaming
compacts or expanding gaming
which we're not we're not
spending machines or expanding
hours removing
but that's a very good point
because it's what I think that
maybe maybe Kodi can elaborate
more than that I can will on
that is that if.
The student you might want to
take this on.
Madam chair representative at I
think looking at the financial
impact report I actually looked
into
the study that was done and
actually that was for market
research it didn't have the
financial impact that may be
awarding higher Jack but the in
other words I felt like that
that particular study when you
look at the actual study was.
Irrelevant quite frankly to what
we're talking about that was
talking about getting more
people in the doors were these
organizations are closed to the
public they are only available
to private members so I don't
think that that would
particularly have that kind of
impact.
And chair of the centers at.
Is the membership stronger there
are these places filled with.
Madam chair and representative
bill Jennings is the head of
these organizations.
Yes ma'am the bill you're
referring to to move to twelve
hours that was by Martins more
Harry Garcia which passed the
floor yesterday sixty six to
zero.
We need to talk about having
members.
All members in Meriden agent in
the state of New Mexico there's
a hundred fifty thousand
veterans in New Mexico we have
nine thousand better which nine
thousand one hundred forty right
at nine thousand.
total of a hundred fifty
thousand veterans which includes
VFW up beyond that should.
The Purple Heart.
Bring Corley.
The disabled American veterans
and I'm not sure of the total
number that.
It's probably about sixty or
seventy thousand in New Mexico
and mess here.
And they are coming to these
clubs.
I'm sorry coming to these
classes after I know we have a
lot of pressure to get.
Get that they're all members
madam chair.
But the auto show up there I
would guess.
I probably have a lot of the
loan just to show that long but
I probably get eighty to eighty
five percent turning your spirit
to come to these clubs.
Okay.
Up I'm sure that some of the
questions hello.
Thank you representative Duncan.
For that one which.
That was this wave that the
charity and education.
Madam chair representative as
I'm being told from back here
now.
He.
Basing this venture to ten
thousand project would decrease
the amount of sure the.
Madam chair Representative know
that the percentages that are
still paid to the charity's
what's would remain the same.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you madam chair members.
Reach the
Those shoes.
Madam chair representative so.
This is a may and if the
individual clubs decide that
they would like to stay at the
four thousand with the machines
that they currently have they
are absolutely allowed to do
that and they can actually stay
with under that number this is a
maximum per day
so if the if they don't feel
that their club can handle the
increase up to ten thousand
because they do have to keep I
believe it's two and a half
times the winning in house at
all times so they would have to
keep essentially twenty five
thousand dollars in a safe
somewhere on their property if
they don't feel that their club
is healthy enough to do that
they can anywhere under ten
thousand dollars is what they
can do it it is completely up to
them and what their club kids
kids a state.
Or
or or.
Why does she.
And then.
The.
Madam chair representative
And.
Just as pin pointed out this
this is a may not a shall so in
other words if they elect they
usually.
Talk to us they don't purchase
the machines themselves they
talk to their distributor who
then leases the machines to them
and that's a problem that our
companies are running into is a
matter of attrition to where
we're cannibalizing the current
machines that we have I think I
did a I think I destroyed
seventy machines just a few
months ago and the reason being
is because we're just pulling
parts out of that one to put
into this one and it's frankly
not sustainable eventually I
will run out of parts as as will
Garcia gaming so that's part of
the issue that we're running
into here.
Thank you madam chair.
The issue.
White shoes.
The.
Madam chair representative the
way that I understand it is that
they can keep the current
machines for as long as they
would like to it's when we get
to the point that clearing.
We see some M. S. that that Cody
was talking about is at some
point we're going to run out of
parts and it's going to be
sooner rather than later and
then at that point yes we will
have to the individual clubs
will have to work with their
distributor to provide.
The solution but without raising
it to ten thousand dollars a new
machine is not on the table.
so the state.
Hi
The issue.
The action will.
Madam chair representative
eighteen point nine percent.
Which was.
Your.
Run at the pages madam chair
representative around thirty two
percent.
Sure.
Yes.
Chair of the.
The.
Madam chair representative I
think currently there's forty
five nonprofit in forty forty
nonprofit and veteran a paternal
clubs that have gaming.
Correct forty eight is what I'm
told yes.
One last.
The.
If there are always one of.
Is it the staff.
We're.
We need
to.
Madam chair representative
it's not statute I think that's
a regulation or rule that the
gaming kind of gaming control
board came up with but it's not
statute that they have to keep
that that's something that the
gaming control board has issue
to the clubs.
Sure
that she.
I.
Madam chair representative
that's
it's the highest jackpot on the
floor.
So is so if you have ten
machines and your highest
jackpot on the floor is ten
thousand you have to keep two
and a half times pretty gaming
control board of one machine not
of the total ten to one machine.
Thank you representative
Representative little thank you.
That.
So how.
James.
The
I did have this will become
effective as of July so when it
is added.
yeah
is this and I I believe
Representative Matthews.
Was in that direction so if I
misunderstood which.
I am the.
Is this going to help.
Also.
Manage madam chair the question
is is the up take from four to
ten going to have a value add on
the charitable or I apologize if
you could.
For Madam chair representative.
We heard the.
Originally requesting our bill
to reduce.
Yes to thirteen percent.
That was described as being able
to help to the
nonprofits.
The at four have wisely would
not be able to continue.
Yeah and so I'm wondering.
Whether this bill.
That's right will help then.
I.
Madam chair representative week
we still contend that this this
is a value add on the charitable
organization there are.
Regional cost there's R. that
bill has validity to it and but
if if I may and maybe turn it
over to Cody or clay whoever
wants to.
Madam chair representative I
think the answer to your
question this actually does that
value because.
Down the line.
We will not be able to replace
parts for those machines and I
may have to come to one of those
organizations and say I'm sorry
I cannot prepare that machine it
will come off the floor we can
have a non operable machine
sitting on the floor therefore I
would have to pull that machine
if that machine earns fifty
dollars per day that's what it's
going to cost of because I can
it I can't replace it just do
the the amount of attrition that
we've gone through and that's
the reason you know.
We're short the importance of
this bill is to ensure that we
can put product on the floor
that they are thank have access
to.
Representative.
So.
And then.
For those that are nonprofit.
I do want to increase.
The
when.
The at.
And that would require cash on
hand.
And I would very.
Services it is this requires.
Yeah.
I haven't madam chair could it.
Security thank you.
Madam chair representative is.
Right now all of the clubs that
we would consider Kodi myself
putting these machines that
already carry that amount on
hand so it wouldn't it would be
no increase to them they already
have the funds to support this
amount otherwise we wouldn't
consider putting it's a machine
that pays that amount.
Follow up question to
Representative thank you.
what about this and to to.
Increases that and madam chair
representative they would follow
the guidance of the gaming
control board they have guidance
on where the money needs to be
captive it's locked in a safe
Who has access to that safe so
that's all
Regulated by the gaming control
board on how the money is is
captain where it's at how it is
secured.
That response.
Politicians would be those that
fire it is.
And upgrade to the system I
wondering if there's going to be
costs.
Madam chair representative so
that there should be no cost no.
Thank you madam.
Question thank you
Representative Lundstrom.
That's pretty passed on house
bill three own nine.
I think we still have a couple
more quick questions and we'll
get back to your motion
Representative Representative
Mason.
All.
The doing that.
Entities that I.
Receipts are.
All.
Madam chair representative no
there will be absolutely no
increase in the least of these
machines.
All right.
Yes Sir madam chair yes Sir
we will
we will observe the companies
that lease the machines will
absorb that cost it it does cost
more to buy those however we
absorb the cost and we will not
increase the lease.
This.
The top off office.
Right now to.
That.
We all.
Madam chair representative yes
anybody who has filed for a
nonprofit gaming licenses
covered under this so you're
Elks club your moose lodge your
PFW American Legion and there's
a whole bunch that I had never
heard of before this are all
covered under this.
Thank you representative
Representative Serrato.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative reading this far
at all as a huge over late thank
you are you had discussed have
related to forty.
to table Representative.
The representative
Representative we did yeah and I
was just curious so we don't
feel that if both of us to house
the conflicting language at all.
Madam chair representative know
that one handles don't handles
operating hours and the
percentages for
everything about the what the
location can keep what goes to
charity it allows for operating
costs be taken out of that now
this is just talking about the
machine pay out so they they
won't I mean the related kind of
but not they don't have it they
will not contradict each other
at all Mr speaker the.
Thank you Representative calling
a little ahead of the curve.
Hello but I I guess the what I
really mean is that you look at
how the languages and nothing.
Madam chair representative press
thank you.
Have already I guess I had just
one clarifying question
So.
Is there gonna be a reduction of
what is given to charity.
Because I I've seen in the
analysis that talks about.
There is possibly a reduction.
That was.
Madam chair I'm gonna make a
short answer on that I think
there has to be a constant
between point a and point out
which I don't think is is
reflected on the strip in Vegas
point in there anywhere else if
you want to get more technical
of the there has to be a
constant I'm going in and out
to.
The that would decrease the.
I mean the bail system.
Detectives.
Okay thank you madam chair
representative there will be no.
Decrease or change to charity
with this bill at all.
The
Impact statement is looking at
one side of the coin that point
out it's not looking at the
point in so we don't think it's
reflective of really that the
industry
if it was casinos around the
country would not have high
jackpots.
That was a verification.
Thank you that's all the
questions I have I know there's
been a motion by Representative
Lundstrom do we have a second.
Representative Mason go ahead
and call the roll.
Representative docket yes
Representative Garratt is yes.
Percent of the yes.
Representative Lundstrom yes
Representative want to.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Matthews.
No one I'd like to explain.
Vice chair.
Yes.
At options.
Yes.
Okay and representative Jim
Matthews please explain your
answer thank you madam chair
presenters not.
I just.
I I got a little confused
looking at the for the team you
just need to the answers and
It particularly the part about
their there's forty eight
nonprofit gaming operators and
maybe twelve percent would be
financially able to sustain the
staff of limits and then the tax
settlement numbers of others
that would not be able to just I
didn't I I didn't feel
comfortable with the
explanations.
Which is probably a reflection
in my left of.
Being much of a gambler but just
a little uncomfortable with this
idea.
So I decided.
Thank you Representative I would
could have and that we need to
talk off line was Representative
Matthews is this receipt and go
on to the floor at for now that
is
thank you madam chair and
committee.
As we are on SB forty one.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I
appreciate you allowing me to be
here today I.
We're on the Senate floor into
came right at the moment I
thought there was a slice of
time available so I really
appreciate that thank you before
I get started I want to
introduce you all to Andrew
Shuman who is my shadow for this
weekend's been chattering a lot
of the state senators over the
session and is doing a
phenomenal job he's done a lot
of actual legislative work for
me already some very grateful
for him being here madam chair I
come to you today with Senate
bill forty one this is a follow
on piece of legislation with
regard to the two thousand
seventeen New Mexico
telecommunications act which I
was fortunate to carry for three
years in a one person you know
what kicking contest and was
able to get that done after two
men approval several people on
this committee that helped we
finally got that done when we
went through the process of
redesigning our entire telecom
expect here our goal was to re
engineer how we regulate
telecommunications for the dial
tone this is only a bill related
to downtown but also in addition
that makes New Mexico as you all
know one of my major some lanes
here is to make New Mexico as
attractive as possible for
investment to help us build out
our broadband infrastructure
here in New Mexico and so I
think that is measure what it
does is it helps us to collapse
we don't really have a gigantic
telecommunications carrier in
the state anymore yeah we do
regulate a couple companies that
we want specifically and so what
this legislation does is it
brings parity to how we
How we regulate
telecommunications so that those
companies to provide those
services and some of the more
rural parts of New Mexico that
they are much more comfortable
and able to continue providing
those services in the highest
quality possible nothing in the
legislation takes away any
oversight by the public
regulation commission nothing in
the leg of legislation reduces
the quality of service nothing
installations as anything that
does not provide but the utmost
quality in telecommunication
services and nine one one
primarily madam chair in about I
would say three percent or so
remaining land lines exist in
the state of New Mexico most of
us have moved ninety five ninety
six ninety seven percent of us
have moved over to to wire the
services or service
telecommunication services over
broadband I do have significant
support for the legislation
across the ten rural New Mexico
any CG companies that represent
the ten role companies in New
Mexico which are represented by
the rural telecommunications act
which I also massively reform in
two thousand seventeen as well a
company that doesn't fall in
that necessarily in that realm
is a company called sacred wind
communications they have been
very supportive of this the
state of New Mexico office of
broadband access and expansion
which I created back in about
two years ago and madam chair
you were very helpful the to me
getting that done thank you The
New Mexico chamber of commerce
The New Mexico industrial
development executives
Association New Mexico
technology council the real
Rancho chamber of commerce the
New Mexico circuits a company
that does provide internet
services all over New Mexico and
Kelly table they've also come
forward and support I've been
collecting my handy dandy list
of who supports us and so that
just continues to move on their
and so with that I just you know
wanted to introduce the
legislation that we have open to
questions or however you'd like
to proceed chair thank you
Senator it do we have anybody
here in favor the bill.
Anybody opposed.
Okay and we don't have anybody
on the same yet but we'll we'll
check back in okay let's start
with people in favor on the side
of the room.
Thank.
I'm sure numbers.
And the.
Or at but forty one as you for
reading commission.
Over the years right all regular
for.
service replaces wireless
services and
regulating reserve.
Of our in the heart of old.
I think forty one of those
issues otherwise will
transition.
It also provides is I checked is
yes your future effective
opposition.
The goal is to talk to.
I love all the buyers to compete
on a level playing field and
will encourage investment wrong.
Representative yeah.
Thank you next.
In favor.
Madam chair members of the
committee
registered lobbyists for the
next page change carriers.
we are the two a rural local
exchange carriers in the state
have the
we we are throughout the city
and we use that as our vehicle
bringing this forward and we
support the parity of of of the
larger companies with the with
the same regulations are.
And we do ask for your support.
Thank you next.
Morning.
For this reason we use in.
Thank you next.
Tribal.
Share on.
Mattis
We support.
And so much.
Thank you.
Anybody else on this side of the
room.
The.
The start the at this.
Chair members the committee my
name Mr Lovelace and the
operations manager for the
office broadband access
expansion and as a surrogate has
as you I'll quickly said so many
points of why this bill level
help broadband we believe that
it is going to help us with the
expansion brought into the
future so for that we supported
thank you next.
Chair members of the committee
was originally this is where you
all.
Yes our supported legislation
this really is about modernizing
infrastructure in Mexico so that
aligns with sort of the
modernization and the evolution
of how consumers are using drugs
just what it is as big staff of
the national center for health
statistics we look at the usage
of wireless only adults Mexico
that's what seventy six percent.
You don't so we've got three
percent soldiers in that way.
We really do need to modernize
our infrastructure so that we
can invest in companies that
invest in innovative
technologies thank you thank you
try to.
Sure members of the committee
much for lobbyists for little
ones.
I have a folder which is.
We have a lot of thousand access
lines today they have.
Or
This loss basically I.
Of their last.
Back when I was with part of the
session was we work all the
others who sins have are
anxious.
And we would be considered
the only competitive
That was not a lot.
Please go to university.
Modernization of this
legislation would actually bring
this car on the table.
I'll also be able to at the
center of the page.
So you were.
Thank you next.
madam chair members of the
committee Jerry salaries to
regional chamber of commerce we
is our our Senate bill forty one
of over the years on services
change dramatically it's gonna
be new to the and with the
number of primary phone service
is being offered broadband and
cellular today versus just lines
are no longer assess any and
all.
we endorse the effort for a
level playing field and
regulations to ensure all phone
and broadband companies can
expand their investment that are
provided for New Mexicans we
kindly ask you to vote yes on
Senate bill.
Thank you yes in favor.
Okay let's go to opposition.
Anybody opposed.
This spans afternoon.
Doing it that way if you would
like.
As far as.
Good afternoon madam chair and
the members of the committee my
name is Jane E. and I am a
member of the environmental
justice caucus of the Democratic
Party also of of Sardinas
Institute and Albuquerque New
Cancio of those to our
environmental justice
organizations in in the state in
Albuquerque.
And
I want to say on their behalf
though we are opposed to Senate
bill forty one.
I am also a retired government
regulatory attorney.
And I am here today to say.
For the that was percent of four
one.
Sure thank you
I'm opposed to Senate bill forty
one.
on behalf of consumers
and and really working people
the people of that worked in
telecommunications
telecommunications this is
because.
The telecommunications act of
New Mexico is.
The one protection that
consumers have today against
poor service high prices and
lack of choice of providers.
The the primary legislative
intent of the New Mexico
telecommunications act is still
accessible telecommunication
services at affordable prices
the best assurance that that of
consumers will receive a
accessible total
telecommunication services at
affordable prices is the
presence of competition.
in the market.
And the telecommunications act
currently provides a meaningful.
Standard tests for competition.
So I would refer you to the
statute and as advantage of now.
The that some of those important
criteria are the ability of a
providers to make functionally
equivalent or substitute
Services readily readily
available.
Secondly barriers to market
entry third the number of other
providers office offering the
same or reasonably comparable
services.
And the ability of a provider to
affect prices or to Chertoff the
tuition.
That's a meaningful tested come
off of competition.
it happened then.
Okay the test in Senate bill
forty one with eliminate that
yes.
And of leave of consumers with
nothing CenturyLink fail yes in
twenty thirteen century like
failed this test as recently as
in twenty nineteen up held by
the Supreme Court in a case that
came out last year twenty twenty
two and I would say in closing
that I would anyone would agree
with what the speak for pro
proponents of Senate bill forty
one just that today yes industry
has change however.
CenturyLink owns the
communications network that all
these providers have to use in
order to provide internet
force over interim internet you
know avoid of course over
internet of protocol and
informed even more of the
services that's where sentry
link gets its market power and
it should not be too regulated
I'm asking you to do not path
thank you to spell thank you
anybody as opposed to this bill
yes Sir.
If we could keep it to that.
Thank you Sir.
Good afternoon madam chair
committee and Senator Padilla
good to see you again
I'm going to read what I have
for you I have ADHD and
terrified public speaking but
what I feel strongly about I do
want to share with you today and
I hope you will indulge thank
you my name is Dennis Conner G.
the current president the
communication workers of America
retirees which represents the
tire state public and private.
People I spent forty five years
in Tel Commission field working
outside a retired in twenty
twelve into monthly membership
meetings that I attended that to
people.
Hopefully conference calls with
retiree chapters to help out
thirteen states.
And through social media with
combination of management and
craft.
What we hear costly second place
of what's happened to service
since twenty seventeen I want to
go on record this you did right
was.
Impartial in twenty seventeen to
Senate bill fifty three the
understood that would be a call
back in two years an appeal she
would investigate whether or not
CenturyLink was living up to
their standards as you may or
may not know it went to the PRC
PRC ruled that CenturyLink LESC
dot.
We have to its status sensually
turned around and sued the PRC
and went to the Supreme Court
Supreme Court to rule in the
PSC's favor and that's our
purpose is to protect your
constituents and public.
Twenty seventeen to Senate bill
one which affect when I worked
in I.
So cold so please we are twenty
four o'clock residential repair
from the customer called in we
have twenty four hours to
restore service that was the
guideline even if we had to stay
longer to finish the repair that
was the intent federal
disappeared the twenty seventeen
to talking to people now repairs
are.
Nonexistent people call then if
they get in.
Thank you we have put out three
four five days installation
bring money into the business
nobody seems to be a priority.
I wanted just one past because a
lot of you will recognise but
all of these cities I'm gonna
start reading more.
So called to carry Clovis role
as well a teacher put Tallas
grants Gallup Silvercity hatch
Deming Edgewood Moriarity the
state see about now Los Alamos
Los Vegas serve on thank you for
the list Red River tell us and
Santa Fe do any of you know with
all the cities that are provide
service have.
I'm such we have in common.
They do not have residential
repair service on weekends if
your phone goes L..
This is what happens you have to
wait to Monday at the earliest.
To have another two minutes I'm
here to its as of so if you like
to wrap it up okay just the
other thing I would take issue
with this and our rural areas
and even here in talent.
Senator the basis of digital
carriage system to provide
service to all of you know I'm
sure a lot of you have noticed
that when your lights go well
you can pick up your phone you
could phone line you and it
still works that's done by
generators at the central
offices or factories at the
remote terminals.
This policy is validate these
batteries are not being replaced
at the remote terminals so we
have people where they've called
the P. O. C. H. would have been
able to get that is replaced the
technicians are having no luck
whatsoever they just put that
part that's not fair people need
phone service the people that do
have level and depend on them
and I thank you very much for
your time you.
Thank you madam chair can I
summarize a little better we've
got one more person that someone
on soon and then you all will
give you that if the for.
The remote.
I thank you commitment on me to
testify today this is for under
a month twenty five year member
of CW away and twenty five years
of broadband installation repair
technicians
You know we are seem to be a New
Mexico teen is wholeheartedly
against this bill it's come to
my attention that
Senator Padilla and Mr Leo Mach
I have mentioned that we have
not to either make any
amendments to this bill and or
have not met.
Which is strange because I flew
from Phoenix Arizona to the
capitalist Tober as well as
Jennifer Smith and a couple of
our New Mexico representative of
New Mexico.
State of the Representative to
try to hear what would be
different about this bill.
We don't agree with this bill we
didn't we cannot make any
amendments to this bill because
it's a bad bill.
We're talking about fifteen
thousand a rural customers at
CenturyLink maybe they're not
our role has.
they have options.
To change over to a voice over
IP services the reason they
don't have some of these other
produced some of these other
technologies are too expensive.
We agree that the infrastructure
investment jobs there's going to
be missed hundreds of dollars.
Part of the state of New Mexico
will address these issues right.
But what these issues are not
going to be addressed now they
will be addressed after the
infrastructures bill with bills.
taking advantage of the hundred
megabytes down and twenty
megabytes upload anymore.
Two people take part in this
plan but until then we cannot
pass this bill.
we have been trying to work.
you know.
To to to to with communities to
find out not a reasonable
solution and there just isn't
any we will partner with
CenturyLink development at a
time when the and support eight
eight eight type bill when
reasonable competition is
available
and it is just not.
At this point in time.
so I stay in thank you for
hearing my testimony today and
we would hope that you would
vote against this bill for rural
for my money in Alamogordo New
Mexico.
Who still has dial tone after
forty years of the same phone
number that every time it rains
performed also and even though I
won't there I can get it fixed
because the lack of investment
in that please stand for my mom
and voting against this bill
thank you.
Yes okay at are you opposition.
Yeah.
Thank you madam chair members of
these are different sorry thank
you madam chair members
committee at John Lipschutz with
The New Mexico federation of
labor just wanted to first say
thank I did want to thank the
sponsor I know that working on
telecommunications issues and
expanding broadband it's been a
lifelong mission of his and we
very much appreciate his mission
and getting that done
unfortunately for some of the
reasons stated previously we do
have to stand in opposition of
this bill but respectfully do
self thank you thank you.
Senator would you like to make
comments before your which like
to hear from the committee for
I'll just make some very brief
ones thank you madam chair and I
want to thank all the folks at
St spoke in support but I also
want to address and thank those
that spoke in opposition we have
had this is been up for me
personally it's been about
eleven year effort but the big
effort began really in two
thousand fifteen and now we are
you know here eight years later
you know I do want to say this
is absolutely not a deregulation
bill what this is is a parity
and right sizing Bill we don't
have a gigantic as I mentioned
before nine hundred and eighty
thousand customer company in the
state of New Mexico anymore were
land lines are concerned this is
consider this is connected to
land lines only and how those
are regular I just want to make
that clear for you all in terms
of provider of last resort
CenturyLink lumen that they're
now called the Medicare pretty
much knows that now this would
directly affect a company like
that we do have through the
public regulation commission the
discontinuance of service as
well as our Kerry last or
regulation where this company's
never abandon customers before
civil war that was mentioned I I
take a little bit of exception
and I will tell you there are a
number of steps that have to go
through if you are going to.
The this having never done that
but it maybe this will affect
them but they've never done that
before but there's a number of
steps you have to go through and
receive approval from the public
regulation commissioner to do
that to further clarify that
while we had this bill in the
Senate just about a week and a
half ago just to further
strengthen that consumer
protection I did amend the bill
to make sure that if there was
any sort of a relationship state
most of the the the company's
most services in New Mexico are
on the lumen CenturyLink Qwest
US west backbone that was built
out you know fifty eighty years
ago but even let's just say that
there's a competition between
the company itself because they
might prop provided the service
to the voice carrier in town and
lumen might be doing the
business service that we even
clarify that for you so that
this is completely you know
protected that way
when it was mentioned about the
very cities that were read out
in real companies those those
areas are primarily covered up
by the real companies in New
Mexico that you heard from a lot
of other fully in support of
this measure and that's exactly
why this bill is needed so that
we can regulate
the larger company that used to
exist it's a whole different
company now this is why we need
this bill so that they can
continue to provide quality
services that that they're able
to provide when Mr Amman and the
CW a book that you heard from I
will tell you that in.
Two thousand fifteen sixteen and
seventeen I personally went to
the CW you all in Albuquerque
there chief Edward spent an
awful lot of time with them on
that on that front this past
year and a half of what we were
putting this piece of
legislation together we help
multiple to several conference
calls we we had meetings here in
the capital we were doing
everything we could to find out
what we need to do to this
developed up CW coupled with
this every time we made that
request we did not receive a
response rate of several months
or at all and so I just I think
exception with some of the
things that were said because I
was in everybody it's as though
there's not even a door in my
office here in this building
because I try to work with
everyone but at some point we do
have to get this done to move
this forward and so I just
really felt like I had to
mention a few of those things
madam chair and have to take any
questions and.
Comma to questions from the
committee.
Representative Martinez.
Mr chair.
Senator.
I appreciate all the work.
This brought.
I.
I have a.
This bill with the.
Insuring Representative that's
correct.
Shares we're on.
The way that I see.
I've seen around on more than a
couple of bills.
Is the opposition seems to want
to keep.
Status quo.
We need to move things forward.
If you oppose it great tell me
what you propose a work with me
and I I believe Madam chair
Senator you you've tried to do
that
so I I really don't understand
some of the opposition.
but that's a whole other
conversation Senator one last
question
Do you have the actual number
of.
Landlines or for telephone
service people using a landline
because.
And this is other than
businesses but.
Private.
Madam chair representative I
don't have the exact number but
I can give you the percentages
for sure so you're you're
looking at about at three
percent of New Mexicos public
records residential or for
business are still on a landline
connection those lines are just
as important because of the
locations where they are they
are just as important as any
other telecom line in New Mexico
that's why you see me.
Around this round building in
tandem trying to move
aggressively on broadband as
well as protect this this in
this biz piece here this
industry that has to be
protected those nine one lines
they've you know they're not
gonna we're gonna work for
people and that's the only
lifeline they have added their
community so that is just as
important to me as it should be
to you and everyone on this
committee and so that's why I'm
here to make sure that we have
regulation parity so the
companies that provide those
services those that three
percent of those lines.
Can continue to manage their
operations and I'm proud I'm the
federal then that blue whatever
going to come up with on why
this opposition from the CW I
I've I've worked really really
hard with them to try to find a
solution but sometimes you get
to the point as we all know was
legislators that there isn't a
it's a it's a light switch on or
off Sen.
Madam chair Senator I I do.
Truly appreciate all the work
you've done on on this bill and
on the broadband cousins help
for me it's help veterans across
the state.
So I appreciate that thank you
madam chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Matthews.
You madam chair thank you
senator for The presentation
into the function the audience
The figure that I had from some
source was isn't that there's
about a hundred fifty thousand
landlines left in the state
so portion of it must be in this
building because I just.
And my question is if we passed
this what will be your responses
thank you the company's ability
to those hundred and fifty
thousand customers is still
exists that.
Thank you madam chair and
representative that they won't
that that a company like a lumen
for a Windstream they are very
fast approaching being the size
of activities well.
They have to be the same quality
customer service and
availability standards the
company of that size has to be
today this one particular larger
company what one point was
impressed with the customers.
Course at that time we needed to
regulate them very differently
because of the sheer number of
customers that they they
impacted but my response would
be they have to meet all the
standards of any other company
if we adopt this legislation
they would have to meet the same
standards as any other company
in that size of the company.
Pods deliverability
accessibility standpoint.
Thank you thank you madam chair
Senator
And fifty thousand customers
left with the land lines are
those.
It do you know what percentage
of those are in places where.
cell phone service would not be
a viable alternatives yeah so
let me just.
At around eight in in a round
about two hundred fifty thousand
probably the size of what a
woman is right now then there's
a number of other customers
through the oil companies and
things of that nature we're
we're wireless is concerned I
would say probably about.
I would I'm gonna guess around
twenty twenty five percent of
them would could only be served
by a wireless option because of
the topography of that part of
the state.
And madam chair Senator so at
least for the foreseeable future
there's going to be a small
populations that nevertheless
the package that will need
to land line service I
understand you correctly yes
ma'am you madam chair and
representative absolutely I have
just I would say maybe someone
the representative from the year
could correctly but I think
about forty eight miles of here
we have a community club in the
Leo is an incredibly difficult
part of New Mexico to reach up
try to get the right.
Every chance I get to try to get
the broadband on the other side
of the coin about the only way
you can reach that communities
through land lines that were put
in eighty years ago for a cell
phone.
And madam chair Senator so for
that small school.
Discoloration I understand yours
your sense we sharing us that
they're not going to be just
call it a good and continue to
have service at least until zoom
had replaced and I understanding
correctly thank you madam chair
and representative absolutely I
would say I would draw your
attention to New Mexico statutes
sixty three ninety eight dot six
two carrier of last resort this
is very clearly outlined for the
public regulation commission on
when where and how a
discontinuation would happen and
I can confirm for you that
that's never happened in New
Mexico but it's there we have it
on the books and you have to get
a jump through those hoops in
order to.
And here Senator thank you for
that and this passes should I
assume that the landline Center
gastrin going going the state is
going to provide us.
Madam chair and and the and
Representative this is my
eleventh year here in that chair
and I came in the same year and
I don't think anything has
changed a lot so that when
you're.
So I don't mean to be glib about
it but but I I I can't guarantee
you that but I can tell you we
will provide the
telecommunication device of some
kind or I know you will find a
way to communicate.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank thank you Representative
Representative throughout the
thank you madam chair thank you
senator for the bill I.
Austin this general years of
using the awesome I am just to
clarify that The New Mexican off
of this thank you just for my
clarification medication thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative Senator
you know it when you're
listening this adversity thing
your competition is in support
but it's not a competition
because that's that's a separate
that's that cell phones it
sounds like they're in support
of your your work to continue
and one one is that is that and
why do you see that as being the
case madam chair and then a vice
chair I think that we so so this
entire industry somehow uses my
shoulders to go through this
kind of stuff I H. I. chair by
your those you know the the
science and tech community over
the years and it just seems to
be like I've I've kind of gotten
into some women have not been
able to get out of it but maybe
something will so so I what
happens is some years we do have
to do things to help the land
line only folks some years we
have to do things that promote
the rural companies versus the
larger companies which we really
don't even have large companies
anymore and on land lines and
cell years we need to work on
broadband as you mentioned
before to me it's an all of the
above solution at the we can't I
don't favor one part of this
industry over the other because
I just think that we are such
we're you know we have with
forty sixth in population and
fifteen let me just we need all
of the above solutions to
deliver nine one one service
broadband wireless you name it
that was the answer thank you
madam chair and senator last
question I had was you said in
the committee said that you
would address some of the
construction concerns any point
to where that is and.
Yes so if you look at the Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
Two two five two three eight
that one we did improve the
legislation by further
materializing how Kerry last
resort will we'll operate and
then also I wish I can wrap my
reading glasses with me which I
did not
what we did is we said
essentially if the entire
counties on the woman.
as simple CenturyLink Qwest US
West backbone but one company
might be providing services as
states that women and the other
one might be lumen telco and
then maybe another company is
using women's back going to
provide business services that
doesn't qualify for for
effective competition.
It does it at qualify perfect
condition if they're completely
divorced and separated and so I
just we just wanted to further
clarify that so that that
provided additional consumer
protection thank you madam chair
thank you Representative
Lundstrom.
The streamlining process.
The the
Right now that
I just think that.
Representative Duncan.
I there's no further debate out
to pass.
As your neighbor yes.
there the the the.
That
always.
What is the loss
Madam chair and and that
Representative the plus side is
that a company that provides our
services will not be regulated
in a manner that allows them to
continue making capital
investments to maintain the
lines and provide the quality of
service that they enjoy today
another plus is that nothing
takes anything that this
legislation takes nothing away
from the public regulation who
is a consumer agency the public
regulation commission's ability
to regulate them and to require
that they do what they say
they're supposed to do and then
providing an Avenue for a class
or a group of citizens to come
forward and say they're not
treating as well here none of
that goes away with this
legislation simply right sizes
regulation increased parity to
help these guys are going to be
regulated.
What I
that.
Or log.
Good.
For.
One of the best ones.
Our answer it maybe had or would
stop talking.
What are.
Act of well.
The fact that the wall.
Find.
Senator and that was.
Well.
The the the the.
Well that that I did a lot of
So.
The.
madam chair and representative
this is a a telephone dial tone
pots line bill.
I have that bill that you just
referenced myself in the Senate
we have completely reworked the
bill so that you know what we if
it gets over here you'll go here
again in a much different
fashion.
But I have
Even better.
Any other questions.
Okay so
The nation.
So Representative Duncan
May that the nomination and
Representative Hernandez
seconded to take the role.
Representative New York.
Yes
Representative don't get yes.
Representative it is yes.
That that yes.
Little yes.
Representative Lundstrom yeah.
Representative Martinez yes
Representative makes yes
Representative mapping.
Representative.
Yes.
Vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes Representative
also is a level test reports for
Senator you have a do pass thank
you madam president with.
Ladies can do is wish that H.
three three thirty.
And the sponsor is on his way up
we believe.
Okay and Representative
Hernandez what would you like us
to do regarding your second ago
the.
If you're prepared we can do.
Our other.
The report okay.
Which was this person okay this
one if they have done for us
right.
Should be correct of.
My understanding there is an
amendment it is being passed out
as.
Experts.
New jacket.
Already representative to go
ahead and present your re
present your.
Okay.
Right the opposition to.
So there's no opposition to the
amendment.
Madam chair here once again.
Talk about a V. three four of
seventy four which will raise
the population limits for CO
debility for infrastructure
projects funding from the leader
fund we do have an amendment
but explain the amendment to the
thank committees clear of the
changes you'd like to make.
Okay let's confirm that the two
to two years two two five six
one five point one.
That you're getting ready to
lose another witness.
He's thinking about it.
You
is my neighbor.
Yeah
Okay Representative here co
sponsors now also here.
Mr I'm grabbing the bill a quick
so we can.
Representative Cadena we've
gotten that an amendment and so
let's get the representative a
copy that as well.
Our.
Okay madam chair and committee
on page one one eleven we're
striking the work amending.
And inserted into their of of
removing.
Well now in the title state
relating to economic development
projects.
Removing this population
requirements for certain
projects.
On page three line sixteen.
After municipality struck the
remainder of the line struggling
seventeen in its entirety and
strike lined up to eighteen up
to though the word war.
So this
is.
At least and then on page three
line twenty after municipality
struck the remainder of the line
strike line twenty one up to the
sept Michael.
That would be our.
So what this amendment will do
is essentially take out all
population limits for
municipalities to be able to use
I'm sorry Representative having
trouble hearing if you want to
I'm sorry.
Forget that this Mike that Mike
is not very friendly
so what this amendment will do
is essentially just take out the
population limits entirely from
being able to use the
infrastructure project funding
from the lead up fund.
My.
I co sponsor would like to say a
few words.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair and
committee and my apologies for
not being able to engage with
you as much as I'd like to
presume our first go around I
really appreciated last time
madam chair at the direction
from chair Lundstrom to figure
out the context and conversation
we're having especially as it
related to potential protections
for smaller municipalities
we're glad to have our expert
mac I saw here today to help us
clarify and and work through
some of the assumptions that we
started with last time and as
such this is this is amend an
amendment we would like to have
a further conversation about
given given new information so
madam chair if if now works we
like to have that catches up
with the information we got back
from the economic development
department Representative.
Madam chair members of the
committee good afternoon that
case on the city manager the
city of Rio Rancho I've worked
in local economic development in
state economic development as
well on the infrastructure
provision was adopted in two
thousand and nineteen or two
thousand and twenty to help
small communities across New
Mexico address site ready just
in the the gap that we have from
Roger to real estate being ready
for for development and that's
with the with the intent their
originally was smaller
communities but have fewer
resources any more technical
assistance the population cap
was put in place for sixty
thousand people at that time and
speaking to my neighbor and
Representative Hernandez through
the in terms and this cussing
the pop the possibility of.
Using the cap from sixty
thousand to two hundred thousand
potentially three hundred
thousand the intent there was to
open up or expand the
eligibility to the next ring of
communities if we well we think
that we have three buckets of
communities in New Mexico three
sizes the smaller and that next
year that mid size which be Los
crucis Rio Rancho Santa Fe
excuse me.
In discussing this with
Representative Fernandes the
intent there would be in the
smaller communities have the for
the first crack at opportunity
to access this funding the
economic development partners in
general you to to support this
funding my understanding is
seven communities have been
funded so far with
infrastructure we've got to
improve their site readiness and
publicly owned lands publicly
owned in industrial parts
business parks was funding
region from two hundred thousand
the two million the intent next
extending it to the next group
of cities again that's coming
from the general leader is to
help that next wave of cities
there is no dedicated funding
from my understanding off for
this and it's been subject to
application in the policy
interpretations of the policy
application of the economic
development department and
funding this the can the the
thought process and going to the
next again tier grouping of
cities is again have limited
resources compared to the larger
cities and and in New Mexico
the largest city or largest city
New Mexico artist County New
Mexico has access to additional
revenues diverse federal funds
more in house staff more
technical expertise to pursue
opportunities to develop
properties as well as more.
It sector developer activity and
investment taking place in their
communities.
The last piece I wanted to have
clarified madam chair and
representative relates back to
the forty percent of provision
if you can expand on that
please.
Representative thank you madam
chair members of the committee
in researching out with the
economic development department
the forty percent of the funding
is a I'm the J. tip funding not
on the leader funding is the
information that was that we we
were able to gather and collect.
Madam chair representative that
came from director price right.
Robert.
To report thank you.
Sure.
The the funding funding unless
you of course.
Correct madam chair members of
the the committee on.
The with the creation of that
infrastructure Lida the
qualifying entity in this case
is the actual community
municipality the tribal entity
or the county word talk about
traditional Lita has been the
funding is intended for a job
creator the infrastructure legal
help bridge that gap to improve
sight reading this so there's
more opportunity to recruit
future job creators so it is a
for lack of better term I a
different bucket or different
carve out of Leda intended
towards you know dear towards
local governments to improve
their site readiness for future
track tractability you
extraction.
For economic development job
creators in the traditional
sense of the traditional media
J. tape is used as one of the
qualifying parameters of a
company is J. tip eligible than
it was deemed good reading we
need to eligible for qualifying
entity when we think company
like Netflix that is receiving
leaders or see that we yes.
Thank.
The first one last point
clarification that will be the
infrastructure is to directly
import you know extend
infrastructure that's roads
sewers utilities to sites on
publicly owned lands for future
development.
Thank.
Is that the.
Is that all your presentation so
yes thank you madam chair so in
conclusion we would just share
this is a conversation we wanted
to get started again the
inception for this idea came out
of Rio Rancho out given that
LESC uses in the community I
represent falls into that state
mid range city
bucket I thought it was a
conversation with having we
appreciate the considerations
raise last time and in good
faith we did bring this
ammendment forward but given
this information in particular
about where the forty percent
please in and
the intent of a previous
legislature to make sure that
the smaller municipalities had
access to resources that they
may not otherwise given their
limited technical staff other
kinds of access to dollars we
think we think it's a policy
conversation we can have some of
that today if you all feel
comfortable advancing this bill
to the house government
committee we of course would
like to further the conversation
and otherwise were ready to pick
this up in the interim but just
wanted to bring back with come
back with that clarifying
information and here's some more
feedback from the committee
today madam chair thank you.
Is that the closure of the
presentation yes okay is there
anybody here in favor of this
bill.
Anybody opposed.
would you like to speak in favor
today.
That is.
All right anybody else.
Okay go to the committee.
Representative Manson's.
Thank you madam chair I've I
just have questions every time
today.
I'm feeling very.
You know.
There are things so my question
I have madam chair and
presenters is at Representative
is that.
By removing the population women
I understand that now
Albuquerque would.
And I guess background and
county would become eligible for
the.
Madam chair representative if we
did pass this amendment then yes
and to clarify this isn't the
that generally this is a
specific part of Leda that makes
leader dollars that do come from
the general fund dropped in to
lead as we've seen over many
years available to local
governments who own land are
developing their own land and
then there is a provision that
that land was not secured
through the use of an IRA be so
they own a piece of land that
they got without and I are be
like an industrial park these
would it make dollars these
already make dis accessible for
municipalities of less than
sixty thousand if we remove the
population cap it would open up
to any government in New Mexico.
this year have Representative.
It is it is tough with the City
of Albuquerque or Bernalillo
county and how they feel about
this.
Madam chair representative I
have not.
We have also not been approached
by the City of Albuquerque but
no we've not made the proactive
effort to do so.
Madam chair the presenters at.
It's money available by in the
state of Albuquerque and
Bernalillo county when that
happens and.
I participate in doing that so
I'm just
Is this share.
Representative is.
To me was original purpose of
this.
To include that.
Albuquerque.
Madam chair and representative
in our bill H. B. three seventy
four no
in its original purpose the
original legislation that is in
place today was designed to give
the smaller municipalities of
less than sixty thousand access
to different dollars so that
they could use towards their
economic development investments
our intention and introducing
three seventy four
now that that's been practiced
and established and because Los
crucis house an industrial park
that would be applicable for
these dollars is to say that we
think this potentially reason to
let in these mid sized cities
any applications that are
approved to come from the
general media fund is not a
separate pile of money it's not
just the special appropriation
they come from and as my expert
explained.
The decisions around granting
these these dollars upon receipt
of an application would follow
the policy intentions and
priorities of the economic
development division director.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Lundstrom.
Here and I will actually ask for
this and they're still not
understanding lined with one big
businesses.
County in the state just days.
I mean I I can see they are news
cities and.
Why would they be yes that that.
This element.
Yeah like out of the.
Our government owned land and
they want to do
the state resources
I would choose.
This number is seven thousand.
They're often.
And because it is a decision on
the Economic Development
Department.
The way volunteers is that I
think it would be highly
unlikely you will go down.
I I would not see that
I would say that want to see
parity they want to make sure
statewide I know that last part
that I live in Gallup all right
the counties.
This has received those those
dollars that
I don't see that as being a
threat and I and and that's
where I am I am I am hearing it
but maybe this recommend chair.
Madam chair representative
Enter Lundstrom I still have a
lot to learn from you.
Coming from southern New Mexico
it's hard to not see Albuquerque
is that that
even last week when I saw the
governor's capital outlay list
and so there wasn't a single
project for Dona Ana County it's
hard to not see Albuquerque is a
threat I appreciate.
That when we exert our political
pressure and influence and have
meaningful conversations about
statewide economic development
that we potentially could land
in an effort that made sense for
all of our communities so I'm
admitting out loud that I have
just underlying.
Trepidations about what happens
when the biggest city comes in
and then also to be fair I
wasn't around I I think we I I
was I guess the twenty nineteen
I don't remember the passage I
did not participate in moving
the original bill the first time
but part of me wanted to respect
and carry forward with smaller
steps moving away from the
direction they established which
was to create this new mechanism
for smaller municipalities to
pull down these economic
development dollars so instead
of just saying.
You started something and now we
all want in I thought it might
be reasonable to take a smaller
step in in expanding the list of
possible **** counties but you
know I can be convinced
otherwise and Adam admitting out
loud my bias as from south
central New Mexico expected you
want to share something.
Madam chair Representative
Representative Lundstrom I'm
very familiar with the national
parks which you speak and that I
think are you know back when I
was in my old role to statements
cabinet secretary of economic
development we talk a lot about
tackling this challenge of
improving site readiness and we
to always having to go towards
the job creator the the the it
requests we receive from
communities of.
We look you know we do lead to
improve an industrial park in
typically the funds to improve
you know government only
answered in federal funds
whether it's the new with the
USDA rural funds or or eighty
eight on it is not meant to be
viewed as a threat or or
blocking out you know we many
parts of the important economic
engine that Albuquerque
Bernalillo county is but really
thinking about it the way I've
thought about it from my current
perch in the city Rio Rancho is
kind of a three step process we
start off of the small the
smallest group of communities go
to the the next group do not
allow you know the up vote the
mid tier cities and counties are
to use this as an economic
development tool and hopefully.
Partnership with the New Mexico
idea and other groups involved
academic development come back
and two three four years.
Open it up your cross the board
and hopefully work in
collaboration with the
department and other
stakeholders for additional
funding and then have some new
funding provisions so that there
is a you know this is coming out
of generally to but we really
need if it had its own dedicated
funding source we can focus on
that that site readiness because
that's the biggest challenge the
end whether it's existing
companies in New Mexico
companies that we're talking
about recruiting and in really
would you know when we look at
the the start up activity that
we have in in New Mexico a lot
of start ups want to state and
grow in New Mexico and there
isn't that next steps of how to
improve that site readiness so
we can continue to drive
investment and create new jobs
for the the long term
but it seems to me fully
understand what you're saying is
we all have the challenges of
flight readiness it's you know
it's very by degrees but it is
not unique to small communities
and rural New Mexico it's across
the board.
Your is this probably should be
a.
fundraisers ninety thousand.
The
person is that after forty
percent those
places and.
I I don't I don't have a problem
which is leading in the that I
just I'm not legislative winners
and losers I I and I thought I
think this is my building.
Our state is the intent was
rural New Mexico because we have
those sites that are ready.
The New Mexico partnership did
their assessment sites
throughout the state.
The analytics at any point there
is nothing hello just drove
buildings
Bill marks the legend and wanted
rob Landis here's what it does
for part two years my rebel road
to get there which is exactly
this service.
But I think.
I just feel that the numbers for
winners and losers madam chair
and the committee is likely.
We are scaling spokesman okay
with that too that I just don't
like a little.
Thank you
Madam chair representative if
you would be amenable I mean I
think we would both love to work
with you on getting a site on on
figuring out how to silo.
The.
Infrastructure portion away from
the general lead up so that we
can make this the way that it
needs to be up to like you set.
Okay.
It is a new fund.
That
the data that I go with the
specific funding.
I have no longer taking out an
overview of the.
Set up in the Economic
Development Department provided
funding callers.
Dedicated to this for.
Is that finance to do that the
budget is ready Madam chair
representative I did not realize
it was that easy.
I have to have.
The others do that.
And of course part three.
Yeah.
Also that.
Yes we desperately the site
development plans.
Good job.
Madam chair representative we
couldn't agree more thank you
thank you madam chair.
So is there any would also like.
Any of the.
Madam chair
Representative Lundstrom this
comments about the these
property with gravel road that's
our economic and that's our
industrial park right now.
And and so to that point you
know as long as the rural parts
of the world or not
that.
I agree with that.
Should should be an open
invitation.
So Representative to us to go to
a vote or what would you like
the.
And madam chair we would like
about.
As with the desire the
committee.
You pass.
And then to.
Yes.
Representative ending on it
sizes on the amendment on the
for the last day.
Yes.
You have to amend it first
before we can pass that we admit
we amended it up there was no
opposition to.
I I missed that completely.
Representative and in order.
Still yes.
Representative don't get yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lente yeah.
Representative little yes
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez yes
Representative Mason yes
Representative Matthews.
At a budget yes.
Yes madam chair I tell is a
leading folks for you.
It amended bill.
You madam chair.
Yeah absolutely.
Already ten Representative
Hernandez you did call
Representative green I think he
is presenting in House Judiciary
and I do not believe
he's not madam chair not
presenting but I could live
okay.
I tried to pull in the future
okay because we cover about
twenty minutes ago okay he's got
about five minutes and then out
we will
Our business for the day would
be so much I I'll text myself.
She's a.
Of course.
That is.
Watching state
Here is one.
Right.
I.
Transaction.
The.
Always.
So I'm we are going to go ahead
and conclude today
Representative Rehm is in
another committee and so we will
roll this bill and till further
notice thank you all.
