I think our second one is here
that might be the first with the
what we should do first because
I think it would go a lot
quicker.
SB one forty three is our.
See if that person is here so
okay so let's start with SB
Eleven.
We're gonna take role of.
One is that some some background
rules for today.
That's.
Is.
That's a so what we'll do today
is I know everybody wants to
speak either for or against this
bill we want everybody to have a
chance to speak today you will
have one minute.
And so please respect the one
minute time limit of Patrick
will be taking that I don't want
to cut anybody off because I
don't like to do that but I
will.
So let's let's be real clear
we're going to do thirty minutes
opposition to people in person
they were going to go to fifteen
minutes on zero so that we forty
five minutes of opposition that
will do the same for those in
favor of the bill and then we
will go to the committee and so
I know that there's people that
may want to come in if you have
spoken and you're ready to be
done please let somebody else
have your seat so they can
commit or at least let them come
in to be able to say their piece
so does everybody understand
that.
All right then I guess we are
ready to start after we take all
those in the so let's go ahead
and take the role first.
Representative and in order.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Fernandes.
Okay.
Representative Lente.
Representative little care
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Representative basin there
Representative Matthews.
Madam vice chair you madam
chair.
I'm sure you have a quorum all
right well we can get ready to
present.
As bishop of these windows are.
Step one.
Sure this could be
The.
Yeah.
Okay.
This is the lieutenant.
He's heard stories of it.
I today presenting SP eleven I
would choose my experts first
we've treated Daniels who is
that the actually LC entirely
Macy's is also with S. W. O. C.
as well I want to thank
everybody for coming out and
doing this bill today hi you
know we've been talking of this
project may appreciate the time
that everyone took and I know
that when it comes to looking at
a policy like this there can be
a lot of confusion that arises
hi it's complex there's a lot
happening with it I don't want
to.
Come for everyone and no one
thing that this bill that not
just pop up out of thin air we
didn't just develop it yesterday
and it over some dinner and you
know you now this bill this is
third iteration R. it's come to
the house we start had a couple
years ago and I came up with in
my district really naturally
organically that this is a need
that was really coming up as an
issue so then last year we
decided to put you some of our
junior money to put together a
task force under other
department workforce solutions
and it was a mix of agencies and
business leaders it was the
chambers were involved we had we
had employee you simply were
involved as well as of those a
good mix we had analysis done
and I was struggling we of them
of pride of the bureau of
business and economic research
at UNM it's a fantastic research
arm of the of the institute of
these you should I think we
should all be very proud of what
they're able to put together and
and not just for my own sake I
think we should really take
pride when I institutions do the
work and they do they do really
in depth analyses so I'll prefer
to miss bureau from now on
because that's going to catch
all the of the so I do want to
thank the WS the chambers you
know the the different units
that came out we were on the
cosponsored I have liked we have
a representative of the Civil
governmental here as well as
with the consultors you know
also Representative Chandler is
also co sponsored US president
Mimi Stewart and also Michael
Padilla so it's a mix of folks
from across the way
no one is completely happy and I
think what my colleague
mentioned earlier that you know
no one completely happy it's a
better bill for it because we're
all kind of trying to find the
best way to do it but what I can
promise you that this bill it
has been looked at and vetted
compromised and analyzed and
histories look we look at these
things really thoroughly and
it's that funny we're talking
today and I mention a line in
there and she's like is that
page seven such and such line of
like that's actually.
We we know this very well
but this is a transparent
process and so if we believe the
paid family leave is going to
make a difference for our
families if we feel that it's
something that maybe reduce the
chance of aces for families
increase the workforce in our in
our state as we've seen in other
states if it's something that we
really believe it I believe in
this iteration of the bill and I
believe this is the time to do
it but let's begin by looking at
the bill so obviously section
one is just the title section to
go right into the definition
that took some notes I wanted to
note here when we're talking.
So looking at the definitions of
the one of the ones that comes
up a few times is what family
leave this page three of the
integrated amendments it's time
to bond with the child of an
employee it's a to care for
family members of a serious
health condition it's following
the death of a child for whom
the employee would otherwise
qualify for family leave
look at the local appearances in
local parents this is a legal
term that comes up sometimes
with a child maybe would go
committee in this as a legal
term that is to provide a very
regularly that I would also turn
the page to look at this as well
and in section five on page four
it talks about any other
individual related by blood or
affinity discloses Association
to the employee or their spouse
is equivalent of a family
relationship and I know that's
causing heartburn for folks and
I'd like to explain to where
that comes from our back in the
seventies when they were
returning from Vietnam their
brothers in arms they wanted to
be there for each other and so
they accepted that as language
to use in the situation it later
was adopted by the US personnel
management and so if you work
for the United States deal at
department labor and you know
any anywhere in that realm you
can also take off time for
someone that has a close
association is very we'll go
through where there's
protections on that and I can
say that in in these cases that
we're looking at that you use
that languages don't the views
are fraudulent use of this does
not happen we do not see that
widespread is not and I'm going
to look a little bit further
what makes this I don't see this
later but when in the
conversation there were five of
the seven pillars the business
community the chamber
recommended that they wanted hit
in order for them to support
this bill we have five of them
to go I think it's five and two
thirds in a minute but we had
fun one of them we don't hit is
because we did I'd say if we but
that is the person is a victim
of domestic violence they can
take time off of work this was
come to again in the discussion
of the committee and the reason
where that comes from is that
when someone is a big.
Moved to mystic violence are
those are the most often cases
of workforce violence that
happens so we hear shootings at
workplaces it's typically
because of domestic violence
issues happening so that's a
protection that that top of the
task force came to not only for
the employee their families but
also for their colleagues that
may be affected as well.
Are moving forward if we look at
section is the section.
Thank I just want to mention
this to sorry on page six we
clarified that the money should
be invested by the state
investment officer as well which
will also help shore up the.
The but the fund as well so
sorry section for then creates
the fund within the office of
the treasure and I want to be
clear explains what those
exemptions that have frontier
will operate and what they can
and can't use of force so the
employees have to have
documentation when they do this
and actually I have an example
when I was pregnant my mom in
her state they have.
And let me tell you something
about my older Hispanic mother
it was very difficult for her to
take the time off that she had a
right to she only to this and
money that the much the no I can
only take up one with at least a
couple of how to get that they
need me I'm not there was going
to chart it was going to and so
we did multiple iterations of
what her paid family what what
her application was and in this
particular case is a case that
we learn from right this is not
what I was going to be but they
really specify who was a
relation that you're aware that
this means war how long is that
person going to be gone is this
going to affect other kinds of
eight now explain to you and
they have to explain it right
here explain what this illness
is that's needed and then she
also had estimate a doctor's
note from my doctor telling them
what my mother would be doing
and there's more the explain
more also what is the program
this is not necessarily will use
but is one of eleven examples of
documentation of people do this
so it is something that people
to look after that and it also
exempt tribes because their
sovereign bodies and it also
said that in twenty twenty we
can adjust the amount that
they're but all is there's more
cost on the employee that on the
player if it goes up any amount
it's always major on the
employee and and less on the
employer.
And we can talk about that again
we talk about coming to
agreements and people not always
being happy with where you're at
what was where we came to the
table and I do wanna be clear
sorry tribes can opt into the
program as well so it wasn't
about that
we don't start distributing
until two and a half years
program more than two and half
years two and three quarters at
this point the reason why that
matters is that this is very new
this is very big and we want to
make sure that in that process
we're doing it correctly and so
if there are things that we need
to do to make it streamlined to
make sure that it's not having a
negative impact that process
allows it and I'll be honest
with you we learn from the
healthy families paid earned
leave that we passed a couple
years ago because we did not
want to put too much burden on
businesses that process but I I
got I got distracted.
We also allow businesses with
substantially similar policies
to apply to be fine you can see
that was amended that we made if
you look at limits and contacts
the reason it's on page eleven
your equipment and contacts out
for hi three originally it just
it didn't say it I just said
that a similar competition
greater than two points we
change that because the we
didn't want to leave people out
because what is greater than
what we're looking at how
inclusive a group as are on
those waves so we that that that
was changed in conversations and
understand the issues.
On in section five it lays out
the documentation that's needed
and that they must include how
much time is necessary for time
off an effort member currently
that was amended that was also
made as well that has to be
included in the documentation
how much is in there it also
clarifies that the department is
ten days to notify the business
that an application is made and
the business has thirty days to
appeal that process and say wait
the said we shouldn't count this
for whatever the reason may be
but it doesn't require create
that that we businesses are not
left in the lurch it not only
please in this section clarifies
that they have to it will
actually go to that place but
that the must contribute into
the fund for more than six
months looking at birth rates
from twenty twenty one twenty
two thousand babies that were
born of those only eight
thousand eight eighty three
hundred mothers had worked for
six months or more beforehand it
otherwise they would not be able
to qualify for this it's a
limited number there it offline
it also clarifies it the they do
not receive their full weight
the incentive to come back to
work isn't here in needing more
money if you make minimum wage
you do get double if you make
more than which is only two
thirds of your salary and let me
tell you that that's our service
when you have a new kid in the
family or we're dealing with a
serious medical issue that does
make a difference I believe
there should be on your desk at
sharply kind of talks about
what those.
CD.
It's the one.
It looks like.
This one clarifies if you look
at that chart you can look at it
and says.
If you make the state average
weight of fifty one thousand
dollars you typically bring home
about a thousand dollars a week.
that when the Representative was
holding thank you.
I'm sorry your.
Yes.
So if you make it out you
usually take about thousand
dollars with that sixty seven
replacement be like when you're
not working with the eight
hundred twenty seven dollars and
staff when you're not making
that money your employer is not
paying you so neither you nor
your employer are contributing
to fund that point just to be
really clear about what that
looks like
yeah so that's that's what that
is on that.
Going forward sorry me look at
my notes on this I do we really
terrible looking here so then no
double dipping you cannot double
dip this is another thing that
was a big concern for the the
business community is that you
cannot later on in simply make
more be taking time off than you
were before you can't layer we
made that clarification as well
and it maxes out the leave at
twelve weeks.
If you look also another piece
that I headed out to that larger
this chart looks here.
This so.
If you look at starts at the top
southwest women's Law Center if
you look over here take a look
at the average length of eight
and it does very it does but you
can see very quickly that it is
not only used immediately it
ranges from the average being
three point seven weeks in Rhode
Island to a higher and I guess
and forty five things being.
Thanks six and a half weeks
almost seven weeks in
Connecticut so that's really
what the average length of leave
you're looking at these cases
and so it but it does Mexico
twelve weeks again we've seen
that pretty consistent with our
people are pregnant but this
includes people Informatica take
care so the sick what one
Freeman a lost child on domestic
abuse issues as well and again
that has to be clarified in the
documentation before all right
so then if we go forward we do
look at section six that
explains the I. documentation in
the claims and there's a few
things I think early port in
this section if you are filing
pay paid family leave
application you have to have a
police report if you are talking
about what were some sort of
issue click here thirty percent
or somebody that says this
person is undergoing receding
has the right it is a victims of
domestic violence there twenty
three we try to make that on
occasion in state police for
domestic violence which is a
limited amount of because that
is a more flexible situation or
not but what is more.
The safety of persons involved
when you're trying to figure out
when they can leave and so that
is why that is that way health
care Freeman which child helping
a family member did say helping
yourself is that you can get
that occupation would drive
that's already what what they do
in other states not something we
want it also includes the
timeline to return and it also
is confidential.
You going to section seven this
is what employees to their
players if they utilize this
want.
To talk about and I want to be
clear about what happens if we
don't have with this policy
nothing changes and so he never
had to take time off from your
employer because somebody got
sick because somebody got
pregnant because you're in a
situation my business in my
district I've seen them try to
cobble together that time off
for somebody and give them get
the rate I've seen my own
companies try to cobble together
and pay somebody when they're
leaving and that's really hard
to do but in this case and and a
lot of times people hi there
this is for a long time to take
more do you think more other
types of these off because
they're sick or often they don't
come they don't fully recover
they're not doing as well this
requires people to actually talk
it out with their employer and
say and it's just basically make
a reasonable effort to schedule
it as to not when you unduly
disrupt the operations deployer
and provide them with prior
notice before they take time off
so that you can be up extent
practical what they can do later
on we also talk about how it's
okay for a business to ask for
regular updates of how it's
going making sure that they are
gonna return on the tiling
expected that's another piece of
this
Mentioned earlier you can not
get paid family leave unless you
are even working for six months
let's seven working for Tracy
for six months and then I leave
five months and thirty days and
I go work for two million what
I'm working for Carillion hi
Taylor oh my gosh I need time
off isn't out of order cycle
accident all the time.
I can take the paid family leave
however she has no obligation to
keep me on she could potentially
immediately let go there is only
job protection after ninety days
and that was another reason that
we came to the business
community that there would only
be Dr protection after the she
could still let me go and I
would no longer work for she
could find somebody that could
fill that will more effectively
at that point and that's the
sort of their a section eight is
when you return to work and
these are protections for the
work that this can't be used
against the worker in any way
they can be you know vilified
for the to sensually it doesn't
well they can't use this as a
look at accrued seniority while
I was out these three months you
can increase your earning
however they can't use it to
drive against you as a reason to
fire you because you utilize
you're legally allowed to take a
time off it doesn't call for
updates if if the business uses
they don't they don't have to
either way a section nine
and section Representative.
Keeps yes are the I'm on the
backside of these you can use
section is when you return to
work you keep your job or at
least the level and pace you
can't drop it into the time off
you to keep that will pay
the you don't mess with it
creating new things sixty nine
is that employers can't
retaliate you can't use it as a
point of fiery somebody.
Section is that you somebody's
denied the appeal process of
what that would look like and
what they have already
considered and then eleven
twelve thirty you're very brief
on asus and these are actually
putting some of the concerns
that businesses tech
systematically preemption thank
one of the requirements in the
vicinity with that you would be
the same across the state and
that's really making it easier
for franchises are for
businesses that are local state
you want to navigate what
Bernalillo has versus Santa Fe
County it doesn't affect you
Representative a union agreement
so that is in a flood of new
open things that they now have
to deal with and finally in the
at the agencies have to work
together in section thirteen to
make sure this all runs well
then section fourteen sets up
the implementation advisory
committee this would potentially
get created in October of this
year if this bill were to pass
and if it were then they would
come together kind of fill in
some of these things it's really
important we create statute we
are not to prescriptive because
what's what works for today will
not work anymore we this happens
all the time legislation happy
very soon by so when I
rulemaking process that we kind
of thought of this and part of
it is in a walk use in there you
can look at page twenty nine
Representative nonprofit
organization advocates women and
girls an organization for people
fifty years and older
Representative statewide chamber
to representatives of small
business development center
Representative Medical Society
in the expertise of children
Representative parents of
newborns a new board.
Representative of parents of
newborn children Representative
from doctor to doctor foster
parents somebody the
Representative unpaid family
caregivers director of the
commission the status of women
Representative university based
bureau business economic
research representative of the
organization chronic illnesses
and one in it is an expert in in
not disabilities so we really
wanted to write wide reaching so
we really understand how these
rules will affect all these
different communities that's a
big piece of it and the final
two is that there the basic ones
it's at we will repay this we're
asking for the six million
dollars which is going to the
Senate process I just rest of
their and that's page the
section sixteen section fifty is
that it actually the mobile
initially take up will be able
to reverse all over the next six
years six and six thirty six and
so that would be reimbursed in
that way so that's the basics of
the bill and again the working
session both sides that I walk
through the only two thirds pay
above minimum wage two thirds of
businesses are excluded from
having to pay into it one of the
pillars of his and he had was
they did not want business
dedicated to it and we were able
to satisfy that up to two thirds
businesses because two thirds of
businesses have less than five
employees in our state and they
do not have to pay to have the
honor and it does not include
temporary workers because that
six month pre that ninety day
job requirement temporary
workers are not part of this in
that same way
yes so that's that's part of
those right so the
implementation is critical that
two and a half years is very
important because we want to
work with RT happened
and it's low cost and as I
mentioned earlier with my second
child my business was able to be
three weeks off and that was
very generous and at the same
time someone else to help with
their family and they gave them.
That's five Kate each of us not
performing work that my company
was able to cobble together and
I'm incredibly thankful for them
doing that because it made a big
difference it didn't cover my
tire bring to mind tired C.
section recovery but it
difference this they would not
have to debate those different
issues.
I want to say also that we know
we face a worker crisis in the
state and let me tell you not
having protections for our
workers make magnifies that
probably more my husband got a
job to come back to New Mexico
we were looking at here another
place and we came back and I
knew I was gonna lose some of
its actually happen I love New
Mexico so as I said I want to
come there I do not want to
these because that place all and
I want to stay here and so he we
made that work and we made it
happen but guess what happened
was I had an employer that a
handshake they would honor like
he can leave if I ever needed
tension and I end up getting
pregnant later they couldn't do
it because then they would have
to pay for three months off
fully paid for me to be out and
they couldn't afford it so I
left because I couldn't do that
I couldn't I couldn't be out
that long and I do it with the
player if you're asking about
that but I stated that the
lawyer for as long as it works
for him and I because he
respected that he gave me that
time with my family and not
repeats we see from other states
I didn't I didn't plan my
pregnancies to be an example of
why paid family leave works it
was an unfortunate Fund
coincidence but they worked and
so what we see in other places
too broad doesn't really happen
it's a trend there might be one
else but they get caught it
reduces turnover I went back to
the jobs that would let me come
back and they didn't.
It I those three weeks meal like
difference and I came back to
that employer it allows the biz
is the plan I was more open with
my employer about knowing that I
was going to be up for pregnancy
and what they could contact me
for what somebody else at night
all laid out very neatly
increases the commitment to the
business and so I think these
things are important because
when you do what's up he has a
medical emergency which people
have right now working are small
businesses working at my local
restaurants that I admire and
and their importante people the
couple together or they don't
and if you lose that employee it
takes the cost three times as
much as a person salary to
actually find somebody else it
takes three years according to
studies to get somebody fully up
to date so you lost not just an
employee that's worth twelve
Bucks an hour fifteen but there
you lost an entity in your body
so that's the piece that I want
to I want to mention here I can
talk we'll talk about solvency a
bit I think we can really get
into that because.
I think it's important but I
think it's also important
knowledge what this committee
has done over the past time
we've been together we passed a
number of bills this is not a
flight through for either
business or labor act after one
of the minimum wage.
Goals did not go forward so we
come up to me is that house next
will go right to look at
Committee we'll find out because
we make decisions together that
are very important so this is
not a giveaway for anybody I
also say that I stand by small
business and many of you know
many folks here have run bills
with me because I believe small
businesses of the court in
alternate was a poor make
changing New Mexico's future I
do but I also believe that we
need to make this difference I
will remind everyone that in the
tax package that we are
believing in a very strong in
there was a quarter percent
taken out of the G. R. T. that
is going to support businesses
as well as we're talking about
the amounts is actually gonna
cost employers I will take you
to my last.
When I promise you it is not
mine on it essentially shows you
the actual cost in place the
person makes thirty thousand
dollars a year which is the the
average income of a New Mexicans
on the median wage at fifty
thousand but if a person makes
thirty thousand a year that's
ten Bucks a month from the
employer on that if you a person
has ten employees or less making
about average fifty thousand a
year that's about two thousand
dollars total for the entire
year two hundred right right now
for the entire year.
All right.
We have to work.
It's less.
That's probably that's been
played yet pro yes yes if you
can employees that's two
thousand for the course yet oh
sorry I thought so we had to
hundred a month you know over
the course of the sorry is less
than two dollars a month over
the course of the year up for if
you had to employees which is by
the way around eight percent New
Mexico businesses twenty or less
about four thousand again less
than four hundred but you have
twenty employees making fifty K.
in New Mexico and I want to
thank you for providing such as
all of which our state because
that's very important but that
is something that again when
you're looking at how much we're
cutting the G. R. T. for folks
when you're looking at how some
of these other efforts we're
doing this is been very up this
is really body and things we've
always supporting I would leave
it at that because there were no
public comment but I do want to
that time I appreciate you guys
going on the ride with me to SB
eleven with that will stand for
questions thank you very much
and chair.
Thank you.
So do we have anybody in
opposition of the bill.
Anybody in favor of the bill.
And all right we're gonna start
with opposition will start in
fact and then remember the
good apples one minute I you'll
you'll you'll hear the alarm
please cut yourself off of that
will go up and they will go to
see you about fifteen minutes
and then we'll switch sides
please don't be repetitive if
you can
Get your point across quickly so
good.
Is it on madam chair members of
the committee my name is Terry
Colin the president CEO for the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce we oppose this
legislation for three reasons
first it imposes a new tax on
employers and employees alike
the latest in a string of
increased costs imposed on
business to.
The bill harm small business and
nonprofits the most they lacked
the flexibility to absorb long
term vacancies are quickly hire
new employees three we cannot
overstate just how hard it would
be to manage a small business
under circumstances mandated by
this bill.
There has been no meaningful
engagement with the business
community on this bill stacking
a task force to arrive at a pre
determined outcome and ignoring
requests for sizable major
changes is not business
engagement in my forty years of
experience with the legislative
process bills like this with all
the fiscal problems and I'm
answered policy questions don't
go forward.
This needs meaningful engagement
needs to happen we urge you pose
a bill today.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee thank
you for your time believe
president CEO The Gallup can we
County chamber of commerce in
the interest of time I will echo
what my colleague from the
Albuquerque chamber just said
but I also want to share just a
personal story about businesses
in our community I have three
businesses who have contacted me
many more than that but three in
particular who I'd like to
highlight who contacted me over
the course of their tracking of
this legislation each of these
businesses employees well over
eighty individuals and each of
them has told me that if this
legislation passes they are
looking to close their doors and
move their operations thirty
miles away going to Arizona
that's the impact this is having
on businesses it's going to wipe
out jobs it's going to close
doors and we ask that you oppose
this legislation thank you madam
chair members of the committee.
Next.
This whole region so welcome.
What is all I think the this.
Thank you madam chair of the
committee when I was governor I
own palms trading company in
Albuquerque
The only problem I have with
this is to use athletic metaphor
we don't have a budget and if we
lose people we can't replace
them in our business it takes
weeks months or years to learn
I'll give you one example today
I have to I have nine people
employed upon.
Two people are out with COVID
one is a day off one is on
vacation and I'm here with you
find people so now I have four
people trying to run a company
that needs eight to ten people
to run efficiently all I can do
is make my customers angry and
leave us more open for theft so
please I oppose this bill I hope
you do too thank you.
Thank you Sir.
Thank you.
Madam chair committee members
Jerry Scheller president CEO The
Rio rancheria Mars and we stand
opposed to this bill this bill
is a challenging bill for our
businesses in our community.
Yes initially there saying nine
dollars per thousand but it's
can be significantly more than
that this is basically an
insurance policy the same thing
as an annuity these these
products already exist in the
insurance world and the lower
the cost just like on your
health insurance the lower the
cost is the bigger the poll the
smaller the cost that means that
you're going to pay much more in
this case New Mexico has nine
hundred fifty thousand total
employees.
Others compatible States organ
two million Washington state
four million I bring up
Washington because they've
increase this thing three times
now and it's significantly
higher than what's being
proposed right now in this state
New Mexico will be and every
employer every New Mexicans
gonna have to pay significantly
more than what is planned thank
you.
Thank you.
Good afternoon madam chairman of
the committee I try to stay
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico Chile Association
Representative Mexico signature
crop we stand strong opposition
to Senate bill eleven just to
give you some perspective in the
nineteen nineties Mexico
harvested over thirty five
thousand acres a chilly New
Mexico fast forward now we're
about eight thousand acres I
recently are so ciation
president Glen Duggins announce
that he's closing down his chili
Business and decided that it is
simply too expensive to grow
chili in New Mexico.
Our farmers are still adjusting
to comment they've just recently
of dealing with the increased
minimum wage and the healthy
workplace Act mandates that come
with it.
This past this bill put another
strain on our farmers and
processors and will lead to more
members are industry following
the steps of Mr Dawkins and
moving out of New Mexico imposed
under chilly businesses please
protect our state's signatures
culture grants cultural propped
by opposing this bill thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I am
glad Dawkins I was the owner of
five star chili and I say was
because the doors are closed
it's too late for me.
But my neighbors.
My kids.
You gotta push the politics
aside and and and get down to
where I am here now.
There's nobody to work.
I've raised doubling three times
the price to pay.
Okay I don't want to work.
I would say.
The checks in the mail and
sympathy I have for my workers
you know what it was the small
businessmen that got me where I
am every time when the chips
were down it was that guy there
sprouts at the big game.
I don't even know the bus that
within twenty years and don't
know they are.
This small business is at risk
and just the small business that
cares about their employees that
came do you.
Propose this please.
Madam chair members the
committee rob black with an
actual chamber we did
participate in the task force
and we did try to but productive
role the bill came out the way
it came out we it was something
that we could not support
because some of the key elements
of it we're not involved for one
and not included like aligning
the federal minimum are the
federal paid family leave with
what what was proposed here that
creates a lot of different
problems that allow for double
dipping because you can take a
budget for the New Mexico plan
and a separate benefit for the
federal so because they right
they represent different things
in the definition also speak to
the concerned very strong
concern about the viability of
the plan
based off of a report by the
national partnership for women
and families
there are the California
utilization rate is six point
seven percent Rhode island's is
between eight and ten percent
it's nine percent an FIR you see
seven point four percent for
Washington state the federal
government and unpaid plan
fifteen percent the plan won't
survive.
Excuse me madam chair members of
the committee my names are
called I'm standing before you
today representing over fifteen
thousand.
Providers that are predominately
Medicaid providers in New Mexico
in the area of durable medical
equipment providers ambulance
providers.
Excuse me home health care
providers and licensed child
care providers the challenges
for us are revenues were
essentially capped their based
on the reimbursements were able.
Excuse me to make from the state
government and so we can't raise
our prices to deal with these
historically increasing labor
costs we're dealing with a sixty
percent increase in minimum wage
over just the last four years
our transportation costs through
the roof we also have to
maintain ratios of employees to
patients so when someone lease
we have to try to back fill it
that's a more expensive employee
to provide that we hold a job
open for and then when that
employee comes back and we have
to let go of that worker we're
going to be on the hook
unemployment compensation we're
short twenty five EMTs in Gallup
just right now.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Tiffany Romero at
New Mexico farm and livestock
bureau we respectfully stand in
opposition to Senate bill eleven
our state's producers are
already struggling to maintain
an adequate workforce that's
necessary to harvest are
extremely perishable products
the proposal before you today
will only add to that
challenging increase operating
that's proposal before you is
another head to New Mexico small
businesses and imposes a new
payroll tax on both our state's
employees and employers are
agricultural producers simply
cannot absorb the twelve week
proposal for the loss of an
employee we continue to
encourage value added processing
in the state for agricultural
products and this simply will
not support that for these
reasons we stand in opposition.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Terry
Garcia number presenting amigo
automotive center in Gallup New
Mexico we represent Chevrolet
Toyota Chrysler Dodge jeep and
ram as you know Gallup is
extremely rural I have
technicians three master
certified technicians I've spent
thousands upon thousands of
dollars to train plus years to
get them to this level if this
bill passes and I lose a master
certified technician for more
than three months I cannot
perform more into work for my
community and all three
dealerships without performing
warranty work which is eighty
percent of my business and my
community.
Essentially I can get people
back on the road to get to their
jobs whether they're on leave or
not because their vehicles don't
work my community does not have
the money to support customer
pay.
If I don't have the work to do
or the employees to performance
in essence I'm gonna shut my
stores down my service
departments will close I
employee over a hundred and
eighty people in my community.
We've been here for forty years.
Please oppose this so not only
can I keep my community going I
can keep my employees going.
Madam chair members of the
community committee I'm Lester
Rodriguez and I'm from pinnacle
banking out New Mexico I'm a we
are a small community bank if we
were to lose a couple of
employees that have to take this
medical leave act at the same
time we would be running on a
skeleton crew we can't just hire
somebody tests like that that
comes in for an interview
there's background checks
there's credit checks that have
to go on when you're in the
financial institution losing
this would not be would not be
able to get these employees to
be able to function just right
away like you know somebody else
could just or you know have
somebody coming off the state so
because of that we ask that you
oppose this thank you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Marie Kyoto
and I'm here on behalf of my
family's businesses Baca cafe
Sammy sees rock and sports
programs real third street
tavern in Gallup transportation.
We play a total of seventy five
people and all these places we
at this time we're struggling
finding more people to come in
to work we cannot they leave
they don't come back.
We we we take care of our own
people on a personal level we do
not let if something should
happen during childbirth or
they're sick or something my
family is the type that takes
care of them we have our own
personal time we strongly oppose
this bill because it would take
so much money out of their
pockets and we're actually more
afraid for them than we are for
us so I hope you post this bill
thank you.
Good afternoon miss madam
chairman members of the
committee receipt box
Albuquerque's bottle chamber of
commerce we have a thousand
fifty members eighty percent of
them thirty employees less six
percent ten employees or less we
have a different approach to
this
you know we.
We up don't believe we should
have another task force to cover
study this with a preconceived
idea that there's going to be
legislation on this we propose
that we get together the small
businesses the business
community the progress of folks
that want to have this
legislation to get together and
find a way that we can work
together to do what's best for
New Mexico for but what's best
for small business and for the
employees you know small
business had to do with the
pandemic they have to do with a
paid sick leave policy and Rick
Dicker up increasing minimum
wage that's enough to deal with
these are all done it piecemeal
we like a more holistic approach
and I guarantee you this is
public chamber would be happy to
facilitate and make sure this
thing happens and people don't
participate to bat for them they
should be participate in this
thank you very much.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee my name is
Melina hi look and I am the
senior vice president of
advocacy for the credit union
association of New Mexico we
represent credit news across the
state and our credit unions
serve met one million members
statewide that's nearly fifty
percent of the state's
population we are small
businesses and as such we are
also heavily regulated as you
already heard from of prior
speaker heavily regulated we
must do background checks we
must do extra certifications and
training of staff that works
with members in the financial
services therefore hiring on a
temporary or short term basis is
just not an option our credit
news report that it takes
approximately three months to
have a teller be able to work
the line on their own without
heavy management there for
twelve weeks of having to fill
those short term gaps is just on
workable for credit needs to be
able to provide financial
services and financial wellness
to all of our members in the
state we we respectfully request
that you oppose Senate bill
eleven thank you.
Settlement of the and madam
chair members of the committee
Marla shows registered lobbyist
for nay up the commercial real
estate developers association
and many many of our members are
those small businesses engineers
architects contractors and as
Mister C. Baca state stated we
are just now recovering from the
pandemic dealing with sick leave
minimum wage and now we're going
to have to try to incorporate
this it's too much to deal with
and at three to four year period
we stand in opposition thank
you.
Under will madam chair honorable
representatives thank you very
much and it's an honor to be
here in the E. commerce and
economic development committee.
My name is this on just I run a
small restaurant here in
Espanola and I represent myself
and one of the only other small
restaurants that have survived
with mandated of sick leave
that's going to cost our
business about eighty thousand
dollars a year and so when we
talk it's about little numbers
like it's only two thousand it's
only four thousand it's only
twenty thousand dollars if you
have certain number of employees
that's a hundred thousand
dollars of his my bottom line on
top of that it really slows down
growth so if we want growth this
isn't the way to do it and I'll
tell you why supporter from
supporters restaurant has about
fourteen employees.
She doesn't even use quickbooks
how is she supposed to keep
track of the finances of the
days of the number of people who
are in her small restaurant we
can all do that on top of that
this is supposed to help the
very people that we're supposed
to be helping and it's not women
are super important to our
industry and we are so flexible
we want everybody to come back
to work so this notion about
losing your job just isn't true
we want all of our workers back.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kelly fought hard
on behalf of broad spectrum that
registered lobbyists but Mexico
business coalition the New
Mexico business coalition
represents hundreds of
businesses throughout New Mexico
but more importantly thousands
of employee employees and what
we have heard is that these
employees do not want to be gaps
on their paychecks again as well
as everything is going up cost
of living is going up and now
there's going to be a deduction
taken out of their paycheck that
they did not ask for and that
they did not want the other
thing is the solvency that's
become it that's a huge huge
huge huge issue right now that
the at the department has has
the authority to go and raise
rates if they become insolvent
which means they do not have to
come back to the legislature and
get legislative oversight we can
see that's a huge concern thank
you madam chair members.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director with the national
federation of independent
business and we Representative
small independent businesses
across the state thousands of
them one of the things that we
know about small businesses is
they intimately know their
employees they know the really
well and what they do is they
make accommodations and they're
flexible and innovative to make
sure that the accommodate those
again I think comment was made
we want to retain those
employees but approaches like
this that create a one size fits
all did not work for small
businesses that really creates
an advantage for large
businesses when we look at a lot
of the mandates that are coming
out of the legislature so really
concerned about it stand in
opposition to the legislation we
really would encourage the
legislature to look at items
that incentivize family friendly
options Representative Hernandez
we worked in the past with on
looking at creating tax credits
for family friendly initiatives
that allow flexibility and
innovation and the small
businesses to find solutions
that work for them I don't harm
them thank you.
After two good afternoon members
of the committee madam chair
woman up my name's Paul guessing
I represent the Rio Grande
foundation public policy
research institute dealing with
New Mexico public policy issues
and economics New Mexico has a
three point six billion dollar
surplus while the this bill
being considered would be a
mixed bag for businesses this
legislation if adopted would be
directly harmful to businesses
across New Mexico.
Especially when the state has
more than enough money to pay
for new budget if that's
something the legislature wishes
depending on how this paid leave
is used New Mexico workers and
businesses could face higher
taxes.
Even that are adopted under this
law in the future because of the
need to ensure solvency finally
a New Mexico politicians talk a
lot about diversifying the
economy but when it comes to
enacting prohibitions policy
proposals for killing those that
would hurt small businesses they
tend to do the opposite I urge
you to oppose SB eleven thank
you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Charlie mark is
registered lobbyists for the
city of Gallup as well as New
Mexico healthcare's Association
New Mexico Centers for assisted
living well these entities are
not alike what is a like about
them is that they run a deficit
was in regards to their
employees.
On top of that to be of
strappedwith this kind of
benefit if you will makes it
even more difficult for them to
continue to
continues their operations so
there's many the previous
speakers to talk about skilled
employees that's what each of
these entities has as well so
with that she can say that we do
opposed the legislation that we
are Jews also to oppose it thank
you.
Madam chair and committee thanks
for letting me speak my name is
Gregory Neil I own a very small
construction company in cedar
crest I don't represent anybody
but myself I have six employees
right now been struggling to get
to.
Ten since I started the company
and it's been a struggle to find
people to work
at I'm not necessarily opposed
to this concept of this bill in
fact I would support that there
are issues I think with the bill
as written I'd like to suggest
that to at least two amendments
just to focus on right now one
would be section seventy
reduction in other leave refers
to that that employees other
sick leave paid time off would
not be.
used this would be in addition
my suggestion is that.
They're accumulated paid time
off and sick leave should be
used first before this kind of
leave would be granted.
Second section fourteen
implementation of by re
committee there's no small.
Thank you.
My name is Jessica Carruthers
and I'm a small business owner
in Albuquerque I want to
actually talk to my fellow
Democrats for a minute I am a
lifelong Democrat and I like the
last tournament I understand all
of where this is coming from I
have a huge hard for it I have
thirty six employees they're all
women most of them are single
mothers because of my businesses
I am watching the cycle of
generational poverty broken
before my eyes so the women that
work for me grew up with
incarcerated parents with drug
addiction and abuse in the homes
just like so many sad New
Mexicans stories and they are
able to buy a car home they're
able to send their children to
camps I'm watching the cycle be
broken before my eyes please
don't hamper small business so
we can continue to care for our
employees like they're the
family members that we consider
them to be I offer paid time off
for vacation paid sick leave I
offer maternity leave I'm trying
to bring four oh one K. on this
year because I want my employees
to understand about the import
saving for retirement please
don't do this to small business.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you my name's
George Gundry I'm a third
generation restaurateur here in
New Mexico I intimacy does and I
employ two hundred people the
supporters of this bill keep
bring up how great such policies
of working states like
California Massachusetts New
York and Washington I would like
to point out that the state's a
widely read is is the most anti
businesses in the nation as a
result both people and
businesses are fleeing the state
the way for New Mexico to stop
being a dirt poor state is for
thousands of new family owned
businesses to start grow and
thrive yes policymakers just
create barriers to family owned
businesses being successful this
is why the best and brightest of
our young people move out of
state do not return I will give
you one example yesterday I
spoke on the phone with Dennis
grab the owner Solaro Energy
Solaro manufactures solar
powered lighting ventilation
other green products Solaro
operated New Mexico for eleven
years and built a seven point
five million dollar plant in
support that employed fifty
people in twenty twenty one
Mister Grubb abandoned the plant
to move the entire company to
Alabama he told me directly that
he did this because of the anti
business policies coming out of
this building and he saw no hope
in this regard we have no hope
is business owners and please
oppose this bill.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Amy Dixon executive director
of desert states physical
therapy network we represent
thirty independent small private
practices throughout the state
and while we understand the
state pays a percentage of the
salary of the person on paid
family medical leave making
these monies available to hire
temporary staff hiring a
temporary clinical replacement
is next to impossible as
recruitment a physical therapist
of the state is very difficult
in addition insurance companies
require health care
practitioners to be credentialed
before treating patients the
process could take eight to ten
weeks and it's not retroactive
if you choose an employment
agency that can provide a
traveling therapist for you the
contract for the therapist
provider costs more than the
fixed rate of payment for the
services it does create an undue
burden on already stressed
health care staff is unable to
find replacements access to
services becomes even a greater
issue for these as well as the
other reason stated today we
respectfully oppose this
legislation thank you.
Madam chair and committee my
name is Tony balls auto and the
former deputy cabinet secretary
for economic development and
tourism for the state of New
Mexico I'm also a small business
owner that employs people here
in the state now and several
businesses along with my family
and I'm here to represent than
and businesses in Carlsbad New
Mexico where I currently reside.
This is not business friendly
this is not how we grow our
state and this is not how we put
more people to work this bill
will keep businesses from hiring
new employees that means more
people on your dole more people
you will be happy to take care
of I want to take care of
employees I want to give them
benefits and I want to pay it
take care of that I think the
way that we discussed employees
paying for this today is
disturbing.
I care about my employees and I
know they care about their
paychecks and when I told them
this was happening they said
please tell them we cannot
afford this and I know they
can't.
And this will only keep people
from paying employers employees
more please about now.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee karla Kugler with
associated builders and
contractors we are a commercial
construction association
representing over two hundred
contractors in the state and I
will not be repetitive normal
labor anyone issue at but we do
find it telling that we are
standing with nearly every major
economic driving industry in
this state and in this roadmap
in opposition so and we stand in
opposition as well thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and Beverly it's
in good executive director of
dairy producers in New Mexico we
in the dairy industry dues
respectfully oppose Senate bill
eleven we take care of our
employees and treat them like
family however the fact is is
that we're in a farm labor
prices currently we don't have
enough employees to cover our
operations right now so to lose
one employee much less several
for several weeks at a time
would be detrimental to our
industry especially since very
does not have access to these
are programs like a two way
since we're year round and not
seasonal having additional
shortage of employees would
result in others having to take
over with an adequate training
which could result in both an
employee safety issue and an
animal welfare issue so for
these reasons and others already
stated we respectfully so
propose Senate bill eleven thank
you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Kathy Konkol and with the New
Mexico hospitality association
here Representative any
representing hundreds of small
businesses across the state and
we stand here today not in
opposition to the concept of
this bill but the current
construction of this bill and I
will go into detail but a number
of our concerns are echoed in
the fiscal impact report that
I'm sure you reviewed and we
echo those concerns and we also
want the small business impact
taking into account of the
overtime cost that the small
businesses are going to have to
absorb in order to to implement
this program so again we stand
in support of the concept but in
opposition to its current
construction thank you.
Thank you madam chair committee
members.
I run a small seventeen employed
telephone answering service I'm
here at twelve o'clock at night
when your child gets sick and
you call your doctor's office
and attempt to provide an on
call provider.
I find my employees with at at
generous paid time off I give
them it no of nowadays employer
paid pension.
I give them everything that I
can find.
What I can give them is an easy
replacement for when they take
their time off because it takes
four to eight weeks just to get
someone trained in that time.
Your.
Waiting for ten minutes when
your child is sick in the middle
of the night and so I stand in
opposition to Senate bill eleven
simply because I'm already
dealing with the effects of the
healthy workplace Act I now I'm
gonna incur additional costs
will thank you madam chair.
Good afternoon my name's Chris
Elise Act I'm a small business
owner for twenty years in
Albuquerque I have forty
employees between two
restaurants I'm in my
restaurants all the time and I
hear what my people are talking
about even after six price
increases since October of
twenty one and higher wages than
I've ever paid in twenty years
my people cannot make ends meet
we haven't talked about
inflation is through the roof
the last thing that my people
need is another tax burden on
them.
Even more concerning to me is
the fact that there's hidden
costs to my employees what this
fund runs out which that
analysis to show that will in a
couple years my people will
incur even more taxes that they
are not prepared for.
It's no secret and the last two
years that the restaurant
businesses but decimated during
COVID you can not fathom the
stressed that we live under and
while in concept sick leave
works people tell us two minutes
before they're going to be off
that they're sick and my people
have to make up for that can you
imagine if people are gone for
twelve weeks the stress it puts
on my current work force it's
just not fair please vote
against.
But it is assumed opposition.
It will take comments for
fifteen minutes.
Yeah we're gonna start with
these generals reality.
Yeah.
Hi my name is Joe Morelli no rig
outfitters and scrub outfitters
and Hobbs New Mexico employs
thirty people if you guys pass
this is how it's gonna affect my
business as I was planning on
opening another store Carlsbad
with another thirty employees if
this bill passes I can't do that
not only that I'm gonna have to
probably let five people go just
to break even I'm just.
Can't imagine what with that the
H. W. A. in the just twenty five
has passed now this my gosh what
we're still trying to recover
for from COVID.
Net if this goes through I'll be
looking at the only white right
over the border to Texas two
miles away just so I I I don't
have to curls it's.
It I I propose is in just give
us some breathing room so we
don't have to to to worry about
the future but right now I can
grow my company just because of
the loan so I oppose this bill.
Carl.
Madam chair members of the
committee on Carlos Suntech with
better together New Mexico we
strongly oppose Senate bill
eleven I served on the task
force and I'm very disappointed
in how it was handled because I
represent business.
And was in opposition to this
measure from the beginning and I
asked if we surveyed business
owners if the results could be
included in the final report the
people managing the task force
were involved in drafting the
questions and promised to
include the results however when
they saw that the response from
three different business
organizations was
overwhelmingly opposed to this
they refuse to give those
results to you.
There have been almost thirty
six thousand emails sent to
legislators in opposition to
this bill and when you consider
employees those who understand
the provisions of the law and
especially those who are
unlikely to use the leave for
their own personal needs are
very much opposed to this the
high cost of inflation they need
every dime they can get to make
it.
I urge you to oppose this bill
thank you.
You.
This.
I want to root for.
Members of the committee I am
report on this spans the screen
I'll post is the living all of
you what elected with the
promise to your constituents
improve the economy by removing
the dealer station some
companies investing in New
Mexico I think this is doing the
opposite by creating yield that
discourage companies to invest
in New Mexico ideal is the
living.
Creating inflation would
disappear affecting on
lowincome New Mexicans the the
take on this one the one the
morning by many symbolism the
treatment that delivers a
quality of goods and services in
the increase of location please
yes.
Especially right now with the
label Crisis I had need to open
the quality early childhood
education center thank in the
the national district and I look
at which is most needed to break
the cycle of poverty however
with all these bills that are
coming to the steam last comment
the New Mexico legislature I see
my brain function that bring the
New Mexico.
Like California we lost over my
loss of the benefits of the
people.
John Waters.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name's John
Waters of the executive director
for the Carlsbad apartment
development Representative a
hundred and thirty.
Business leaders and community
leaders we are adamantly opposed
to SB eleven for many of the
reasons that the folks have
talked about before we also have
a two point five percent
unemployment rate down here in
the county
it's it's it's that it's a good
help is hard to find here that
any help is hard to find down
here and allowing more and more
leave without
making them take their their
employers leave ahead of time is
going to create more holes in
the work force and it's it's
already crippling certain
industries one industry in
general that the expressed a lot
of concern were nursing homes we
have several nonprofit nursing
homes in Eddy county and they
have government mandated levels
of employees to keep if they do
not have those levels they
cannot function these are
nonprofits this is going to hurt
them terrorists so we do oppose
this on on a number of reasons
we think it's it's something
that was ill conceived needs to
go back to the drawing board
thank you very.
This.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is also on the
cell a small business owner
creamy Act is chairman of the
New Mexico Russian Association
and most importantly in New well
our family three beautiful
adopted children with the recent
adoption of my children I would
possibly Bennett benefited by
the benefits of this bill but I
do speak with you however in
opposition of this bill now is
not.
As always run earlier I
challenge you to look at the
people being represented here
today yeah yeah members of state
associations chambers of
commerce and many groups on the
help the representative the
small and large businesses The
New Mexico such as mine many of
us cannot be there with you
today so we we have this people
tried to speak for us and and
how that point many of us are
still struggling with the
inflationary costs staffing
issues higher overhead of this
bill affects every business and
working person in New Mexico and
not necessarily in a positive
way I urge you to reconsider
imposes and table and I
appreciate your time thank you
for your time and consideration.
T. J. the.
Thank you can you hear me yes.
My name is needed to be a
representing for cemex traded
Gallup New Mexico which my dad
started forty nine years ago I
just finished signing forty
payroll checks which I do proud
every Friday.
The native Americans that helped
create a beautiful heart.
I'm very doubtful that I'll be
able to do this if this bill
continues and does passed it's
my dream to carry my dad's
company into another thirty
years quite frankly with all the
numbers game that everyone can
say in a way it's not realistic
on the ground it's not realistic
for our company to survive these
types of laws we're already
planning that possibility of
having to move to Arizona twenty
miles down the road from the
border this land we own and I
don't want to do that I don't
want to have to do that nor do
my employees one.
Please oppose this bill please
consider what it will do to the
native American Community
because it will open the door
for more imports to come through
because of the loss of
production that we may incur
thank you.
At the box.
I'm I'm a small business.
But what stated doctors.
Papen.
We don't have access to care
for for this is this one the
reason which are currently area
want contemplated because of the
revelation.
Six.
Yes.
Take care and.
The pair might not.
For additional doctors.
It's a lot more useful.
And.
At C. Romero.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Patrick Romero I am the CEO
president or something money out
on the that's on my provide
intermediate care for adults
with intellectual disabilities
but today I speaking on behalf
of my hundred and thirty five
employees who are adamantly
against this bill there is well
intended
Bennett those sponsors have
brought forward but this is not
a way to implement it they
cannot even afford my staff
cannot even afford a very small
tax increase to it up there
already struggling to feed their
families and as an employer of
Medicaid services I am not going
to be able to afford the taxes
that are going to be required
need to maintain this budget Mr
chair members of the committee
as employers give us the
opportunity and the
responsibility to care for our
staff we know how to do it this
mandate is going to be thank
you.
That.
Good afternoon my name is Chris
staggering as president public
affairs house he Dolly.
I would just need to oppose this
bill Townsend Ellie is a the
corporation we already have a
minimum wage with all of our
employees including part timers
eighteen dollars an hour we
strive to give the budget but we
feel that this program would
hamper our ability to do that
and we think it's not well
thought out I think that going
back to provide incentives for
business to take care of their
employees that meet your
business needs.
For so again thank you for your
time today and ask you to oppose
SB eleven.
General Colin.
Afternoon madam chair members of
the committee my name is Jim
Copeland executive director of
the association of developmental
disabilities community providers
we represent twenty seven
providers of developmental
disability services across the
state of New Mexico and for all
of the reasons that have been
stated before our association
opposes SB eleven thank you.
Character of the OB.
Greetings madam chair and
committee I am a female business
owner and native New Mexicans a
mother of four and a speech
language pathologist I open that
they're having and early
intervention company in Gallup
and rural McKinley County
following the birth of my fourth
child being born with with Bill
association which is a rare
condition I was forced to drive
Albuquerque Phoenix Denver and
various places to obtain the
much needed services for my
child we opened the therapy
academy seven months ago have
hired thirty three professionals
and if chosen to pay them each
fifty thousand plus to provide
much needed services in our
county.
The current employees each
language pathologist
occupational therapists physical
therapists nurses dietitians
family counselors social workers
and developmental specialist we
currently serve a hundred and
twenty special needs children
this bill is simply too much
more no small company.
Forced to close this will result
in children being without
services yet again we see.
To Tokyo.
This.
Yes.
Hi my name is Julia Jones I am
the Navajo women from Gallup New
Mexico and I am in agreement
with all that has been set as
far as employee and speaking on
behalf of my fellow employees
five percent from my paychecks
is not.
Low cost to us we are already
living paycheck to paycheck and
we work hard for our paychecks
and this bill of like stated
before it would affect employees
more than the employer and
that's why we strongly oppose
this bill
I under I've undergone family
emergencies and so have my
employees and our small business
owner has been more than
accommodating to comply with our
needs whether medical or family
related.
Thank you.
As a manager thank you all right
let's go to those who are in
favor of the bill.
Let's start one.
Just wanted.
Hold.
Well
that was actually with.
Ready madam chair thank you
madam chair members of the
committee Representative Roybal
Caballero hero and I all I want
to commend all the work that has
been done since I introduced
this bill in twenty nineteen it
was house bill two thirteen it
has I I commend everyone
everyone came together it's been
a lot of hard work I do wish to
save brief make a brief
statement I firmly believe paid
family leave increases workforce
participation especially among
low income women particularly in
communities of color who I know
provide unpaid care for family
members or care for young
children this population often
leaves the workforce due to
their overwhelming family
responsibilities combined with
their work responsibilities paid
family leave will help them stay
productive in the work force
this is an asset for the
employers for this all of the
reasons Representative set up to
spoke about I joined her in
sponsorship and thank you all
and ask you to please vote yes
on on Senate bill eleven thank
you very much for your attention
Representative.
Madam chair members of the
committee I Meredith Meijin
speaking on behalf of the legal
voters of New Mexico and
American Association of
university women we stand in
strong support of this
legislation I come from
Connecticut I've been here for
many many years but I am
followed what happened with
Connecticut what it passed the
paid family leave and it has
worked and a lot of people don't
understand this is an insurance
policy you pay into it and if
you need it you have it and I
want to thank all the sponsors
the coalition it's worked on
this with the business community
and I think it's a little
disingenuous to think that their
voices have not been heard I
think there been lots of good
combinations here this this is a
really important step for New
Mexico and will help to secure
this the individuals who need
the emergency care it's not for
everybody it turns policy thank
you very much.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'd like to thank you
for looking at this I'd like to
speak thank the sponsor for
bring this forward my name is
mark strand I'm president of the
central Mexico labor council
I've been married for thirty
years and if something were to
happen to my wife this bill
would ensure that I would have a
little bit of time with her and
be able to pay a little bit of
the bills during that very
crucial time so with that I ask
you to vote for this bill thank
you very much.
Hello madam chair and members of
the committee my name is Justin
strand and I'm a bartender in a
server I've been working in the
industry for ten years.
And this is why I support this
bill I missed the birth of my
child because my boss would do
not believe that my significant
other was going labor.
then the very next day I had to
report back to work and barely
got any time with my child and
that's time I'll never get back.
Then later on in my life.
My kids well passed away from a
terminal illness and I had no
paid time off so I had no time
to grieve or to heal.
All I'm saying is I'm forced to
work on holidays for everybody
being in the restaurant street
and all I'm asking is that the I
can have the time off to be with
my family when it counts and not
have to worry about losing
everything that work hard for
the process thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Sharon Arjun bright.
I'm a nurse for forty years plus
retired Air Force the family
medical leave act has turned
thirty it covers about half our
workers Congress addressed the
need for paid family medical
leave during the pandemic by
providing temporary emergency
paid sick leave an emergency
paid childcare leave I'm sure
this benefited our employers in
the state.
as a nurse working the pandemic
I responded to people who had
tested positive for COVID one
woman was sick she had just
arrived home from work twenty
six one issue years old making.
Thirteen fourteen dollars an
hour I have to tell you Hershey
was positive for comment and she
just finished her shift at a
fast food industry if she had
paid leave maybe she could a
state Amanat spread the pandemic
thank you for your time.
Madam chair members the
committee my name is Leah
Sanchez I am the co executive
director with yes at the top of
the New Mexico Public Health
Association I'm here on behalf
of our over three hundred fifty
members were public health
professionals in every region of
the state we participated in the
paid family medical leave task
force and stand in strong
support of this bill R. three
hundred fifteen members know
that developing this plan was a
fair process based in good data
with many compromises among
parties and that we cannot have
healthy communities without
employees having reasonable
access to paid leave to care for
newborns themselves or other
family members paid family
medical leave is an essential
policy to ensure that working
women and families have equal
opportunity New Mexico thank
you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is John the
money in Sanford I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico religious coalition for
reproductive choice a nonprofit
organization we are subject to
the same health safety and
employment regulations as any
other small business and we pay
employment taxes.
We also offer paid family
medical leave we pay well above
minimum wage pay time off and
health insurance the last time
we had a job opening we had over
twenty applicants people want to
work for employers that value
their employees.
By passing this this paid family
medical leave bill you will put
us on an level playing field
that's an ethical employer not
one that has to give our
employees the choice of either
quitting their job or being
forced to work when they don't
want to and when they can't
thank you very much.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Jennifer
Rafael gets and the executive
director for the commission on
the status of women
the commission is a bipartisan
commission it's made up of women
who live and work in the
communities that they represent
in twenty twenty one the
commission hosted a listening
tour to engage women in all
regions of New Mexico to learn
about the challenges that they
faced one of the top issues we
heard about was economic
security we have all heard the
statistics that only fifty
percent of women are currently
in the workforce in our state
there's a pretty good body of
workers now let's talk about
that over one million women and
what they need.
Many it told us that they had
left work for us to give birth
to a child and they've been
unable to return because of the
ability inability to provide
child care women have always
been the primary care providers
for our families and our
communities unfortunately for
many New Mexico women this
departure from the workforce is
having a disastrous effect in
the short term period families
are living and reduce rages and
relying more on socialist
programs.
Thank you please support.
HM medically treated.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee on
Jacob Vigil M. with New Mexico
voices for children we're kids
advocates and because of that we
look at investments that will
make us stronger future for our
state we look at big ideas we
look at things that will make
our state a better down the road
for when our kids grow up and we
can give a lot of data we work
with data where the kids count
organization we can talk about
the impacts of this policy on
child development Infomart how
the workforce participation but
I want to emphasize today are
really workers and families are
the backbone of our economy
workers generate our wealth they
raise the next generation this
is been done in other states the
worst case scenarios have not
played out this policy here
would exempt two thirds of
employers in our state and it's
not a tax it's an insurance
policy so although it should be
voted out that should be
supported because of all the
data that's been talked about
here on and by the sponsor I
urge you to do it as well
because it's the right thing to
do it's a strong and for
thinking policy for businesses
and for workers thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm chain hammered a
volunteer advocate with a a RP
New Mexico A. A. R. P. was a
member of the paid family and
medical leave task force that
studied the issue and proposed
recommendations this past year
we believe that this policy is
not only important for working
parents but also for those who
are caring for elderly or
disabled family members
especially those in the rural
areas when I was diagnosed with
multiple sclerosis my small
office at fifteen employees saw
the value of having such a
policy so that I could manage my
MS my employer came to me and
told me to take twelve weeks of
leave even though hiring a
temporary attorney wasn't
feasible for them on behalf of
the two hundred forty thousand
members F. A. A. R. P..
We strongly support this
legislation and thank you for
your time and consideration.
Madam chair members of the
committee on the river Holly
Beaumont interfaith worker
justice New Mexico I'm also a
small business owner Santa Fe
colon aria and let me just a
point of clarification the
pandemic did indeed heard a lot
of business it is also was a
boon for many others including
mine which saw a doubling of
online orders whether SB eleven
passes or not small businesses
will continue to face worker
turnover.
Whether is be eleven passes are
not employees will continue to
get pregnant to have family
emergencies and in some cases
choose to to quit their jobs and
take different jobs that offer
better benefits SB eleven offers
an opportunity for both
businesses and workers to come
together to address this issue
by sharing in a solution with
the help of our state government
yes it requires a fundamental
shift in our understanding of a
worker employee relationships.
Workers in New Mexico are we are
you being treated like a
liability like servants who are
depended on the generosity of
their employees we want to be
recognized as partners.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee John Lipschutz
with The New Mexico federation
of labor we represent over
thirty six thousand our workers
in the state right now and we
also like to say that we also
represent workers who are not
unionized as well I had a the
honor of being on the task force
that helped create this policy
and and work on these issues I
will say first I actually want
to applaud and thank a lot of
the businesses that have come
forward and talked about how
well they take care of their
employees if they do get into a
situation which they need to
leave and we applaud them and
all I would say is this please
continue doing that and if you
do you would be exempt from
being part of this program so
please continue working on that
but I do want to just leave you
with a question what do we do
with people who have to miss
work because of a catastrophic
injury or injury to Baird what
wants I mean do we force them to
work workforce in to quit that
is in unsustainable solution
thank you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my seat though the
American art Association up you
know there's a lot of
misinformation out there eleven
states have implemented this and
their businesses and their
employees are thriving and for
example in California the
majority of the.
Employers surveyed said this had
a positive impact on their
businesses and profitability in
New Jersey you know they easily
adjusted to the changes and they
had no impact on the
profitability in in Rhode Island
you know here after the
implemented a majority of the.
Lawyers and you know supported
that a favorable you know impact
on their businesses so that the
bottom line is like you know I
mean the this is not gonna have
a you know.
You know the scare tactics by
our friends on the other side
that they'll be moving out but
you know this is going to be
positive for New Mexico we
strongly urge use but this bill
thank you.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I'm Janet Williams
with Santa Fe national
organization for women and we
believe what's good for women
family and children is good for
New Mexico and good for
businesses we also believe that
it will help level the playing
field for for small businesses
when they're dealing with
competition with large
corporations thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jim Jackson for
disability rights New Mexico I
think most of you know that
families with children with
disabilities often face a number
of challenges and many of them
are unexpected dated a kinds of
things we support this bill
simply because it would this
benefit would be really helpful
to those employees who are
parents of children with
disabilities to take the time
off the work of work when they
need to to deal with those of
those often unforeseen
challenges that they have to
deal with so often so we think
could be a benefit to be helpful
to them and we appreciate your
support thanks.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Susan Loubet a and I'm the
director of the New Mexico
women's agenda we are so in
support of this measure because
it leads to up a steady work
force because both employees and
employers can plan for things
that will eventually calm winds
employees have to take time off
I hate to think of employees
that have to work while they're
sick or while they're worried
about family that they can't
take care of it in nineteen
ninety two the commission on the
status of women did a survey of
employers in New Mexico to find
out what they thought about this
kind of a proposal and I
remember one of the small
businesses answered that they
were against it because they pay
their employees less and offer
them good benefits and if
everyone did that they would
have to employ you pay their
employees more so let's pay the
employees and women in the
workforce.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm Dana Middleton and
I'm with the national
organization for women as well
but the New Mexico chapter the
state chapter and I'm here today
in full support of this bill
because I was an employer a
penthouse for twenty years and I
can tell you it would have been
a boon to our our whole business
and our relationships with our
employees to have such a bill
that we could depend on to help
families and I also speak as an
employee when I came down to
live in Santa Fe almost twenty
years ago and I would have
absolutely been very happy to
have this so I urge you to vote
in favor of this important bill
the time has come thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Ellen
pines representing the
disability coalition I want to
thank you for devoting so much
time hearing from everybody on
this bill today that's much
appreciated I'm not going to
take much time I assumed last
person the room although I
expect there more people on soon
on behalf of the disability
community we support this bill
if you are a person with a
disability or you have a family
member with a disability you may
need often without much warning
to take time off work and this
will be protective of those
individuals and family so we
urge your support thank you.
Thank you and now we are going
to go to zoom.
We'll go there for fifteen
minutes.
At the Meyer.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I'm representing my
Evans and I am the clergy and
congregational advocacy
organizer for New Mexico
religious coalition for
reproductive choice we are
facing rooted organization and
because of that we believe that
it is our moral and ethical
imperative to care for the sick
to also seek justice for the
marginalized and to support the
health and well being of our
families and we believe that
passing PMLA is vital to us
being able to live out calling
here in the state of New Mexico
so we stand in full support of
this bill and we ask you to join
us in the support thank you.
On eight March back.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Melanie archer back and I'm
here on behalf of the New Mexico
Black central organizing
committee we stand in strong
support of SB eleven because
because we understand that paid
family medical leave as a racial
justice issue that requires a
carefully designed policy that
is outlined in just eleven by
providing paid family medical
leave New Mexico will begin to
address racial disparities in
access to wealth and wealth
building that had been
compounded by our communities in
accessibility to paid family and
medical leave the gap between
the wealth of white families in
the teen all black families are
severe and lack of access to
paid family and medical leave
makes them worse these racial
wealth gaps exist because
discriminatory policies and
persistent racism have prevented
most people of color from
building wealth for generations
paid family medical leave will
provide essential financial
support and stability for
families of color at critical
times helping patch one of the
many holes in our committee
safety net and providing an
opportunity to break the cycle
of lost wealth accumulation we
urge you all to pass S. P.
eleven thank you for your time.
Erica Davis problem.
Madam chair members of the
committee I am from girls thank
you to speak on behalf on the by
line that I students families
require with the community care
policy that is the amount the
term weathering is defined as
early health deterioration as
measured across biological
indicators of repeated exposure
an adaptation stressors exposing
how the constant stress of socio
economic barriers historically
lead to premature biological
aging poor health and
disproportionately high death
rate for black and brown folks
whether it's going to play a
critical role in labor amid the
mass disabling event at the
globe is actively experiencing
that the COVID with PFL the work
life balance and equitable
accountability happens here
lastly let's take a startling
look at the opposition versus
the lived experience of clothes
and support and we can't afford
to continue to keep putting
property of our people who are
simply asking to work with and
businesses that treat them with
dignity and we thank you for
your support this aspect of
reproductive justice today have
a beautiful Friday eight.
Without the.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Michael
credit and I'm care practitioner
in private practice at
equilibrium wellness center in
Albuquerque I mean speaking
speaking in favor of this bill
because I feel it's a good bill
that will help support workers
and families my staff members
are both single mothers and I
see how difficult it can be for
them to take care of their
families needs even when they're
just help.
This bill will provide workers
with the assurance that they
need to feel safe in their jobs
when workers feel supported they
are more productive and no
worker should lose their in
house just because of getting
getting sick thank you for your
service to the state and I ask
that you vote to pass this bill.
Yeah Sechrist.
Madam chair members committees
thank you my name is Dale
Secrest I am the president of
the CW a local seven zero
seventy six which represents
public sector employees New
Mexico speaking in support of
this bill and I would like to
address one issue that's come up
several times regarding the very
real labor shortage it has been
asserted several times it this
bill would somehow make it
impossible to fill the position
of a difficult to fill positions
a indispensable worker
It would not have any effect on
that whatsoever if it's
difficult to feel now with the
employees are not a long term
illness we're trying to take
care of a family member of a
protected under FMLA.
Is getting paid or not paid
that's really the question is
the employee was out getting
paid or not paid.
Right now if the employee goes
out for a long period the only
way they can get paid once we
run out of leave whatever
creating deserves to be fired
yeah except unemployment
that does not seem to be.
I am set up.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is lance on a
policy director for the center
Pacific policy and I've been
battling cancer for the last
thirteen years in those years I
have not not once question why
did I get cancer but rather
light intensified the difference
in my survival has been to
policies like the family medical
leave my sister was able to
capture hundred seven degree
fever while the transplant I
have been able to sit by my side
through chemotherapy however for
cancer patients like Bernalillo
at age eleven have to wake up
from her biopsy alone because
her mother did not have access
to a family member of the.
The state do chemotherapy alone
increased much more battle alone
and died at the age of eleven
because her family did not have
access to medically vote for
just eleven allows for more
cancer patients to survive to
see another tomorrow alongside
their loved ones it allows for
children to be with their
mothers and fathers for battling
cancer your support.
The sponsor Representative
Serrato my name is Kathy mostly
retired community health nurse
and member of the coalition I
support the family medical leave
in New Mexico California's
policy allowed my daughter to
bond with your get a good start
and breastfeeding maintain
employment during the COVID and
in turn our business kept a
loyal employees who is promoting
that raises or into New York and
that came here was not audible
enough to avoid being laid off
recently she remains with this
employer seven years later and
like my daughter people who take
P. FML are more likely to be
employed by the same employer
two years later replacing
however an employee constant
every to twenty one percent of
the worker's salary New Mexico
ranks thirty six on the status
of women report and if we match
the rest of the.
We could one point four billion
more wage dollars to New Mexico.
West of sarpanch.
Hello madam chair my name is
members of the committee my name
is a western cash for the public
policy director for small
business major we urge you to
support SB eleven small business
owners want to provide
competitive benefits to their
employees but they can't afford
to do so I've talked to a lot of
small businesses and folks in
this and the room as well said
that workforce retention is an
issue but they can do it if
there's a program like this you
have to be able to attract and
retain a workforce we have
fully measures sixty seven
percent of small businesses want
to be able to find.
The family for support those
measures we've also heard folks
say that it's nine dollars for
every thousand dollars it's not
four dollars that's point zero
zero four percent misinformation
has been spread and it's very
clear to some of the small
businesses what the actual
program does another gentleman
mentioned that Washington state
is charged fifteen percent or
seven percent that is untrue
small businesses need to know
the reality by purpose so
essential to them and how they
can benefit from such a program
thank you to support this bill.
And zero right.
Yes Representative.
It will go on to I mean W..
Six one one.
Madam chair members of the
committee featured a live into
the business manager over in
order to have a Representative
forty seven workers in the state
of New Mexico all we work every
day to keep the power on in the
state of New Mexico we don't.
We're here rain snow sun shine
accidents sickness and in we're
expecting to be on the job order
workers there's a shortage of
help treat workers and.
How they treat others how they
respect their families and their
values.
Other in the.
And if we get a long treat each
other respect each other have
time with our family we what
we're doing here in this state
in Mexico thank you madam chair
and members of the committee.
Charles marker.
Yes Mr chairman members of the
crew madam chairman members of
the committee Charles Walker
speaking on behalf and then the
C. action fund.
In twenty twenty one the
department of workforce
solutions reported our labor
force participation was fifty
six point seven percent which is
five percent lower than the
national average and fifth
lowest in the country what is
this matter will labor force
participation rate important
indicator other areas economic
health measures the percentage
of the civilian non
institutional population sixteen
years in order for working or
actively looking for work hi
labor force participation rate
reflects a healthy economy
because a large part of our
population is working in able to
financially support themselves
and their families hi labor
participation work also reflects
large labor pool making it
easier for lawyers to provide
workers this bill on Abel's for
workers to remain in the
workforce rather than losing
your job it's good for states
economic development please
support this bill.
Yes the Calgary.
Hi madam chair thank.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the community many
just a casual DP of operations
for CHI St Joseph's children the
largest home visiting program in
the state this bill is a win win
win New Mexicans get modest
monetary contributions to
support the most vulnerable New
Mexicans newborn babies with
their mothers those living with
catastrophic illnesses the
elderly for example these are
infrequent life event this begs
the question who among us has
not been vulnerable perhaps as a
baby perhaps when affected with
catastrophic illness perhaps
when a victim of domestic abuse
perhaps when being an elder and
wanting to have the time in
those final days we're all
vulnerable at some point and a
bill like this is like an
insurance program to ensure
every Mexican has the support
they need when they need it
please rate past this SB eleven
if not who pays the price thank
you.
HB bank of our.
Thank you madam chair my name is
Lee are unable workers rights
attorney for the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty we
stand in support of New Mexicos
paid family medical leave act
the bill has been crafted to
meet the needs of New Mexicos
workers and businesses opponents
of the bill have advocated that
it be chart changed is to be the
same as the federal federal
family and medical leave act
ignoring the fact that according
to data by the department of
workforce solutions only three
percent of New Mexicos employees
are covered by the federal law
changes to this bill to make it
more like the federal law would
maybe convenience three percent
of employees but we got the
budget to everyone else paid
family and medical leave also
supports family care giving
which recent studies have shown
reduce health care costs and
costly institutionalization for
older individuals for these
reasons we urge the committee to
pass that thank you.
On an island.
Good afternoon
chairman
diagnose and committee members
my name is Tom Donnelly I'm an
owner of a small business and I
also work we're very actively
with my chambers in Mexico
This is a life
and I stand very much in favor
of this bill because what this
bill is about is about whether
people who have family
emergencies and medical
emergencies get paid or not
there there yes I am sure that
this is people talking about we
can't do this and so what if
they say that they're trying to
keep their employees employed
and not taking care of the
family members not taking care
of themselves or that they don't
want their their members to be
able to have the financial
resources to be able to deal
with these problems that are
occurring in their life I think
this is a great solution it
shares the.
third between both employees and
employers and it is it is a
great great opportunity to make
working in New Mexico much more
supportive and affirming of.
And ourselves as human beings
and not only as employees.
Doctors.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee is John urged with
A. F. T. New Mexico speaking in
support of Senate bill eleven as
as everyone in the legislature
does the educational workforce
is suffering still from a crisis
vacancies throughout our our
positions in public schools and
Representative Serrato made a
really important point when she
was talking about how to use it
I would where she wanted to move
and evaluating the worker
benefits and the different types
of things that will be
conditions of of her employment
and that's the leads that we
look through in our support of
this bill as we raising wages as
we create conditions our schools
to be attractive to regional
educators were looking for work
paid family and medical leave
would be another way to attract
qualified educators into the
state of New Mexico at all
levels of our public education
system as well as my fill those
classroom positions as we
believe other support positions
in our schools that's good for
our communities it's good for
our students and it's good for
the profession as we do our
support on Senate bill eleven
thank you.
After the fifteen minute time
thank you before moving on to
the committee I'd like to thank
all the members of the public
who participated either in
person or on zoom your voice is
very important to
the committee and to myself
I I think that we we got a lot
to think about hearing from
everybody so with that let's go
to the committee.
Representative Martinez.
Thank
thank you to everyone who
participated
So a lot of information to.
All.
That last but I do have some
questions.
Just out of curiosity in the
title of the bill.
It.
H.
have the line numbers on this
page.
But it says that this is set up
to allow the employee to bond
with the new child or to care
for a family member.
Limiting the time allowed for
paid family medical.
It seems like there's from
listening to your opening and
listening to the explanations it
seems like there's a much wider.
All.
Reason for taking the sleeve.
I'm just.
Personally curious why that was
included in the title.
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative also the three.
Not hitting your answer the
three types of leave you can
take your rate a family medical
or safely and so the title
recognizes those ones in there
yeah and it allows for the rate
paid family medical leave
accepting some
yeah I I don't think there was a
it was a.
There was a specific purpose
that we did that rotation on
anything to that now I think
that was that directing decision
yeah
I was just I know how important
the title of these bills or I
mean I've seen you want to
change three words in the title
yet that we committees of.
So I was I was just personally
curious for that
This body in just two years ago
mandated paid sick leave of
sixty four hours per year.
those healthy work healthy
workplaces Act.
Was that taken into account
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative yes actually I
will say that and though there's
two the three key ways I think
really was one was that looking
at what happened with that
implementation process was very
difficult on on players and I
I'll say that no promotion I was
concerned that's partially why
there's an extended
implementation period no one is
paying into this bill again for
another year and a half should
this pass that would be
happening so again there's that
delay there to help with that
too was that part of the reason
why that ended getting past was
we were very concerned with
people returning to work sec
during the height of the
pandemic that came up on the
floor I want to say in the
committees where was her so that
was another piece of it but then
three when you look at states
that actually had paid family
leave processes already in place
before the pandemic actually
fared better overall the states
that did not have those plans in
place already so I'd say those
are the three ways that that
impacted this legislation.
So sure we're currently
mandating businesses to give
eight weeks hopefully.
Madam chair representative eight
days sixty four hours.
For years yes madam chair.
Yes I.
Write with my left temple the.
And now we're going to mandate
twelve weeks of paid leave.
For small businesses that that
is going to be an impact.
I mean I've I've had.
I think a hundred thirty eight
emails or the last couple of
days.
Okay everybody that emailed me
that I emailed back.
Asking for clarification how is
this going to affect you.
and these were people who are
supporting the bill I had one
person respond to me.
And say I am will.
One person show this is the
business that I'm in.
I want to be able to take leave
and still get paid.
You said that there are more
rules that are or stop that.
What are some of the guard rails
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so to be clear as
I mentioned earlier most people
that utilize this way at this
time on do not use twelve weeks
and it has to be documents so
let's go real quick to the.
There's actually I see there's
two sections of how this is but
it outlines that they have to
apply for you can't just say I'm
sick I gotta go for twelve weeks
that's how this works get a
doctor's note indicating that
you are going to be primarily
taking care of this individual
outlets how long you will be
needed and then businesses if
they choose can require that you
get regular updates to that most
people will not take twelve
weeks twelve weeks we'll
typically you'd be used for
parental time off and is a state
with a declining population we
need a larger workforce we knew
reasons to encourage people to
actually take time off so they
can talk to their families right
and I'm not I didn't think this
lady was passionate take a
twelve week vacation.
But it was very clear from our
email exchange.
That she was hoping to use this.
To be able to take time off from
her job and when I told her.
This is not what program is this
is for you taking time off to
take care of a sick person.
There was no response after that
I think that this person was a
little confused.
I'm very interesting bill which.
Kind of gives me pause that this
stuff is going to go on and.
It's a one person show it's very
easy to get a doctor's note.
You look at me confused but it
is very easy to get a doctor's
note.
Every time my goal for a for a
doctor's appointment.
The one to write me a note to
give me a couple of days of.
Of
Sick leave and I'm like what
retired I don't really need to
act.
so it's not it's not a very
difficult thing.
I hope that doesn't happen if
this does pass I really hope
this there because the build up
to this in your opening is this
is not going to be abuse.
But people are people.
But I really hope that there is
no abuse what in this bill has
any teeth for somebody that does
get caught abusing this thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative there is a thirty
day appeal for a business to
open to yield to the department
of workforce solutions to it and
they can make the claim that the
person was not using that sick
time appropriately and what we
can do is look at the evidence
from other states and the
evidence of places where you do
have parental leave a right our
federal government has you know
leave policies well there's not
rented out fraudulent use of
this but it is built in there
this is they can appeal this and
if there is a fraudulent claim
maybe that person can no longer
use paid family leave for at
least three years and there's
more that we can do.
Earlier when my mom did this she
was very reticent she had to get
back to work and as we heard
from so many commenters the way
small businesses have those
relationships with their workers
they are a family in our state I
see it all the time so the
people are you know who's going
to be using who's going through
what there is that conversation
and it businesses every right to
appeal that that should not have
been utilized.
I love the fact Madam chair
representative that you.
She the best and everybody.
Privilege.
But we all know that during the
pandemic there was over two
hundred fifty million dollars
worth for all.
Unfortunately.
These things happen and to say.
You can do it for another three
years I don't think that that's
enough teeth in this.
Is there is there a provision in
here that.
If workforce solutions catches
me abusing this.
Am I gonna have to pay that back
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative to be clear.
The the money that was put out
during the COVID period during
the pandemic what did not have a
lot of the guardrails in place
at all and I remember this very
clearly we're just a lot of
money the federal government
want to get into people's
pockets as soon as possible so
that business or whoever was
doing that we're doing that I
think we we know that there was
fraud that was committed whereas
in these cases we're not seeing
it what I would also point to is
on page twenty five the second
where they didn't mention is
that if
See if there's a violation under
under that way they can follow
complete the consent to answer
the complaint on the table that
night the state there's a
there's a whole process that we
have and it has the power to
take sorry it's not on page
twenty six point do they have
the power to take disciplinary
action including investigating
finding censuring or
reprimanding a party or
suspending or revoking a waiver
issued pursuant to the PMLA and
then again there's a whole
process that's laid out in here
hello business or person can can
make that complaint in a timely
matter which the DWS us that has
to get back to them.
Can you where where did you say
that age twenty six it's it's
section ten.
So.
Sections and sorry
that.
Page twenty seven.
You have that eight point.
Little deviation section ten B.
two.
The.
The seeds have power to take
this warning action including
investigating findings centering
reprimanding a party or
suspending or revoking a waiver.
God forbid that one of these
people get to reprimand this is.
That's really good stuff.
So during the during the
pandemic Madam chair
representative.
We pay people to stay home and
not work it seems like we're
finding very creative ways to
keep doing that.
How does this bill really
support business I I see that
people don't want to work at
sports them but I was just going
to support small business loss
of productivity loss of
workforce I don't see how this
really helps businesses would
like to think people are going
to be loyal.
How does how does that help a
small business.
I think it's going to be fat for
morale.
Because I'm not having to do two
jobs.
And I've seen that happen when
I've been in charge people.
Somebody starts taking leave
and.
The state government we have a
very liberal leave policy.
But it affects morale so can you
blame me Madam chair
representative.
What is your supports business
so I think there's two pieces to
what you're asking madam chair
representative on one I think
it's important amount of someone
take that time off to take care
of someone to that time off
because of busy taking care of
someone to take care of
themselves what they're they're
not getting their full day
they're getting a fraction of it
and that doesn't encourage
people to return to work and how
it does help businesses that
read out is that what you're
looking for a new employee you
don't have budget to encourage
it can make it harder to find
folks and been taught that to
extremely.
To replace someone when when
Google to two thousand seven
this is years ago change and
increase their paid family leave
the cell retention of women
workers go up by fifty percent
that is a significant shift in
their what we've seen in other
states as examples of some of
the miss mostly mentioned
earlier people you see retention
rates increase you see people go
to those jobs with a receive
those benefits that that's just
interval Evans will I because I
know we can talk about theory
all day long what actually
happens and what states
experience is increase retention
not having to find somebody to
replace somebody because they
had to leave it would just found
something else instead.
Madam chair representative.
It's very important to look at
current levels.
The states that you see
implemented this California
Washington Oregon part of that
group.
Oh sorry Madam chair
representative they have
believed it is Colorado because
of the to the tier products
Madam chair representative we
need to look at the the
migration.
Point that are coming out people
we California to a point where
they ran out of fuel trucks.
If this is a plan to.
Encourage workers to state.
California did something like.
It's not happening then.
it is hard to replace employees
and and we heard testimony from
people that oppose this.
They're looking at the cost of
having to replace somebody or
retrain somebody or you know
hire temporary or somebody from
the medical field talked about
contract workers.
I still don't see how this
budget business.
Can you explain to me.
What part of this thirty one
page bill.
It's a business small business.
Madam chair and representative
you know I think it's important
look at the correlations in
California's Policy Bradley has
been in place for more than
twenty years the fleeing that's
happened I could imagine as you
a lot of other things you know
that would be included in that
so that's definitely not the
reason for people thank all four
in this point sorry what I would
say is when you look at this
there are specific pieces in
here that say that the employee
has to work with the employer on
their leading and so right now
you know many people not to
leave their jobs they they don't
have a contract for six years or
a year what have you right they
can leave at their discretion
discretion of employer and so
this says that they have to they
have to make they have to work
with their employer they've
talked with their where abouts
going on when somebody leaves
suddenly which is how it
happens.
Will delay telling their
employers about their health
conditions because they don't
want to be fired so that leaves
employers in a lurch they don't
have to tell that they thought
they heard so I agree Madam
chair representative that
perhaps people that again
filling in that extra time can
be difficult that is not it but
again sipping out twice to pay
someone while they're out and
then also paying a temper
somebody to fill that time
they're not worrying about that
double pay is one element of
this but also but they're able
to do is know that someone's
gonna be back and they can make
a game plan for how to do that
better there's an again there's
there's many other elements to
this as well this is no cost to
two thirds of our employers
because they have less than five
employees in our state we did
that specifically so that that
would be this concern has been
growing on it reduces turnover
in will be seen in other states
is it does increase around when
it interviewed states where they
do have a paid family leave
policy across the state
employers report improved and
more all right
there are there fewer sick days
use because again people are
getting fully recovered as
opposed to not might my guess
madam chair representative why
your doctor encourage you to
take a notice because so often
businesses are very strict about
that are expected I think I mean
my kids school is really strict
we have a doctor's note so I
think that what people forget
often times though I can't
predict what your case is that
we just alter one's a different
I guess and then and this is the
biggest one I didn't say it
earlier.
It allows them to compete with
businesses at large businesses
right now you Netflix our state
yep I'm limited paid family
leave if Comcast interstate
twelve to sixteen weeks of paid
for primary care givers Facebook
has for months that sixteen
weeks on the state of New Mexico
has twelve weeks and and you
we've already just four weeks.
You people want to work personal
business because again their
family they were together it is
really hard to ignore those
benefits I don't even mention
Amazon in the state which I
believe was six point I believe
that as of six months you have a
program that applies to
everybody that means you're
pulling these resources together
to benefit everyone in that
sense and what that is is
economies of scale right it
allows them to compete with the
police research together with
the big guys in a way they could
on their own or a smaller
program the reason I mention
that is because we do have
smaller often programs like work
and save that has been tried to
go past year early's twenty
twenty twenty nineteen it is not
been able to be fully
implemented because not enough
people are interested in signing
up for you have to ensure that
everyone's part of this to get
to that that that
That that that that saturation
level working actually utilizing
it doesn't become a problem
you to my next question and
making this mandatory program
and there's.
Businesses can opt into correct
Madam chair representative you
know working save is a different
one that's a retirement program.
Madam chair representative seems
like.
We will mandate a business and
then say that some are
supporting business why was
often.
Not included that's why we
mandating every business.
Or or one third of businesses to
opt into this.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative said and I want
to be clear is it going to lower
cost because as all businesses
will have to someone's paid
family leave two thirds of
businesses do not have to pay
into the system just for clarity
to the place to be
but the reason why it's again
it's the same reason that for my
employer all they could give me
was three weeks because that's
all they could afford knowing
they have paid the entirety
while I was at when you combine
the forces of everybody in that
sense you are able to get to a
capacity of the work capacity
what actually works and where
people are able to draw from it
and it it makes them you know
get we can't we're not gonna try
to match limited paid family
leave the Netflix at but if you
want to stay with your local
employer because for variety of
reasons maybe you're you're
turning your parents business
make whatever maybe.
This allows them to get least
offer something that that they
can manage it would and I will
see what's neat about it is for
businesses that already offer
something.
The they can offer even further
if they like or they can say Hey
you we want to you may only be
getting paid back two thirds of
your salary above minimum wage
we're gonna make you whole
hundred that's still a
competitive advantage that
should businesses want to should
they want to offer more they
have the opportunity.
Okay I still don't see how that
budget business well let's let's
move on
on page nine.
Section C..
Getting on January twenty twenty
twenty five for each calendar
over there after until January
first twenty twenty eight.
There's an assessed assessment
against you to wear what.
Five or more employees.
That's the one third of
businesses you're talking about
in the state.
Sorry madam chair representative
were you looking at so on page
nine sections the section of
this.
I'm sorry to be the one to get
us the five or more employees is
the one third of businesses
would have to pay into this
madam chair for ease of every
Christmas sure.
Is going to be taxed on this
Madam chair representative each
of them will continue to this
one Madam chair representative
without an option.
Yes thank you madam chair
representative they will all
have to contribute to the funds
and they will have access to.
Madam chair representative so.
What was that.
House again it's just of
automatic deduction like another
tax thank you madam chair thank
you Representative I actually
appreciate that question because
the healthy workforce workplace
Act the past was really
difficult because it was on the
backs of employee and employers
to figure out right they were
this many hours the tract you
know the I care the one of
etcetera etcetera I was all of
the administrative duties of the
business and I think we
difficult however what we what
this does it's much more
streamlined and it can be hosted
through the department of
workforce solutions if I may the
secretary is here and he's just
asking how madam secretary the
that amounts contributed from
employees would be collected I
don't want to.
Okay that.
Madam chair representative
Martinez at and we assume that
most employers would be deducted
from employers check like other
with holdings.
So madam chair representative.
I have a business as for
employees.
I'm gonna tax my employees even
more.
They're able to take advantage
of this program.
Yes madam chair representative
there.
The quick side question who's on
this task force there is a great
question my phone just I had a
right now it's the last of that
is an excellent mix of folks and
it's unsurprising to me Madam
chair representative that a lot
of them spoke in favor because
of the.
They're away which we really
still.
Pull that up so you I want to
the list of yours so would.
It it delineated a statewide
nonprofit that provides legal
policy experts women and girls
another that is all it has
expertise in the interest of
children New Mexico Public
Health Association a statewide
nonprofit and expertise on elder
rights to a coalition the books
on perinatal issues another out
with disabilities and are they
sure presenting people with
disabilities to statewide
organizations representing labor
one specifically about health
care employees a native American
tribe the a native American
tribal government Representative
the American Indian chamber of
commerce in New Mexico to
statewide organizations
representing business statewide
organization representing
Hispanic business owners another
representing LGBTQ that that
people another representing
African American business owners
the bureau the bureau of bureau
business and economic research
at UNM number the executive
association one small business
owner appointed by the Senate
one small one small business
owner played by the minority
floor leader of the Senate so
Madam chair representative
public total were on the task.
And I believe it's ninety eight
dollars sure.
Madam chair representative
according to my count we had
nine nineteen you said yes to
two three four five six one
nineteen.
They.
Eight bill.
Madam chair representative that
is pushed is good for business.
Nineteen people on task force
and.
Six people dealing with
business.
Representative form seemed to
be.
Disability advocates unions.
Whether or not business owner.
Madam chair representative of my
counted seven which is nearly
half were of the of the of the
that.
At eighteen yeah I would say
nearly half our our business
representation and it's not just
local labor the cover the rest
of it but how this affects the
health and well being of New
Mexicans again we anticipate
that this will have of and
improved outcomes for children
because they have that early
time to bond what I will say is
that we all operate in that
market of supply and demand and
whether we're consumers who are
being affected by prices because
the person for those fighting in
or businesses who are affected
by labor supply and demand that
is an issue that we're facing in
New Mexico supply and demand
with look comes labor what we've
seen is that you can retain
employees and you keep them
longer as a benefit to
businesses as well Madam chair
representative Madam chair
representative I completely
agree with the idea of spline.
And I have always said if you
don't like what you getting paid
and you don't like the budget.
Find a business that will
provide that for you.
What mandating a business.
Another tax on business on on
the tax on employees.
I I'm I'm having a hard time.
Right and wrong this is good for
small business it just seems
like another tax another
regulation.
and the tax on one tax on
employees or RT.
I mean.
I don't know if you've seen the
this tax bill.
There's gonna be a lot more
taxes.
in a time where we're people we
have a forty five or three point
six billion.
All or.
Sure plus.
Coming up with more ways to tax
people taxable businesses.
Really and by the list of people
stood up.
In opposition.
Madam chair representative I'm
not a little.
Small businesses big businesses
organizations.
Chambers of commerce restaurants
associations.
I mean.
I thought well you know we're
gonna have to an office building
propose.
But.
The vast majority of people who
stood in opposition to this.
Are not happy with the way this
was done people who.
We work on the the task force
madam chair representative are
not happy with their voices were
heard and their suggestions were
not taken.
I'm new at this game.
But I think that my job is to
listen to the people that.
Elected we that put me here that
are involved in my community.
And I reached out yesterday well
I was on the way when.
I was curious I wanted to talk
to people so I just randomly
call businesses and brought this
up and there.
This was the general answer.
Madam chair representative.
I.
This is Representative Martinez
and I'm just curious.
I'm here Representative and I
have this bill that I need to
vote on.
One person actually tell me and
this is a cool are you kidding.
What do you people trying to do.
That's the general consensus
that I'm getting from the
business.
In my community.
Obviously communities across the
state Madam chair
representative.
I mean a wide swath medical
providers the car dealerships
restaurants credit unions.
The Chile Association.
What what the different types
of.
Small businesses are standing up
and saying.
Please don't do this to us Madam
chair representative I think
it's incumbent on us to.
And to act like I said I would
just be maybe.
I don't know.
But.
Madam chair representative did
not feel like we have these many
businesses that you have
something that is supposed to be
pro business something.
Something is not right.
I have one last question madam
chair and I will listen to the
rest of the debate.
This fund Madam chair
representative it's being set
up.
Will be controlled by.
You know once the temporary
Temporary task force goes away.
Every year.
The secretary of workforce
solutions is tasked with making
sure that the fund is solvent.
And can make that decision.
To raise.
Taxes on order please.
Without legislative oversight.
Madam chair representative.
There are nonprofits that are
gonna shut down.
Nonprofits or.
For every community I don't
understand how we are we draft
it'll this and we're gonna put
millions and millions of dollars
chair representative of taxpayer
money.
In a fund and then not have
legislative oversight.
I thought that was part of what.
This chamber was supposed to do.
Was to have oversight of.
Chair representative how we
spend taxpayer dollars.
Cool the way this bill was
written one person was going to
make that decision.
I personally don't believe that
that's right I don't think it's
I mean there may be even be
constitutional issues with the
Madam chair representative.
I just I'm having the problem
wrap my head around a lot of
issues with this bill.
Like I said Madam chair
representative on the line and
huge most of the rest of the
paper the way it stands right
now.
I do not feel like this is very
business friendly.
and for that you just cannot
on should report the spill.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
H. R. thank you Representative
Representative Mason.
And your.
Thank you.
I have a few questions.
You should.
I.
The your.
Thank well what will our.
That.
At
about at the.
Have the.
We
Prior to exit polls that we are.
well this is our state of New
Mexico.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for that and I didn't know this
earlier today
we are a small business
accounting is what we are.
And madam chair representative
depends on yeah but it's it's
side.
All
right we were greeted we have I.
Part of our work.
You are this.
Madam chair representative yes
but a lot of right.
Options for the.
A lot of the work of the.
But.
The.
About the about percent.
Of our workforce working.
You're like is no just so you
know this is the.
Will someone.
I'll get it over closer from.
About fifty five percent of our
workforce boards which belongs.
Cervi us all which you probably
Madam chair all of these you
might be a percentage off your
the.
The.
A lot of our small businesses.
The part that I have a hard time
through all of this the.
No doubt about it but
The.
It is one of the points up in
you know the.
What all what all the.
The debate this is that for.
this may seem like a tax.
On.
Small business.
And I'm a little confused that a
little bit of it.
This is one of your.
But the the I guess I'll take it
for a minute.
The
Which.
Do all you know I was thinking
in the.
Well but.
Businesses are I up for the ones
that opted for this plan the.
Madam chair representative.
Listening to the earlier.
Well the one employee business.
I always feel hi.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative that's a really
good question so the way it
works out is that
As the Legislature also consult
and if I wanted to pay into the
paid family leave so you know I
got sick or something take time
it would be I would pin point
nine percent.
I am wrong the point five
percent I would pay and as an
independent contractor so but
when I in in the case you're
talking about if you are a
business and I work for you the
only employee you don't put
anything I still put in point I
Representative that that thank
you madam chair I was didn't
confused as well.
Hello said all of the but the
employee has stopped the.
The.
If it's less than five
employees.
Madam chair representative no
they they would have to if I
were to I would have to pay the
point five percent in but I
would have access to those
benefits thank you madam chair
representative so what what
Madam chair representative what
to decide.
Estimated participation rate in
this I can honestly was one of
the thank you madam chair thank
you Representative that is a
great question.
And so when we look at the rates
they're taking I got some
numbers from the federal level
as well just to make sure they
match with what we were looking
at it is in other states that
it's called the uptake rate how
do people actually using three
to six percent depending on the
state you saw some of the
numbers I handed already
somewhere between three and six
percent with the federal guys
what they told me.
how many how many people used
and that is that is an estimate
that again deeper utilized with
they were coming to the numbers
of what would be likely and and
what we could afford.
Thank you thank you madam chair
so.
Then.
So it's five percent this
person.
Argument.
But so.
Five percent of the.
Workforce.
Well I thank you for that.
But ninety five percent of a
hundred percent of the workforce
it.
So ninety five percent of the
work.
Are are paying the premiums for
the five.
Madam chair representative on
that's a great point because
it's five percent a year and so
I think I think I can say those
of us we'll go through some sort
of if that we may need to take
this time and so at some point
we're all kind of covering that.
Madam chair.
But the.
All the employee rights five
point five percent five point
five percent so five dollars for
every thousand.
Wait for the employee madam
chair yes the point four percent
for the board thank you team
player you know of Business and
so I'm paying a point four
percent.
All there was to me Madam chair
representative.
What will recoverable call I
will.
I will try to recover the costs
of by products will.
After reflect the extra.
Cost.
That's why.
This is going to work.
So I go up Madam chair on my.
I just.
So well my employee that also
buys from.
Hi.
Forty five percent and let's
also putting extra for the
brought.
So you know to me it's a it is a
more of a tax on the workforce.
Your the representative.
I don't see like you said that
you know to me it's.
We we what those of us in the
last few years you know what
with COVID I use my word
anymore.
The.
The general sixty percent rise
in on minimum wage rates in
Mexico.
That the as the fuel our
inflation.
And the.
You know in the last two years
ago when we got at the.
The sick leave.
Some of the work so many hours
you get someone's all.
What is also cost.
Madam chair.
Representative a lot of the
employees that
that that was also the.
Most of those heads up and.
In yeah I still was better a
little bit of.
The.
But we can't afford to get well
we have to offer that.
The study that was actually gave
some of what was left.
Is that what it again so what a
lot of some.
Which is.
But the the main thing like I
said though it just think back
to me we just keep stacking
cost.
Of doing business in New Mexico.
Madam chair representative no
charge Senator in the.
Speaking of love in twenty miles
there's a.
Madam chair representative part
of this country.
We're close to Texas so we hear.
All of that.
Detectives.
Yeah.
Mexico what about next question
use of Madam chair
representative having states to
do so I have of a law something
like this them seven thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative out there are
eleven on yeah
So how many does that Madam
chair representative is that
Mike the double.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I'll give me a
minute.
Thirty nine.
It the.
So I'd like they madam chair
members of the.
If it was the greatest thing.
That would be.
More states getting into this.
The.
This brought up before madam
chair representative.
The people some states are yes.
Some states.
Are losing business.
You know what how we relate in
the business well in this madam
chair representative thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative I think I think
we both see that sat in the
exact opposite way yes I do we
we were very low on there and
Madam chair representative from
what we heard from different
places again there's a lot of
worker training we don't have a
quorum of population that is
trained in a way to tackle
something on I would argue ex of
my friends are read me that the
anti donation clause limits us
are availability to incentivize
businesses to be here like we
see in other states really build
out I would make that argument I
I also say you know that.
Among states when you look at
how the states are tax because
our property right look our
property taxes are so low and
look at that compared to how
high they are in Texas we are
there are many incentives to
move here because many ways our
our taxes right better than some
of our neighbors.
Representative I agree with that
our property tax Senator but.
On the other side of small
business which.
Madam chair representative that.
Right percent of them not only.
The the the this.
Also.
Representative product ratings.
The staff was.
Which by the rental along
there's there's all all of the.
And I.
You know.
There is a.
We are not.
The complexity of some of our
business taxes.
Different things like us a
little less.
Appealing to a small.
We were just talking earlier the
example I have my district I
have.
Some people are not really nice
family.
Almost small restaurant.
I am always is no.
Right now that we have a cooker
to.
Some of the call of the sets of
the program.
The waitresses questions
including the.
You know.
Though most of the businesses so
I I have one gets off of the
state that you're running at
eighty percent.
As far as the work.
Then.
Well I just want to the office
the.
The.
So that sixty percent so we have
to replace the tax.
In some somewhere in the small
in we know that the.
Then this forget what was said
you know.
this is the.
With the officers of this and if
it goes on very long Madam chair
representative is a hard on the
system.
You know what they have to.
Not that they provide coverage
for.
You while you're off I
appreciate what you're all.
But.
I want the revival.
To the.
Yes whatever but anyway it's not
like I said it's not.
I don't think anybody would side
with the but.
It will be and I would like to
offer that care that's the other
I did not want anybody to think
of as well.
Or have cancer.
Is it the most the good small
businesses with the help of this
for a hundred years of our life.
Without legislation the bike is.
Madam chair representative.
And through history if you are a
lot of other people here.
And that your apologies.
You're probably not going to be
an employer long.
With all the we.
I have Madam chair
representative I use myself that
would.
I think was workforce twenty
five thirty.
With with with the lots of
things.
But we have with them by the
bike you for that.
Government that we have so Madam
chair representative about I
think this the.
Thank you I wanted to remind the
committee that we've got to be
back on the floor at six and so
I want to make sure everybody
gets a chance to ask questions
so if you'd be point it with you
questions that would be great it
looks like we will probably go
into another day is is what I've
seen because I want everybody to
have the opportunity to talk but
Representative that's okay I
just wanted to remind the
committee because we like to all
top line so I appreciate you and
I appreciate that moving along
so representative Duncan.
Thank you madam chair
Representative I was glad to
hear that a a RP is for this and
I look forward to giving.
This is the over the.
Look it up first on the list
here most your questions get
taken so I'm just going out with
them the reason that I'm sure.
Part of this bill that occurred.
I really.
a small business owner and we
have done exactly what was
shared today with people without
the legislation we are family
and we make it work and I don't
tax them at the end of the day
and that's what this is as this
committee knows I am not for
bigger government more my for
taxes and I think just be eleven
does exactly both of those.
Most of those things.
Representative Madam chair
representative I think you
answered the question of most
small businesses.
About this when you said.
They couldn't find it and so I
left I think that's what most
small businesses are going to
face.
It's awesome right I'm sorry.
Can you live with your.
That.
Sorry about that.
So I yes just a couple more
questions I think.
The question I would ask I think
it may have been asked before I
apologize for that you think
this is a really good time to to
implement this thank you madam
chair thank you Representative I
do and I I will point to the
diversity of folks that came out
and spoke in favor of it because
it wasn't just employees it was
it wasn't just small businesses
though it wasn't wasn't just
what religious organizations and
once was just a R. P. but you
see that there is a many people
that have been asking for this
because we people are.
When when we are entirely
beholden on.
The ability of our small
businesses to take on huge and
unpredictable costs would
somebody has an emergency it
makes things on stable across
the board and it makes it
different now with the worse
health outcomes than what we
want to see so I I mean I think
it is the time with their this
committee did not support a
minimum wage increase we see
that did not happen here and
that is a significant cost on
small business I do acknowledge
that I was not a co sponsor and
that one hundred K. madam chair
representative but it is a cost
this one is more of a manageable
costs for what we it
realistically comes in place for
to unemployment for up for for
emergency insurance fund is what
this is you pay into insurance
fund just like you do anything
else and that's really what this
convention thank you madam chair
Representative can you tell me
what what is out there for
others or for anyone for that
matter that may need to take a
leave of absence from their
business and and how they can be
how the state can help them in
that three month period.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and the aspect of
teachers and racing what do
other businesses provide or what
is the state provide when
someone is outstanding madam
chair yes that's what I'm asking
is if money is my wife got sick
for example and I have quit my
job and I take three to four six
months on what else is out there
that's already in place the
state offers I can take
advantage thank you madam chair
thank you Representative in that
particular case there isn't
anything if you worked for the
fifth if you work for a very
large company you may qualify
for FMLA which is unpaid and you
just have to kind of figure that
out on your own unless your
employer was like one of these
ones are if you were
Representative Mason which I
recommend you know that would be
a good idea but it really is if
you aren't lucky enough to have
an employer that is able to
cobble together that money it's
not possible and that is why you
heard some of the stories that
we heard today madam chair.
And
So I hired another employee.
Give your time off a train that
employee and most businesses
just can take months to three
four maybe even six months.
By then you're ready to come
back what we do is that other
employee that I can't afford
now that you're coming back
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative you know I've
seen
postings from other states that
spent clarify this is a
temporary position well somebody
will be out on maternity leave
around paid family what I think
is really unique about this
postings if they say that will
be out so that they can plan for
this to happen that hand over
can take place there there could
be something and that's part of
something that makes it
memorable manageable which is
why employees are called on to
make to to do it in a reasonable
way that doesn't give a do a
dual
wait on the businesses thank you
madam chair and representative
and I think you hit the nail on
the head when you said that it's
hard enough to get an employee
to go to work for you full time
without saying to be honest with
you you're gonna be here for
three months maybe four months
and then I got let you go.
I think that'll be difficult
Thank I think the the fear that
I have with some businesses.
Our state will be able.
They will say I
appreciate three employees so
that three more New Mexicans
will be out of jobs.
As automation takes place
because of if they add up all
the taxes they're going to be
paying it may be cheaper for
them to automate and and replace
those individuals with
Whatever peace mission there
there need or the other
committees or their technology
for that's what my fears or
they'll just choose not to fill
those empty slots if we had to
the four million more on our.
Here is your fault just as well
as the cost would be shared I
don't think it would be as
burdensome if you want when
you're calculating that.
So if I have chair
representative if I have forty
million people in state in
Mexico last week to two million
of those are in the workplace
would it still be forty five
percent I thank you madam chair
thank you Representative that's
a good question states have
found that so I'm gonna give me
a brief but I there are three
examples I think they're worth
discussing here there is one
case where the where the I was
insulted and they had a range of
and in that case it what we've
created it's it's point nine
percent is taken from the wages
that are earned over between the
two in that case the only to
point four and they didn't have
a number of business pay and a
visiting is under fifty and that
we should we just just wrecked
that fund that was terrible so
we started from a much stronger
position and that's why we
started we are there are two
states actually reduced how much
they collected because they got
to a point where they were
seeing more people involved I
will say that in the case you're
making and we seen an evidence
wise is that only half the women
that are able to participate in
the work force are participating
in the workforce because there
are many other as we all know
they're missing oftentimes
responsibilities that often
times of it would have to the
household women will take on
with family what have you worked
for it simply hard to get back
into the workforce with what you
need to manage what this does
and and even if if you saw the
L. yes these review of this
legislation they think retention
of teachers may increase because
of this kind of program so those
are ways of the reason that is
those are ways that we will not
maybe we will see a stronger
workforce and what workers in
our in our state and that is
part of the solution to driving
economic development in our
state that we're lacking right
now.
I hope that's true my fear is it
will not be true and it will
fall on the backs of middle
class Americans hello further
and further into poverty madam
chair that's all I have a love
for working with a.
Representative.
Okay.
Around over the years how I
guess so it doesn't sound like
it's working on that site thank
you madam chair
You know I I was going to take
the approach madam chair earlier
today that I was going to go
through every page line by line
but I'll leave that to my
colleagues your to do that a
little later I want to go up
thanks general comments Madam
chair all.
I think there's just too many
concerns raised by those are
directly impacted.
You know it's easy sometimes for
legislators to recommend things
for somebody else that they need
to do I want to share some
information and I'm certainly
willing to be corrected if I'm
in if I'm wrong in the
statements.
But to my knowledge there's not
one state established or managed
insurance program that's
currently solvent.
One.
It does not meet actuarial is
not one that we run has a state
of New Mexico.
And I do have a lot of issues
around the fact that
distribution of funds would not
be done by the appropriators.
I have a big problem with that
we've done that with too many
funds in the state of Mexico now
where we create we create them
and somebody else and bureaucrat
gets to dole it out and with
very little oversight.
I'd also like to say that and I
should be corrected on this
workforce solutions department
can't feel their own vacancy
right now.
And it's very very high and I
doubt very seriously they're
going to get the number of
employees this bill calls for.
I do not see that in any way
shape or form.
Like you concerns also is that
this is a we're still going
through a domino effect with the
pandemic.
and what and what I mean by that
is that we're still having
problems with supply chain
disruption and inflation.
When it comes to business
activity we're still dealing
with that now.
Businesses are dealing with
minimum wage increases now this
committee had to bills
technically that came here.
I am glad that we took the
action that we did I know one of
them told but I'm glad because
we've already put that into law
so we need to see if and how how
this all works just give it a
chance.
I think businesses are also
dealing with the healthy
workplace Act now so we were
dealing with the domino effect
of the pandemic we're dealing
with minimum wage increases were
dealing with the healthy
workplace Act currently.
and for me personally you know I
had ten businesses from my own
community testified today.
Three were still sitting in this
audience and I guarantee you
they're not getting paid to be
here.
They are here and they're paying
for it themselves.
Out of their own pocket.
And I wish that we could have
had ten businesses from each one
of your areas here also to talk
about what the impact would be.
And I think for most legislators
there's there's not gonna be any
greater influence than the
people back home verses these
national associations yeah I do
I think groups like this is a
listing on but places are groups
like a ARP aren't good they're
great but they're national
group.
Is that gonna have more
influence on me or the ten
businesses that stood up and
said wait a minute
Representative Lundstrom this is
going to hurt us in Gallup.
I guarantee this gonna have more
influence on me.
And most of our all these
associations are located in
Albuquerque or Santa Fe.
I don't know any headquarters
Center out there in Gallup.
I don't know if we have any
Gallup numbers.
But I do know that I had ten
small businesses come forward
here today and say what they
needed to say but the bigger
issue for me madam chair and
this is a bigger issue for the
committee overall.
You know there's a number all of
the bills are coming forward in
the come into this committee.
I think they come from the
interim process I've never
served on this committee before
so I'm not really sure where
they all come from I've I've
heard this one in LFC this was
presented LFC last fall
primarily because of the budget
impacts but.
At some point we're going to
have to have some kind of
guidance for these legislators
are what we think is going to
move to Mexico because there is
a Hodge podge of bills that are
coming through I know
everybody's got the ability and
the right to drop whatever they
want to but a lot of that stuff
gets out I mean I've even helped
get a few of them out here
myself I mean I sit down to help
rewrite of and have them the
paperwork I guess for me madam
chair what is the plan at the
end of the day what is the
economic development planned for
our committee and as we go for
forward on this I know this this
particular bill have a lot of
work done but I would assume all
those that have come through
here have also through the
interim process I I don't know
that as this is the first time
I've ever served on this
committee but I think we have a
bigger question in front of us
because of what I said I will be
supporting this bill
I just want the I mean when I've
had to.
My community come forward to
strive as a have today.
And honestly I haven't had one
person from Gallup tell me they
wanted this bill.
Not one.
I don't know if it's our process
we get assume then and people
don't understand it hello this
is going to run out during lunch
people from Gallup to call me.
What they're gonna do but you
know I'm very practical on these
things and I look at what
affects my business community
and how it affects back home
because they are the driver for
our economy out there and the
last thing rural New Mexico
needs is more stuff piled on.
So I I don't want to go through
this line by line as I had
planned to do madam chair but
you need to know I will be
supporting this bill and I'm
hoping that we can get excused
from the floor I mean there's a
lot of people here.
I travel a lot a long way.
That we can't just just.
Through this get everybody's
comments and take some action I
I just just feel like that's
part of being accommodating to
the citizens of New Mexico that
of travel all this way that
don't want to go get a hotel
room now and have to stay here
and come back sometime over the
weekend so that's where I stand
on and I will be supporting this
bill thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
okay so what.
But okay so I'm just going to
kind of go out
what it is problems with this
bill is.
How to how it's going to affect
health care.
Growing pandemic that we have
there with health care providers
leading up with almost fifty
percent of our state.
Doctors being reliant on
Medicare reimbursement requests
on top that I can
I'm worried that we're just
gonna be pushing more talked.
Stating that point thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative are you saying
because of the additional
benefit that would be provided
no because of the additional
cost per employee.
And the fact that we're already
down on Medicare reimbursement
from a hundred percent now with
stacked up on top of it we're
just Moul thank you madam chair
thank you Representative so I
have heard from the home hospice
and home health care Department
groups
Association they were neutral on
it you know so I do think that
it it varies Health does look at
this I've I've spoken with a
private home health care
provider in my district when I
was being this forward he said
he was fine with it not for a
number of reasons it wasn't it
wasn't a concern from his first
so I mean I I think.
You know I I don't see that same
flight because of this and again
looking at the states that are
happy to have this in place
before the pandemic they were
better prepared for it the their
works their workforce and their
employers knew how to handle it
and it it's it was easier for
them to manage the whole thing
so I'm not too concerned.
Thank you.
Okay
okay so then can we talk about
solvency of this month just a
little.
Yes I was roled out of this with
the
okay so you find.
Thank you.
Okay.
But as our colleague
Representative Lundstrom said we
don't have solvency and a whole
bunch of these funds so these
numbers of.
Here one two maybe what happens
when our funding needs
we have no legislative oversight
what what and what are these
numbers could look like how much
can right the minutes by.
In order to make that funds and
that's I mean that's a huge
scary part of this for me it's I
don't want to go from these
numbers to.
With a huge jump over a couple
of years you put a cap and you
are all right now I know this we
were coming tons of those
together
it over four years five years
this could significantly job
that's what I.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and I'm gonna go
through a few these numbers what
is important for what I will say
about this discussion I think
it's important for me to keep in
mind is that.
If you will leave the paid
family leave is an important
step to fighting of the an issue
with with pieces that we have in
our state and and that it's
important to bonding with a
child support taking care of
families and and fostering that
believe in New Mexico if we
believe this is part of that I
really believe in this bill for
that reason and why I said I
start with that is that this
bill.
Was looked at for extensively by
the bureau of business and
economic research at UNM and the
numbers they use or their
capital was four percent usage
of it annually which is right in
the middle that three to six
percent we're seeing in other
states in their their example it
was completely solid plus a
remainder and they never been
rolled over that mean an extra
that each individual here that
was all that they did not
include interesting enough the
additional gains of the the
returns made from S. I. C.
investments which is a very I
mean of the plot our state
program that would what we saw
in the FIR was an uptake of ten
percent which literally is not
anywhere in the country when I
ask them what they use that it's
because they said we just don't
know we just don't we just don't
know my concern with that
approach is that we have so much
empirical evidence so much so
much research has been done on
this issue that I think we do
have a good idea I think
somewhere between three and six
percent as realistic
I will say that any state that
has the distributed double
Washington did face insolvency
they are at one point one point
one zero point eight percent
there is a zero point eight
percent so they went up and then
the the settled they they have
I'm sorry madam chair and
representative they've gone up
they started at point four
percent with the and exemption
waiver of the employer
contribution for those that have
more fewer than fifty employees
and that funding has not been
sold and so that was part of our
consideration when we were
looking very carefully at at our
definition of a small business
and what the the fund could
withstand as far as that waiver
goes they first increase at two
point six percent and now
they've got to point eight
percent no state has ever had to
go above one point one percent
of wages and to keep in mind
California has been doing this
for twenty years and with that
being said with one point one
percent were implementing our
state that would still be less
than five dollars per thousand
dollars for employers it doesn't
it it's still I think it's point
four nine percent is what that
would be for employers.
The other piece mention is that
when they were doing this
analyses as I mentioned earlier
only eight thousand women who
gave birth in twenty twenty one
actually have the six months
behind the work that qualify for
P. as in the late when they
would do the assessment they
were looking at the full twenty
two thousand live births and
presuming part in all of those
to be very simple actually look
to that eight thousand and then.
More than doubles a spouse
involved was that I was
interested I was generous to
make sure that was all that as
well
and the there's two things I
will say in the end of this one
is that it's a two and a half
year implementation process on
purpose and that's that's very
that none of this we get paid
out until twenty twenty seven
twenty seven twenty twenty five
be the first couple of twenty
six is the first twenty twenty
six and the kitchen yeah but it
but it doesn't appear until
twenty twenty seven this is what
it is you can start putting into
the fund in twenty six to
construct occasion to twenty
twenty six but you cannot go out
so that process ensures that
we're making it safe
that's that's that's what you
know but.
Thank you for that
So I mean you said you kind of
hit by email right in there
somewhere was with.
You guys are looking at other
states but.
Look at our state where we are
the highest Medicare
reimbursement state with almost
fifty percent we're not like any
of the other states that have
done this and that's my worry is
that The three or six percent to
have its way to.
because we have so many people
that.
Use the programs that we provide
each it's not always a bad thing
I will be the first one to say
that but it does give me some
worry about that so
And and I did still down for
Okay so can we go and talk
about.
Approval decline and
I don't.
It was sec
The appeal process which is I
believe on page.
Is there any protections for the
state for the department.
Yes on if someone.
Get denied peels soups right
about that too under H. for
which I guess twenty twenty one
H. before.
Shortly whistleblower there's a
whole bunch Act what about that
as well is that this is just
open do the rest to lawsuits if
someone says that they were.
That they were denied for could
be I I'm not saying it would be
real that doesn't always make
thanks make it right that they
would try to come into to get
their coverage.
Thank you madam chair thank you
apologize are you the amended
one I am in the amended one page
eleven the only place the order
was in two ways maybe start
madam chair doing business art
was that hi the.
Section hi number four employees
may fuel to the Department of
any right granted under the paid
family medical leave act is
violated does that open I just
want to make sure that we're not
gonna get sued essentially is
what I'm trying to find out the
to to as this one Madam chair
representative that's the way to
the waiver section of how if
they said no this does it might
my Netflix plan doesn't isn't
enough I feel that that would be
a process that would not look at
what process madam chair this is
on the employee part yes so but
the but madam chair
representative to point there's
no right of action in here
there's no you know stipulation
for that kind of penalty it's
you can appeal Department you
know the normal way and if you
were you know I can't speak to
any other ways that perhaps but
purely for this that's on a
alright so madam chair so there
I mean the state could be open
to additional costs through this
no madam chair representative no
that's because there's no right
or there's no claim process.
Madam chair I don't.
I'm sorry my phone.
Still.
Madam chair representative
Hernandez at the short answer is
yes I mean we could be sued a
class action by the all the
people who've been denied we
could be stated on the basis of
discrimination there is not a
path to see you as part of the
redress for The Tonight also
like it's not part of the
administrative process to turn
on the department but I think
we've all seen that anybody can
see for just about anything.
So that's the thank you madam
chair
Okay so I'll keep it short out
like to.
Get up okay so earlier I think
it was in Representative
patients questions he had asked
about the under for employees
employers will also take.
I guess my first question to do
if the employer has less than
five dollars.
Are the four or less employees
required to.
Madam chair representative yes
madam chair
That would tend to but deficit
correct or is it or is it that
that those for employees have to
pay for the employee part part.
Because somewhere in there you
have eight point zero nine was
the number thank you madam chair
thank you Representative that's
a that's a great question and I
am excited to tracing a second
but what I will say about that
is that we work that was a huge
concession that we made because
again that's two thirds of
employees employers that are not
part of a into it but that was
what we found would still keep
the the I solve it and and not
lose that interest at there's
only one I thank you madam chair
representative date the addition
like to add is that while it's
sixty six percent of our
employers it's actually a little
less than nine percent of our
employees which is how that the
fund remain solvent
size and do that the sixty six
percent of employers because
those employees are still paying
in but it's only nine percent of
of the the issue areas that
could possibly
file a claim.
I'm sure it doesn't make sense
okay.
One last question how many state
employees this program going to
take it you probably areas I
don't remember the answer
company like are we trying to
hide in New Mexico I am sure
it's a lot thank you madam chair
thank you Representative this is
it this is shipped this is a
cultural shift a lot of ways and
it was something that we didn't
really agree with that secretary
but she really laid out.
Two thousand and I respect
because this is our department.
To.
Madam chair representative
Fernandes our best gas is that
this will basically be the size
of the unemployment insurance
program including those folks
who are in other divisions like
appeals and fighting and all
that stuff so I think our
estimate was two hundred and
twenty additional employees and
you have to remember to that
that's not just process the
number of claims that are
granted projected gross that up
to about eighty percent of
claims are granted so we're
talking about processing that
plus the twenty percent.
Madam chair once before you one
question at secretary how
staffed are you currently.
Madam chair representative
Hernandez we read about in
between eighteen and twenty
percent they can see rate
although much of that is due to
unfunded vacancies because our
like many other people in the
audience are all our federal
funds don't keep up with our
state funds and so as costs rise
we have to keep positions vacant
thank you madam secretary
madam chair will on that point
if I get that part of the
secretaries.
Workforce is federally funded
and we don't always get that
money but do you really believe
that in the and workforce crisis
that we're in our state right
now with.
I want to send everywhere that
you drive down that we're
actually find other two hundred
plus employees to make this go
to beat this program work and
get started and then the to keep
your from there is when you guys
are really need to be.
The staff but I'm worried that
disappointment prices and going
to keep going past thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative I think that's
exactly why we need more
incentives for workers to
provide color on the New Mexico
but with that being said again
that's a two one half year
process over also staffing will
start it was likely after a year
we have the you know the this
this was this past part will
start in July but to July twenty
twenty three twenty four is
really with that initial stages
happening and that again gives
us time to adjust things as as
needed right what if one of
these positions need more
incentives to be filled how can
we help with that you know if if
that needs to be is that the
right to want to go I think you
know that's the reason for the
prolonged implementation period.
Thank you madam chair and I'm
I'm just worried if that that if
we have to put more incentives
and cost more taxpayer dollars
to get people to just come in
implement the plan also worries
me so what my statement just and
I'm done I'm super worried about
putting another saying with
recent minimum wage increases
are safe workplace at you know
small businesses as they take
out of COVID and the case get
all the stuff I just that and
having issues writing staffing
and transportation and supply
chain and everything else I'm
just curious when do we stop and
give them up there either and
storage which is I know what we
all so with that are here.
Thank you representative Lente.
Thank you madam chairwoman I
appreciate the yes I love this
afternoon and thoughtful
dialogue
and you know I I recognize that
this is the economic development
and commerce committee and I
appreciate all the sentiments
from the audience and and those
that are on this diet this this
afternoon and.
Thinking about.
The legislation that there are a
number of things that you can
either love about it or hate
about it.
And and and the first thing
that.
I think about is when mention
was made about.
How many people stood up in
opposition
of of of your of your bill right
at how many people stand in in
support of you feel.
And those that were identified
in the opposition aspect of your
bill what number of business
owners and and I'm glad that you
all here this afternoon I think
it's very thoughtful of you to
join us and welcoming at the end
I thought more about well.
There's there's none of the work
issue because they're all
working.
They're all at their jobs right
now they're all trying to make a
living and I read and and I
respect that so much that when
those that are in support of the
bill stood up yes there there
probably a our peace of the
world and those large of this
firms but when I think of of of
who sent me here to to the
representatives point about.
If there were a number of
businesses that came from my
community how would I feel about
that would be awesome guides
that receive any comment from
any one bank this within my
district I'm sure they're still
concerned about absolutely that
doesn't dismiss that
conservative but.
The people that sent me here to
voice their concerns of the
working families of state of New
Mexico absolutely and so how can
I stand up here set up here and
and not recognize those
individuals with these concerns
and these issues at these
potential.
Applications that you bill
addresses and not voice anything
for them for about that.
Knowing that well I was a
business owner when I was a
young man.
That was an old man I do
recognize that.
I watched my family.
Juggle one two three jobs in
some cases knowing that there
were times when.
My own parents were not able to
take off of work.
So that hi because I was.
I was I was forced to have to go
to
the Indian hospital I was forced
to have to go to the dentist at
the end of wholesaler and that
when you missed those
appointments that are sometimes
once a year and mother cannot
get off of work because she's
scared because she's gonna lose
her job and you miss that
appointment for you one year
check up and you don't have any
other option.
Then you just wait and you lose
your your your your your place
in line and you move forward
hoping that the year after.
You don't have to get all the
treatments that you're you're
postponing you have to you have
the years of.
I'm here on behalf of the
people.
Of New Mexico yes the business
owner as I understand that I
understand that you want to make
sure that that you have a place
you're doing you absolutely do
and and and what I respect small
business owners and in the state
as well but when I think about
those for my community.
I can appreciate their stories.
I've always their stories often
times when I'm up here.
And I take their stories
everywhere I go because.
They are in these cases the most
disenfranchised because they
have no one else but those that
sent them here to speak on their
behalf and so sponsored this
legislation I want to tell you
that I absolutely support your
piece of legislation because.
Our employees need that
assistance our families need
that assistance.
Not to say there's no
consideration was business
owners today but.
Having this structure in place
as intentional as well thought
out.
That took time to establish.
Is enough for me to say that I
can support this piece of
legislation thank you madam
chair thank sponsors thank you
Representative little.
Thank you madam chair oops.
I.
Thank you very much more.
Thank you to the sponsors for to
the sponsor and those who have
brought this bill forward.
Without the respect to my
colleagues.
I your team member and that will
be the.
I will tell you I mean because
that is a real experience that
people have to do it so I think
it is it's all right but I'm
going to tell you that
I could relate to it
constituents in my district to
in northwest Albuquerque.
I saw at their doors at caring
for parents and I'm in a come
from this experience I also am a
small business owner
but I was also and I said listen
the daughter I am the daughter
of the in stage renal disease
patients.
So that happened to them.
Later in.
My life.
What happened was that I was
elected to from why why do that.
That was cast for a management
trainee program.
And I was going through the
program my dad for my father
became progressively was
diagnosed with diabetes he had
been used before.
And so in this time at this
point in time
I was almost had to make a
choice between continuing that I
cannot imagine the effort that
was put into this net of
applications because I was one
of like over fifty candidates.
And so my training was so
important to me but my father
was even more important to me I
did not realize at the time just
how much my mother was having to
do she worked part she works
full time
In the that that.
That.
In the restaurant industry.
And I did not realize because I
had come back from Washington DC
just before that what they were
dealing with we knew he had end
stage renal disease and he was
doing
that at home that they do at the
time it's been a long time but
at any rate I did not realize
when it became progressively
worse that she would have to she
would go to work early in the
morning.
be at work for four hours and
then leave at eleven o'clock
leave so that she could get him
to his appointments for dialysis
at eleven.
She would then go back to work
to work for a couple more hours
until he finishes his to his
dad.
Dialysis and then would have to
go to pick them up she went to
pick him up drove him home
sixteen dinner guidance situated
and then went back to work to
finish what was in it are
working.
It wasn't we didn't find out
what happened until she was
going to our clinic and this is
at their clinic to pick up his
prescriptions.
And they ended up putting her on
a sailing trip because she was
so dehydrated.
And that.
I found out we found that in.
That was still there was nothing
to decide about that we were I
was going to get involved in
and.
And so my brothers and I did we
figured out of plane so that she
could.
Do is she needs to do it we
could care for him.
And the reason I think that this
is important to bring up is
because.
It also becomes a public health
issue.
Public health issue that exists
in this state.
You're looking at the
communities that are here of
color in in rural areas.
These are workforce this second
people who are coming to work
for just for us a small
businesses they're loyal they're
committed they're hard working
still do anything to make up the
time that the taken off to take
care of their families.
That's the reality that we're
we're actually looking at so I I
truly as a business woman as a
business owner you know I would
have to be if I continued my
consulting firm I have to be
that one that would try to get
that to to buy in if it wasn't
for another form of healthcare
that we had it is a public
health issue we have to
acknowledge that as business
owners in this state that has
the population with the health
disparities that have existed
for such a long time.
I I don't expect that the
government is going to resolve
everything but I watched my mom
I know what I was faced with I
actually was given an ultimatum
by one of the divisions who was
provided my training about well
you know what you just sure I'm
sorry just minutes.
It was my are you we just can't
have this and so I went to the.
Executive in charge who had.
Come in after this program was
initiated.
It uses over we spent too much
time too much effort.
To get to hear let's see what we
can do and so that wasn't the
end of it I ended up taking like
four hours at a time off because
it four not to have some level
of income coming in and so I I
understand that when I think
about the business that I have
in bringing on people because
I'm so committed to making sure
that the thing that.
My question then is with this in
mind.
Will this bill.
As it's established help someone
like me someone like others in
rural communities.
And people that communities of
color and in my district it's
not limited to rural areas of
New Mexico it's been my
district.
Well it helped them thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative the way we
structured separate yes and you
in in not example you gave in
particular because we had to
come to an agreement originally
with the with the folks at one
of this bill that the please
wanted if they could dig in
increments of four hours we
actually raise that to eight
hours of the day just to
businesses so that if people
have ongoing chronic illnesses
they can be part of our
workforce they could do so
successfully and still take that
that time on but it also means
that in these difficult times
all of us face madam chair
representative.
We'll have time with their
families with their families you
to most and I just I really
believe that.
The foundation of.
The future of New Mexico is
dependent on our families being
able to act as a unit no matter
if it's your grandma raising new
matter if it's you know up to
parents at all what are you know
to point to get a job over the
you know the judge of that like
it doesn't matter what that
looks like you get time with
your family so they are outcomes
are better for kids I really
believe in this bill because
it's it was looked at for so
long with input from the
business committee there that's
whether amendments in here that
we even continue to have them
even after the task force
because we sat down again and
again to make sure that we could
address what we could still have
a viable option that works for
families.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative you know I don't
think that any employee wants to
be given the ultimatum you need
to you want to be at work or do
you want to leave the family.
There's no doubt there was never
any doubt in my mind of it was
more like don't we don't ask me
that question because is not
gonna be to stay here.
It really wasn't.
So we lose business communities
lose good employees that we I
don't think this is
let me just end by saying that I
think that this is going to help
us gives me something to look
forward to should I ever go back
into full time my own business
again because I do worry about
this about having employees that
I want to take care of madam
chair and representative so I
will be supporting this bill and
thank you for being
thank you for bringing it
forward and I think this coupled
with the other.
Other bills that have come
forward that I'm aware of during
this session I'm sure a lot of
work is been done in the past
but this is my first trip here
and I think.
That the the the at the emails
the phone calls that money
legislative assistant as logging
in including many many people
who are asking to.
The state Representative this
bill so Madam chair
representative thank you so much
thank you Representative
Matthews.
Thank you madam chair
thank you presenters for your
presentation.
And to everybody in the audience
to spoke favor or.
In favor of the bill.
I like many of my cohorts
changing over to the college.
What Senator.
Ali on.
The committee had received less
and less of the input from
people just like yourselves.
The value for the.
It is about whether or not this
bill should pass and and I want
to clarify a couple things first
of all.
All due respect for.
One of my favorite people small
business people our workers.
People say come in usually to
open the door first they leave
last there is much work as
anybody any other small
business.
they.
The difference may be that they.
Decided to take the risk so they
are the entrepreneur in the.
Restaurant or whatever but they
were as far we see my experience
in this.
As far as any of the other
people there.
The
if they get sick to.
Madam chair.
Representatives
They have family that they love.
And I actually support.
Family medically.
My problem is this.
And.
let me share a couple signs and
why I have a problem with this.
first of all we we argued about
we are usually invaded minimum
wage increases earlier in the
year hi pursuant about.
Chair representative in a
A lonely place and I was
advocating for all of those
employees and workers who work
for the state opted for non
profits and times for for profit
companies out there doing
childcare they're doing
home healthcare they are doing
work that even if it wasn't
being done.
Every I swear virtually every
family in this state would find
themselves with a mortar in
terms of trying to take care of
the family.
Hello everybody so.
I mean they work with different
listen to these people this is
signing they are credible.
And what we do in New Mexico
because of.
I'm not sure why but what we do
in New Mexico when we increase
wages.
Thank you for we priest benefits
programs like this.
What happens is that those
providers are paid any more
money in order to be able to pay
for the increase in the.
Patrisse wages or the increases.
That is in this case.
I believe that
what I see happening this is
been going on for a long time to
figure this year minimum wage
bills that was produced what it
would have taken a hundred and
one million dollars to make them
yes even.
That's a lot of money.
So what's happening they don't
get any more money to produce
the services they provide so
what they started doing is
cutting the number of their
workers what I see happening in
the state as we have benefits
and wage wages and so forth
again because we're not dealing
with these people what I think
is a fair way is what we're
doing is we're we're managing
our ability to take care.
Our society that is going to
need to take a test.
Hey prices and it's not going to
be that far away if we don't
change that we can.
And I'm going to speak up for
them here just for a moment
because this is the same kind of
situation.
We're going to have a program
that is called.
They the nonprofits that provide
services and hire these people
will have to be participants and
that was your very very small
but they have no way to.
Prices or do any other way to
generate the money to maintain
workforce show more and more
people.
Here childcare.
Let me just give you an
indication of the cost this.
In the child care industry in
New Mexico.
We have thirteen hundred
employees.
And it rose payroll is.
Three hundred twenty five
million dollars.
The employer annual cost free
program that you're presenting.
Would be one million three
hundred thousand dollars.
When your margins are smaller
people's margins are that's a
whole
so it's probably gonna happen as
with any other reduction members
have care workers programs that
would provide often to low
income.
The second thing I want to
mention that.
This population of people who
work for the non profits and so
forth is many of them working in
industries that have a lot of
rules childcare workers have a
lot of rules you have dentures
certification you have to have
checks to be sure United
criminalises etcetera etcetera
yes.
If.
If if they.
If they can't thank you can't
replace it with pants.
You have to have people fill the
requirements in the future and
the same is true with nursing
homes and so forth and so what
happened and what may happen is
as we go through this process is
what we find is that there's no
child care centers or whatever
but I have to close our doors at
least for Sunday related work
which I would need to the people
user services.
Yeah people who were brought
to the surface this is down with
the kids before the job care
centers clubs my point is that
there are a lot of money into
the consequences when we began
to change the rules of us
pointed to work we need to be
aware of those missing should we
do it is that we have to be
aware other people pay the costs
for some of these are the kinds.
These are serious cost and for
nursing home the shut it is that
is critical if we can have its
workers and put it in another
context
public safety
what happens is we have
something like a fifty percent
vacancy rate in the ended
regards to jail and you can have
Bernalillo county.
We have we have a number of.
Hospitals that don't have enough
workers.
I can't remember what it was
maybe one of my colleagues over
there ask about and the and and.
Health care providers.
All of these are going to be
impacted by what we do here.
We just have to be aware of that
we have to decide is the best
way to do it what are the ways
of the tax of these people not
make this something where we
shut down a nursing home or
childcare center or a hospital
Houston on Community.
We didn't think about one to
speak.
As.
on that issue.
the second thing I want to say
is in in the number of the
people who testified today
talked about this being line in
insurance program and that's
what it is it's an insurance
program.
and the wrong with that except
the insurance programs have to
have to be viable.
They have to have reserves.
And I'm no expert on insurance
but that the setting up.
And where are reserves in this
program.
If if there is not enough money.
To pay.
The times that what you're going
to do under this bill is a thank
you the and no offense to Syria
but they give her the ability to
do an analysis and without a
hearing and with that hi and
wave in any notice I'm not
suggesting you would do it that
way but what it's going to do is
increase the point four percent
that did businesses have to pay
into this program.
In other words once is program
starts and if the figures are
different than you.
While could be that within a
very short period of time is
going to be in San.
Every business is going to be
paying more money and when you
representative today.
Is what they would be paying
again unintended I don't know I
component in the to the
consequences of these works
there are there is no back to
backs other than in the business
community to pay whatever it
takes yes to keep this program
so and.
Which says to me that.
The only and I look at the
uptake figures and I've got a
bunch of questions about that
also which again just to nine.
But what is this to be is that
the only way to do this program
states dollars.
People don't use the budget.
And once they start using the
benefits if they choose the one
your four percent whatever you
would you were coming up with
this program will quickly be
insolvent this is we thanks a
lot for to keep itself and
then that point that's alright
this actually was something
madam chair and representative
that I feel like Representative
Hernandez also brought up in a
way and there's there's two
pieces that I want to mention
yeah I I've been I've been I I
have my kids at daycare and when
there are multiple people that
were pregnant had to take time
off it did affect the schedule
and unfortunately none of those
people turn to work afterwards
I'm gonna go back and there
wasn't there wasn't anything
that but I I will say I
understand your concern because
you you mentioned going up for
businesses it would go up more
for please and I I do want to
say madam chair if you know I I
be open to talking more madam
chair about rolling this a bit
so that we could look at
amendment that can ensure that
that doesn't go up or or or
something else along those lines
are designed to.
That I just mentioned that here
because I I do I didn't want you
to.
I think that I didn't look at
that here IT.
I think what we need to do at
this point I know a great deal
of work is going to this but I
am just at the point where as a
state I think family medical
leave service for rolling or
safety net but I think that this
bill is not as it is vehicle get
their.
And the question is.
this point I can't vote for this
but I am certainly willing to
work with you thanks twenty four
hours or so to see if we can
make some changes so that we
don't have a lot of intended
consequences so that we can fix
some of these major problems I
don't know if that's possible or
not I'm certainly willing to
have dialogue.
And.
So I don't know if that's a
motion but
so thank you are you are you
done speaking eight okay
I am being called by the speaker
wanting for just to wrap up so I
think this is actually a really
good place to to stop
and what I'm hearing from the
committee is they would like you
to do some more work
representative Ted and and I did
hear from you that you wanted to
consider rolling the bill to do
that work is is that correct
that's right and I'm sure I I'm
happy over the committee because
I believe that we're.
That well the Representative I
may not agree on the bill this
point I believe that this is the
wrong place that we can start at
I don't think that this is an
impossible task I hope that we
can work together okay well on
that I am within I am going to
make a unless we make a motion
to go in order.
Well we're gonna roll it.
I.
so it's going to rule the bill I
do want to say that I I need to
talk to the committee members
about consenting out.
And I need to look at that with
developers it is a bit.
SB one forty three because we
have already heard it's a more
bill so I will talk to you all
on the floor about it of but if
you look at it to see if you're
willing to consider that because
we did already here the bill I
think earlier.
Okay and I did pass out I don't
know what the numbers rises.
Of that okay.
So will need to do that to make
sure that we can keep moving
along but with that we're going
to adjourn.
Being here.
