Thank you. OK, we're gonna start
with HGM 9, which is me, so I'm
handing the gavel off to the
vice-chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, HDM
9 proposes a joint memorial
which asks legislative council
to create a special interim
legislative committee during the
2025 interim, um, to hold
hearings, gather testimony from
stakeholders and to develop
recommendations for legislation
that addresses artificial
intelligence, development,
deployment and regulation and
comprehensive data privacy
protections for New Mexicans,
um, and that
chair, I stand for questions.
Thank you very much. Do we have
any? Oh, OK, let's do 5 in the
room, middle of the room, you
Uh, hospitality association, um,
Albuquerque Hispano Chambers
missing one or two, but all my
clients do have AI you need to
do is have an AI against
efficiency.
We want to promote
with other states to allow AI to
be a runaway train here, but we
have of industries and including
you know the next session.
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee carry Robin
Bruunder with the New Mexico
Medical Society and public
charter schools of New Mexico,
uh, AI is impacting our
healthcare industry. It is also
infiltrating different decisions
that are made in schools with
curriculum, software, everything
else. We think it makes a lot of
sense for all the stakeholders
to be at the table so we can
have a really great bill next
year. A lot of the.
Service. So we think this is a
good plan moving forward and we
support
needs to be studied more in the
state in a.
This is the
company.
Uh, we, Madam Chair members of
the committee, uh, retail
association.
I do stand in strong support of
the memorial. I won't go to the
Jason week's route. I don't know
if he understood it was a minute
per client that he thank you.
supported this bill. We think
that good.
statute for the summer study uh
would be a very wide.
Cathy.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Kathy Coal. I'm the CEO
for the New Mexico Hospitality
Association. I won't repeat what
our lobbyist Mr. Weeks said
earlier, but I do want to
strongly add our support for
this measure and let you know
that as an industry that is
across the state, we are
pledging our support with both
local and national resources to
make this an effective committee
that can develop comprehensive
policies for the state.
Thank you.
Representative Armstrong
Representative De la Cruz, yes,
Representative Fernandez.
Representative Lee.
Representative Mason.
Representative Matthews
Murphy Representative Pajon.
Representative Serrado
Madam Vice Chair. Yes and Madam
Chair, Madam, final tally for
Representative, are you ready?
All right. Please begin your
presentation.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee, um, house bill of
396, um,
to make it more current,
including um altering the board
composition and limiting bond
issuance and requiring GRT Rebo
And um, Madam Chair and
committee, I'd like to introduce
my expert, um, commissioner
if you need it.
is currently
We believe
And Don and the County, we have
4.
In Sierra County, we have
12,000.
And over 90 the last 20 years,
95% or $147 million have been to
support the bonds.
Sierra County with less than 1,
only 12,000 residents is
actually provided less than 6
better represented on the board.
My solution for that or
recommend a uh currently, let's
put it this way, it's going to
county gets 2 seats.
Sarah County gets 2 seats, state
government governor also gets
too, I believe that if we
Actually taken an approach that
says, you get a seat on the
board.
For every $1 million up up to 4
members maximum.
According to the original state
statute, there's no.
positions that were named was to
Fredonia County.
24 Sierra County and one minimum
for the governor.
Next item
I
The district may enter into
contracts with the authority
pursuant to the authorities of
financing. The interesting thing
is is in when the had a last
meeting actually had the board.
Approve taking the excess
reserve.
As you find projects directly,
you can only be used to fund
bonds.
In addition to that, we also
released Against the Vote of our
county because we didn't have
the board CT which the Attorney
general and that would like to
make this change, uh, there's
also one New Mexico 20E25A.
20
And I say
should be repealed if necessary.
And then in section uh New
Mexico State.
Uh, the authorities shall pledge
irrevocably payment of the
principal and interest of bonds.
Uh, that's where we've had a
problem board members felt by
making these changes
that your presentation
representative for?
Um, yes, Madam Chair, and there
have been some concerns of 25%
that was.
part of the 100%, um, left from
the 75% going to the bonds, um.
Have information that the county
um is in charge of that funding
and to all the different schools
and we have the,
um, who here is in favor of the
bill. Anybody here in OK.
Anybody here in opposition of
the bill?
OK, I can get you all to come
up.
The attendant will hold the
microphone. You'll have one
minute.
Uh, please state who you are and
uh keep it under a minute,
please.
Madam Cha members of the
committee, I'm Chris Balzano.
I'm with the registered lobbyist
for Las Cruces Public Schools.
There are several substantive
issues that I want to bring to
this committee. You look on page
7 line 7, line 11, line 13, and
line 9 there are issues there.
This billboard and ending
significant funding stream for
spaceport capital projects at a
25% of the collected GRT.
This not only impacts Las Cruces
public schools. This in part
getsen consequences, um,
municipal schools also Hatch
Valley schools.
Um,
The challenge and Learning
Center, we serve more than
40,000 students since we are
able to have access to that 25%
uh GRT project tax.
Uh, we have been serving right
now 3000 students. So we are
talking about lives, student
lives, not only that, we'll talk
about payroll.
teachers, transportation.
You're talking about paychecks,
the lives of employees for each
of those school districts, the
whole community. So I ask you
please to consider this to the
interim, where all the stake
take a look on this. I heard
that there is a substitute, um,
and we ask you also thank you.
Madam Chair, Honorable
Representatives, Rebecca Barte
from Truth Consequences School
District. I'm the board
secretary. I'm also a former
educator of 20 years from Sira
County. I was a science
educator. My students launched
payloads from Spaceport America,
and it was due to funding like
this for those hands-on
educational opportunities that
changed lives. All of my
students and my rocket club
later went on to um explore
careers in science. If we do
something like this and you
support this bill, you take
$200,000 annually away from
truth or consequences schools
and over 4 million.
for Las Cruces schools. So this
would be negatively impactful to
students, staff. We pay for, um,
salaries, instructional
materials, and other things like
that. We are also an at-risk
school district. We serve 72%
poverty, 20% ELL and 20% um sped
population as well as we serve
migrant children and their
families. These types of
learning opportunities change
lives, and I urge you not to
support House Bill 396.
Hi, I'm Scott McLaughlin. I'm
the executive director and then
we're we have a lot of concerns
about this bill. Um, I, I don't
want to get into a lot of
details, but I think I hit, I
hit upon one fundamental aspect
of the the spaceport um is, is
supposed to be supporting all
New Mexico, supporting the
region, but of course some of
the primary benefit of the
spaceport goes to the two
counties.
In my understanding of the way
things go, this was kind of the
deal at that time that for the
spaceport to come to an
existence, the counties needed
to support in it state needed to
support.
And the way that worked out in
terms of the capital
improvement, which is what the
GRT tax supports is about 1/3
has been coming from the
counties in terms of the, of the
infrastructure development over
the last 28.
If you change that formula, the,
the spaceport becomes purely a
state endeavor at that point, in
spite of the fact that it
The county is gonna and most of
the regional activity. So
consider how philosophically
that alters that balance and.
Thank you. Um, anybody on Zoom?
Travis. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair. Can you hear me?
Yes, you have one minute.
Thank you. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, uh, Travis Day, I'm a
single member of the Spaceport
Tax District and just speaking
on behalf of myself. Um, I just
want to highlight a couple
things um that I think are being
missed in this and and during
the creation of the Spaceport
Tax District, it was negotiated
upon all the parties that being
Doniani County, Sierra County,
and the state to make up the
structure of the board that
includes 2 members from each.
This board completely erodes
that. Sara County's citizens are
the same grocery receipts tax,
and if this bill was to pass, we
would be negatively impacted by
taking a voice away from our
constituents and being
discriminated against because we
do not have the same population
as Donana County
may have. Um, lastly, Madam
Chair, I want to be clear, and
it's, it's extremely
disheartening. Um, that is a tax
board member, I was never
involved in any discussions in
regard to this bill. It has
never once been brought before
the tax board, um, yet it works
to restructure us. It will
remove existing members,
including the two state
appointed members, and it really
delicates how we as a tax board
can use the money. Um, and I
just want to remind the
committee that a few weeks ago
you unanimously passed House
Bill 261 that gave the tax board
flexibility. Thank you.
David
Pato
David
Hello? Madam Chair, members of
the committee, yes, good.
Thank you. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
I'm here is the Sierra County
Attorney to express serious
constitutional concerns
regarding hospital 396, which
would alter the composition of
the Spaceport Tax District Board
in violation of the contract
clause of both the US and New
Mexico constitutions. Article 1,
Section 10 of the US
Constitution Article 2 Section
19 of the New Mexico
Constitution prohibits laws that
impair contractual obligations.
Our Supreme courts made clear
that when a government action
retroactively deprives the party
of its contractual benefits. It
constitutes an unconstitutional
impairment. Here the states here
Dona and account he entered into
a binding agreement in 2008 that
guaranteed equal representation
on the Spaceport tax district
board. This agreement was
reached after extensive public
input and formed the basis for
Sierra County's participation in
the district. House Bill 396
would break that agreement by
shifting board representation
disproportionately in favor of
Donana County, reducing Sarra
County to a single seat while
granting Don and a county 4.
This change strips your County
of meaningful voting power,
undermining its ability to
protect its interests, since
equal representation was a
material term of the agreement,
this legislative action
Pas Sierra County's contractual
rights. I just commit to
recognize these constitutional
violations and reject opposed
legislation and the alternative,
I respectfully request the
matter be tabled and submitted
to the New Mexico DOJ for
examination of the
constitutionality of the
proposed legislation. Thank you
so much. Sky.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair, um,
and committee, can you hear me?
Yes.
All right. My name is Mrs.
Cochran. I am a middle school
science teacher in Sierra County
with truth or consequences
municipal schools. This bill
negatively impacts not only our
salaries, but some of the
resources that I get to use with
my students. I teach 8th grade
science, which is an
introduction to physics. We have
gotten to um utilize a physics
curriculum where they have
hands-on learning opportunities
within the classroom. And so if
this bill passes, it will
negatively impact not only me as
an educator, but also
impacts these students and the
um opportunities that they have
within our school district, um,
as well as the opportunities
that they may have as they go
into high school with PLTW
classes like medical detectives
and anatomy or life science or
um sorry, life skills classes
where they get to actually um
put trade um skills into action.
So this would negatively impact
our school and our students.
Sabrina Bierner
Sabrina
Christie La Font.
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee. My name is
Christi Lafont, and I'm the
school board president for Truth
or Consequences School, um, as
has already been stated, this,
um, tax change to the gross
revenue, uh, receipts would
really impact our school and how
we use these funds for our STEM
education, um, and the students
that, uh, benefit from it. Uh,
we don't get a lot of benefits
from the spaceport as was
promised back when we voted for
it many, many years ago, but
this is one of
the very tangible benefits that
we do receive from Spaceport,
and I would urge you to oppose
this bill.
That is all. Thank you. OK, do
we, um, so I see that we've got
a sub.
So do we
Any opposition? We've moved this
up for discussion, um.
Let's go to the committee first
on the list is Representative.
Thank you. Thank you,
representative. Just a few
questions, uh.
First of all
Who
Um,
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Mason, we wanted that for the
from the Donana County, um
our, our county there changes um
are.
And you'll notice that the
change it very much.
Correct.
Um, a drafting mistake it's 75
to the county.
I'm, I mean, I'm sorry, the
other 25 is
And um
So
What I guess aren't aware that
they are still held.
So whole with their and that is
um because of a resolution that
the Donana County adopted in
2007 and that resolution lists
all the schools and a lot of
them, you know, that are upset
about this, um, are still
getting their funding. We would
not do that to the schools, but
drafting error on the first
bill, which we are correcting in
this isn't expressly said in the
bill, but
It goes to the county and the
county, and that hasn't changed
with our legislation that
County, the 25% and the
County has had this resolution
since 2007 to um almost 20 years
to get that funding. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Madam Chair
representative, uh,
representative, what about the
programs that the schools talked
about that.
Madam Chair, no, not at all.
They'll still get the funding,
um, as it's been.
I guess the main thing we got,
you know.
There was no spoke in favor of
your.
But you know,
In the in the county.
But we'll go on with other
questions. Uh, one question was
brought up.
That I had from the start that
we passed House Bill 261.
Which also dealt with
the spaceport.
I only thought of this late, so
I'm not you.
It's completely at the my
knowledge conflicts with this
building.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative.
Expands the spaceport and for
capital improvement.
Projects.
But in fact, that's what it was.
It moved the
The
wherever it goes now to another
committee where they could.
Actually, that's
Finally came to
But so to me it.
If we, if we pass both of these,
I, I mean that there's too much
different I mean
provide what things to remember
what it is you have some
information.
I do remember reading that bill
and looking at it in the, I
remember correctly, when looking
at that bill, I'm surprised the
current state statute that
suggested all the GRT tax.
can only be used to pay for the
bonds.
There's no mechanism in state
statute 5831-9 to allow them to
use the money for directly for
projects.
When you look at that
It says that the
Authority shall pledge
irrevocably a minimum of 75% of
the proceeds of revenue received
from the County Regional
Spaceport groce receipts tax.
To the payment of principal and
interest of the bond, or they
have they, do they have the
authority in existing existing
state statutes to use the money
directly for projects.
So if you pass that, then that
would have meant that you should
have already also modified the
state statute explicitly thank
you uh.
on the matters of
Of state stagger no idea, but
also when.
One of the testimonies in the
comments in the was that your
bill.
uh
Opposition of the
The Constitution
not so much the board but as um
they think it's retro, um, but
it's after this. That's all for
me.
Thank you. We go to uh
Representative Murphy.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, um.
If this bill goes through, and
I, I believe for me, what would
be the board makeup items that I
mentioned here based on the fact
Madam Chair representative and
expert, thank you very much. I
want to sort of circle back to
um well, first off, I appreciate
that explanation because I, I
assumed it was off the FIR at
roughly Madam Chair and roughly
15 million out of Donia out of
the Sierra, Madam Chair and
Representative, my, my, my main
concern with this there were and
sometimes the rules do need to
be changed, um, but this is
changing in a pretty dramatic
way, um, which I'm sure given
the size of this project, Madam
Chair and
Representative, there had to be
some, some pretty intense and it
seems like, you know, circling
back to to Mr. Mason's question
is, is that
Um,
By, by changing those rules,
that's really big by part the
the Donna County Commission. Is
that a fair
assessmentative Martin.
When these, you know, kind of a
pie in the sky back to our
communities if we invested in
this, um, you know, pay off our
bond, have um
The fun communities.
Um, Madam Chair representative,
uh, I wanna, yeah, circle back
to your or to.
The outlook for this project,
when I look at the, the total
outlays with capital outlays and
the operating budget, it appears
that you've got between your
operating budget and your um and
your revenue, you've got to.
Shortfall of about revenue and
your total outlays you've got um
quite a bit, about 8 million a
year and my worry is, is that
Madam Chair and unless there's
really uh what I would think of
as a solid business plan to to
replace virgin Galactic, uh,
this is going to be a big
problem.
Um, it's gonna really have to
be, um, I would assume, um,
Madam Chair and Representative
and expert that that $7 million
is probably in that spread
between the 8 and the and with
respect to that, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, there's got
to, um, uh, and, uh, the
auditor's office or make those
corrections, I would think there
was, there would be a madam
chair and representatives and
state statutes. My main worry
and I, I'm not sure I can, I
can, I can get this right.
But the main concern seems to be
taking the money away from the
local entities now if I
understood your your explanation
that might have been in the
original draft, is it not in
the.
on page to the schools is still
going to the bonds.
So nothing has, Madam Chair. I'm
sorry, I interrupt you
representative,
I just wanted to add, Madam
Chair, um, representative Murphy
that
Um
It goes to the county and the
county has the resolution that
adopted for all of the school,
and that's where I think the
disconnect they were getting it
from the county, but the bill
that the county gets that 25% in
the county has it in their
resolution, all these.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. I'll wrap up
here pretty quickly. I, I still
am, I'm very concerned about um
The
One party sort of changing a
very toughly negotiated, I'm
sure contract.
So that's principally my main
concern. The other concern is,
is that
Is that you have
Perhaps one county that is
basically coming to the state
and saying I we wasn't
originally part of the deal.
Now, Madam Chair and
Representative, there may be a
real justification for that, but
I think that would involve a
very extensive.
Stakeholder in discussion and
interim process and so as it
presently stands and for those
reasons.
Thank you. Um, Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you Representative. Um,
can you read sorry, Madam Chair
and uh
no um.
This is counts so much. So Mr.
Reynolds, are you here
representing the county
commission or are you here
representing the tax Armstrong.
And so why hasn't this ever gone
in in front of the tax board to
We were outnumbered in the vote
and it was given 2018, and this
lack of proper representation
has been a problem. Thank you,
Madam Chair and Mr. Reynolds,
and so there, this is a new tax
board though, correct? This is
not the old tax board that that
you say misappropriated money,
that there's a new tax board in
place now. I that
there's a new tax board in place
now. I that
the same behavior.
OK, so, Madam Chair
Representative, you're just
unhappy that you can't get the
vote. So Madam Chair
Representative, I um, I, I'm
concerned about the
constitutionality of uh what uh
David Pato brought up, um, I,
uh, represent Sierra County,
actually, you can see that on my
name plate, um.
I believe that uh there's a lot
of individuals that work at
Spaceport from Donana, from
Sierra.
And um I believe uh the same as
Mr. Murphy talked about moving
the goalposts.
Um, after, you know, this was a,
I'm sure a fairly thought out.
We were, we were hoping for pie
in the sky, not quite what we
got, but we still have hope.
Um, and so,
I'm from rural New Mexico, Madam
Chair.
And I really get a little bit
upset when
People want to treat you
differently because you're
smaller, you're more rural.
And uh
The benefit of spaceport is for
all of New Mexicans.
And I understand your point.
Um, but at this time, Madam
Chair, I, for the reasons
obviously state representative
de la Cruz.
commission and other
stakeholders throughout the
entire system that the.
I did not have the conversation
with you. The reason I felt this
was necessary inception.
That's right, that the
Benefits, as everyone has
mentioned that were claimed and
we were supposed to, we're
supposed to generate a billion
dollars every 5 years, according
to New Mexico state's revenue
assessment, um, that was in
2002, a benefit to the county.
When I plugged that into the
amount of tax dollars that we're
collecting for that benefit, it
comes out to less than 7, and
yet we're contributing 15
million.
And and the way the board is
made up right we need a good
business plan.
I've been asking for a good
business plan, cheers.
And they still are telling me
they're working on it with a
million dollars budget to create
a business plan that doesn't
change the economic since this
is a state agency that we're
funding here, we're the only you
down this path, we're gonna be
results for the next 20 to 30
years.
And with the way that when you,
when you, yes, uh, allocate more
money to specific for the
funding mechanism needs to be
what they're going to do that.
And when I bring it, so it's me
state's been the fishery of the
taps where I get all that at the
same time.
It, it, it feels whether it's
merited or not merit happened.
It's, it's, it is a very
important and expensive, and at
the same time think that it, it,
it's a disservice having their
input and yet we um
representative Matthews.
Thank you Madam Chair, um.
Thank you, Representative, and
thank you for getting it right.
Uh
I don't come from that part of
the state, um, but I was
actually at Spaceport
Dispatants.
Uh, for one of the Virgin
Galactic flights, which I have
to say was incredible in the
plane. I just, I've not, but um
and I
The first thing I, I kind of
thought of as you were talking
about the spaceport in Donana
County, um.
was at Virgin Galactic, and I
think it actually has a somewhat
slightly different name for that
piece of the Virgin Galactic
Empire, but um
was certainly spending a great
deal of money at the Spaceport
that day, not only dealing with
the flight, but, but for all of
us and the food they were
providing and the tours and the
all kinds of things, and I was
walking around, um, asking
people, um, not where they
bought the.
wandering around and asking the
people who
Work in where they lived.
And the, and it wasn't a
scientific study, I don't mean
to suggest it was, but I don't
think it's uh they lived in, in
Las Cruces.
Um
And in fact, the night early, we
have been put up in a hotel and
then a bus would have taken us.
To from Las Cruces, so, um,
Obviously,
Las Cruces has some substantial
role and uh we didn't, I, we
didn't take up that offer and
instead we
Um
and uh
So I'm, I'm wondering, um, has
Don in County determined how
much business
Various kinds of income is
generated by this by the
spaceport Representative
Matthews, um, the only
determination that I'm aware of
is a New Mexico stand in that.
The study showed
in 2020 direct contribution,
$150 million.
60, I'm sorry,
that being of the Donnata people
employed there, um, they also
calculated 6,731.
visitor days at 31,090 for a
total of 2.1 so that brought up
the total revenue $18.3 million
in receipts of some kind. Yes,
ma'am,
and
looking at, uh, you're right,
Las Cruces because they have a
lodging $10,000 Las Cruces
benefited 583 and the county.
Uh, roughly $45,000 is a lot
well for the GRT tax.
And 297 for the uh rest of the
tax. I don't remember exactly
when the galactic flights
started taking off, uh, updates
since the since there's been
this influx of activity.
Um
Ma'am, I cannot, I can only
speak to what um spoke about
yesterday and what he provided
with us.
I think this.
Man representative, um.
Whenever you get into a new
venture like this, particularly
there's expectations.
And all kinds of thing and um
kind of
Just feels a little bit like
buyer's remorse.
Um
And I'm kind of wondering, to be
sure, I, I don't have a crystal
ball, but
Um, watching there is obvious to
me that this could be.
Uh, an incredibly valuable.
Um
I guess I'm kind of asking if it
had generated a, would you be
asking to share that with Sierra
County. I think that's a very
good good question. Um, I would,
I would really hope, I wish they
did generate the $1 billion and
as a matter of fact, if
If, if we didn't have so many
problems in the County that this
money could have been used
because we have
Health problems we have
infrastructure, we have 38
colonials that have needs.
And if I were just getting a
return on this money.
And I believe so that we're not
burying the 90, yes, I would
feel much happier and I would
have no trouble turning up
money.
I, I think, I think how, how do
we represent like all the
services necessary for the
people we serve.
When this investment is not
returned if it was if it was
you're asking though.
in this legislation for the for
the state to change the
distribution when the people
were testifying, hadn't been any
discussions.
Uh, between Donana County.
And Sierra County about working
on a compromise, talking about
how to make changes.
Um, is, is that, um, essentially
accurate.
Um, that there has a approached
the state.
By having both counties approach
the state and say, here's some
things that we could.
Uh, no, that has not happened. I
can only testify to the behavior
of. And, uh, Madam Chair, um,
this.
Um
You're here as county
commissioner.
But the county commissioner Dona
Anne County has not enacted an
ordinance or any other kind of
authorization to send you here
and
Uh, on behalf of like.
Madam Chair Representative
Matthews, we have not acted
officially to send me here.
That's correct.
Uh, we're of the other
commission, yes, we have work
session hours and uh all 5 were
in agreement that this is
This doesn't change anything
that exists. It doesn't.
It doesn't really to all the
schools. The bonds are still
being paid off. There's still
another 27 $28 million
responsible to pay the bonds
this doesn't stop any of that,
it just gives us a a bigger
voice.
So that wouldn't being done by
this board that we have some
ability to at least slow it
down.
With no, with, with a majority,
never having a majority in any
of the votes.
We voted against almost every
action that was illegal.
And Madam Chair and
representative, I'd just like to
add that when I became aware of
this, um, I asked uh Reynolds to
help me to get the protect the,
you know, Madam Madam Chair
representative and commissioner,
I understand your, your it does
occur to me that bringing
legislation
And ask you
Existing legislation without and
I
So I rather approach and come
back to the state.
If that would help the situation
or not. I, yeah, I don't, I, it
bothers me that there's not a
conversation happening. Thank
you.
Representative Serrado.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Chair, an expert for
the conversation colleague asked
the same thing when I stepped
out. I apologize,
um, but how it was there's a
formation document we're gonna
have.
Thank you for that and Madam
Chair and uh Representative and
expert um.
I, I, I this is just a a
question about the statute in
and of itself because it's
repeated in the, the, so it says
in here on page 7,
a minimum of 75% goes to the
district, and then no more than
25% goes to uh the counties, the
counties, um, why is a phra a
minimum of and in the original.
And the reason why I bring that
up is that it's repeated on page
9, where it says the authorities
shall pledge a minimum of 75% of
the proceeds. And the and and
and to explain further.
Um
I, I'm just curious why, why
that's freeing because of the
fears that's being expressed by
the school districts that um
that it seems like that would be
the leniency that could propose
this change. Language comes from
and then again, um why it's
repeated later on page 9, Madam
Chair, uh, representative.
The text that you see in this,
the same language that was
actually in the original
document, it's not changed.
Um, the reason it's highlighted
here is because uh when I first,
when we first talked about in
that state to do it, they made
I think you bet. I'm sure thank
you, uh, expert. I'll come back
to that in a second. I think I
have a little more question
that's a little nuanced on that,
but I, I appreciate that and I
appreciate the correction that's
in here that sets you on the
bottom of page 8, again this is
just trying to understand as a
stylistic or that this means
something.
Um, it says interest and
principle, interest and is
scratched out to be principal
and interest. What is that a
consequence? Is that stylistic?
Why is that that was actually
the Thank you. All right, so
those are kind of my, my
baseline questions kind of get
to what I'm I'm curious about,
uh, and, and while I appreciate
the, the, the core of what you
want to do is, is adjust the,
the setup and how that that
board is made up and everything,
um, it does also direct the
spaceport Authority to then
spent utilize the 75% they get
from this.
For paying back the bond. And so
my that that seems pretty
consequential and doesn't really
necessarily replace it with any
other funds that they would be
able to have that they were not
anticipating. So, uh, again, I'm
just kind of curious.
Does it replace it with some of
their funding in some other way,
or, you know, because again, now
that that's 75% they've been
relying on um previously, that
was just to be used for, you
know, uh, for purposes in
accordance with the provisions
of their regional Spaceport
District Act on page 7, now it
specifically says payment of the
principal and interest. I is
there anything that says that
gives the mother flexibility
with essentially now that um
that.
That chunk being directed very
clearly directed the 75%, the
75% is actually to only cover
the bonds.
The money that that money
provided by the bones to $70
million is what actually is used
to fund the projects.
So the statute was clear saying
that the 75% is only available
to pay for the bonds.
And now the bonds are the
mechanism that they use, that's,
that was the original document.
Yes, 5, if you look at 5167.
limits use for the GRT revenue,
a district may enter into
contracts with the authority,
that's the tax report to which
the authority may issue bonds.
That's the spaceport A4.
Under the spaceport Development
Act.
Now the bonds are for the
purpose.
Um, financing, planning,
designing, engineering, and
construction of the regional
spaceport.
Projects and district and
projects.
The the the GRT tax was never
Supposed to be used for anything
except paying for the bonds.
This board has tried or has
actually used the money for
other projects.
OK, thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
thank you for that. I, I just
have some concerns and then
again looking at the spaceport
Authorities, uh, you know,
analysis of this, I mean they
they spoke today said not this
will be surprising, um, but they
also.
feel that this is limiting it
for that bond repayment as well.
So I, um, in their synopsis, it
mentions that as well. And
And what's interesting to me is
that they also note this piece
that um a bond payment terms can
easily repeatedly be modified
after the bond is issued. This
will this will lower confidence
in Mexico's bonds. That, that's
pretty consequential in our
state. We rely on our bond
ratings, or at least in Santa,
I'll acknowledge that we're
pretty reliant on our strong
bond ratings. Um, but they
specifically say we are
recommending that the New Mexico
Finance Authority be consulted
for their opinion on this
matter. Have you consulted with
NMFA or, or any of the investing
arms on this on how this.
How this might affect the the
overall bond rating or any
changes in that.
Adam Chair and representative
and expert man um.
This doesn't change the bond
payoff in any any way or form.
So, um, it doesn't affect
anything that uh that all the
payment, the bond, the the way
the money is used to pay the
bonds reserve, it doesn't
affect, it just doesn't change
any of that. I'm just asking
mostly for the when the bonds
were paid off that we, that we'd
be allowed to, uh, sunset. Madam
Chair representative, and I, and
I appreciate that expert. I, I,
it just, it seems there are
other aspects of this that have
also changed as well, which is
why I, I come back to this and,
and it it would be helpful and I
know that I'm sure you're
looking at how
we can continue to work on this.
It would be helpful to have some
of that feedback as well from
those that are that experience
more than I am on how we're
shaping and changing these,
these bonds, um.
Uh, and, and I guess the the
other thing that going back to
my original question about the
original language like versus uh
minimum of 70. My concern is
that because of however the
Spaceport Authority funds right
now, it, it seems from what I'm
reading from the analysis from
the bill, that perhaps they're
using
A different allocation for
paying back the bonds and that
there's going to be this hole.
My my concern about that is that
if it's minimum of 75%, that
couldn't that mean they could
use more of that and give less
to the county to make up any
differences, and that that
change is probably what's
creating this kind of tension
that's happening. Um, that's my
concern on that one. I don't
know if you want to respond to
that or anything along those
lines. Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Sarato, you are
correct. The 25%, which is the
money look at the original
document, which.
Hasn't changed on page 7.
On page 7, it says that the 25%
is uh the last uh line in that
uh last uh next to the last
paragraph. It says the governing
body of the county imposing a
county Regional space for
grocery reces tax may retain
retain no more than 25% of the
county Regional spaceport
groceryces tax for for
spaceport-related priority body
of the county. That's, that's
been the same language
throughout the whole process
from 2006.
The county could, if, if they
wanted to change with how they
use the money and apply it
directly toward the bonds or
however both counties, County
and Donana County have chosen to
use that to fund STEM projects
at the schools.
That's that began in 2007 in
Dona County and also in Sierra
County. This is the stump, this
is the money schools have been
referring to.
We are not changing this, this,
this.
This bill does not change
anything that wasn't that
affects the school in fact at
the county's pleasure, we do
have the authority and the and
the right to use that money for
other projects, but, uh, as
you've noticed when people's
comments, that's not a good
decision to change it. So we've
left it like that for now, 19
years, and we plan to leave it
like that until the bonds are
paid off. Thank you for thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you
expert for that explanation. I,
I am still listening to the
debate on this. I, you know, I
share some of the concerns of my
colleagues just again, when
we've heard from different.
and again, the, the concern of
how this would affect spaceport
and those jobs in there.
Thank you, Representative
Parajan.
Mathematicians that I had
originally were asked, um, but
I, I just have one more point,
But um
Um, working a work session. I
share a lot of the, some of the
on our bond readings. Thank you.
So, um,
Just in listening to the
discussion today. I, I realize
that you've got some legitimate
concerns, um, and, and I, I
think that those are things that
should
There should be some ongoing
conversations, um, starting with
The school districts. Uh, when
I, um, when I saw the bill and,
and I know that there was um
issues raised. I um
I, I contacted getson School
District and some of some of the
other ones and um they had
legitimate concerns, and I think
when you don't
Bring people into your
stakeholders in, I think that
there's lots of reasons for
people to be uh suspicious of
what's going on. I also think
that uh conversations need to
happen with Sierra County. Um, I
mean those are our neighbors,
um, I understand if we're paying
the bulk and wanting to change
some of that, we need to have
those conversations and, you
know, it's a
Sierra County, I know is um it
generates the least amount of
the GRT, uh, but it's a large
portion of their county funds,
and so I know we don't, you and
I don't represent Sierra County,
but as a state representative,
we need to look at how that
affects all New Mexicans. And so
I think that we need to sit down
to the uh and be good neighbors
and have those conversations.
And so I know that um that the
regional space uh port District
Acts.
Um, sunsets in 2029.
It seems like there should be a
lot of discussions before that
the sunset and um.
I think having everybody who is
a stakeholder, uh, should be
involved in those discussions
and so that's just my input and
so with that, what's the will of
the committee,
uh, representative dela Cruz.
All right. Patrick's take the
role.
Representative Armstrong
Representative De la Cruz.
Representative Fernandez.
Representative Lent.
Representative Mason
Representative Matthews.
Yes, yes, the table.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Pajon.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair
Yes
Madam Chair.
Yes. Man the final tally for the
uh tabling motion, 10 votes,
yes, 0 votes no.
Thank you, like I said, I would
recommend that you go back and
talk to the stakeholders and I
think um you take your pils been
tabled.
Thank you very much, uh, Madam
Chair and committee for the
discussion and we will do um
possibly have a special, you
know, before the appropriate
committee handle today. Thanks.
So we've got um HB 415
Representative Duncan up next,
uh, by request of the sponsors,
uh, HB 574 and HB 476 have been
rolled.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
Um
A boss I got a promotion there
Madam Chair.
A boss was talking to his
employee one day and he said,
uh,
You've been late 3 times this
week, you know what that means?
Mature
That's not exactly where this
bill is going 4:15, um, we're
trying to make a clean up for
when employees on the earned
sick leave, providing the use of
emerg sick leave is not
foreseeable and employees shall
notify the employer orally or in
writing. Now for a practical,
I'm gonna explain what happens
in her life notification is not
given.
In a timely
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you very much.
My name is Barbara Tedro and I
am a provider in Farmington.
I've got 5 licensed, um,
nationally accredited childcare
centers with over 125 employees.
And I'm also the policy chair
for the New Mexico Early
Childhood Association, and to
keep this short and sweet, um,
what happens is the current law
regarding earned sick leave
lacks clarity in calling
requirements, creating
significant challenges for
industries like home health and
especially childcare. Um, simply
because we must comply with
strict regulatory mandates.
Childcare centers operate under
the licensing rules set by the
Early Childhood and Education
Care department, which requires
specific teacher to child
ratios.
At a minimum number of CPR first
aid certified staff to be on
site at all times. These are not
flexible guidelines, they are
legal mandates designed to
ensure the safety and well, and
I want to be clear, this law
does not change any benefits of
the healthy Workplace Act.
By restoring the ability of
employers to require employees
to follow a written call-in
policy, House Bill 415 ensures
that businesses can maintain
compliance while still honoring
employees' rights to take.
Thank you. And do you already,
do we have anybody here in favor
if you'd like to.
Come up front. You've got one
minute.
Uh, certainly, you know, the
current law just with its
language as soon as practicable
for small businesses does cause
issues in terms of staffing and
and notification. Uh, we do
believe the change to, to align
it with employer manage.
Staffing for predictable while
still ensuring that the statute
calls for. So we just do believe
that this is gonna help.
Make it more predictable for
both employees and employers.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee, my name is Kim
Lagant. I'm a registered
lobbyist for Good Samaritan
Personal Care, uh, AMR ambulance
and the New Mexico Childcare and
Education Association Hospital
for 15 seeks to clarify the
notification requirements for
employees using earned sick
leave under the Healthy
Workplace Act, while the intent
of the original bill was to
provide flexibility for
employees. The current language
requiring employees to provide
notice as soon as practical is
vague.
And creates operational
challenges for industries like
childcare, healthcare, and
emergency services. Uh, we ask
for your support. Thank you.
Madam Chair member workforce
solutions. I'd say we're on the
supportive side of news, what
our investigators, except when
it snows in Artesia, um, tell us
is the, the, the lack an
opportunity for an employer to
put, here's my expectation when
Vince Moffett.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Vince Moffett. I'm the
CEO of the Basin Health
companies providing home health,
hospice and personal care
services in Northwest New
Mexico. I urge you to pass this
bill to align with existing
employer call policies allowing
employees to call in up to 2
hours after the shift creates
serious operational changes,
particularly in home health,
where timely coverage directly
impacts patient safety and
quality of care. Employees,
employers already have fair.
policies that balance employee
needs and business continuity,
delayed notifications disrupt
scheduling, increased costs, and
put medically fragile patients,
including bedbound individuals
at risk. I asked the committee
to support a solution that
protects both the employees and
those who depend on reliable
care. Thank you.
Ruth Porter.
Um, good afternoon, members of
the committee, Madam Chair, my
name is Ruth Porta. I am the
owner of La Esperanza Preschool.
Childcare is one of the
industries that has mandated the
staffing to child ratios. The
staffing shortage can
potentially cause us to close
classrooms, causing parents to
lose a day of work. Since the
passage of the Healthy workforce
Act, which has no protection for
employees, employers, we have
experienced a bit heating
absentee.
some employees calling in sick
just minutes before the
beginning of the shift or after
the shift, and because of the
law, we cannot ask for any proof
of illness or emergency. We have
seen an increase in callings on
Mondays and Fridays with
insufficient time to arrange
coverage. The constant callings
and turnover create high stress
and more on to the staff who
consistently show up for work.
So, we decided to stuff and as a
consequences, our payroll
increased by 30%. Please vote
just to HB 415, so employers can
start with the start racist
mandates can provide quality
services to New Mexico families.
Thank you.
Robin Goodnight.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee. I also would like to
speak in support of this bill.
I believe it can be a win-win
situation between employers and
employees.
When employers like myself and
other early childhood education
employees respect and understand
that we all have lives. However,
we are responsible for the lives
of children in our care.
And it is very important that we
have advanced notice.
And the ability to
Get coverage, even if that means
my myself as the director to go
into the classroom and change
schedules. So I think
I support this bill in order for
the employer and the employee to
have a win-win situation where
we can support the employee and
this employee can support the
organization by following
policies set for.
Ray Janamio
Madam Chair, uh, members of the
committee, uh, my name is Ray
Jaamillo. I'm the owner,
director of Alpha School for
Young Children, um, in Las
Cruces, New Mexico nationally
accredited uh preschool. I have,
um, approximately 160 children
with uh nearly 30 staff, and uh
I just stand, I just wanted to
say um that I, I ask you and
encourage you to vote yes uh to
HB 415. For everything that uh
my colleagues have already uh
mentioned today so for um for
time, I won't.
uh reiterate some of those
things, but, uh, I, I ask you to
support this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. OK, do we have
I'm opposed to any changes of
the health workforce.
Act
Uh, HB 415. We have such few
benefits as we know what we
need. This is very, everybody's
gonna use it.
I, I sick leave,
my everything. I've actually
worked for companies that have
been sued.
We definitely don't want that.
Buenos Aires.
My label.
Too.
De Los Cambus a
De Los Cambusla
big but the beneficial.
Parami familia los travajadore
Mexico.
I will translate, um, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Cruz Gonzalez. I'm
here today against the changes
to HB 415 because they will not
benefit uh my family and workers
in, uh, the healthy workforce
Act as it is. Hello, good
afternoon, Madam chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Aurora Ortiz and I'm
a mother of 3 children, and I'm
a proud to support my community
with my hard work.
Just like many other immigrants
workers. I'm also a member of
the Central de Guaddi Dre.
An organization that fights for
the rights of immigrant workers,
with over 5500 members in
Albuquerque.
When the pandemic began, we were
recognized.
As essential workers.
we're not given the opportunity
to work and keep New Mexico's
economy flowing.
After we and a stronger
coalition has paid sick leave.
It has been extremely
beneficial, not only for the
workers, public health.
But also for businesses.
We understand the intent where
we are concerned about HB 415
because he has the potential to
create barriers for workers to
use the basically that we
earned.
Workers are the driving force of
New Mexico's economy.
And without us, businesses
cannot thrive. Thank you. Thank
you for your Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Zack as it is, balances
the needs of workers and would
undermine the act by allowing
the current standard that is
failures to fill out, take the
obligation that workers already
have of how workers can comply
with that, it would invite
employers to impose new barriers
and block workers.
The act as it is has kept our,
we are due to reject this. No,
sure. Alright, let's go on. Do
you have any questions from the
committee, uh, Chair Dela Cruz.
Representative, what does the
word?
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, that's the
problem when we've had this
doesn't change anything in this
What does this do for that
situation?
we all know and we all have
employees, still good employees,
when that happened this time it
was just the phone.
Madam Chair, representative, um.
My company has an employee
handbook and we spent a lot of
time developing that employee
handbook with our employees
because um I think every um
employer wants to be responsive
and, and responsible uh to their
employees. And when we went
through that process, this is
something that we talked about a
lot and I got my, my managers in
and, you know, we have people
that work in the office and
people that work in the field,
and there was a very
Robust discussion about this,
and I think that those employee
manuals really address this very
well. I think they address it in
a fair way possible employers
and I think most are, um, will
use that to make sure that they
can manage their business but
also protect their employers. So
think about its representative.
Pretty much the act, it only
changes the representative, yes
sir, that's it.
Representative Matthews.
Thank you, Ms. Pedro, um, do you
have?
Madam Charon most of the
children that we serve are on
childcare contracts.
And those hours are listed at
just a number of hours they can
utilize per week.
My, my mainly 50 hours per week,
a lot of those are workers that
their schedules change, so
staffing childcare centers that
are mandated to have 2 people
qualified with first aid and CPR
at all times is a problem when
the openers, two openers, one
calls in sick or doesn't call in
sick is the problem. They don't
notify you and you don't, we
have conflicting and we are
breaking on site.
That is, that's the verb here is
how we can have the staff on
site meet regulation
requirements set forth by those
children. What happens now is we
have to stop families at the
door and say we're
um, it is only 2 people who see
like that, Madam Chair and
Representative Matthews, the two
people on site at all times is a
mandate from for opening hours
and after that it goes per
classroom, so you must have
qualified staff to meet
teacher-child ratios per class,
always 4 to 1.
So you have to have.
Staring at 6:30 in the morning
pretty much every classroom has
to have a teacher in that room
and then you have to take roll
and as soon as that 5th child is
gonna walk to the door, you have
to have Madam Madam Madam Chair,
do they have to have special
training in addition to like CPR
or other.
Madam Chair and Representative
Matthews, yes, and especially
with your 5 star and your
nationally accredited um
childcare centers, you have to
have qualified teachers with
their trainings, their degrees,
on site. There is also a
regulation that states you can
have no more than 3 primary
caregivers within one day, and
that is set forth by ECCD. So
when you have a call in and you
don't have a qualified teacher
that is one of those primary
teachers for that child, and you
have to just.
throw a floater into there or
the director walks in and covers
so you can get the substitute,
then you have the two teachers,
then you have the closer, you're
breaking ratio right there,
I have over 100 and I'm sorry,
Madam Chair and Representative
Matthews, um, I.
Madam Chan, Representative
Matthews, yes, I'm fortunate
enough that most of the
employers and
Um, the average turnover in
childcare, Madam Chair, um.
So before healthy workplaces was
enacted. What, what was the
policy on people calling her
ill.
Madam Chair and Representative
Matthews, the normal policy for
most childcare centers, the 2
hour requirement before text
message or via phone physically
talking to them to tell them I
am stops there, then it is up to
the director to find the proper
personnel, and if she can't find
the personnel, that director or
owner themselves will be that.
OK, so my chair and instead if I
understand correctly, that the 2
hour time period.
gives you or the the business,
the opportunity to find the
replacement, is that right?
Madam Chair and Representative
Matthews, that's chair, um.
Miss Tedro, I
The healthy workplaces provides,
I think it's 64 hours.
of paid sick leave a year, am I
right?
Madam Chair and Representative
Matthews, yes, that's correct.
And are you suggesting in any
way?
Uh, Madam Chair and and Madam
Chair, uh, when
You mentioned the
Uh, it's, that the staffman
fills the voids when somebody
doesn't show up, um, do you ever
have situation uh you don't have
that, and if so,
What happens
To the family that's relying
upon you to provide childcare.
Madam Chair and Representative
Matthews unfortunately, we have
had to close classrooms and from
the association we have done um
surveys with all of our members
around the state and at least
every childcare center has had
to close classrooms due to not
having proper stas employ those
families cannot go to work or go
to sleep.
Um
Madam Chair Representative does.
He says it's heavily regulated,
this easy, ECD and for Madam
Chair and Representative
Matthews, they do not enforce
the healthy Workplace Act, but
they enforce all of the rules
and Madam Chair, uh.
Representative if they don't.
Uh, uh, if you violate the ECECD
rules. What can you, what, what
are the punishments for that?
Madam Chair and Representative
Matthews, licensing will cite
you, you, it will be on a
survey. You will have a
citation, and if that citation
is deemed up to the department
up to a certain level, and
again, that's up to the
department if they come in and
see that this is the first time
we're gonna write you up,
correct the situation, that
employer and director, childcare
center, must come up with a plan
on how to keep that from
happening again. So we must
submit written recommendation.
back to licensing to say this is
how we are going to fix it. And
most of the time that will be,
we will have to overstaff and
have overstaffed just in case we
without notice, um, to find
coverage.
And I'm sorry, um, Madam Chair
and Representative Matthews to
continue if it happens again,
licensing can up to a point, uh,
fine, the fines can be up to
$5000.
Wow
Uh, Madam Chair, um,
If you, if this pass.
Um, and it allows you to have a
pursuant to a written policy,
Madam Chair and Representative
Matthews, I, I do have a written
policy that is in my handbook.
We did not take it out when
healthy workplaces came in, we
have just
Um, when we go through
orientations with a new
employee, we give them all of
the paperwork regarding the sick
leave, how they earn it, how
they can ask for time off. Um,
we say we do have a policy that
was in place. We cannot enforce
it, but we highly suggest that
if you can, that is what we did
for 23 years prior, we
understand, um, urgency,
emergencies happen, Healthy
workplace Act protects you,
however, to run a regulated
childcare business, madam chair.
Uh, Mr.
What happens if uh you're,
you're not, you're, I'm in, I'm
your employee, for example, and
at 4:30 in the morning, I'm
feeling fine, but it's starting
to get a flu or something.
What, what do you do? What, what
would be your policy?
In reference to that, Madam
Chair and Representative
Matthews, the policy is, of
course, because we are dealing
with um young families and we
don't wanna make any other
people sick, um, with that
advanced notice. Um, there are
times and emergencies have you
that most people in the
childcare industry are mothers
themselves. We've had families
with child care centers work
with their employees. I just
need to know that's the I mean
you have people in your staff.
How easy is it to
to just find people to come in
and and work in a child care
center. Is that even possible?
Madam Chair Representative
Matthews, unfortunately, no, um,
childcare, we are going through
a still a workforce any factors
such as um float painting
teachers to have bachelor's
degree, um, finding qualified
staff in itself is tough, um,
most centers have had to take
the option to try to overstaff
and um there, the downfalls with
overstaffing is, of course,
income and childcare only comes
from two sources. It comes from
family or it comes from a
private pay tuition fee, they do
not change.
So we are limited with that
income. The only um factor that
we can take into play and
unfortunately it falls on the
backs of those private pay
parents of that.
And men do the workers also have
to have like that,
Madam Chair Representative So,
Madam Chair,
if I'm understanding, even if
you have some people who you can
pre-qualified, if, if I, if I
can say that because Madam Chair
and and Representative Matthews,
that's correct, every employee
must have a background check and
they those take usually.
Ranging a good time, turnaround
time is 5.
Madam Chair, uh, Miss Tedro, do
you have any short?
Madam Chair and Representative
New Mexico is a childcare desert
in itself.
Most childcare centers um to
um,
that the handbook, even though
we have it according to law, we
cannot, we, we cannot follow
that or it we can urge our
employees to follow it, however,
legally, we must abide by the
healthy Workplace Act, which
right now kind of laid out what
you look like with I've I've,
Madam Chair and Representative,
uh, we, most childcare centers
have floaters, um, are what we
call them, and we have extra
staff on site and they are
people that are relieve people
for lunches, so they're not set
designated to fill in the
classroom, but they're set to
relieve teeth when they need to
take their lunch breaks, or if
an emergency arises, they can
step in. So, and that sounds
entirely 6 page bills not until
chair and representative, uh,
uh, one the, uh, either got to
have a policy in place that if
this bill goes into effect, then
that will.
I represented.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, presenters, uh, thank you
representative for the bill. I
do have some questions, um, all
right, and I think um what I
appreciate from this
conversation is we're looking at
this from the best intents of
both the businesses and the
workers, because I think that's
really that relationship is, is
valuable and important. Um, I, I
kind of share the concern with
my colleague, just this idea
that it's kind of a broad idea,
um, and
If it employee were to feel that
the written policy of an
employer, um, what they.
Madam Chair and Representative
Sato, um, in working, if you
looked at the FIR um Secretary
Nair from um Department of
Workforce Solutions, um, did
state that if there is not a
policy in place that the
Department of Workforce
solutions could actually help
small businesses right a policy
that would be conducive to that
business, to the ends of the
healthy workplace. Thank you.
And and along those same lines,
uh, madam, uh, uh, Madam Chair,
and, and experts.
So, but, but what if the policy
is already written and for
whatever reason, it's not, it's
felt not to be, you, you know,
there, there's just a
misalignment in what it's
thought as being effectively
practical and reasonable. What
would happen?
Madam Chair and represents that,
um, so the, according to the
Healthy Workplace Act right now,
um, if an employee has any
questions, any, um, complaints,
um, they are allowed to contact
the Department of Workforce
Solutions, so we feel that that
would be one of the areas that
they could say, I don't think
this policy needs. I think it's
over burdensome. I don't think
it aligns with the healthy
Workplace Act. Can we take a
look at it that employee would
be allowed to take that policy,
turn it into Department of
Workforce Solutions and have.
And um.
Madam chair and representatives.
So, and, and I don't know if
you've gone through the dispute
of a, of one of these before,
but, but whatever your insights
are would be helpful. So in the
case that right now that an
employer is feeling that.
You know, a, a use of, of this
healthy work work workplace um
act was abused or like someone,
someone reported late, you know,
because they weren't paying
attention there's a million,
I'm, I'm sure there's reason a
million bad reasons to, um.
Have you ever been able to turn
towards your written policy as
an example of a practicable, um
solution towards uh uh reporting
to you. Is that possible to
utilize your current, what's
currently you currently have
written as an example of what.
Madam Chair and representative
Serato, um, we've had long
discussions with legal counsel
from the Department of Work
Workforce Solutions, and they've
made it perfectly clear that we
can have those written policies
now, however, we can refer to
them, but we can't ever say I
can reprimand you for not
following them, and I can take
action against you for not
following them because we can't
follow them.
The way the law is written right
now, there is no recourse to go
back to our employee policies.
Thank you. So that is very
helpful. Thank you, uh, expert
for this and um, OK, so you guys
are kind of implicitly. It was
kind of funny when I was looking
through it. I was like, oh, why
don't we just do this? And then
I did see in the FIR they also
had a solution, and I'm curious
why would, would it be?
Um, uh, unfriendly to propose
instead of, you know, removing
that practicable, just adding or
pursuant to the written policy
of an employer. And and I think
they have theirs in in the FIR
they say it's slightly
differently, but the effective
pursuant to the written policy
of an employer or in the absence
of written policy as soon as
practical. I just saw they also
had it. Um, what would be the
concern with having it written
out that way. And the reason why
I mentioned that is that while
this secretary at this exact
moment may agree with, you know,
that that's how it should be
interpreted, should that shift
for
a million reasons, right, as we
know this is shifting place, um,
you know, that would make it
very clear that it doesn't
exist, that that would be the
the the format and that are, you
know, written policy would be it
in absence of that, and I'm
curious if that would be
friendly in any way.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, as soon as practical and
connect, that's, that's the
Actually, if, if the wording
states, um, their suggestion of
written policy or as soon as
practical if they don't have a
policy. So I need to correct you
and I don't want to um do that
at the table, um, but I do
believe that the suggested
wording takes care of that if
there is a policy, there is a
solution. And Madam Chair, I
just want to say I appreciate
both answers because, you know,
I, I did give an example which
was just a straight up or and
then I also gave the example. So
I think you answered both of
those, um, you know, I, I
personally would prefer the that
at least that language in that
sense, um, that's my only
hesitancy.
Because I'll be, I'll be honest
with you. I just don't, um,
Well, no, I know, I, I
appreciate this conversation. I,
I, it just makes it a little
difficult that like there will
be these gaps so represented are
you suggesting an amendment, uh,
Madam Chair, if, if the
representative will be open to
it, I would gladly
introduce that amendment.
Madam Chair Representative, it's
already in the legs. Madam Chair
Representative So on page 2 of
the fiscal impact report at the
very top. It says, um,
essentially uh delete that
section that you already have
deleted and replace it with
pursuant to the written policy
of the employer or in the
absence of written policy as
soon as practical.
And then, and Madam Chair and
Representative, I think this can
addresses the concerns of a lot
of the folks that came forward
today, um, that had concerns
because on one side, people are
a policy they want to believe
that it's effective that uses a
reasonable basis, however, you
know, there are recourse to
that, that not be reasonable if
it's you have to tell me 5 hours
ahead or something wild, you
can't call in because your kid
got sick, you know, there's
something ridiculous, you know,
that they do have action.
However, this does ensure that
those those employees that don't
get a handbook have some, some
movement on there.
Um, so that would be my
recommendation, Madam Chair, is
that strike that same section
that the representative has and
replace it with the language
that we see in the FIR. So
representative, would you see
that as a friendly amendment?
Yes, ma'am. Is there any um so.
Already.
Anybody else, uh, for questions.
OK, what's the
Well the
Committee.
right.
Patrick to take the role
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Dela Cruz, yes,
Representative Fernandez.
Representative Lee,
Representative Mason.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy
Representative Palehon.
Representative Serrado,
Representative Parajun.
Vice chair.
Madam Chair, yes, Madam Chair,
final tally for the Dupa has in
