Keeping we are rolling house
bill eighty three.
And so we will just start with
house bill one sixty three after
we cover all.
Representative and in our new.
Representative don't get your.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente there.
Representative little.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Representative masons.
Representative Matthews here.
Madam chair.
Madam chair here.
Madam chair you have a quorum
wonderful already if we can get
Representative a lot.
I also point.
Sure
that two freshmen here today
right yeah.
All right right over there was.
Welcome to past customers to.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Representative today I'm
joined with my co sponsor
representative time maybe about
Maria and.
This one.
Thank you can you hear me now.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you representatives so I'm
here with the Representative
timing of all my a and R. bill
here is house bill one sixty
three which would help the
businesses most affected by
recent economic crises and give
them much needed tax relief of
the this bill would affect
businesses that are fewer than
five employees and it would give
them a twenty five percent gross
receipts tax cut small
businesses are the backbone of
New Mexicos economy and
especially the smallest entities
also referred to as micro
businesses are what employ fewer
than four employees and are
really growing our economy we
believe this hyper targeted
relief to these small businesses
will make a substantial impact
on lowering their tax burden and
allowing them to not only create
jobs to but to make investments
in their businesses well paying
their employees higher wages.
The more money in the small
businesses pockets could mean
that they can help revitalize
our communities across the
state.
This really for most greatly
impact smaller more rural
communities that of the smallest
employment per establishment
ratios according to the
department of workforce
solutions so this bill would
really affect the small
businesses and give them much
needed relief and I'll turn it
over to Representative anymore I
am.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee
sorry this one I'm I'm so used
I'm used to singing if I have a
Mike in my hand so so if I go
into song please forgive me
just.
but
I just wanted to say a few words
about this bill that it is for
those smaller businesses which
many of those small businesses
are women and minority owned in
New Mexico and this is the and a
lot of them are the start up of
these businesses so this is
their their their lake up this
is the the small step that we
can do to give them that that
foundation and give them a
little bit more capital in order
for them to be able to grow and
and to make up those of those
steps that now I've a I have
read in there that the that
there's some comments that say
that this might keep them from
growing but I personally don't
believe that but businesses want
to grow businesses want when
when you get to the point to
where you need more people you
usually have the revenue in
order to be able to do that so
that there are that that's
whether they're hoping to be
this could be again that small
step in order to keep them here
because there's many businesses
right now that can conduct
business not having to be in the
state and they're thinking that
okay do I need to make the
decision because it's too
expensive to stay here or go
somewhere else and still be able
to conduct my business we want
to keep them here we want that
we want that revenue here we
want them them to employ people
here we want them to grow here
so with that.
If we don't have anything else
we stand for questions.
Thank you Representative I do we
have anybody in the audience in
support of the bill if each of
a show of hands.
Great anyone opposed to the
bill.
All right if we can start by
anybody's wishes to speak on the
side of the room.
Sir.
Is that all correct just like
that okay good
start singing to sound.
First and foremost I would like
to thank you for a that means
more to you.
I believe that this bill is
absolutely critical to keeping
businesses in state small
business owners this is my
business partner one of the age
of twenty five we started with
just a dream in the garage in
the back offices they were
weaker two and now we're
downtown Albuquerque with an
office once we did our taxes
this year New Mexico is not our
top option anymore for us Sappey
and I don't want that to be the
case for anyone else any other
minority even other young
individual who wants to start a
business in this beautiful state
we call home we take so much
pride please please please allow
small businesses opportunity to
grow and then tax them if that's
what you want.
Please do not do in these events
they just a lot of they will not
make it we know friends wanted
to try they didn't make it as
far as we do thank god for that
so please take that into
consideration there's other
minorities just like under other
you just like me and this is
part of here would love the
opportunity to stay here at home
in a place that we're product so
please take that into
consideration please take my
words and made such a hard to
make this what like it needs to
thank you I just like to speak.
We have a yes ma'am.
Carl.
Yes thank you madam chair
members of the committee on
Carlos on tech with the New
Mexico business coalition and we
support house bill one sixty
three.
It has been a hard time for
small businesses in New Mexico
and this is a really good thing
to help them continue their
recovery from what happened
during the COVID it's also good
policy you know we don't have a
really strong tax structure in
our state and when you look at
other states that are really
prospering what their focus is.
Is on lowering taxes not
increasing taxes when you lower
taxes you see people want to
come here to run their
businesses and you see the
businesses existing in our state
doing better we think this is a
really strong step in the right
direction and we hope that you
will support this bill thank you
thank you.
That's all right
any comments or questions from
the committee.
Representative Matthews.
Madam chair and thank you for
presenters
Four three.
I'm I'm not sure I really
understand how it works.
Because it talks about a twenty
five percent receipts.
of the business may be deducted
from gross receipts.
Are you.
Are you suggesting that those
small business doesn't need to.
Collect tax.
The second there's a couple ways
gross receipts gross receipts
are usually back most businesses
passed on to so my question is
are you asking.
Not to pass the tax on to the
consumer and not be liable for
tax.
Some communities.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative so yes that
that's pretty much what we're
trying to do with this
legislation it's on the gross
receipts is not necessarily net
profits but like you said that
that cost would go down to the
consumer and it would be a less
cost to the consumer to have to.
To pay more for a product so we
would probably benefit both the
consumer and that the individual
that has a business Madam chair
representative.
Thank you madam chair
Representative.
So.
Would you charge the gross
receipts but you would keep
twenty five percent of it.
Yourself and always give seven
five percent to the state.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so.
From my understanding with this
this piece of legislation it
would be at tax time you will
get a tax cut yet so I guess it
would be a.
Deduction I believe to be twenty
five percent chair
representative.
Representative I guess I'm not
still have a little trouble
following this most businesses
business to those businesses
back
gross receipts tax.
Let's wait serving as a small
business and I tens of millions
or they filing certificate I
quarterly a lever for every six
months.
And.
Still not a hundred percent
clear your are you going to
collect the tax from the
consumer.
And then only.
Hey tax pay seventy five percent
of it to the state that makes
sense it doesn't tell me that
thank you madam chair thank
representative so I I believe
what I said previously was
incorrect so this would be.
Just the taxes that they would
receive it would be twenty five
percent cut so I I like for me
I'm a small business owner I pay
quarterly to the state so
instead of giving them that full
amount it would be whatever the
the tax code within state with
this bill in place will be less
than twenty less twenty five
percent of what you would pay so
at tax time every quarter I
would pay a certain amount to
based on my mic and income and
the amount of employees I would
have which would be four or less
and so that would be taken into
account each quarter but I
believe if you if you pay a
certain amount more like if you
if you make a certain amount of
money you need to do that
monthly instead of quarterly so
that could push some of these
small businesses into that
monthly a fragment does that
answer your question Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative I'm
not.
Really are still not clear are
you collecting a hundred percent
of the gross receipts tax and
your sales let's start there.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative now you're not
collecting that extra twenty
five per or the current full
mouth very collecting seventy
five percent madam chair.
Madam chair representative thank
you and then you would.
So in effect you're not having
to charge the consumer.
For that twenty five percent is
at doing thank you madam chair
yes that's correct.
And chair representative.
This.
Page two it talks about having
give these records so you can
evaluate the effectiveness of
the production.
And I'm wondering.
What you mean by that tell me
about.
You're looking to see whether.
Not chart the five percent of
the tax.
Increases your sales.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative could you please
repeat that the last part of
your question I apologize.
Right
here Representative since you're
not collecting the twenty five
percent.
We try to figure out where this
is a good idea are you looking
to see and effect a lower tax
rate to consumers.
What what impact that has on
your sales.
Thank you madam chair thank
representative yes I understand
your question now so yes that's
exactly what we're looking at
we're looking to see if if
lowering that tax and G. R. T.
would trickle down per se I hate
to use that phrase but trickle
down to the business and then
the employees of that business
Madam chair representative.
And madam chair representative
Finally to small business and
you have a definition I do you
know how many small town meeting
small businesses would qualify
for this in the state.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative yes according to
the census bureau more than half
the fifty four percent of all
employer businesses had fewer
than five employees but they
only accounted for five point
five percent of total employment
in all industries Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair I'm sorry
Representative I couldn't quite
make out with the last word yes
so.
Fifty four percent madam chair
that's according to the census
bureau of those that have fewer
than that have four or I guess
fewer than five employees rather
and so they make up five point
five percent of total employment
in all industries Madam chair
representative.
And.
Chair representative what
percentage of gross receipts to
the state do that'll
Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I do not have
that figure in front of me at
the at this time.
Chair representative thank you
for your answers information and
you'll.
Thank you Representative
Martinez.
Madam chair of representatives
thank you for bringing this bill
forward it encourages me.
To see something that is going
to support small business.
Everybody knows that small
business the backbone of any
economy and businesses show this
bill.
Find a small businesses I always
are less.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative this does not
define as small business as what
that is this is just a which
small businesses would apply to
this tax deduction Madam chair
representative.
Yes thank you madam chair and
that's correct it's less than
five so be like for employees
Madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative so on
page two.
line eight section the.
As used in this section small
business means businesses and
employees no more than four full
time.
For part time employees hello
deploys one point whether
business for at least forty four
weeks.
And then it goes on to.
Well requirements
Madam chair representative.
I guess I'm kind of struggling
why.
It it's for full time or part
time employees it it would seem
that.
That distinction what.
It doesn't.
Mesh in my head it would seem
like if I had for full time
employees that could have six
part time employees it was that
definition taken from existing
statute.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative so that
definition I worked with the
bill drafter with that what the
intent of the legislation was to
do was to not have it and X. an
exorbitant amount of fiscal
impact we'll also especially
targeting these smaller
businesses that are like mostly
businesses that are such as food
trucks and small businesses that
don't really need more employees
than four or five or that amount
of employees so that is mainly
the intent of the legislation
however you know we are open to
amendments if if you prefer to
put that as full time or if you
like to add any language
regarding contractors etcetera
Madam chair representative.
Representative thank you for
that
let me go back to page one.
Line nineteen.
Twenty five percent of the
receipts of a small business may
be deducted from the gross
receipts and that small business
then pass on that savings to the
customer.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative yes they
certainly can where they can
pass that along to to the
employees they could give raises
or they could make improvements
the buying new buildings or
equipment it's it's dependent on
what that small business would
like madam chair representative.
Madam chair representative all.
We all know we're facing tough
times inflation this one was
reported at six point four
percent
Not I feel not only with this
bill have help small business
but it would help that person on
a fixed income.
Who is trying to stretch that
dollar as far as it'll go.
Madam chair representative I I
fully support this bill I like
the concept
one last question.
Madam chair representative I
didn't see a sunset in this is
this open ended.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative yes it is open
ended.
Madam chair thank you.
thank you Representative
representative Duncan.
Thank you madam chair.
I got a.
To go.
Representative.
That's which is what I have
three employees and
My business just takes off and I
am making more money to.
That person should make this
Madam chair representative did
you ever think about.
Separating small businesses in
all amounts those that make
three or four hundred thousand
dollars years opposed to those
that are very fortunate to just
make a million dollars.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative very good
question so when we were
drafting this bill we took that
into account and so what we
wanted to do was ensure that as
many of these small businesses
could be held within this tax
cut so we did try that we did
look at many scenarios but you
know it's all based on whatever
you made that year or that
quarter so madam chair
representative if you had a new
employee in the the fourth
quarter for instance and let's
just say you're you're making it
a lot of money then you
technically.
It fall out of this this tax cut
if you added that employee Madam
chair representative.
After that's all I have.
Thank you representative Lente.
Thank you madam chair thank you
to my Nibert Representative
Matthews for the clarification
and your clarification along the
same lines of representative
Duncan madam chair
representative so that.
The concept is based on
essentially a flat extension
right for small businesses five
people.
Correct thank you madam chair
yes that's correct
Representative Lente madam chair
and representative as we look at
this then so see see that's
that's taken to for example
hypothetical of the real estate
agent right they may work
independently and they're making
a million dollars plus per year
what then they be except from
this G. R. T..
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I guess it would
depend on the business so I
guess that there was an
independent realtor who had an
LLC or a corporation that did
have fewer than five employees
depending on whatever they made
that they would still receive
this twenty five percent
exception that's correct I'm
here to answer yes there's and
madam chair and and
Representative I I appreciate
that clarification so.
The same then what what what
apply to that the food truck
operators across the street that
if they were making their scrape
invite I don't have the same
another business but if they're
making a hundred thousand
dollars a year and and and and.
There were a couple life that
would apply the same to them as
well right thank you madam chair
thank you Representative yes
that's correct.
At in regards to the
that and and you don't have
privy to this but according to
the analysis here in the
majority
analysis is that this may have
been estimated expenditure of
about three hundred and forty
five million dollars per year at
the state level and at least two
hundred twenty seven million
dollars per year for counties
and municipalities
what would you say to that Madam
chair representative thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative so I I appreciate
that number I I worked with the
drafters and the folks who did
the FIR and I believe the
original FIR it was inaccurate
is that it would cost about that
six hundred million dollars a
year they they multiply that by
four I believe there is suppose
to subtract that original number
by four by twenty five percent
so would have a much less fiscal
impact probably around closer to
to thank you madam chair two
million I'm sorry two hundred
two hundred million madam chair
representative yeah but that
would be on the high end on this
madam chair representative okay.
Thank you madam chair thank you
present.
At Representative the.
Mr.
Thank you madam chair I'd like
to
Was an amendment if I could see
what Sanchez thinks about it.
I think what this is
A bill that would be very very
hard to implement it's hard to
track but it's got you know good
good thought behind it I'd like
to suggest that it be drafted in
a way where it's a twenty five
percent tax credit for business
licensed in the state of New
Mexico.
That would not receive more than
forty four weeks of.
Participation within one
calendar year.
I just kind of what you're
trying to do.
And the state is very adapt to
credits.
I think this because it's Friday
and and you don't really know
what that.
Gross receipts tax number is for
any business at the front end.
I think it be very difficult for
the tax department to track.
But I think if it were redrafted
in a tax credit method.
And it was very clear that the
incentive could be combined with
any other incentives of the
state provides and can't can't
be for more than forty four
weeks in one calendar year and
you can actually measure it.
And it would have the sunset
Five years after five years if
you don't see a good return on
investment then the tax
committee could that and
basically abolishes.
But I think it needs to be clear
it's not clear at all it's it's
hard to track where tax credit.
I think that make more sense so
I'd like to propose that for you
all to think about.
Because to be honest which
drafted now I couldn't supported
in the way strapped it's just
too hard to get my arms around.
But if it were a credit to be
different and if it had some
guard rails around the credit I
think we could she went on to
what a little better that's just
a suggestion.
Thank you madam chair more
responded that.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative that that
looks like it would be certainly
friendly amendment or change
rather I guess public you
committees up is what we look at
on that so we would certainly be
open to working with you to get
that language changed thank you
madam chair need to know what
the pleasure of the committee
just before we jump out there
but I just think that's with.
And so.
Representative I Representative
Lundstrom that you're proposing
to do the amendment here at
committee or would you like them
to come back with that with the
committee so I just wanted to
run the idea past them first and
see if that would be a friendly
idea or not.
If they're friendly with it.
We we work.
Representative how do you feel
about that.
The suggestion.
Thank you madam chair of we
provide this friendly.
weekly status of our collections
so let's go through the
questions and maybe we can flush
it out a little bit more and
they will will make a motion so
Representative little.
Think that.
Thank you madam chair I received
that in the notes indicating
that madam chair that the
yes for the speaking madam what
microphone not function was not
working well and there was an
opposition registered
I'm new here so please let them
know that it's proper for me to
relate this information okay
this comes from
New Mexico voices for children
standing in opposition to house
bill one sixty three a small
businesses are of course a very
important part of our economy
but this proposal would
come at a substantial cost to
the general fund reducing
revenues for the public
investments that benefit
businesses in New Mexicans alike
also further narrows the G. R.
T. base making the goal of
broadening the base to lower the
rate for the benefit of all New
Mexicans that much harder it
also created the wrong
incentives for small businesses
able to grow but hesitant to
hire additional workers with the
risk of losing a twenty five
percent deduction for these
reasons we oppose this bill
thank you thank you
Representative and our apologies
to voices for children we didn't
have we we insure them on our
screen here for this deal but I
think that your message or their
message was conveyed so thank
you Representative that
throughout the.
Thank you madam.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for the bill presenters off just
it continue on a different
action than what Representative
Lundstrom is talking about but
one that is a concern is the
impact that we specifically have
to counties they are primarily
based on your keys that for the
there funding specially in
smaller counties you're looking
a lot of small businesses that
do employ that the numbers you
have or have the state and and
that does and that's a look at
numbers of I or less much to
their right so in some counties
that she's going to decimate
them and so I was curious and
not tax experts but I'd be
curious if there's a way for it
to be known to have twenty five
percent deduction on the state
part of the G. R. T. if we could
do that instead that way to
counties could continue to
collect it would be interested
in you know you have to run the
numbers I'm sure and see how
that works but I mean that is a
big concern to me kind of
looking at this you know you
would face up to make it
actually work as the
Representative you know more be
manageable even then I'd be.
I don't respond or you want to
just really quick madam chair
and representative thank you for
that because I I was to is I was
reading more into this a little
concerned about how how to fix
them the municipalities but I
think with the the tax deduction
at the end of the year it could
come it's it that would be all
state and not and they wouldn't
be affecting your Munoz
municipalities at that point.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Rep I look a little closer that
I when I do pay my your TD
typically I do a lot of the end
so it might just going to look
into that and see that something
thank you madam chair and thank
it is that something real quick
on that you know I appreciate
that we we've been trying to
work with counties and local
officials to see what do you
think about this and can you for
this and we just certainly want
to make sure this is hyper
targeted right we don't want to
just slash any ones budget
whatsoever so thank you for that
very thoughtful question and we
will work with the committee to
ensure that we can make this the
best bill committee thank you.
I thank you Representative at
Representative Matthews did you
want to speak for second time
yes yes thank you madam speaker
of the the other concern I have
in terms of the redraft.
Duration at the table that
representative Lente again which
is a realtor is making a million
dollars a year to commission
payments commission payments but
commissions
That is really in terms of the
dollars is not a small business.
Do not New Mexico.
So I think that I have they need
to have some kind of a cap or
something as to.
Which level of sales.
Common spelling.
Yeah this would apply to.
And.
I would think.
All.
Representative is.
Look at different things but
not.
It seems to me that you're sort
of focusing on small businesses
and probably start ups and that
was it think about looking at
some of the data on what kind of
figures there are.
Those kinds of businesses if
you're trying to help.
The last coming Madam chair
Then I wanted to make it's I've
got
just a second here.
Most of the new.
To make thank you.
Thank you Representative Lente
thank you generally do this
event and I apologize it sounds
like this bill is turning more
of a brainstorming session
that's that's fine if it works
out that way but I would also
like to extend that perhaps if
it doesn't work up during the
session because bills always
work out right that that you
might want to work with the the
revenue stability
And Tax Policy interim committee
during the interim and and we
can bring in the other forces
like like tax whatever whatever
else will be affected by this
bill so that maybe.
Next year whatever you want to
review and is not to say that
it's gonna fail now because we
know the template Department but
at the same time just to make
sure that you have the the by of
all the stakeholders so that
we're not here to try to develop
a bill to fly thank you Mr thank
you Representative maybe just
want to speak.
One
chair acts.
That was it for the two of them.
I I remember that point with
okay very good.
Yes.
During the pandemic part of the
tax relief that we were
provided to small businesses in
the last businesses had to do
with tax relief operations.
And and I would just suggest
that you look back there were
some really interesting lessons
learned about gross receipts tax
it is impact on sales and so
forth
in a lot of what we offer.
Businesses didn't take us up on
but I don't remember the details
of it in two states to work
through this that that I would
suggest you look at that and
madam madam speaker thank
you.
Thank you
Representative is a I think that
from what you're hearing from
the committee is they like your
concept
that they don't necessarily like
your bills.
And I think we can improve on
that and I I would like this to
be a teachable moment for both
of you because I think that
once again the concept is good I
think Representative Lundstrom
hit the nail on the head with
the tax credit definitely would
talk with.
As TRD to get some feedback
there but also tend to the
municipality if I were you
because I I think when you start
talking about taking revenues
from of from our small
municipalities
and and that's our state get
some legs on it with the room
will be packed and so we you
know that that's a another way
to hurt your bill
So at this time would you like
to roll your bill.
Thank you madam chair.
Yes please.
Thank all right thank you for
your presentation today and we
hope that you'll you'll take us
up on some of the
recommendations and as we don't
see this session we hope seed in
there in a thank you thank you.
All right.
Eight to eighty one.
Hey.
With the.
Course of.
The.
I.
Yeah.
Representative every time every
time Representative.
Welcome back to converse.
Madam chair committee thank you
for indulging me in another
book.
Before we start on house bill
two eighty one the chair is
asked that we say a few words
about the uniform law commission
and the deliberative process
that we go through and I have
Paula Tackett who was.
Basically the royal Burciaga of
yester year
she was head of the Legislative
Council Service for many years I
have heard lined up to
speak about the uniform law
commission but she's been snowed
and so my experts is not only an
expert in subject matter but an
expert in the uniform law
commission
I've only been on the
commission sense appointed by
the speaker two thousand
nineteen Mr Burton has been
there for well over two decades
so I.
Asked him if he would baby
introduce a committee to
Just a quick overview of the
uniform law commission it's
delivered it process and how we
come up with the books that
we've been bringing to you.
Just a couple weeks so with that
the if you would allow Mr Burton
to talk about the informal
Commission of course
it's a great thank you madam
chair members of the committee
they uniformed law commission is
a non partisan of state
supported nonprofit
organization appointed by state
government.
J. made up of commissioners from
each stage of the commissioners
are legislators members of the
legislative staff law school
professors judges and other
lawyers.
Of the uniform law commission
provides rules and procedures
that are consistent from state
to state.
But still reflect the diverse
experience.
Of all the stage.
The euro for blog commissioners
deliberate process up vote
drafted.
And draws on the experience of
the commissioners but also uses
input from legal experts and
advisors Representative use up
the interest groups.
That will be subject to the
uniform laws that are products
of the.
Commission.
The commission has no power to
impose laws or anybody instead
it commissions bring their lost
back to the stage and asked the
states to enact a.
What law commission keeps the
state laws up to date by
addressing timely legal issues.
All the walls are prepared.
As a result of open meetings
held by drafting committees
while the country hold for
several years.
The committee is produced there
are traps.
Then each draft is considered
line by line over by a whole
group of commissioners from all
over the state it will reduce
about three hundred
commissioners attend from all
over the country each state has
at the two.
Usually two years in a row.
They're read line by line.
Every
chance to ask questions debate
quicker proprioceptive gesture
amid much these are voted on.
Are the committee bay acceptance
they're well taken.
At the end of the process each
state gets one vote to vote up
or down.
So it is a deliberate process it
is slow but sure.
The end of.
Yes the lawsuit should I.
Our.
As we say brought back if we if
the local commissioners I think
they're right from New Mexico we
will bring forward can I ask
this group the state legislature
to.
Access.
Thank you for what commission is
produced or supported by to
strip every state dues are set
based I barely all population.
So that's all the you will be
locked addition works.
Now New Mexico's here before
welcome pressures are.
Of representatives are chair or
I have worked Senator Bob change
Boxgrove also we have lawyers
who are.
There are selected primarily by
the Legislative Council which
you ought to always different
from the Legislative Council
Service.
The Legislative Council.
Also she lacks non legislators
they are of.
Forward to does a very old from
the university of New Mexico Law
School and Representative night
but also mentioned Raul Burciaga
yes pavement member.
All attracted up to local water
quality.
Pseudo.
It is the commissioner share a
appendage raven statues.
Our Cisco work shortly of course
myself.
So does.
Locals are that's all the
commission works how they
produce for loss and if you have
any questions I'll be glad to
try to.
Thank you.
Representative do you have
anything in which I talk about
your bill Graham if no one has
any questions about the U. L. C.
will be happy to jump right into
the bill.
Madam chair and committee before
you is house bill two eighty one
it is a really like the bill as
most of these uniform laws tend
to be
it is.
A.
Bill that
Has.
This is the second generation
limited liability company
accident passed by the you'll
see New Mexico did not adopt the
original U. Elsie Act.
The New Mexico has drafted its
own act that's part of I do in
article nineteen of of chapter
fifty three of our our statutes
the limited liability company
act in New Mexico
Has served a purpose and and
there are many limited liability
companies that have been formed
in New Mexico.
In fact nationwide.
with the liability companies are
now probably the preferred
mechanism of transacting or
forming new businesses and
providing some limited liability
aspects to the the owners of
those companies and to
carry out to
Their business purposes.
Very reason that limited
liability companies came to
fruition is is
Because of the Internal Revenue
Service and the tax treatment
that is given to limited
liability companies as opposed
to corporations.
there's
I'm not on the tax committee and
I don't know much about taxes
but I've been told that that's
the one of the driving forces
for forming a limited liability
company instead of a
traditional.
Corporation under the
corporations act so before you
is a.
It is a second generation
uniform law commission product
for limited liability companies
this particular piece of
legislation
is I would say longer them The
New Mexico limited liability
company Act although our act is
quite weak the of of if you want
to pull your your statute book
out.
This the purpose and why we're
bringing this to you why the
commissioners from New Mexico
have asked us to bring this
forward.
Is because that there is
more jobs.
Both in terms of
The.
Not so much the formation aspect
with the
reporting requirements and what
struck me is the protections
upon dissolution to creditors
and others and then it goes into
more detail regarding mergers
consolidations and other
corporate
joinder type of bands which are
not well defined in our current
statutes.
I in in preparing I contacted
The gentleman by the name of
Alex Ritchie.
Alex was a professor of law at
the university of New Mexico
he's current adjunct professor
at the university Colorado
and is executive director of
what was formerly the rocky
mountain Law foundation I think
it's now known as the foundation
for natural resources but Alex
Ritchie was a well respected law
professor UNM and he taught
business corporations and his
response to me is that.
It would be malpractice for a
New Mexico lawyer to recommend
the formation of a New Mexico
LLC I've been going to great
depths on that but he says that
there are many advantages to the
uniform act over and above the
the protections afforded in our
current statutes so with that we
bring this forward I think that
this is a step in the right
direction to provide additional.
Protection I don't want to to
the members of the alt LLC but
also to the public creditors and
others who may be owed money
upon dissolution or on of
unfortunate events such as
bankruptcy what have you with
respect to the all city.
And I would turn it over to my
experts to maybe discuss you
agree to your all points and and
then we'll be happy to take any
question.
Madam chair members of the
committee I think Representative
divergence doesn't excellent job
tell you what this bill does and
why we're bringing forward hi I
just want to head a couple of.
A couple of items one is that
with who we are first looked at
this bill.
in two thousand Chevy G..
The the secretary of state
estimated that will provide
recurring revenues in the form
of fire late fees or report.
Fees for filing reports every
three years up two hundred sixty
thousand dollars additional
revenue for the secretary of
state.
the end that would be because
she limited liability companies
are our only business
organization in my district use
that do not file either a little
reports or reports every two
years with the secretary of
state to keep their records up
to date.
Secretary of state has no way of
knowing for example whether a
limited liability company has
ever changed its address for
mailing purposes so.
They have no way of knowing.
What the sheck Wes of the
limited liability company is
going on the previous page.
So as a result in two thousand
seventeen.
J. secretary of state have a
hundred fifty thousand.
Limited liability companies
office records with no way of
knowing what these companies
were default we're still active
or not so one of the things
we're doing.
How to bring new limited
liability companies into the
modern age is to say well you
gotta start file your report
which.
Article like everybody else does
this will allow the secretary of
state to keep their addresses up
to date for the actor wants to
weed out the ones that are
distraught get off the books
free up their names for use by
the.
Limited liability companies that
are paid for so that's.
One of the things that we're
doing this.
The other thing we're doing is
this bill is to make conforming
amendments to the this does
corporation Act.
At the request of lawyers who
worked in this area.
All right bring that up to date.
In the area of mergers and
acquisitions so.
That is not sure thank you.
I'm I'm why the one one other
thing the secretary of state's
office the contact we and would
like us to push back the
effective date and so I am
certainly willing to do that I
located last night quickly to
places in the bill
where effective date.
As presented is July one twenty
twenty four and they wanted the
twenty twenty five rate so
there's a couple places that
that I've seen but I'd like to
drafters actually go through
this and make sure we pick a
mall up if we're going to change
of date so I will be giving them
amendment should it passes
committee I will be getting an
amendment before it goes
Judiciary to accomplish not only
that effective date delayed that
but also
Making sure that we pick up
every notice of a date in here
that may be changed by that
request I don't think that would
be a problem extending the
effective date into twenty
twenty five.
What that madam chair we stand
for questions thank you
Representative so do we have
anybody here in favor of the
bill.
Anybody else in favor.
Madam chair nobody else in our.
Okay and anybody opposed to the.
Okay
let's go to the
To the committee Representative
on.
Thank you madam chair I.
I understand why this.
The.
Meeting.
I'm not sure the listening.
Tensions are high.
I understanding for five and
course.
Morning to do business for
correction that.
Things that.
protection
because I work.
So
was and that we are.
I understand wanting.
And we have lots of.
Legislation action.
Thank you explain levels of.
Madam chair representative
several things number one
This this bill makes it clear
that simply being a member of an
LLC does not
Make you responsible for the
deaths and the
Obligations of the LLC it's like
being a stockholder in a
corporation Senator
Clearly there is
protections for those who have
invested in the LLC the members
and and having some distinction
there simply be that number does
not cause you to be liable for
the obligations of the of the
LLC and so Act.
In that case today.
That.
I think.
It is a case today under our act
and I think it's more clearly
spelled out in the bill it's
before you also the fact that
you are a manager under this act
you you can or cannot be you
don't have to be a member to be
a manager under this act
there are extensive provisions
of article
Three.
With respect to the
relationships between the of the
members and managers to to third
parties it goes into much more
detail them down our current
statutes.
And as I mentioned in the
prepped or comments.
It has expansive language
regarding dissolution of the
corporate into or that.
The LLC and what happens with
respect to notices
creditor's rights and the
obligations of the manager or
for members with respect to the
assets of the corporation up on
dissolution so that
of third party creditors don't
get cut out and things like that
I think it's more robust than
what our current statutes
provides
The the other thing it does is
an article I
I think you're.
There was some thought that.
An LOC.
Being more like a corporation
and a partnership that when
someone dies for someone.
Transfers their right to
distributions that they become a
fellow member of the LLC.
This act clearly spells out
that.
The members select who are
fellow members at one of members
that.
The heirs successors did not
automatically become members
when they have a right to
distribution the but it's more
like a partnership that it is a
corporation with shareholders so
you don't automatically step in
the shoes of our the associated
to become a member in the LLC
you might have the rights to the
distributions from the LLC but
the members would have to vote
on and accept you into that
membership much like a
partnership instead of the.
Lots of we the corporations
where you just impaired to
shares and you're now
shareholders so it makes those
things of a lot more clear and
specific you pick your partner.
Here you pick your members yeah
and the membership can can
retain its
decide who comes in to the
membership category even though
on the damp obviously somebody's
going to be entitled to that
members former members right of
distribution of assets would
have.
I'm ready.
Ideas are sure to.
A more.
Adding more responsibility to
the.
It is
just that.
As a line with our one.
I.
I just want to make sure that
we're not having.
The other two.
Madam chair representative of.
Hi I don't know that for the
simple LLC's of that we are are
doing that I I do think that
what Mr Burke brought up having
the and it's three years under
this act proposal every three
years they do have to make a
report to the secretary of state
we're still here we're still
business and if they don't the
than that props some notices and
if they don't respond to those
them
The the L. L. C. will in essence
be terminated no longer
recognized as being able to do
business in New Mexico so that
is one feature that is.
More complicated it will
require.
People who have L. also used to
once every three years make a
report
corporations I think do a once a
year this is once every three
years and as Mr Burke pointed
out there so many LLC's that are
on the books but.
They're not active the the fact
I need to close one.
From my uncle's a state right
now because of it no longer is
in the assets in trying to
remove those from from the books
of the state
I think the formation the
formation of the LLC itself.
Is.
If I read it correctly I read
both the existing statute in the
bill
it didn't seem to be to require.
Any additional steps or in any
additional information that the
information is all of the
Organization and it's really
pretty simple in fact the
members of a LLC.
The public may not ever know who
those members are there's
nothing of record as to who the
members are what what is in the
organization documents are are
two things number one.
The organizer is.
Many cases a lawyer sorry.
And number two the agent for
service of process and that of
course is important because of
the LLC get sued.
There has to be a mechanism to
to serve notice on that LLC and
to get them into the courthouse
so I think the organization
aspect and then the operating
agreement which is filed with
the secretary of state that is
the agreement among the members
you have a sole member them the
operating agreement can be very
simple because they're they're
making all the decisions what
have you
so so I think for for those mom
and pop LLC's it's not any
different what this does is
because it's recognized as being
the preferred vehicle there are
many very complex LLC's out
there and they need.
A lot more.
Substance to it and so this
this.
Technology is that and provides
for where you have a manager or
a group of managers and could
have hundreds or thousands of
members and this accomplices
that and tries to.
Find rules that would
deal with those more complex
situations that have been
occurred because people got away
from incorporating to forming
LLCs even for very significant
businesses in fact I would tell
you that some of the largest oil
producers in the state that are
sending the state.
Hundreds of millions of for more
dollars are limited liability
companies now they're not
corporations.
I.
Because of the.
Is that.
Yeah.
Yes.
Madam chair.
Madam chair one other thing that
I probably need to state to the
representative.
Mr Ritchie also pointed out that
Delaware.
As the in his opinion the
preferred limited liability
statutes and he would recommend
for any significant business
maybe those oil companies I talk
about to look at Delaware law
and the protections afforded
there as opposed to the uniform
act that's been incorporated in
the states so just to be up
front with you Mr Ritchie did
say Delaware would be the
preferred method for some of
these larger entities but but
that that was his.
If I could add to that I would
certainly agree with this
direction the problem with
Delaware frankly is that do you
do that it does not provide as
much protection for the small
investor has a uniform lacked
jobs and Delaware further has
specialized judges that do
nothing but.
Try and hear cases involving.
Investors and corporations and
LLCs so they get to be experts
all of their Delaware.
Operation all tell us a limited
liability company so that's
another reason why people feel
with.
Huge.
Up companies.
Thank you for there.
organizations of dollars they
get they get.
These laws that give all the
projection to the algebra
lowers.
Very little protection frankly
to the.
Investors to to the local level
folks who put their money into
it I have all these judges who
experienced with so the hero for
bloggers the other way and
provides for protection in my
estimation to the people who put
their money up.
So much that's my take on it.
Then.
Madam chair members of the
committee presenters high.
Flipping through this time
members time in my life.
When not only did I used to form
of liability.
The company's for clients but I
get paid for.
I think these questions can be
answered quickly.
Representative.
So just a couple of things
And I my first question is that
the whole point of the LFC is
not recall it.
Became something that we could
do was to avoid to the general
liability of partnerships and
reform partnership act but I
have all the awful tax
consequences into corporate law.
And.
Shares that still what's going
on is that that's exactly what's
just what's wrong okay.
This second question is chair.
Representative is I know this is
repealing the prior law.
And I'm thinking about all those
LLCs and I'm like it's created
years ago the committee.
I wanted to be sure that now I'm
not going to get sued for
malpractice years later because
Lawler way that we're let me ask
a question or seriously
I assume that there's some
language that allows some kind
of a school transfer into the
international period of time or
something to have dates down
we're not just in the new all
those Elsie's are we.
No ma'am Madam chair
representative the the existing
LLCs would continue the only
thing that
the leaves of the new statute or
the new bill that would be
required would be the reporting
requirements so if they haven't
changed their their agent for
service of process they haven't
changed their address.
The principal place of business.
Then all they would need to to
to file would be that every
three years that report and and
that's probably something the
secretary of state I think
that's why they wanted the extra
here is to be able to say about
maybe the notices and things for
folks to say Hey you know you
have to start doing that and and
if they don't then they would
start clearing their records of
those LLCs that don't don't
respond but the other things
because all that's all bits of
record in the secretary of
state's office is the
organization documents with that
information still accurate they
do nothing else to to to do and
they're operating agreement
should be grandfathered in and
they can continue on the new act
of course if they were to
dissolve for
merger or something like that
the new act would control those
matters but they don't have to
we re up as an LLC just because
the fact is changed.
Madam chair.
there is an average thank you my
last question I think it's my
last question is.
the way that the LFC is used to
be able to work and I'm just
asking whether or not it's still
true you could have a limited
liability company.
And then you would have the
owners of the LFC also be
limited liability companies who
gets that going limited
liability and the way it used to
happen sometime would have.
The the LFC and then you have
the individual people who have
often fair amount of.
Thank you they can be two
semi frequently and they would
be.
Perhaps physicians or other
kinds of people who were then
created LESC to be the member of
the LESC the owner of the LFC
service in order to get through
those barriers and limited
liability is virtually
impossible I was just and again
I think short answers nine
assuming that that's probably.
Possible yes
I believe that that would be
possible again you have to treat
each of those LLCs as a the
state entity of not.
you know intertwined you were
activities but as long as you
respect it the corporate
identities and I say corporate
the LFC identity I think that
those protections would would be
four.
thank you that set this up
question.
Thank you Representative
Representative.
Madam chair representative I
just have one question.
This bill would help us all the
all of the most recent
recommendations.
For the for the this LLC I mean
this this
Area.
Madam chair representative the
the bill that's before you
incorporates are some changes
that were made up with the two
thousand.
Thirteen and seventeen there may
have been another year that that
the committee that originally
did this they.
So also litigation salsa merry's
and need to be touched up they
provided that and I believe that
Legislative Council Service and
dealing with the uniform law
commission
take up all the supposes
revisions that they have accrued
over the last number of years
yes.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative and thank you
madam chair
it's one of the six.
You have to look at.
Good question for it in my my
delightful reading of this short
walk.
At one question is my own
purposes on workers domestic for
are they allowed to merge now in
the one.
Madam chair representative are
there are a lot of.
Mergers that take place
particularly within certain
industries at UC LLC's merging
into corporations you see
corporations merging and the
Aussies UC our partnerships and
corporations combining you see
all types of different entities
going through what I would
consider a merger process
sometimes that's the technical
term that that that that is.
Or limiting them the what I
would say is working but there's
a lot of consolidation processes
that can occur one of the
reasons for this bill is there's
a whole section that provides
for these types of
consolidations or third
generation and other
transformations to occur and
that can occur with respect to a
corporate entity have a limited
liability company or limited
liability partnership in a
limited liability company or
general partnership yeah I mean
you know the the.
Gamut of business entities
can be handled within that
construct it's provided to you.
Thank you thank you madam chair
Representative Serrato.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative I have.
The difference is I think I have
a list of the F. I. R. it says
in FY twenty five on that that
it will be an indeterminate
impact on the revenue but
substantial and serious why
there's no impact in twenty
three twenty four and what that
Santa was.
I would suspect it's due to the
effective date.
The fact that they in the bill
before you is is one Y. one of
one twenty twenty four that
we've been requested additional
maps so if we extended it if I
have a lighter thing but what
what there there's two things
that will happen
Because of that
Reporting requirement we talked
about every three years the
secretary of state will be
charging a fee for those reports
and so there should be money's
coming and that's not currently
coming into the secretary of
state for that that station.
Yeah and then it not only covers
the requirement for domestic
Mexico LLC's to to do that every
three years but all four LLCs at
transact business in the state
they will be subject to the side
reporting requirements and like
was still be charged with the to
find that that the every three
year.
update if you will or you know
we're still here for for
transacting business in New
Mexico so so there should be
the positive
Impact on the secretary of
state's office to those fees
just like corporations and other
business entities that require
periodic reporting thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative answer that helps
you make sense thank you
answered it already but sorry
about the question that the LFC
is important before twenty
twenty four which is then the
under this act or the vendor
this where they would still be
end of the previous.
You know from statutes.
Okay I'll try to answer this
the.
The best I can the LLC's that
have been important they don't
need to read for themselves they
exist.
We're not changing their
existence they will have to.
Begin making those reports.
Once every three years I have a
new act but they will be
grandfathered and we're we're
not we're not dissolving all
LLC's and making them jump
through hoops
To the contrary they will
continue to exist they will
continue to be a business entity
and they will continue to
be in good standing and operate
New Mexico so long as they make
that once every three years of
filing with the secretary of
state's office as a thank you
madam chair one last question
voting on I think you are
inserted but these
right feeding them so we don't
for sure that the interest rate
is reporting costs will be
nominal are these not the wide
range of policies we have.
Madam listed in the you're gonna
make me look.
Thanks for the.
At twenty.
My experts says twenty dollars
for the reporting
it if you miss a report I recall
that there's if you're late it's
two hundred dollars I recall the
two hundred dollar figure
something.
Okay.
Many members of the committee.
I I had a couple I just have
one.
comments.
So in looking at the FY are.
Over at the age of
the provisions that are going to
affect the AOC at work in
consultation with them we
doesn't see the data that it
just gives a list I have.
the AOC at a demonstration of
course.
I don't know how the courts
should be involved unless
somebody got stupid.
Thank you very at at the end of
the.
That madam chair I look at that
list
and all those provisions are
already in the existing act most
double.
and show show I didn't
understand what what the purpose
of that list what's it look like
somebody went through the act
and looked encoded every time
court was mentioned in rodeo and
nobody went back to look to see
how many times what was paid to
the existing act so
That.
That was my impression anyway.
There are many there are many
provisions in here that that
prescribe how.
The.
Protections are afforded
including the filing of a
lawsuit where the jurisdiction
with the and that's you know
we're we're courts come in when
there's a dispute so there are
provisions in here dealing with
with actions but it shouldn't be
any different than than what
exists today we're not creating
any new causes of action we're
not creating the the new
Abilities to to to su we're just
providing more depth in
describing the avenues that were
made for the pursuing should the
company does all particularly if
they are under capitalize.
Thank you Representative I I did
reach out to the is C. and told
them that
with their long list here that I
and I update your and you were
presenting today is heading
reservations are are concerns
that they should be here and I
don't believe that they are here
today
so they were given the
opportunity but yet it does seem
like a rather extensive list and
I wasn't sure
why that was in there I also
consulted with the with the
secretary of state's office you
did mention that the the when
the bill would be implemented
would be changed before the next
before your next destination
which is Judiciary so I guess
Judiciary could also look at the
implications of AOC as well
usually we wanted clean bill out
and so I would usually say we
would slow down the house but I
think what I did talk with you
all it was because it's such a
big deal that they're going to
have to go through and make sure
that it's all the dates are
correct so we will go ahead and
take at a vote on this today but
that was it's coming yes madam
chair in fact while we were
sitting here I found another one
on page forty seven I have one
page one seventy six lives
twelve thirteen able to arrive
line twenty three about eight
forty seven I found what will we
were sitting here of a of a date
that would need to be changed so
I feel more comfortable letting
Legislative Council Service go
through this and pick those up
and just sit here and propose an
amendment and this up so thank
and and I'm comfortable with
that yet but I've I've been
referred to the committee to
make sure they're also
comfortable with that and what's
the desire the committee.
Yes.
What
do passed.
Representative Serrato.
Okay.
Representative and you know one
of yes.
Representative Duncan yes
Representative Hernandez yes
Representative Lente that yes
Representative little yes.
Representative Lundstrom yes
Representative Martinez yes
Representative Mason as.
Representative Matthews is.
Adam Bettcher yes madam chair
yes madam chair the final tally
as of eight votes yes zero folks
know that yourself.
Looking you're next.
I need to go upstairs to get the
first thank you so much bills
and.
The war.
All
right.
For the last.
I was hoping that.
Senator.
Twenty two.
There was.
The notion.
Right thank you.
Representative we're getting out
yes of.
Yes we committee now has that so
if you'd like to get.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members it's a.
A pleasure to be before this
afternoon I'm glad to be your
last bill.
I.
This bill does two important
things and I'd like to explain
it both of these.
And I think we should hopefully
make sense
and then of course I'd be happy
to answer questions but this is
a tax bill.
And this is specifically in
regards to our corporate income
tax.
And just so you folks are aware
right so the vast majority of
the businesses in New Mexico are
not corporations right the R..
Pass through entities in column
they're all Elsie's their
partnerships these are folks who
when their business earns money
they pass it through to the
personal level in the pay to the
personal income tax.
So we refer to as the personal
income tax so what ninety nine
percent of the businesses in New
Mexico paid to the personal
income tax there's really only
about a dozen.
Maybe a little bit more
corporations that pay through
the corporate income tax and
usually we get to the general
fund somewhere between twenty
five to a hundred and forty
million dollars of corporate tax
year.
We usually did not billion plus
in personal income tax.
Roughly half of that it's rough
and roughly half of that is
individuals you know who wage
earners the paying the personal
attacks roughly the other half
are.
Business owners paying their
income through that.
So.
that's the way of the land.
Now what this does it does two
things.
The first thing it does is right
now we have to income tax
brackets in the state of New
Mexico for for a corporate tax.
And and what it does is it
removes the lower one.
So we only have one bracket the
top bracket.
And let me just explain why
we're doing this right I mean I
sound like annual Republican
trying to raise taxes right
But the reason why you have
multiple brackets in a personal
income tax is because perhaps
those people who are not earning
as much.
Perhaps they should not be
paying to the same percentage as
folks who are earning more where
they have perhaps more disposal
income right that's the.
That's the rationale for why you
have multiple brackets on a
personal compact size.
Well.
That rational kind of falls
apart we're talking about
businesses.
Right and and I'm going to.
We just a little cold here that
all I'll give.
Right but I believe this is
saying this is from the tax
foundation this is a nationally
recognized well respected
Center.
Center right leaning
organization.
And they say twenty nine states
and the district of Columbia
have a single corporate tax
bracket.
Not a greater propensity toward
single right systems are saying
you know there's why we have
more surgery systems for the
corporate tax and individual
income tax.
It's likely because there is no
meaningful ability to pay
argument.
And Jeff wall professor at the
university of Chicago law school
says.
Graduated corporate income rates
are on equitable that is the
size of a corporation bears no
relation to the income levels of
the owners.
Indeed low income corporations
maybe all owned by individuals
with high incomes.
And high income corporations
maybe or by individuals with low
income.
So.
This is really saying is there
is no relation between how much
money of corporations making in
one year to how we'll see the
owners are or how amazing that
that businesses and so most
states have adopted the single
right and you want that single
right match the top level of
your personal income tax.
And the reason for that is.
We don't want the tax code.
To a.
A reason for someone disruption
or business a certain way.
Right it makes sense for you to
be in L. C. span LCS which is
for your your corporation should
be a corporation.
But if you have one that's
lower.
On the other you can see which
people saying we're gonna
structure this waste we pay a
lower tax.
Right so so this the states that
have a single corporate tax rate
is the same as their top
bracket.
So that's one thing that this
bill does this does generate a
little bit of revenue because
there are some people appear
this lower bracket but is not a
law.
Okay.
Now the second thing this bill
does and to me this is the more
important part.
Is we're changing how income is
a portion that's a fancy way of
saying.
When a business makes money.
How much about should be taxed
in New Mexico.
You example because examples
helping what's what's your
favorite.
you know.
Businesses in fifty states and I
just I was gonna say Burger King
I don't know right the programs
as a subscriber on example but
let's see there's a company it's
a corporations in all fifty
states and they make a billion
dollars virgin makes a billion
dollars how much of that should
be taxed in New Mexico at R.
five point nine percent right.
so say all of it right services
are not but but the the truth is
we have to figure out how much
of that actually happened in New
Mexico and we can tax in New
Mexico.
with the state which is multiply
that by one fifty right there's
fifty states what's up what's
taxes by one fifty.
Well I'm sure they would say we
did a lot more business in
California that we did in New
Mexico so that's not fair.
So this is a question that
everyone had in the fifties in
the sixties and all the states
that opted.
What is called the three factor
formula.
And it sounds strange but it's
actually pretty simple and all
overseeing is to calculate how
much that one billion.
We're gonna look at three
things.
We're gonna look at.
All of your payroll.
What percent is in New Mexico.
Let's just say it's part three
percent.
There is a all of your square
footage what percent is in New
Mexico let's say it's a four
percent.
And then what percent of all
your sales are in New Mexico as
a Mexicans like Burger King so
it's five percent right to take
those three average on three
four five minutes four percent.
That is what we multiply the one
billion dollars by four percent
of four billion dollars see that
was how much more New Mexico and
that's what we're gonna tax on.
Okay that makes sense right that
seems fair all the state's
adopted that back in the day.
But what happened interestingly
You know mass means something
right.
When you're calculating this for
me.
What happens if the business
decides.
They're going to expand outside
of New Mexico.
The business as we're gonna
build a new factory were to hire
a lot more people
in Colorado.
Well.
Because these percentages are
based off of the total.
The percent New Mexico as we go
down.
Right because we just added a
bunch of people somewhere else
the percent of New Mexicans is
going down.
And so when a business.
rose outside of your state.
You actually catch them less.
Okay.
Now that's not too bad.
What's really bad is the flip
side of that.
If you have a business missing
you know we're gonna take a risk
on New Mexico and and we're
going to.
We're gonna invest in the state
that we lost we're gonna add a
ton of people in a ton of
I I
for space well now their tax
rate goes way up because the
proportion in New Mexico is now
much higher than it was before
so.
For the privilege of investing
and growing in New Mexico we're
gonna charge them a lot more
tax.
This is for this out about two
decades ago.
And they've been moving away
from this formula.
Into what they call a single
sales factor.
And all that means is.
Establishing these three factors
work we're not going to look at
your payroll or your your square
footage we're going to look at
your sales one percent of your
state also the single sales
factor and that way if the
business grows in New Mexico.
we don't hit them hard
and then the other beautiful
thing about this is
you know kind of the the old
adage is that you know when it
comes to taxes don't tax me tax
that guy behind the tree right
I go to a single sales factor
you're actually charging your
out of state corporations
generally a little bit more.
And and the ones that are in
state virtually little less
you're basing or working people
that are here and and making
this was outside a little more.
And so if you look at the FY are
here you'll notice that.
It's kind of.
You know we raise a little bit
of money with the if changing it
from to practice to one that we
lose power a little bit of money
was one of the single sales
factor would put both of these
together.
Basically revenue neutral maybe
a little bit revenue positive.
Thank you that's that's kind of
good tax policy right.
So
I think the last thing I'll
mention is.
Out.
And I just want to say that this
isn't just Representative Harper
talking about the tax policy
right
if I've done the math here if
you would only states that state
sales these are the ones are
doing a single sales factor now
if you count how many you're
doing the three factor if you
look in New Mexico.
It says I agree factor slash
bills will talk about that in a
second but there's only.
Six.
States that still do the three
factor formula.
there are thirty five states the
any single sales purely.
And
six five states don't even do an
income tax so right now seventy
six percent of the states that
tax income.
To the single sales factor so
we're already kind of behind the
the curve ball on this
the last thing I'll say is the
state already been moving in
this direction even before I got
here right now we do three
factor formula for everything
except manufacturing and
corporate headquarters we give
them the single sales factor
option so really what this bill
is saying is we decided it's
good enough for those two let's
just go by the way and and how
to fight whatever states have a
state reducing a suspect for
everybody at.
And
That manager I'm happy to stand
for questions.
Thank you Representative is
anybody here in favor of this
bill.
I want to do a strict.
You madam chair.
Microphone.
Thanks Chad thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is JD Bollington and I'm
speaking here today on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce under our current
tax system there is a
disincentive to large multi
state companies increasing their
physical presence or employment
base in New Mexico we penalize
them from a staff standpoint for
doing so it's actually
advantageous to their tax
treatment in New Mexico to build
new plants and have workers in
the other states in which they
operate greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce feels that
moving to a single sales factor
apportionment would improve our
tax competitiveness it would
help attract large exporters to
New Mexico who can build a large
footprint here and employ a lot
of New Mexicans this move could
drive investment to our state
that is likely not occurring
here now and that's an important
growth pro growth tax reform
that the chamber supports thank
you.
Madam chair members the
committee are called a
registered lobbyist for fidelity
investments were headquartered
out of Boston Massachusetts but
we maintain a large presence in
New Mexico at the mesa del sol.
with over seventeen hundred
employees
this change in corporate tax
policy would to simplify the
administration and compliance
with our corporate tax loss and
and we think stabilized
corporate tax revenues in New
Mexico so we Soto strong support
this legislation thank you.
Everybody in opposition.
And then what is in them.
I want to.
H. night.
Yes good afternoon madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is stage right and I'm a
senior research and policy
analyst with New Mexico voices
for children and we stand in
support of house bill three
twenty two we know corporations
received a big tax break back in
twenty thirteen when the top
rated seven point six percent
was cuts those cuts did not lead
to an increase in economic
activity but it did reduce
revenues we need for the public
investments like education and
health and public safety that do
create jobs and build a strong
economy and only added to the
pain of the last decade so
having all corporations pay a
rate of at least five point nine
percent on their profits is an
important step in ensuring that
corporations pay their fair
share for these public goods
moving to single sales factor
for apportionment purposes is
also good policy makes sense for
New Mexico being a market state
we do believe however that
corporations can and should pay
a higher rate than five point
eight percent and so we support
and recommend for consideration
the increase in Senate bill one
eighty nine that would impose a
corporate income tax rate of six
point nine percent so this would
raise additional revenue that
New Mexico can use for educating
and training our workforce
improving public safety and
modernizing our infrastructure
to the benefit of New Mexicans
and businesses alike thank you.
Thank you is there anybody else
on the.
Already have members of the
committee.
Representative Lundstrom you
madam chair thank you mark no
more than as mentioned to my
colleague next.
They we have in the house the
work that taxes on this money
I'd like to thank you you're on
your on your down.
Interesting maybe that was on
rather than use surrounding
states.
And I can tell you from economic
developers you madam chair.
Corporations are interested in
New Mexico and look at one how
much for taxes the state I see
very little.
The question and and that's
happening more than once madam
chair because it and we want to
be able to corporations on a lot
of them this is a business
friendly state and the only way
that you can see that they look
at what else is here.
You can use that next
welcome I mean it's one of those
things madam chair that.
It's just like anything we were
recruiting we want to make sure
the state that were friendly to
them this morning that that
isn't the case when you when you
see how much they actually being
there at how the.
Legislation was each year that
that's a big deal also.
I did have a question on madam
chair and all that I there were
some issues involved.
That case.
So madam chair and chair western
thank you for the first thank
you for the great comments I
did.
this is not the bill that's a
local governments are up in arms
about
one no one on the line.
I.
All of the activity.
Madam chair you have a specific
effective date here in the state
of New Mexico what does that
today.
Are under them taxes are try to
get a.
Madam chair and chair Lundstrom
great question and out of state
I love our secretary our tax
department very much support.
Yeah she's really good in the
apartment.
They did struggle for many many
years and they still are
struggling with their doing
their best and they are they're
great people I really respect
our our tax department work they
do.
I do have a bill that is quite a
burden to them I'm talking with
him about that but this bill is
actually us great
simplification.
For that if you if you actually
look at the bill.
Because we are taking out to
these factors we actually
striving Senator these pages are
striking the two.
If you really FY are from the
tax department they mention that
this is a simplification it will
be easier for them to administer
the corporate tax which
generally is pretty complicated
and hard for them to get through
this this is actually how are.
Madam chair all right
Representative I liked a video
store and everybody was another
country working average
Here she the route the entire.
It is an interesting example.
Does it just.
Unbelievable this on Amazon at
any time for.
Lack.
I appreciate you bringing this
forward thank you madam chair
on.
Thank you
Representative Martinez.
Madam chair thank you very much
representative of.
During the interim we had a
very.
A couple of short conversations
about this and.
I love the idea of
simplification.
It makes it easier for
everybody.
Not only is it easier for the
corporation it's easier for the
tax department.
Just across the board it's
great.
I do have a question.
Does this make it easier for
just for corporations we just
heard a long.
Up conversation about L. L. C.'s
are LLC's Porter this how about
the small mom and pop shops how
are those affected by this yes
so madam chair and there's a
Martinez thank you great
question so this really all is
focused on the corporate income
tax so if someone is struggling
of the strange of a mom and pop
a structured as a corporation
but if they were this would this
would apply to them but this
really is as I mentioned the
very beginning you know the the
couple dozen issues people of
file as a corporation in New
Mexico this would affect them
not the OCD's not the
partnerships or other pass
right.
Representative thank you.
Thank you representative Lente.
Thank you madam chair just a
comment appreciate the comments
by Representative Lundstrom and
I think it's a great compliment
to you
as we move to next committee
that shorten the presentation
but.
Thank you.
Madam chair chairman to.
Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you very presentation I
appreciate you talking to the at
a time so I can get my head
around certain we're we're going
with this
I do have a question that you're
you're track is
I noticed a couple states that
are certainly considered to be
quite wealthy we are.
Those with the Florida and
institutions.
in the in the charges double
give you TV sales.
and then Massachusetts that
sales slash double did you do
this.
I wonder what.
What is that is that something
you should be looking at because
as I noted.
not only are they more prominent
business and we are gonna dance
of coastlines.
Yes madam chair and
Representative Matthews thank
you for the great question this
is a little in the weeds I I
love this question but
what that stands for is double
weighted sales.
And if you think about that
three factor formula as I
described it it was all kind of
you add these three together and
take the average.
But what the states do is they
make even a little more
complicated that the state for
the sales part.
We're gonna double wait it's you
to multiply by two.
So that's how they calculated
it's it's kind of a halfway
point between a single sales
they're saying we're we're still
to consider your payroll in your
square footage but we're really
gonna put more weight on the
sales.
All and madam chair.
Representative I I know this is
just states that do three
factors.
You know these are not the
answer then capitalised.
Anyway it didn't pass it just
sort of says to me that that we
shouldn't let our preconceived
ideas whatever they are taxes
and all of this corporations and
all that we need to we need to
look at reality we need to
figure out what's best for us
not get tied down to.
Dhaba on either side quite
frankly in terms of how we can
this government our own state.
Have more people so I really do
appreciate some bringing this
and I I guess I have one other
question looking into and that
is there was something.
Bill there's some kind of a.
Tax years as act taxes that were
of there's a review of corporate
tax structure in New Mexico I
have been.
Representative Lente is very
committee.
I'm not sure where I said there
was something happening
corporate tax issues.
Madam chair representative
Matthews
I am always excited to study
issues I'm not aware of anything
at the moment.
Energy shows at this without
chair representative Lente if
this passes all the way through
this that can change our tax
structure for corporations.
And in the effective date madam
chair.
Representative with the win.
So.
Madam chair in Representative
Matthews the effective date will
be this coming January.
so January of twenty four would
be the first time this is
implemented so when people file
their taxes in twenty five would
be whether this we see the
change in the tax thank you
thank you
And share.
Representative and if
everybody's comments are down
high Avenue.
They're not on so.
Thank you Representative you
can't since you're the last to
speak but we the advice or make
any sense.
And the role that we can discuss
thank.
Representative and in our new
yes Representative Duncan yes
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente yes
Representative little yes
Representative Lundstrom yes
Representative Martinez yes
Representative Mason yes
Representative Matthews.
Yes it is okay.
Well except.
Madam vice chair yes.
Madam chair yes Madam final
tally is yes votes eleven folks
there.
If you and your committee
members I enjoyed being years to
this afternoon thank you all in
the.
To.
K..
We talked for.
All right we'll see you on
Friday.
It works today.
