I am here.
Representative Dow.
Well there.
All.
Here.
Representative Johnson.
Here.
Representative being as.
Isn't that.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
here.
Here.
If you get a lot.
I am here.
Yes.
I'm here we have a quorum thank
you and welcome everyone as of
now right now we have forty one
attendees.
Representative Hochman Vigil in
as a panelist and then we'll ask
her who well she wishes to to
let in.
And if you could let
Representative Lori Scott in as
a panelist.
Members of the audience watching
at home we're gonna have a
Representative.
A school eight.
And we go to public comment
working average as doctors and
hospitals sixty four these are
a.
Very calm.
Control out.
How to work on.
Is there a with waste.
Okay let me try.
All right thanks everyone
there's also a.
Bills in the Senate on the
Senate side sponsored by leader
Peter Wirth on Griggs that are
hearing and tax business and
transportation last week that a
productive hearing in rules
today.
House Bill th to fifty five has
also been introduced by myself
Rod Montoya Javier Mart√≠nez
Josh Stewart and a non this and
also New Mexico Sanchez day
Hochman B. hill and
Representative guy goes.
so to fifty five will be heard
on Wednesday but we definitely
want to hear the the great ideas
coming out a house plate the
great ideas coming out House
bill one sixty four to
incorporate these best ideas
into if they have an already
been incorporated into to fifty
five so
Having said that Representative
Hochman Vigil who you wish into
the path you wish anybody as a
panelist I thank you Mr very
much Mr chairman at this time if
we could move over on director
Andy by host some RLD and also
US secretary we should cues from
EDD at this time.
And testing will give a we'll
give a minute to come in from
the hallway.
And to sit sit next to you in
the virtual.
The virtual chamber.
And I noticed there is a.
An amendment to house a new
member you also want to talk
about could you read the that
that two oh two number on that
amendment.
I'm thank you very much Mr chair
it's up point two one nine three
four six dot two.
I entertain a motion to to move
the amendment for discussion.
Seeing opposition that a man is
is available to us for
discussion and I would ask that
you present to a.
President await and the and the
amendments as if it's you know
one conference of bill and you
have the floor thank you so very
much for your for your work and
and leadership it's forty years
in the making everyone forty
years in the making and I think
everyone not knows we have to do
this the key is to do it in a
responsible and reasonable way
for those most affected so with
that I'll turn over to you
Representative Hochman Vigil
welcome.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the committee
it's my pleasure to be here
today and this form of ideas to
discuss comprehensive our liquor
licensing reform I first wanna
take a moment to thank director
any by a host of the RLD because
of all of the incredible hard
work that he's put into this
issue R. for for years really
and for his patience with me and
and learning this comprehensive
and very nuanced area of law I
also want to thank secretary
keys for the Economic
Development departments
continuous support of this bill
and I also want to take I think
the governor's office as well
that Garcia for all the work
that you have this it's been a
great team so house bill eight
makes three distinct
modifications to the liquor
control act Mr chairman it
provides to the delivery of
alcoholic beverages to homes and
as a new type of license which
were calling a type B.
restaurant license to permit the
sale of certain alcohol but
alcoholic beverages in
restaurants and it allows
certain dispenses licenses
require a suspended retail
privileges once lost by an inter
local trick transfer of those
types of licenses starting with
the home delivery component of
the bill Mr chairman it creates
a delivery permit to allow for
delivery about two sorry this is
one of the minutes we made out
one bottle of wine one growler
or one six pack of beer however
your you're very smart and
astute analysts did actually
catch the additional issue with
that which we're going to
correct this more but our
language issue and I so permits
for that sale in unbroken
packages with an order of at
least ten dollars worth of food.
The delivery permit would not
would not be transferable from
person to person or from one
location to another and it's
valid for one year it's
renewable the fee for such a
delivery license would be three
hundred dollars for a restaurant
choosing to are utilized to
deliberate license or one
thousand dollars for third party
service choosing to offer
delivery.
There are all the will be
propagating rules that limit
delivered alcohol to again
unbroken packages it'll require
disclosure of delivery fee up
front you're more and
And it would limit deliveries
are to licensees regular
business hours and only at
within at a certain well as to
be determined through further
amendment at certain distance
from those.
Restaurants offering the
delivery or establishment
offering delivery and there will
be other continued regulatory
provisions for oversight
including minimum insurance
provisions of the required and
of course anybody acquiring a
delivery license will have to.
Approved training of such
delivery drivers so that we are
did you can sale of alcohol to
minors or intoxicated persons or
anybody else you should not have
their hands on alcohol as part
of the delivery of the type B.
restaurant license this would so
there's already a type a
restaurant my since Mr chair and
not only can base the right to
sell beer and wine
and this would potentially allow
the take the license would allow
for the sale of additional
alcoholic beverages so spirits
and the like and this will only
happen upon approval by the
local option districts in which
the restaurant is located on
allow for an adoption of an
ordinance and the issuance of
the new type of restaurant
license that would allow for the
sale those alcoholic beverages
are through that ordinance.
If adopted and after the
deduction of the ordinance
restaurant may apply for the
type B. license excuse me if the
applicant has a valid food
service establishment permit I
gets no less than sixty percent
of gross receipts from the
preceding twelve months from the
sale of food and if the
applicant does not sell alcohol
for off site consumption so it
has to be on site consumption
only
lastly the third component of
the bill Mr chairman members of
the committee is the react
acquisition of a suspended
retail privilege so this is one
of those really nuanced areas of
liquor log in New Mexico right
now the law states that for
certain types of licenses
usually dispensers license thank
when we first initiated this
type of regulation there are
only a certain number of
licenses that could only be sold
to certain places around the
state so that we can assure
access to alcohol licenses in an
equitable way between the urban
areas in the rural areas of the
state and so for these types of
licenses which always had a
package still components if that
type of license what the package
was transferred our to another
local option district we're
calling on in our local transfer
usually from an of a rural area
to an urban area it would lose
the package portion of that
license so it would be limited
only to the dispensers license
and so this law would actually
allow for the reinstatement of
the package portion of the
license for a add nominal fee at
one point it was fifty thousand
dollars it's actually been
amended to twenty five thousand
and that would allow for the
reinstatement of the full
licensed dispensers license with
the package of public as well so
there are.
Use me just just fees and such
but at this time Mr chair and
and in the interest of saving
time because I never gonna have
a robust discussion on this I'm
going to introduce Mister Andy
bye hosts are the director of
alcohol and gaming what are the
welcome director.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee I would just suggest
we start with Secretary keys
first and then I can stand for
any questions that you might
have.
Thank you madam secretary
welcome good to see you thank
you thanks for having Mr
chairman and members of the
committee and representative
yeah I just have some very brief
statements so thank you for
agreeing to go second for US
house bill eight is a priority
for economic development it
furthers the goal of
diversifying the economy helping
businesses grow and adding
employees especially in the
rural areas from the very
beginning of the pandemic we
heard from businesses that loud
and clear that they wanted to do
the right thing that they wanted
to follow the public health
order that they wanted to limit
customer contact but they needed
more tools from the state and
from the legislature
the leisure and hospitality
industry a category that
includes restaurants saw a
thirty percent decline in
employment from December twenty
nineteen to December twenty
twenty a loss of twenty nine
thousand jobs the option for a
new type of restaurant license
as well as for the safe delivery
alcohol will provide additional
revenue for restaurants grocery
stores and small breweries so
that means more confidence to
hire and bring back workers as
we move towards a sustainable
recovery and it means these
changes make a lot of sense even
without the pandemic the
chairman said this is been a
long time coming so this feels
this feels like a big move in
something that's super positive
for proprietors in many towns
and also rural communities
across the state maintaining a
full liquor license is expensive
and these areas often have
little to no establishments
licensed to serve liquor adding
the new restaurant license opens
the door for restaurant
operators to serve liquor who
were previously barred from the
liquor industry due to
exorbitant financial barriers so
this will bring more revenue to
a low margin and challenging
business and also just needing a
lot more to.
Us so thank you for letting me
participate today and for give
me a few seconds to comment from
EDD.
And and director he was to
address the committee at this
time.
No Mr chair I'll just stand for
any questions you might have and
to give any technical background
but I think the secretary and
the representative really
something that.
For now.
Mr chairman I'd like to say a
few words please do please do a
co sponsor a resident guy goes
thank you I thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I believe that my
colleague summed up the bill
pretty well and I I just want to
let everybody know it it's still
a work in progress we're
definitely working on amendments
to to continue to emerge
of the chairman's bill and our
bill to make sure it's it is the
co he's a plan that we that
we're all hoping for to to make
sure that it gets passage that
we can get it to the governor
and and we can get a signed bill
to me this bill represents a
major investment in economic
recovery for restaurants and
liquor industries specifically
the provision in the bill that
allows for delivery of liquor
from retail liquor license
holders and restaurant beer and
wine licenses is in line with
the changes that we're seeing on
how our customers are accessing
food and other commodities this
pandemic has pushed more people
to get comfortable with the
delivery of groceries and other
goods people are ordering
groceries shoes and clothing
online should this bill pass the
person of legal age would be
able to add whiner beer and
other spirits to their grocery
order such as Walmart or
Albertsons if if they were
permitted for delivery service
or person can call in order from
a local liquor store that offers
delivery I this I believe that
this bill will entice more
restaurants to come back and
open up for business I think
this bill will help the liquor
establishments to get back on
track and I think especially
with the
everybody just hurting so to so
much right now with this
pandemic that this is the
kickstart that we need in this
industry and so with that Mr
chairman I would stand for
questions as well.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
You very much Mr chair and
members the committee thank you
very much co sponsor
Representative great goes thank
you for your words I appreciate
that it's so awkward zoom
atmosphere so I apologize for
not knowing how to include
everybody who should be speaking
or not so my apologies
specifically and with that Mr
chairman I think we're good to
start the discussion.
Thank you very much
Representative Hochman Vigil
Representative guy goes
tremendous tremendous work
tremendous thought went into
this bill
it is a.
This like a semester of
economics of thrown a little bit
of politics so I just thank you
out for these great ideas before
we go to members of the of the
public let's switch over to.
House bill one sixty four house
bill one sixty four
Representative Lori Scott has
been involved in these issues
for some time and has brought
forth a very innovative and and
great ideas on how to undo
essentially a.
Fifty or statutory scheme are
going back to nineteen thirty
three after prohibition you know
a seventy nine year statutory
scheme so with that
Representative Scott I'll turn
it over to you you have the
floor and welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Members of the committee on
bringing.
One sixty four.
Before the committee for
consideration.
And.
For perhaps members.
Are your with the problem.
There are forces on one side of
this issue.
Demand additional access to.
Alcohol.
A retail services.
And on for economic development
purposes.
And forces on the other side of
the issues that have a
significant asset values
established with existing
licenses.
And
For example many of these
existing licenses are pledged as
collateral.
for blank wall many of these
licenses or.
Our life savings from the owners
of these permits so.
These two forces act in
opposition and.
And there have been.
Over the last three four years
five years multiple screens.
Four four to try to address the.
Economic development concerns
all of which have so for been
unsuccessful for various reasons
are one of the big ones being
challenged by.
Existing license holders.
My proposal or House Bill.
Sixty four.
Is relatively simple solution.
To a complex problem.
And what.
What.
This would do is at.
A fixed number of licenses for
dispensaries licenses to the
inventory every year.
The auction process.
With the proceeds of the
auction.
Going to the state.
As drafted.
So truly no restrictions on
where the license can be
located.
There's no minimum bid.
There are.
Your work market forces now in
the early years.
Most of these licenses would be.
More likely awarded to.
Of businesses in our population
centers.
But there is no upper limit on
the number of licenses that can
be issued so over time.
The value of these apartments
would decline.
To the point were truly.
And I say isn't truly
My target was seven to ten year
period.
Everyone wanted to serve alcohol
would be able to do so for what
consensually would be.
Three.
Gloucester Department.
There have been and
conversations with.
Industry so.
Health.
And conversations with industry
it was discussed that perhaps.
Five percent was was too many
licenses to issue one year there
were also conversations about
whether there should be a
minimum bid.
As.
Annually perhaps a declining
anymore it.
But the ultimate objective would
be.
Issuance of a significant number
of new licenses.
While at the same time providing
a soft landing over a.
Quite a number of years for the
holders of existing licenses and
that's all I do with that Mr
chairman I will stand for
questions.
Thank you very much so.
Representative Scott very much
for bringing this forward we
will now go to members of the of
the audience and and for those
folks who haven't been on the
zoom before we can see your
names you can't you can't see
your name here in up zoom room
called attendee there's fifty
three attendees so assuming most
do you want to speak if you do
want to speak please raise your
hand within the zone.
Raise your hand we're not gonna
go opponents or proponents
because there's so many
complicated policy issues
involved we want
We want our criticism of the
idea but more importantly I
would ask the public to focus on
one thing and that is how do we
How do we
Give a soft landing to those
folks who made decisions and
investments and plans with their
existing licenses.
Localizes is essentially a
permission by the state when
when liquor became legal after a
constitutional amendment in
nineteen thirty three.
The federal government left up
to the states the states then
granted permission to folks and
in New Mexico that permission
was one liquor license per two
thousand people.
And that was the way to regulate
liquor at that time will in the
fifties and sixties it it it
morphed into liquor license is
being sold being least being
transferred and then it became
allowable in state law and so
that's how you get a liquor
license.
When you take a get a driver's
test you take the driver's test
you take the eye test they give
you a card you're good to go to
get a liquor license you apply
you qualify or not and if you
qualify the state doesn't have
your card you have to buy the
card from an existing license
holder they became in excess of
two hundred thousand dollars
several years ago there now in
excess of half a million dollars
if we don't do anything they'll
be upwards of a million dollars
for not to renew or to get into
this market so I think
everyone's in agreement we have
to lower the barriers to entry.
But how do we do that in a
responsible reasonable way with
with the statutory scheme that
the state.
The state came up with so anyway
with that we'll go to members of
the audience I will say your
name but I want you to say your
name and you know maybe where
you're from maybe what
restaurant you're with or what
association and then everyone
will get
You know one to two minutes to
address the committee so for
those who wish to address the
committee please press the the
hand button there's about.
Fifteen you so far so why don't
we go up to minutes a person and
we'll start with you us Sir
Eugene welcome.
Thank you can you hear me we
sure can't.
Okay thank you the chairman my
asked us and the rest of the
committee for the opportunity to
speak my name is Eugene Moyer
and my wife and I
we purchased a business many
years back and along with that
business a a liquor license and
and as you have expressed you
know the liquor license
was very costly in that
transaction it was a big part of
the transaction
and we use that to secure
financing which we are still you
know we still have
a commercial loan against the
business that we're paying on we
also finance the second mortgage
on our primary residence to to
be able to execute transaction
and so so just based on that you
could understand that this is
very very concerning to us are
we've we have worked extremely
hard to maintain a successful
business
you know we we employed people
the whole the whole bit that
everybody does that is running a
business.
the a lot of the issues that
have been brought up you know
our I'm I'm glad to hear people
voicing that there's concern for
people like us that you know
follow the rules as the rules
were in those rules have been
you know at this point
you know we we took a risk and
we we have expended you know
invested in a in this huge
investment and and I've worked
very hard to maintain it and so
it's very concerning.
That the you know depending on
what happens here the value of
the license that we.
That we invested in again
following all the rules
may be seriously depleted
I want to be clear though
I don't have any issue with.
It's not about not allowing
others into the business it's
not I allowing you know other
features to be added such as
delivery I think I think that's
a fine idea
I just.
Think that there needs to be you
know serious consideration given
to those of us and there's many
of us you know I think I don't
know if this is true or not but
there's you know a lot of
Hello a lot of talk that there's
a narrative that you know only
extremely wealthy people or
corporations on liquor licenses
in New Mexico and I can vouch
for the fact.
Just myself that that is not
true there's thank I know
there's a lot of of small owners
and and people that are regular
people just like many of us that
are on this call and you know
the this is not just about
Walmart.
At Centro
there's a lot of us that are
trying to make a living.
Like everybody else and so.
I just ask this committee to to
be open to consideration on to
Two inputs on.
Options for you know I guess the
term for it is called a soft
landing we that's what I've been
hearing
you know I I know there's a lot
of things being kicked around.
In two minutes I don't think you
know that's the this is the
right time to be able to talk
about all those different
options but I ask that you give
those of us that our current
license owners.
Opportunity and ample
opportunity to be able to
provide input and provide
suggestions and ideas that can
work for everybody.
Those of us that are currently
in the business and currently
working with licenses as well as
you know those that are
interested in in getting into
the business.
So I'll leave it at that for
now.
Thank you Mr my very much over a
Marci Dickerson please on mute
yourself.
It's thank you chairman can you
hear me yes.
Thank you thank you chairman and
members of the committee I
appreciate the opportunity my
name is Marci Dickerson I live
in Los crucis New Mexico I own
for three liquor licenses and
currently least one liquor
license from the state at our
catering facility at the New
Mexico farm and ranch museum I
have two concerns today first of
all of course the soft landing
may I make two suggestions one
suggestion would be.
It that these provide those
license holders you currently
have a license because it is.
I'm sorry to hear me now we can
but start over with your for
suggestions.
I apologize my first suggestion
is that the state of New Mexico
as we know those liquor licenses
which are you know normally
finance would definitely
decrease in value that the state
would provide some common
compensation the state tax
credits for the value of our
licenses that could be something
that was given out over you know
a period of five years but that
the state would come in and give
us a compensatory tax credit on
our state taxes that we pay our
state payroll taxes and
hopefully that would help with
the soft landing that is one
suggestion
my second can you still hear me
Sir we sure can't thank you okay
perfect I'm sorry my second
suggestion and this is one that
you know we discussed a little
bit but I I haven't had an
opportunity to get in front of
you also let me let me put it
this way and explained it very
quickly I think a very easy easy
way to make this happen to allow
for more licenses to be given
out there to be a made available
to the state all the while
financially compensating those
people that own the licenses now
is do something which I refer to
as a stock split what that would
mean is one of my licenses would
suddenly turn into three
licenses from the state and part
of that within that.
Start with part of that say part
of that you.
We lost you open to more
businesses with it which more
this is why at this happening to
everyone selling other two
licenses would flood the market
that would create a decrease in
the prices it would end up my
estimate my contest that would
end up that the prices of the
licenses would end up at about a
hundred thousand dollars which
is probably what we need as well
as it would then compensate
those people that own it it
would make the banks hold
because as we sold those
licenses we would have to pay
them off and that would keep
everybody's asset books balanced
and everything going on I'd be
more than willing I have this in
detail I'd be more than willing
to discuss that I know within
two minutes we can't my third
point on this is certainly the
safety in the history of New
Mexico New Mexico as bad very
much anti alcohol we have been
very concerned with D. W. eyes
would be concerned with that's
caused by drinking and driving
we've been concerned with minors
drinking and those things and
all of a sudden because we need
economic development which I
certainly agree with I don't
think that we can just move
forward drastically and flood
our streets with alcohol and
expects that we will not see an
increase in tragedy we will not
see an increase in domestic
violence child abuse six cetera
and I do not see any of these
bills that we have a plan for
more enforcement I know that our
alcohol or alcohol forcing
officers are ready you know we
have two officers for all of
Dona Ana County that's pretty
you know that's a lot of places
that they have to monitor so
those are my comments today I
don't take up any more of your
time you know safety certainly
concerned and the economics of
the section be license is my
primary concern I will say I do
not have a problem with delivery
I think the delivery part of
this regulation is something
that should move forward and
certainly is a very positive
move and could possibly have a
very positive impact.
Thank you Mr president and and
for folks at the listening at
home that was about for three
minutes forty five seconds when
you go to minutes also say two
minutes and just to give an idea
everyone gets a two to three
minutes Mr Mike Cheney welcome
on mute yourself.
Mr chair can you hear me.
Yes Sir.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you very much I
love in Riyadh though so and own
the win place and show bar and
package store the bard packed
backstory stab wished in
nineteen fifty six.
Really the third owners and we
only bought it in twenty
eighteen so we're one of the new
license holders that invested
our life savings into this to
full dispensers license and
honestly the package doors all
that's kept us alive during this
pandemic
our revenue has dropped over
fifty percent because the bar
has been close we've been close
for three hundred twenty five
days now and we have gone from
twenty employees down to my wife
and I working seven days a week
so.
That's the reality we paid six
thousand dollars for liquor
license and recently got an
appraisal of six hundred
thousand dollars.
We were told that if we
transferred oracle license was
transferred out of district and
that licensed we were three
hundred twenty five thousand
dollars so offered let people
spend ten fifteen twenty
thousand whatever the number is
to achieve a full dispenser
license does not seem equitable
to me
if if the value of my liquor
license falls and have my bank
loan has a covenant in there to
where I must maintain it that to
work ratio of three to one for
every three dollars in debt I
have one dollar and equity if
that liquor license falls in
half my number would go to seven
the one my loan goes into
default which increases the rate
which may even be callable I
don't know what would happen
honestly on the deal but I'm
just trying to share with you
the reality of what we're
working with so that as you
consider and I appreciate all
service you consider these
actions the impact it's going to
help people like me
you know I don't disagree with
some others that I mean I I
believe in the free market I
want to be able to just compete
on a level playing field but at
the end of the day allowing
people.
Yeah thank you allowing people
to get in for a cost much less
than what I got in for it is
just an bill equitable so thanks
for your time.
Thank you Sir.
Oscar on that are on it
yourself.
Yes we can.
Members of the committee my name
is Oscar on the roadway I'm the
president and owner of stores in
southern New Mexico.
The twenty locations twenty
three locations
licenses with the intention of
building new locations
additional background Fauria I
started in center street when I
was eighteen years old at seven
eleven stores and have been the
business for forty years so I'm
getting old and current but a
lot of time in this industry I
was very fortunate in nineteen
eighty four to be able to come
in and with my investments
improper sharing our server
Senator storage.
Take over and purchase strict
but storage that was founded in
nineteen fifty eight so we
currently operates stores in
hatch New Mexico and in New
Mexico and bother New Mexico as
the New Mexico around the border
with Texas and of course Los
crucis.
So.
Stern again I
Started eighteen our work my way
through the system
Maybe the acquisition with my
life savings back them and
Purchase liquor licenses on the
open market
and so one of my concerns and I
number limited here but
coating an article that was
written
By Hannah Grover we make a
comment about
That you have less concerned
about the impacts of
corporations like straight away
is a liquor licenses reduce in
value than mom and pop
businesses well I am that mom
and pop business my parents are
both from Mexico my mom is from
second across maple by data from
Monterrey Mexico I'm first
generation Hispanic.
And when I went to the bench to
rebuilt procrit store secure
over stores when I came into the
market.
I knew that I had to acquire
liquor licenses there are
availability of liquor licenses
now so there's not a shortage of
licenses for several and you
know during these hearings now
gonna be more available licenses
because people are going to be a
panic.
I was able to acquire loans for
new construction
for the liquor license and again
based on the lower control act
that was written in nineteen
eighty two.
So.
Okay so are you on the plan try
to make this that I am a
minority owned business I hate
to play the race card but I am
the poster child for the person
that you're trying to help or
individuals are trying to help
to get into the industry
allowing more liquor licenses
into the system and especially
if you're over fifty thousand
dollars they're going to go to
all the national chains for
national trains for crisis out
there's no predatory pricing
laws in New Mexico and that
would allow them to sell below
cost or restrictive Malone so
below cost and so could be
devastating to my forty years in
this industry my daughter works
for me is more public controller
educated at UNM I'm sorry I
missed you
I have three hundred plus
employees all my employees are
promoted within the system all
the money that I are we make
status in the community and
Alexa said the ad in more
licenses were not needed but
back up in a mix of economic
impact that you're trying to
accomplish we need more
population not more licenses so
I would agree and the liquor
control act currently allows for
more licenses with the growth of
population we have not have the
population I believe there are a
lot.
Hello that is because of the
restrictions that we have in New
Mexico so again I have much more
to say but I would like to to
serve the fact that you know
we've been doing.
What's been proposed it will
destroy my forty years in
industry
and three hundred plus employees
and who knows when we go from
there.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you Mr on that are just a.
Just a quick comment
what's being proposed is to
expand
Liquor licenses for restaurants.
For restaurants to sell liquor
by the drink up until eleven
o'clock at night with food so no
question it will disrupt the
entire market of local agents is
but the proposal on the table
now is
Is allowing restaurants to not
get full dispensary licenses not
till two in the morning but
restaurants to sell spirits with
food but all your comments are
very valuable and we appreciate
you mentioned that for the time.
I'm gonna say two minutes which
doesn't cut you off but everyone
gets to three minutes of Mr
Patrick block.
Followed by.
Enroll for at G. mail Mr block
welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and good
afternoon Mister chairman and
chairman and members of the
committee I'm locked in today
I'm speaking on behalf of the
New Mexico retail association
and Walmart well we're gonna
speak to the delivery portions
of house bill eight today as
majority whip by guy it goes put
it we live in a rapidly changing
world and home delivery of
groceries and other goods was
already on the rise before the
pandemic.
The COVID nineteen has greatly
accelerated that rate of change
and a significant portion of the
public expects delivery of goods
including beer wine and spirits.
Retailers large and small either
on their own or using third
parties are currently providing
help curbside delivery not only
to offer better service to their
customers but also to allows
customers to better follow COVID
safe practices.
Yes No eight is an active
retailers be able to include
alcoholic beverages those
deliveries we're convinced that
this bill provides a solid
framework that enhances consumer
convenience and safety while
providing sufficient controls to
prevent sales to minors or too
intoxicated for.
So in closing I'd like to thank
the sponsors will bring this
legislation forward and thank
you all for your time.
Thank you very much.
And we.
It's and R. O. E. UFO at G. mail
of please on mute yourself
welcome.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
thank.
The gentleman got cut off so Sir
on mute yourself.
Welcome you okay thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman once again
thank you members of the
committee my name is Neil row
and my brother and I have.
Have pepper's grill and bar here
in Roswell New Mexico we are a
small family run operation with
one restaurant liquor license
our I've been at it for forty
one years we've had two other
places prior to this one
restaurant that scared us like I
said for the last thirty one
years so I do have a lot of
experience and and a lot into
this industry
I don't know if you're white saw
our with us but I was a when a
New Mexico's restaurateur of the
year and ninety one and so on
and so on I think everybody's
pretty much put it out there of
that I could think of I do have
just a couple quick things and
I'll give it to somebody else as
far as
the change of the liquor license
and adding the B. side of the
restaurant license there's
there's a bunch of complication
going from beer and wine to
spirits
not only the skill set that's
needed and and and the the
restaurant bar has to be watched
a little more carefully because
once you at spirits
you're talking about shots
that's the main thing shots of
tequila shots across oil shocks
of the shots of that which would
not happen with the beer wine
license of margaritas are then
involved which is a lot of
alcohol in margaritas
being just to keep electrical
second maybe some lime juice or
sweet and sour so there's issues
there
I also
and very concerned but this is
been mentioned but that's
dilution of the value of our
licenses again up there and my
upper sixties I've been doing
this a long long time and from
the very beginning from buying
the license license a long time
ago to paying my annual fees of
two missing never expected that
our license would lose its value
all.
The last thing I want to mention
or something that was in the
bill and that's the sixty forty
ratio of food and liquor
a typical restaurant at least
money that has been here a long
time we're always under thirty
percent alcohol insurance
companies make it very tough one
to go over thirty either they
don't sell the product of
insurance where the price goes
up exponentially so forty
percent is an awful lot of
alcohol and I thought I'd put
that on the table for you to
know and I really appreciate get
the same I. peace and we
appreciate everything you do up
there in Santa Fe.
Thank you Sir Raymond Santurce
followed by.
I'm on.
Process Mr such as welcome thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Raymond
Sanchez Attorney in Albuquerque
and I represent all subs all I
will make my comments very very
brief discussion light of the
fact that
My state representative is the
sponsor of this bill
magnificently long built.
You I would like to point out Mr
chairman for everybody or just
balance on what everybody else's
also to the X. choir.
This throughout Mexico.
More.
All read the rural areas alike
but a lot of in the in the rural
areas of New Mexico where they
do deliveries.
One on deliveries I can remember
back when I was in college on
they allowed a liquor license or
rather package liquor to be
delivered.
At that time there was no
difficulty in many of us having
that liquor delivered to us when
we were under age the statue
limitations has passed all of us
so I could tell you that there
was no problem and I I read this
building although it has a lot
of safety devices built into it
and language built into it.
that's a dangerous prospect no
matter how you look at it.
It will affect the the package
to create industry and that's
what we are prevalent in our
with regard to the expansion of
liquor licenses.
That is also very problematic
many people have spoken on that
before me I'm sure many of those
who own liquor licenses will
speak about it and in the future
on my family had a liquor
license many many years ago and
I'll tell you.
It was easy to get rid of on
today it's a little more
difficult because of the high
prices and we recognize that and
I recognize I want to recognize
the fact that the.
Of the Sanchez a put a lot of
time into this bill not only
that a but I notice I just
printed up your up seventy seven
page bill that I haven't been
able to get through yet so
there's a lot of liquor
legislation pending all of the
site to be very careful what we
do they need to be consolidated
at some point or another I'm
sure you're thinking of that Mr
chairman as must be the
leadership with that in mind Mr
chairman we stand reluctantly in
opposition to this legislation.
Thank you Sir.
Ramona set us followed by
teaching through he'll.
Please send me yourself miss
Ramona.
Discuss this going in on mute
yourself you have the floor.
Welcome.
We can hear you welcome.
Welcome my name is mark rose I
I.
In the present.
In my going out of order or no
Mr Marcos you're you're up.
Your screen says Ramona Gonzalez
but more growth welcome mark my
assistant is Ramona Services G.
handed me her a device in more
than two it was I didn't
recognize I also like it to
start my two minutes because
it'll it'll help the sort of
learn that what I need to say I
presented an op memorandum in
opposition which I hope that you
and the rest of the committee
has an opportunity to read
because I think it's more detail
basically New Mexico's cells
eighty five percent of its
liquor package for to go sales
so the ultimate stakeholders and
liquor like license legislation
as Mr Representative Sanchez
former representative is the
package Likud street the reason
that they are affected in this
particular piece of legislation
is that it creates an effective
domino effect because the first
element of the domino is that by
adding spirits to beer and wine
licenses which are free licenses
that impacts the value of full
service by the drink licenses in
order to apparently placate the
full service by the jury folks
from the value they lose on
their license what happens is
the you allow them to reinstate
package which completely impacts
the package liquor industry the
problem is the dominant stop at
that point and there is
absolutely nothing done to
reimburse they're the ones that
have the greatest to lose in
this particular legislation even
though on the surface it doesn't
appear to affect them
specifically I'm gonna address
the spirits element because I
represent a lot of individuals
within the industry slight hold
them on how much hard spirits
actually adds to their sales and
the answer was.
Across the board that was three
four percent so one of million
dollar business we're talking
about thirty thousand dollars in
additional revenue if you add
hard spirits to a existing free
beer and wine lists.
One would think based on the
projections that I've heard and
reviewing what I can get my
hands on from economic
development within the state
that restaurants stand to lose
thirty stand to make three
thousand dollars more through
delivery so if this component of
the legislation was removed it
would solve many problems
simultaneously it would solve
the problem of one impacting
full service I drink licenses
and offering to give them back
package I would seriously
recommend eliminating the
addition of spirits to beer and
wine licenses for has been
stated repeatedly it adds a
level of licensor that is
unnecessary right now you have
seven hundred twelve beer and
wine restaurant licenses if they
are free licenses it is
conceivable if not probable that
you will double that amount five
years if you increase the number
of liquor outlets by seven
hundred to eight hundred
licenses and five years on that
level you're going to literally
exponentially increase the
amount of look related
fatalities to address that point
specifically I went back to the
same people three medic provided
an economic analysis for the
legislature four years ago the
bureau group at UNM with
economists who waited to
specifically talk about what is
the economic impacts they came
back and I legislative report
which I provided to your
committee as well as
Representative Hochman and
representative Scott
Representative guy a goes about
the adverse impact of this
legislation I'm.
Separately.
Still if I might just sort of
sum it up
our group and I represent the
New Mexico package liquor
Association.
Who include many of the people
who are speaking this afternoon
our position is very simple
number one.
We support with some changes the
liver things because we
understand that is a component
of economic development that
makes sense in quite frankly may
be overdue I would point out
that the insurance provisions
are too low Representative shop
the verdicts are well in excess
of a million dollars the
enforcement L. elements are kind
of lax at the point but I would
be more than happy if anyone
wants my up what to help
I would however say that the
rest will is problematic and I
in relation to a solution rather
than just a industry that comes
forward and rejects out of hand
bills that are presented on
liquor.
I have talked to Representative
Scott.
And if this legislation and
Senate bill six are not passed I
would like very much to continue
and will continue the discussion
with with Representative Scott
because I think he has sort of
backed into a situation where
strong five minutes I'm sorry if
yet there's if I may just finish
my train of thought that I was
doing and I appreciate the
courtesy or expanding if.
There is a limited finite number
of licenses that are presented
to the market and the proceeds
go to the state you saw two
birds with once you kill two
birds with one stone thank you
very much for allowing me the
additional time thank you Sir
and everyone introduce
themselves and who they
represent right off the bat
teacher Trujillo followed by the
agency already welcome Mr
Trujillo.
Good to see you Mr chairman.
Members of the committee of
follow Sanchez of the various
bills my name is TJ to real
registered lobbyists for the New
Mexico all call all call lance
would start by a first of all
thank you all the different
sponsors of the part the most
most of you and greatly
appreciate and on behalf of the
New Mexico Alliance of you guys
being willing to sit down and
listen to us and and work with
us we're in the process of
trying to figure out the
different options much like
everyone else.
I would reemphasize to pool
points because I want to save
you time Mr chairman members of
the committee to get to let the
committee debate two quick
points because folks have a
covered most of what I want to
cover one yes the soft landing
is use as you say I think Mr
chairman is is a critical thing
for the members if we're going
to go down this path of changing
their obviously our position is
we don't want any changes to the
existing situation.
However if if we're gonna go
down this the soft landing is
important as part of the us stop
soft lining including some kind
of monetary compensation or
monetary relief the second major
point is a lot of our members of
the as it is been indicated.
Use this as collateral when
banking situations again I think
we discussed as some kind of
lender loan lender protection
provision needs to be developed
and will continue to have those
discussions with the responses
in order to protect those people
that
need that we're going to
continue.
Operating in New Mexico with
that Mr chairman thank you for
the time and I look forward to
to the debating hearing the
different thoughts that are out
there.
Thank you very much miss salary
welcome.
I'm good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee my name is the
nationality and I'm the
registered lobbyists for Garcia
Erreway LLC I respectfully stand
in opposition to house bill
eight I've talked with the
Sanchez about my concerns in the
last five years my client has
invested one million and ninety
five thousand dollars towards
their liquor licenses we own six
licenses additionally my clients
have invested in design and
construction of horizontal and
vertical construction land
planning and attorneys in the
amount of ten million dollars in
private capital from Garcia
family investments their most
recent license was purchased in
August of twenty twenty they
still owe a tremendous amount on
their notes to the bank as
Representative Scott addressed
house bill eight would nullify
their investment overnight it
does not in any manner recognize
the risk and investment that my
client has undergone based on
the value of their license we
think it is deplorable to reduce
the value and discourage
investment in New Mexico this is
the wrong message to send to
people that want to invest in
our state especially during this
distrust economic time as I
discussed in Senate tax for the
more bill Senate bill six we
would like to see package
reinstated for the inner local
districts that lost our package
due to the move from one
district to another specifically
for those that purchased in the
last five years an amendment
that would automatically at no
cost provided I'll do with
package would provide some
relief to those folks that will
experience overnight the
valuation additionally we like
to see the bill amount amended
to allow for some sort of cure
to deduction or license in
perpetuity which will allow for
additional economic relief the
message house bill eight cents
to investors is inappropriate
and lacks recognition of the
investment put forth in pursuing
economic investment and
innovativeness and rest I do not
think this is a message to say
New Mexico should be sending to
our economic partners and
investors I sent my suggested
language the sponsors of this
legislation I hope they will
consider amending so we may
support this legislation thank
you very much.
Thank you Mr Mr Pat Keane
followed by excuse me followed
by more stress.
Hi this is Pat Jerry keen here
from artichoke cafe in
Albuquerque New Mexico welcome
hi how are you on we are just a
little bit about us we opened
our Joe cafe thirty one years
ago we didn't even have enough
money to buy the building so
Terry's dad had cosign for us at
the time we did I get a beer
wine license because that was
all we could afford to and I
think for twenty years we got by
with a beer and wine license
until we have enough credit that
we could buy a liquor license we
bought it because we thought it
would be a good investment and
something that when we sold the
restaurant would be an asset and
we believe that to be true until
this recent that proposal to
change the liquor license laws
so it's been a little bit
disconcerting for us and we
definitely are think that Baker
license reform could be a really
good thing if it's done
correctly and kind of slowly
especially in this economy but
we also think that liquor
license holders need to be
reimbursed somehow.
We looked at the gross receipts
tax a proposal for reimbursing
that way it doesn't really make
anybody whole and especially in
this economy gross receipts tax
are greatly reduced and that
there is a proposal out there
for a technology attacks on
screen by the.
Less living a supplemental tax
of four percent and drinks and
to present our retail bottles
you know the could not be bonded
against reimbursed liquor
license holders and then we
could even keep that tax going
because I don't think anybody
without too much objection to a
tax and a drink.
When the eight they're willing
to pay twenty dollars for it
crap opt in to use yes the user
Tax in it's a choice after that
that money could go into the
state coffers to use for other
good purposes and that's that's
where we stand on it I'd like to
the we don't have any problem
with liquor license reform we
think it we wish when we it was
in fact when we purchased our
liquor license you know fifteen
years ago
what we do have a problem with
is that the states seems to
devalue the liquor license
doesn't give it doesn't give
liquor license holders much
credit for following the the
state law in the alcoholic
beverage control law that
required us to purchase a three
hundred fifty thousand dollar
liquor license at the time in
order to sell liquor by the
drink and now.
It's as if the state and is is
telling us that it was a bad
investment and we don't think it
was a bad investment and we hope
that the state realizes that the
people that I've spent.
Millions and millions and
millions of dollars on their
liquor licenses
Had a licenses off over ten
fifteen years to a bank and.
We think that it's it's
important.
To understand that.
Liquor licenses are worth more
than two hundred thousand
dollars.
Credit on gross receipts tax.
Thank you Mr Mrs came very much
Mr Thomas all by Mr John
Anderson.
Welcome Sir thank you thank you
Mr chairman my name is mo Chavez
and I am the registered
lobbyists for responsible liquor
license coalition and Mr
chairman and members of the
committee
while I appreciate the Sanchez
Representative Hochman Vigil and
Representative guy goes and the
office of the governor for
working with my group I'm trying
to make this bill better we
stand in strong opposition to
the bill as you heard if this
bill is passed a significant
number of New Mexicans who've
invested their lives quite
frankly in this license and its
value will see the value of
their license diminish plain and
simple Mr chairman you said
something earlier when you were
talking about the state of New
Mexico and a license is
permission by the state and I
agree with you one hundred
percent so let's talk about what
equitable what equity I want you
to thinking about what you think
about what you're doing to this
industry in this license what
about the medical cannabis
industry there's thirty six
thirty five thirty six medical
cannabis licenses that were
given out
two thirty six lucky individuals
or groups around the state in
those licenses are worth
millions are those license is
going to be opened up as well
you only think that it's
equitable to do so if you're one
after these licenses and one
more the gaming industry there
are five or six gaming licenses
which are worth in excess of ten
million dollars around the state
one soul down in Hobbs for
ninety five million I believe so
my question is why are we
attacking this small industry
when you've got to other
industries whose licenses are
worth more.
Open those industries as well
and then we can have a talk Mr
chairman members of the
committee thank you very much
for your time.
Thank you Sir Mr John Anderson
welcome.
But in on mute yourself thank
thank you Mr chairman can hear
me please.
We sure can longer thank you so
much Mr chair I'll be great I'm
John Anderson hi Representative
New Mexico bankers Association.
And as was discussed by
Representative Scott and Mr
Cheney.
we have a concern with regard to
this bill and so far as it the
harm it may cause to our
collateral that as you know
banks often land to businesses
which pleasure liquor licenses
as collateral for for loans are
concerned with the bill is that
it is likely that the licenses
will substantially declined in
value which will impact the
value of our collateral.
That will cause banks to seek
additional collateral from our
customers to make up the lost
the value of the collateral is
that customer has additional
unrestricted collateral which
we're which says they're willing
to pledge.
That will cure the banks bankers
problem and and also why our
customers problem if not that
loan is likely to be classified
by our regulators as
substandard.
And loans can be classified
substandard if they're in
adequately protected by the
collateral pledged.
And those loans are
characterized by the likely
possibility that the bank will
sustain some losses if
deficiencies are not corrected.
If not corrected that we may be
forced to basically right the
loan off at the direction of our
regulators which will basically
cause us to lose substantial
funding and something we
currently would not want to do
what we could at the end of the
day actually take a foreclosure
action against our customer
which is the last thing we want
to do and certainly have no
interest in holding a liquor
license one of the things that
we think is also very important
is to find some way to
compensate those liquor license
holders that are basically going
to lose great value in their
licenses I was reminded many
years ago worked on eminent
domain built for the legislature
and I was reminded of what's
considered a partial taking and
some ways that's what we're
doing here obviously this isn't
going to be a eminent domain
situation my needs but there is
that that thought that perhaps
we're looking at a partial
condemnation if you well if the
legislature could comes up with
some way to compensate those
license holders that are being
they're basically building I
think of no fault of their own
losing value in the licensors I
think that would be crucial the
other thing I wanted to mention
this another banking issue and
that has to do with the capacity
to borrow.
Right what if a liquor license
holder are basically realize we
rely very much on the net worth
of a borrower when we determine
loan capacity how much you're
gonna able to borrow as well as
your capacity or if you take a
look at a.
Net worth statement for any
number of license holders this
is going to be substantially
decreasing their net worth and
their ability to borrow and so
that's just another issue that I
think that the committee should
consider and we want to thank
you very much for the
opportunity to testify we also
want to make it clear that we
know that the end game in this
is economic development for the
state which we very very much
support but again we oppose the
bill for the purposes for those
reasons that I just stated thank
you so much thank you Sir Mister
Tom Hennessey.
Followed by and they can Donna
on mute yourself thank welcome
Mr and see thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee.
I my opinion on this is is what
we're using the guise of COVID
and under the pretense of
helping restaurants we're
substantially reshaping the
liquor control act and it's
gonna hurt businesses and
individuals
we've made a significant
investment in liquor licenses to
operate.
The two aspects many people have
already talked about the the
loss of value in the liquor
licenses but there are two
aspects in this bill that are
going to substantially hurt
sales for package licenses if
you allow a license to transfer
of the local option district
without losing the package it
basically eliminates the value
of a retailer Lasance according
to Mr by a host of director by a
host figures those licenses are
working million dollars now.
I work for rural company and
we're a local New Mexico company
and we own three of those so
right off the bat those licenses
would value would be down to one
point five million.
Further if we're able to buy
back to the dispenser part of
the.
The I. L. D. license for fifty
thousand dollars that could
potentially put four hundred and
seven new package licenses in
the mix.
Which again it will impact our
overall sales if there are that
many more package stores
available.
One of the fundamental things
that that they have.
We have an issue with with the
bill is the alcohol delivery.
It's presented under the posture
that it will help small
businesses and restaurants but
it would primarily those profits
of big box stores and Amazon and
it'll hurt local businesses.
The bill requires that payment
for alcohol delivery and quality
shall be received only at the
licensed premise of the lack of
the selling licensee.
Most restaurants through the
pandemic have adapted to
delivery by using third party
delivery systems like door dash
and grow up the payment
structure on these apps directs
the payment suicide door dash
who then reimburses the retailer
if restaurants are going to
deliver alcohol it will require
them to completely change the
way that they're currently
handling their food deliveries
investments in technology
vehicles and staff to be able to
get it off the ground.
I'd like to note that this that
the this bill did pass in the
Senate in the tax business and
transportation committee and
that there were no restaurants
that spoke in favor of the bill
in fact the only organization
that spoke in favor of the bill
was The New Mexico retail
association.
The board of directors for this
association is comprised of
representatives from Walmart
Walgreens target CVS and yes
Amazon they're the ones that are
pushing the delivery the big box
stores have thrived through this
pandemic and this bill gives
them yet another windfall in the
home delivery space they already
have the delivery platform three
minutes including the technology
vehicles and staff to implement
this immediately local
restaurants and other businesses
will once again be left behind.
I would ask that you vote no on
this bill thank you Mr chairman
I appreciate your time thank you
Sir Mr Anthony can Donna is on
mute yourself followed by.
Hi you.
Welcome Mr gonna.
Going on mute yourself.
Mr can done as the floor we can
always come back to what is
going on mute yourself.
Yeah sure can well.
How you doing today Mr chairman
good thank you Sir welcome my
name is Ronald Anthony can
brought in my family we are
small restaurant owner of those
here in Silver City New Mexico.
And we've been operating here in
the area for about given that
to twelve years we have a.
Dispenser license we have a
restaurant beer and wine license
and we also have a small brewers
license we are opposed to these
new bills are being introduced
just because of the economical
impact that it would take on our
license even though we have a
beer and wine license and would
also benefit the reason why our
opposes just because we think
that there should be more of a
conscience
effort done with introducing
bills and expanding liquor
licenses in the state with
consideration of the investment
of the owners that are ready.
Have obtained their license
without devaluing those
licenses.
I think I agree with the Marci
Dickerson as far is having maybe
the option of possibly splitting
licenses without devaluing or
devaluing the license in terms
of what you owe on your.
On your loans to the banks but
we're just strongly opposed to
it and that there are licenses
out there that are billable we
started with our beer and wine
license at all of our locations.
And just like everybody else
that I've heard in here we work
hard in the industry to obtain a
dispenser license so that way we
can serve school school spirits
in one of our establishments
I am aware for.
Expanding and doing different
stuff within the liquor licenses
and maybe somehow getting more
to give out to restaurants.
The biggest.
Are you got cut off he said that
the code intact.
On the licenses that already
exist or the market place and
that's that's all I have to say
thank you Sir appreciate you
much content out of this.
A tie you followed by followed
by Adam.
There is lotus.
Please on mute yourself welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman can you
guys hear me are we sure can
thank you.
Hello my name is Heidi and I am
the owner and operator Pacific
Rim restaurant how's Mexico
thank you everyone for taking
the time to share the concerns
that I and many other restaurant
owners have in regards to the
proposed changes we rules
regarding liquor licenses.
just to give you a little bit of
background our family
establishment we've served on
the county for over forty years
my parents Joan Terry need for
immigrants the US and New Mexico
from Taiwan and the Philippines
respectively and the we've we've
gone from a business that
employed a handful of servers
and cooks until multimillion
full service restaurant
employees anywhere between fifty
to seventy five individuals at a
given time.
in twenty fourteen we acquired a
full service license a
considerable cost of two hundred
fifty thousand dollars in
addition select health we spent
over a half million dollars
remote remodeled credibility in
order to fully utilise lessons
this is an investment that we're
happy to make as it was needed
to take our business to the next
level.
In a year where restaurants that
would have been distrusted COVID
we feel the flu type B. rest
icing proposed each BA is
insult to injury to everyone
that follow the rules and
regulations our system the
license market the state
allowed.
it's not a question of
competition and so many other
people have said we celebrate
the fact that many other
operators are going to have to
believe it is our spirits but
something must be done for so
many of us that I participated
the state sponsored scheme that
has existed up to this point.
Like the rest of my peers thank
you would at the committee and
the government to provide some
measure compensation and soft
landing there been very good
suggestions proposed thus far
and I would increase the
committee to entertain the idea
is proposed here thank you for
your time.
Thank you Sir good to see
someone from Hobbs.
Mr Adam.
Adam does lotus welcome unmute
yourself followed by Mr Matt
Reeves.
Thank you chairman my Estes the
committee members my name's Adam
there's Otis I uh own and
operate C. liquors in Fruitland
New Mexico.
I'm a member of the New Mexico
package
for.
And I'm a one of the board
members we stand for the idea of
delivery we believe delivery can
add a lot of.
Value to some businesses that
are already successful in RD
proven operators.
But I think it's an important
thing for people to understand
the actual difficulty of
operating a package liquor store
it's something I've been doing
for an awful long time now there
is a lot of regulation and red
tape involved that I think a lot
of people maybe don't quite
understand what you're just
trying to throw out there on
people who aren't experienced
with it serving by the drink is
one thing serving by the drink
with hard alcohol is another and
serving package liquor all day
long where you have a very short
period of time to evaluate your
customer is an entire another
thing when you start doing this
in rural areas you complicate
these problems I've heard a lot
about us for an idea of a soft
landing or for what peoples and
ideas of how this be could
become a soft landing but it
seems like those answers of all
this talking that's happened
today have been pretty elusive
I've yet to hear one solid idea
of how we're gonna recruit the
same people that were trying to
stimulate your trying to
stimulate small business people
were the ones who are already in
the game you know I I believe
that favoring on proven
operators.
Over proven operators is a is a
very big agency step in the
wrong direction like other
people have said I agree that
liquor license law and liquor
control act need to be revisited
there are many issues but
sweeping change during a closed
session we're not able to proper
lobby or speak to our
representatives also seems like
a missed step with generous
misstep.
I borrowed a lot of money
against my license like we've
heard other people talk about
today created you know a lot of
the value of our company around
that license it's been my life's
work so far I could have been
there's a lot of other
industries that I could have
chosen and you know this telling
me today as a native New Mexican
that possibly my success in this
business is all been for not
because we need to try to reward
other people during the COVID
we've suffered our industry is
suffer tremendously during COVID
we lost two months we're
completely shut down with
hundreds and hundreds of
thousands of dollars of
inventory sitting on the
shelves.
We're still in my area still
facing closures from the
reservation which are affecting
our business tremendously.
I think like I said before
fading favoring untested
operators and and expanding the
market is dangerous not just for
native New Mexicans who have
built their life around these
licenses what is dangerous for
our communities and I think you
know over overstep being very
quickly without thinking this
through and making sure we have
everybody's opinion which is
going to be difficult to do over
zoom is in the state.
Give comment is been devastating
all small business people so
going to another point of
picking winners and losers is a
mistake I think that the the
bureau report on that that was
in our association that Mr roads
provided to you
Speaks very strongly about some
of these issues that will be
created by expanding liquor and
I please ask everybody all the
committee members to make sure
you read that report because it
really points to exactly solid
numbers over prove in markets
over and over what actually
happens when we do regulate.
The regulating sounds great from
the prospect of the business but
I can tell you as somebody who's
been in this business a long
time it is a very very
competitive business the idea
that there's a low hanging fruit
or some golden apple sitting
there that that these you know a
restaurateur for example who's
gonna pay twenty five thousand
dollars now that it's been
edited from fifty two to get
into this business well that's
not the only the only
infrastructure that they're
gonna need to cheese and cheese
final thought Sir yeah that's
and that's pretty much it it's
not you you're you're selling
the idea of being able to sell
package liquor on a twenty five
thousand dollars well it's gonna
take a lot more than that to be
competitive in delivering
alcohol to us businesses that
are already struggling to be
able to pony up awful big
investment in the business they
know very little about selling
with selling liquor by the drink
is not selling packaged liquor
and and my final thought would
be that if this is something
that the state decides to do me
and my association will have to
strongly consider suing the
state and to recoup our losses I
don't think that's something
else that we need to be getting
in right now COVID is a time we
need to be drawing businesses
together and figuring out ways
to pick us all up not to be
creating more competition and
more gridlock thank you for your
time there was a point of order.
Water was Martinez thank you Mr
chair I would like to remind or
or speakers if I may number one
this is one of most open
sessions we've ever had we have
people from all over the state
showing up on zoom providing
their public testimony in very
very gracious extending a lot of
time to to those concerned to to
express themselves number one so
this is not a closed session
nothing is happening behind the
scenes in a recent that Mr chair
secondly I don't take I don't
take lightly to threats I'm not
going to act or not act as the
Legislature simply because
somebody can sue of the state I
mean that's that's completely
aligned Mr chair and I just want
to make sure that the committee
knows that we're we're
undertaking a very difficult
up set of bills props to all of
the sponsors for all of their
work we're investing our time
taking time away from our jobs
and our families to do this work
I don't appreciate being
threatened I don't appreciate
the insinuation that were
working behind the scenes and
not open to the public thank you
Mr.
Thank you Representative and I I
did keep time on that one so
that was my bad but we'll go to
Mr Matt Reeves and then Mr
Williams construct a Mr reads
welcome.
Thank you appreciate the time
letting us that.
Have a our canyon stated Matt
Reeves I on paradise liquors
with my partners in Albuquerque
we have to package licenses.
And you know I just like to echo
some of the sentiments that have
been expressed today
On what this will mean
increasing the number of
licenses available across the
board and certainly we stand and
support as some form of change
but it is a very complicated
issue.
Reshaped what's been said from
the banking industry because we
also have a significant amount
of debt against the collateral
and that I would add is not
something that Walmart Walgreens
Albertsons happened place.
They all needs licenses freeing
clear it's the small operators
the local New Mexico businesses
that have data that we've put in
place to compete on a level
playing field.
And if we take that option away.
Of the locals are are unable to
play at this game and it's going
to be nothing but nationals.
And I think that's the biggest
thing that I would put forward
is no matter what we undertake.
If there's no ability to
collateralized these licenses
because the demand is
unpredictable and therefore the
value is unpredictable or the
supplies unpredictable.
We're going to have issue having
any locals compete for any
additional licenses that hit the
market no matter what way they
set a market and the nationals
will take further control.
Which I think they're already
over ninety percent of the
existing supply.
On delivery all echoed the
sentiment that we're just really
not in a position to compete
with all the nationals they have
the infrastructure in place we
do not we don't have the funds
to to set up that kind of E.
commerce and and from that
That front to to.
Be able to service as well as
they can in that arena so we are
going to fall further behind.
That's the way the world
delivery is is on the horizon no
matter what we do here but I'd
ask you to look at and think
about the local businesses and
what is being done already for
example with shipping where.
companies are are sending it
through FedEx that's not a
licensed alcohol server that's
delivering the package it's not
within the local option
districts that that's being sold
or controlled there is no age
verification there is no
intoxication verification if
we're going to undertake
delivery let's really examine
that and try to make sure that
anything that's going to a
households has the same
restrictions and the same.
Qualifications for those that
are providing that service and
and make sure we use that
opportunity to.
There I know we've got over
thank.
Our our industries present you
Mr William once we're gonna fall
by peak Kenny on your welcome
yes thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
appreciate all of you for taking
time to listen are concerns I'm
calling on behalf of my in laws
owners of metals many more
people are Mexico and
I am an attorney but I'm rules
turning and so this areas to me
going Mr Anderson ask themselves
a little bit like contagion this
is an area that the government
basically created by issuing to
many licenses and then now
trying to devalue or less in
order to expand access to
different types of licenses
I thought of the eminent domain
parallel myself earlier today
sure here the remarks of owned
this business since nineteen
fifty seven one Alastair Merrill
of all the sources nineteen
ninety five they have a
dispenser license they shut down
the bar portion and have focused
exclusively on package liquor
sales by the drains and
obviously they're very well
known restaurant a grocery store
they don't use the of our
scenario I mean our of our
situation as their parents did
but the enjoyed having that
option they enjoy the value of
the liquor license of being what
it is and to them tell them that
with their life's work now
they're in their seventies is
about possibly be chopped in
half for into a third of what it
currently is is very distressed
and so trying to you know look
at these ideas that are being
your doctor
we have to realize things only
four percent of the total New
Mexico restaurants needs only
four percent of their earnings
comes from hard work are you
asking to possibly expand.
Harley resold places which the
training received by staff is
not very intense there's a big
difference between service on a
glass of wine or beer it is set
in shops and so situation will
be already high do you why did
you waste in New Mexico with
that in terms of the valuation
of the liquor licenses are
concern is and we actually I was
very happy to hear Mr Anderson's
idea where she said possibly
split the dispenser licenses and
three I'm just saying for
example Romero.
Probably glad we sold a
dispenser portion capital
package questions because then
they can monetize instead of
having it all under one umbrella
that is now being threatened to
be taken away from so we're
urging your community where do
you to really think about this
please don't mistake what
happened with the missile
marijuana that's now been thrown
out in the courts because they
lead to a.
And in the into a group to make
the rules we don't want to A. B.
to make a law we want for sweet
you all right as a law three a
so we're saying thank you very
much and we appreciate this form
to share our office.
Thank you Sir he can be followed
by Justin green.
Please on it yourself.
Can you have the floor Gordon on
mute yourself.
We'll keep you in the room we'll
keep in the room
We'll go to our Mr I just Cherry
yes yes of who is this Mr Mrs
Chris Gordon actually okay
Crisco go ahead you're on the
phone yeah I saw the undo button
come up on my screen so I'm not
sure how we got out of order but
Mr chairman and committee
members thank you for that for a
give me a minute to talk
I'd like to give a different
perspective I'm actually a.
Operator owner of Farina
pizzeria.
Here in Albuquerque and I'm also
investors so I can offer two
different perspectives.
the current bill that's being
proposed.
You know has a dilution area
secretary because I'm super
increasing the supply into the
market place which is going to
cause a decrease in the.
Valuation of the liquor licenses
what it does
Effectively to John Anderson's
pro point by lowering the value
many many of the operators have
actually use these licenses as
borrowing base you know these
are for lines of credit the
banks feel secure in their asset
this is something that they can.
So into secondary market.
And it actually allows the
bankers to give confidence in
welding not only for the fit out
you know for
plant property and equipment.
But also for giving them lines
of credit and in this pandemic.
I I have to believe I'm speaking
probably for a lot of other
operators you know we've use
lines of credit just to survive
I mean I can tell you revenues
are are down we're all running
at a loss and negative cash
flow.
We can pull through long enough
to let things turn around then
we can go back in recess for the
debt.
So underneath.
The.
Banking instruments are our
personal guarantees these are
guarantees on our houses.
I personally have purchased one
point six million dollars worth
of liquor licenses.
And I and I owe a lot of money
to the banks for that the only
way we can cash flow in and do
the debt service.
Is if we continue our operations
flow one of the things that will
happen is the banks will be
forced to.
in force there are debt
covenants and they will forclose
not only on the license whatever
values left on that but then
they'll come after our homes so
there's a secondary in the
domino effect that you know
people need to be aware of.
and for me I've been at it for
twenty years this is a life
savings this is part of the
retirement plan and I think for
a lot of operators it's the same
way.
As an investor.
I own a package license as well
as two miles units that I lease
out and the less he's also have
personal guarantees on these on
these leases so there's a
secondary effect work.
People of sign on leases also
have personal guarantees so
there's a huge legal
ramification that kind of goes
that ripples through the entire
system.
in.
In the seek remedy on that would
be it would be devastating for
the current operators that have
survived this pandemic they're
trying to do in our trying to
move forward I'm all for a.
Economic stimulus expansion but
I'm not sure that by.
Changing the supply curve
causing the price to drop.
Our experiments
is is the right solution so I do
appreciate your time there's
also social responsibility
aspect to this.
The impact to the community the
police officers the police
saying.
I only is assets so I make sure
that all my staff for training I
protect my assets to make sure
that the insurance policies are
in place and put a significant
amount of effort and complying
with all that I think that if
you give licenses out freely or
three thousand dollars and a lot
steak I think you're gonna lose
control people probably won't
have adequate insurance they
probably won't care they'll just
close our LLC and open another
one so.
Those are things to consider
thank you for your time great
point Sir thank you so there's
three people in the in the
committee room with us up from
the audience and then we'll at
work by your name the last get
on mute
so be patient with us so there's
four people left to speak.
if anybody else wishes big
bombings raise their virtual
hand we're gonna go Mr Justin
green and then back to a peak in
the Mr green welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you to the sponsor into the
governor for putting this on
their agenda for this year my
wife and I own dashing delivery
Santa fe's local delivery
service and a leader in last
mile delivery industry in
sustainability and other best
practices first off we use
employees we maintain living
wage and Santa Fe and make sure
our drivers are operating safe
with the requisite training our
employees go through background
checks and have a food handler's
certificate we are self funded a
small mom and pop and never
received venture capital or a
billion dollar value from
Silicon Valley which is
happening daily these days we
specialize in serving local
restaurants to their community
with professional and safe
delivery solution I also serve
on the board of the R. NDA the
restaurant marketing and
delivery association with
representation across the
country and from operators in
Los crucis pods and Santa Fe.
I served on the liquor control
act reform study about five
years ago and have run bills to
legalize beer and wine delivery
in the past many of you on this
committee have shown your
support in the past thank you
very much.
We about HB eight this bill will
help our restaurants this will
help our restaurants expand
their sales incrementally with
the potential to double the
sales resulting in a restaurant
and G. R. T. recovery for our
communities in a time when we
need this but most importantly
this will help you keep our
communities safe in three
important ways one with comment
right now we have to do alcohol
in sales in person and we need
to social the distance I
governor's mandates and by safe
practices this bill will help
keep our people at home are
community at home and complete
the dining experience without
leaving the house this will bill
will reduce the WYFF in Houston
this is good for the community
by taking the driving out of the
equation in the past mothers
against drunk driving came out
in support of previous delivery
bill and I wouldn't be surprised
if they either stay quiet or
come out in favor of this at
some point of this bill also
limits consumption the limits on
delivering with this being with
meals and to the fact that it's
only a six pack or a bottle of
wine or ideally a bottle of wine
also reduces the opportunity for
excessive drinking.
We on the points on the bill Mr
chairman that there are a few
corrections that probably need
to be made in this in some other
bills that are tracking this one
the wind limit is too low for
even a single model it mentions
twenty five a maximum of twenty
five fluid ounces but a bottle
of wine a standard model is
seven hundred and fifty
milligrams our segment leaders
which is it just over twenty
five of fluid ounces so that
needs to be corrected if the
goal is a bottle of wine there
is no snow mention of cider in
the legislation and that is a
home grown industry here that
would be great to have cider is
mentioned as a quantity in this
bill are there is there should
be some restricted stacking of
subcontractors and requiring
that this doesn't become just a
bill to allow contractors to
hire contractors to hire
contractors that qualify third
parties have to be licensed and
there's no stacking.
Reiterating the delivery should
be limited to no basis no minis
and beer and wine only probably
and only with food as a best
practice it's in the bill but we
have to make sure that it
remains and there is the
requirement that all delivery
person be it be licensed and all
of the very comforting word as
you know Mr chairman and I would
like to see that word chain
store that wording into
something income thing.
Really which all personnel
handling all for delivery lastly
there's a limitation on
profiting from sales we operate
as an E. commerce platform for
our restaurants many of our
restaurants are mom and pop that
never had a website until we
built one for them and so we
operate is the way that they
collect money we pay them weekly
we pay them daily sometimes and
we need to be able to process
that and sometimes that might
fit under the definition of
profiting from the sale of
alcohol we would like the if the
ability to process their
transactions and charge a little
percentage mostly credit card
fees and other things like that
thank you Mr chairman we're
supported delivery some minor
tweaks will get this there thank
you for your time thank you Sir
up to more folks a peak Kenny if
you could on mute yourself
welcome and if you could
introduce yourself.
I checked.
Check the volume on your
electronic device and tried to
unmute yourself.
Just a little blue if you're on
a laptop it's a little blue
screen in the in the upper right
hand corner of your square.
On.
All right going to keep looking
for that you're still in the
room beginning no worries we're
gonna go to Mr Gerald somewhat I
welcome you have the floor Mrs
I'm gonna.
Thank you very much chairman for
allowing me to speak my name is
Gerald tomorrow I own and
operate three bars and
restaurants in Albuquerque New
Mexico and I wanted to speak to
two topics I know a big focus of
a lot of our speakers today
which is a big concern of mine
as well has been the financial
impact of hello the value
licenses except for.
But there's also a larger social
impact that I think we haven't
focused on as much and being in
the industry for over twenty
years I think I can speak to it
very well first a little
background I am definitely not a
wealthy person who just owns all
these licenses and uses them for
investments and this that and
the other I have earned my way
over twenty years for working
for many many people and making
them.
A lot of money.
And about six years ago I got
the opportunity to go out of my
own and it was only about two
years ago because of other
issues and bad partnerships and
stuff that I actually started.
Making money myself to provide
for my family for everyone I do
not once again come from wealth
I want to stress that.
Because this is not just about
the money aspect yes it is going
to devalue it which is very very
disheartening because I worked
all my life to get to this point
me and my family
this Martinez Representative
Martinez knows this we grew up
together since second grade he
knows my family is not wealthy
by any means I have no rich
uncles no one to self fund this
other than my sweat equity you
know may need cleaning up after
everyone for the past twenty
years.
So yes that is a very big deal
to finally get to the point to
be able to afford and do this
stuff and to have a bill that
will basically take all that
away.
Now we've already gone through
how it's gonna hurt us
financially but there's another
aspect that we really have a
focus on which is the social
responsibility.
When I was twenty four years old
I thought with my whole heart I
was ready to open a bar I wasn't
able to because I didn't have
the means and have the resources
and things like that and back
then I really thought that all
of this liquor license structure
was unfair today sixteen years
later
I look back at it and as a young
man I was not ready I would have
done so much harm to myself and
to others with you know lawsuits
and other endangering situation
what our customers in by a not
really understanding the gravity
of what it is to serve local it
takes a lot of responsibility.
In essence.
Now the investment that you have
to make on a financial sense I
look at it not as a way to box
out the little guy but it away
to kind of almost earn your
weight and so you understand the
responsibility you have given an
example you know a doctor
medical doctor just because he
goes through schooling and
passes everything doesn't mean
you can go out immediately start
practicing he has to go out and
get experience through being a
resident agent in I mean I'm
sorry a resident at a at a at a
hospital except truck before he
can actually permanently thing
that he has.
It's going to take that you're
gonna have so many on on
educated people in this industry
that are going to rush into it
they're gonna cause more W. eyes
they're gonna cause more over
serving they're gonna cause more
deaths in our community because
they don't understand it have
the experience of the gravity of
what it is to serve all cool.
And that's why in essence the
value aspect helps put that in
perspective because anyone as
they spoke they're not going to
go out and recklessly serve all
call and get miners intoxicated
except for a because they have
so much on the line when you
take out all what you have on
the line then there's no reason
for anybody to be cautious you
are going to have twenty one
year olds that fit there's
nothing against that but they
fit the model of getting a new
license and they're gonna go out
there with no experience other
than reading the state statutes
which I'm sorry anyone can.
But to truly understand it and
put it into real life play and
understand how when you serve
that person they drive away and
they kill family.
Because you didn't follow the
things that we've all agreed
upon that are that are best
practices and socially
responsible it's gonna be a
whole different thing to flood
the market with new licenses
this is not the time to do it
this bill is not well thought
out of in all those aspects I am
passionately against this bill I
am not against delivery if it's
done in a in a contained in
smart manner but in total since
the bills connected to that I am
passionately with no exception
against it.
Thank you Sir Mr up R. PKE
rather P. can you please on mute
you are muted a moment ago we we
heard you up you can see the
last of public speaker.
In on mute yourself.
Well you can't welcome welcome
we can hear you.
Four drops me out again yeah
before okay my name is Patty
Kenny and I am the liquor
license owner for the dirty
Bourbon dancehall saloon of
which I will say that in the ten
years they've been in business
they have never received a
citation following on the heels
of what was.
We stated that is what is most
probably the most important
thing about these bills this
these bills have so many holes
in them that are not addressed
and they have to be addressed
there is no way with clear
conscience anybody could put
these bills through and tell
these.
Very potable reasons have to be
addressed training how do you
how do you monitor except truck
and then we go back to the value
I still half the value of my
liquor license to the bank if
these get value to work there
look like they're trying to be
pushed I am done and this is my
retirement as I sit here in my
wheelchair I'm this is something
people don't think about they
don't think about the
ramifications on the other end
it always looks good when you
throw it up against the wall
until it starts falling off in
pieces
it is not the people who hold
their liquor license we take
responsibility for because we
have a value when you start you
start the addition outlook for
license a much much lower value
you know what those are easily
replaced ours aren't that is
something that needs to be
really thought about we value
our license we take care.
And second of all the one thing
I was talking to my son the ones
that are very.
What that has not been addressed
and I think that was one of two
people there I saw was as old as
me I remember why the liquor
control act was really put into
place back in the eighties.
And it was more because New
Mexico outrageous do you why.
What people were getting killed
almost daily from the White.
You all have just kind of some
people barely touched on it but
it was a social impact statement
why the why the control act was
put why it is now.
And now we're going back we
cannot go back we are I I'm I
love New Mexico border raised on
a farm in New Mexico Los crucis
I'm having a hard time wrapping
my head around all of us I
oppose this if if it ever could
be put out as it needs to be in
a complete form I mean Madam it
can be addressed and looked at
there's no compensation for me
you want me out I mean there is
no way to maintain control over
all of those license and the
training that's required and
another thing.
license does not have package
fell and there are many many
bars in the state that are not
equipped for package sales
because that was not their
intention.
But you get the package so so
what are they going to do now
that's just another Avenue would
be responsible legally for
something they you know they did
not want to be responsible for
in the first place that's it I
usually talk louder longer but I
appreciate it thank you thank
you so very much and I want to
thank everyone in the public
there's one gentleman who
couldn't make it
I had another appointment but Mr
Ruben Baca Mr Ruben Baca wishes
to the committee to note his
opposition on behalf of New
Mexico petroleum dealers
opposition to house bill eight
before we go back to the Sanchez
is want to thank everybody for
their decorum
this is a very very difficult
endeavor even for those in
agreement as alluded to back in
nineteen eighty one the
legislature came up with an
incredibly fantastic statutory
fix and was incredibly generous
to the then existing license
holders.
And extended tax credits for an
entire decade.
Tax credits for an entire decade
one a gentleman was not
satisfied with the tax credits
And while lawsuit on a takings
clause taking as you know is
when the government takes
something from you they owe you
you know if they build a road
through your land they owe you
for the land you know
the Supreme Court said it's not
a taking it's not a taking the
state has the full authority to
grant permission or not grant
permission the statute clearly
says that it's not a property
right in the courts have ruled
on that I think two or three
times but in the eighty one case
but the court did say all the
phone hold the phone New Mexico
this is unconstitutional tax
policy you can give this person
a tax credit on G. R. T. for
selling alcohol and not give
that person over there and so
everything.
Came crashing down here we are
forty years later and I
appreciate the words of
Representative Martinez I don't
take slight chair of the are you
suggesting that that you would
lawyer up and.
And and and file a lawsuit Mr a
there is lotus.
But whoever were to do that this
one it we're not doing a tax
credit let me let me back up.
We can't just by am back.
It's unconstitutional it's not a
property right.
We're not it's not a taking it
was very easy it be a taking
with slide and backed we're good
to go we can't brought back
because they're they're not a
property right and if we do
value it's not a taking and so
how do we make people whole how
do we give folks that soft
landing that that we've
discussed is gonna be a.
Gonna be a tough landing but but
no no no a twisted ankles no
bumps and bruises but there will
be a landing there will be a
devaluation
and if somebody were to file a
lawsuit on a takings with all
due respect they would lose.
And they risk bringing down the
tax deductions and other
incentives like a house of
cards.
So along with the new Wallace
Pat Garrett and Billy the kid
the lawyer and the plaintiff
will go down in New Mexico lower
all for bringing down this the
statutory remedy so we will be
here Wednesday we will be here
Wednesday on house bill two
fifty five.
The good ideas from public
comment and from these two bills
will be incorporated in house
bill two fifty five it's on the
calendar in full disclosure
transparency it'll be in this
committee on Wednesday hopeful
to pope we will be in our house
tax the week after that assuming
it passes in the house floor and
then obviously the Senate
majority floor leader will
assign it to Senate committees
if and when it gets that far but
we for we up we take a a soft
motion by committee
Representative guy goes
Representative
Hochman Vigil
of any final words.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee and I
want to take a moment to
actually think members of the of
the public for the testimony was
given we are always knew that
this is going to be a really
tough hearing for you know all
the reasons stated but it was a
good afternoon actually because
of the stated intent intention
we always hide which is this is
a form of ideas publicly aired
ideas there is a reason why
these bills are so difficult and
why it has taken decades upon
decades to really provide true
reform to correct some of the
issues that are licensing are
licensing structure has had for
such a long time I don't
discount any of the testimony
that we heard about you know
members of the public who have
invested their livelihoods in
these licenses and that's just a
symptom of the licensing regime
that we have created in the
state and their concerns are not
falling on deaf ears as you
stated earlier Mr chairman we
have been in intense
negotiations to try and find a
way to make this easier on
everybody because it is not fair
and it needs to be a more
equitable system and is not
gonna be perfect and it is not
going to make everyone happy we
recognize that but I'm happy we
had this hearing because we
needed to talk about alcohol
reform and all of these all of
these competing ideas that all
of us had for quite some time
I'll call bills of come and go
we find ourselves in a situation
with at this session and that
it's the issues at the forefront
and I think that the timing is
Act but all right I continue to
remain open to making sure that
whatever reform we achieved will
be in as good as it can be as
reasonable and equitable as it
can be I also want to say that
that you know our licensing
scheme here in New Mexico is
pretty much are the last of its
breed we have are there it
licensing regimes that are kind
of resemble what it is we're
proposing here and continuous
states we don't seem to have a.
Any of the problems that have
been stated here or any the fear
is that I can give have been
placed but never the less we
meet we I remain committed I
can't speak for anybody else in
my co sponsor and I've had
conversations about this but we
remain committed to finding a
product that is as good as it
can be for everybody we welcome
additional conversation thank
you for all the testimony today
and I without turning over to my
co sponsor she wants to add
anything.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you committee and especially
thank you to the public I think
today was a really great
conversation
you know as I said in my opening
that I wanted to make work on
this bill to help economic
recovery.
M. and and I also mentioned that
the doing this that
The bill was still in process
and boy did we hear about some
different ideas today and that
was that was good because I
think this is you know we're not
in the roundhouse right now
we're not we don't have the
ability to have side bars and
have that communication and so
yeah it was a tough hearing
today but I think it was a
really good here and some of the
opponents to the bill are people
that I called to be on the call
today because I really wanted to
hear their perspective and I
want to make sure that we
somehow
We have that process of making
sure that everybody's heard
so I just want to acknowledge
that one of our are at.
Calling one of our our public it
Colin listeners
she had said something that she
had a lot of passion and you
know it I'm glad she doesn't and
we all should because this
affects you Mexicans liveliness
and so I think it's so important
that we we listen to that and
you know
my parents have always told me
to we listen to you these listen
when somebody is telling you
something you don't want to
hear.
And so there's always going to
be a little bit of you know I I
always keep that in mind and you
know so if I can make this bill
better I want to do that so Mr
chairman this is really really
beneficial I have I'm committed
to continuing to work on this I
would like to get it right I
feel like we do need to do
something and so if we can
somehow pull all the good ideas
and make it the perfect bill
that would be the way to do it
that we you know we don't have a
lot of time and I think that New
Mexicans are looking for ways to
to drive to what they need a
past board to to get us to that
place so once again thank you
for this opportunity I think it
was great.
Thank you very much
Representative Scott any any
thoughts.
Mr chair.
Incredibly sensitive to the the.
Testimony was given today.
Well you was created.
Well I say public policy.
Yes we are now.
Considering anyway destroying
that.
Is your in a short or perhaps.
Longer term.
One sixty four.
I think has the capability of
addressing.
A lot of those concerns and I
won't minimized the length of
time.
Should be required to bring
these permits internal
alignment.
With market demand.
But through the mechanism of.
A limited number of new
licenses.
And the mechanism of I had
process with a minimum bid.
I believe most of those concerns
can be addressed even the
bunker's concerns I would like
to have some regulatory
certainty going forward as to
the value of those assets.
That's all I have Mr chairman
thank you.
Thank you very much and I just
want to thank Representative
Hochman Vigil Representative
Gallegos your your leadership on
this issue and maturity they
have agreed to be sponsors of
house bill two fifty five along
with minority who are Rod
Montoya Representative just
waiting on this for real
ranchers joined us here today on
the diets and chairman of tax
how did Martinez the
So will they'll be there and so
they asked to roll this bill
procedurally if we roll it kind
of still lingers on the calendar
so
Representative guys did you have
any final thoughts your hand is
up.
Before we go to Representative
Dow for of motions you know I
was going to ask Miss it could
be role because I think that are
you still gives us the
opportunity to to work on it is
is.
Just to keep it.
In the background.
No thank you Representative
Gaydos at it and I think it
causes confusion and and stress
if not division if it if it is
in fact in the bathroom of
background.
The Senate is awaiting to fifty
five the governor's office is
awaiting to fifty five and I
think it be better if we're all
at the same table our with
regards to that so rolling or
tabling is the same procedure
Lee are the same in all reality
but procedurally assist that are
two fifty five is a culmination
of.
Of what you over two years of
work from this very committee on
this committee committed to
trying to solve this problem
last year and and we right
gracious for all the the new
folks that have joined the
committee on this and the
struggle we're grateful to the
governor's office the majority
floor leader as well as our
members in the minority
So with that Representative Dow.
Just house bill eight Mr chair
just procedurally could you
explain explain to me if we do
choose to table of the procedure
for someone voting in the
majority right could bring back
can bring the bill back could
you find that procedurally just
so I understand the two I mean
it's like in terms of my list
every day I have a list of bills
in my committee and bills that
have left or tabled.
I don't mind keeping the this
bill on the list but but if we
want to do what Representative
Gaydos spoke of
if it's on the list so to speak
I would have to put on the
calendar.
Well theoretically someone could
bring it off the table so just
for all the U. of procedural
wants but the reason I wanted to
be able to just what's off the
list but and six one half dozen
the other
Thank you Mr chairman but I just
think of this in this committee
we we don't kind of keep things
on the list as we did with Susan
at that as I I just wanna be
consistent Representative about
it I brought a bill asked us to
roll it and we rolled it on to
the on.
Mr chairman just before I make
my motion I just you know I have
a couple of comments at it was
suggested that this is the most
open and most transparent
process that we've had a you did
hear gentleman from my district
get on and talk about having a
family owned and operated
restaurant that's been in city
for about twelve years he got on
the webcast was not able to
participate what he thought was
a at at I actually don't know
what he's on webcast how do I
get on how do I participate I
had to go learn for myself that
he goes to the committee
hearings what's happening to
commerce and industry click on a
link that says click here to
participate see the black screen
with only a few of our chain and
then when someone else is
speaking in favor or against a
black screen with their name he
has a firm that process did not
see a committee member doesn't
know who the committee members
are and you know was asked a lot
of questions so in reference to
being open and transparent we
are by scientific evidence
communicate eighty percent of
our our communication is
nonverbal so it is our body
language it's our facial
expression and so you know I
just I I these people are
scared.
They're angry they're frustrated
and they're trying to
participate so first of all I
want to say that I'm empathetic
to the situation and that
there's a situation I need to be
resolved and I am happy on this
committee looking for the
resolution and I think that you
know we need to worry about that
and therefore the very gentle
like not the big Kirk gavel
Chairman my Estes but that
little rubber one that you just
gently tap I would move to table
all right no thank you is that
are you can't give a speech and
moved to table so I will dari
yet are not lightly with the
velvet glove of refer table
house bill eight.
second.
And there's a second I was out
of Baldonado all those opposed
raise your hand so we could see
you in the zoom.
And will not your opposition
raise your not your virtual hand
but your actual hand thank you
is that we appreciate it.
Please note our Representative
Gaydos in opposition.
House bill eight has been table
Representative Dow house bill
one sixty four.
Mr chair and move to table.
There's a motion to table second
I was involved in that debate of
a motion those who wish to
oppose the tabling motion please
by a show of hands by by your
real hand on the zoom on the
zoom.
Please note all those present
voting in the affirmative no
opposition there are there are
house bill one sixty four has
been tabled that they're not
gonna they're god they're not
gone those brains have morphed
into one big giant brain into
fifty five we will see all we
will do amendments to the policy
aspects of the bill on Wednesday
we'll do amendments to the tax
and the soft landing portion of
the bill and tax the following
week and and let's keep the
dialogue going thank you all
very very much we are adjourned.
