These that are that are lining
up so far we have seventeen
attendees there's fourteen of.
Our panelists because we have a
lot of expert witnesses so give
us a second to get that
organized but in the meantime
of.
missile but as we recall the
role.
Yes.
Well.
Well.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Mart√≠nez.
Here.
Your.
I am here.
And Justice.
You wonder shows here and we
have a quorum thanks everyone we
have but today it is one person.
I'm not missing a project called
On this put our views on.
Here yes.
Please put your mute on and then
also sixty six with the
Representative of my birds if
you could let in we have two
expert witnesses
I just.
Yes the cultural and Alan
Sanchez our expert witnesses.
I'm gonna turn over the Mike to
vice chair for that as I am
along with Representative
Martinez presenting this bill so
take away my advice but give us
a minute to get our experts
then.
Jesse cultural and Alan songes
and also if you can hello this
is with Groginsky and in as a
panelist as well the secretary.
Thank you.
Thank you all the joining us
were up to thirty attendees as
well as numerous people are just
simply watching on the website.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Are all of the witnesses in our
panelist room at this time.
I think we're waiting on Allen
but what will have in the last
where we're ready to go madam
chair we don't have.
Okay that's fine he'll he'll
he'll join us in a minute
thank you Mr chairman and Sir
Martinez would you please take
us through your bill your house
joint resolution one.
Why don't you start
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr chairman and madam
chair members of the committee
house joint resolution one is a
bill that you've already seen
some of you have seen it for the
last ten or so years I've been.
Involved with it as a legislator
for for the last seven sessions
since I've been a member of the
of the state house it's very
simple bill what house
resolution was one does is it
increases the distribution from
the permanent school fund by one
percent to be used for early
childhood education services
across the state as you know you
know two things have changed in
the last ten years since this
proposal first came to be the
first one is that the fund has
grown astronomically ten years
ago that fund was about twelve
million dollars it is now
expected to surpass the twenty
two billion dollar mark by the
end of this month the other
thing that's changed the last
ten years as a child well being
has actually gotten worse in the
state of New Mexico we've gone
from roughly forty fourth and
forty fifth in annual kids count
reports down to fiftieth this
year.
New Mexico suffers from the
pandemic that came long before
COVID nineteen pandemic is the
lack of investments in our
youngest children particularly
children of color across the
state.
Is our believe that by making
this additional investment.
Not only are we preserving the
health of the fund in the long
run as you can tell from the FIR
and in other documents but
you're making a transformative
investments in the youngest.
in our state
our children for whom every
dollar we invest in them there's
a thirteen percent return on
that investment our children
that will one day be our future
legislators our future business
men and women our future
educators our our our future
technology developers that can
get New Mexico on the map.
keep in mind that but by by
making this happen.
What we're ultimately doing is
growing the pie of funding.
That is dedicated to early
childhood
I don't think there's one person
in the legislature for in the
does not care about early
childhood I think members of
both parties have done excellent
work of the last few years
increasing our investments and
in finding alternative and and
and creative ways of funding
early childhood.
This proposal in front of you is
the big one this is where we can
secure big substantial permanent
investments in the area of
government that we normal can
work the best and where we can
get the most out of that
investment and that is in early
childhood education
lastly Mr chair members of the
committee I would be remiss if I
didn't talk about the history of
the land grant Fund.
as many of you know
New Mexico struggled.
I believe in our quest to become
a state.
and in the congressional record
members of Congress at the time
rejected or numerous requests
for statehood.
Based solely on the racial
makeup of our state.
We were in their words to
Mexican to indigenous we didn't
speak the language we weren't
part of that dominant culture.
When they finally allowed us.
Into the union the sensually
tied her hands behind her back
because eighty entrust us to
manage our own lands Committee
entrust us to manage our own
money.
So here we are in front of you a
hundred plus years later.
asking for a very moderate in my
opinion a very conservative and
very mindful additional
percentage from this permanent
school fund to support.
Every single child in the state
of New Mexico I'll pass it on to
you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much of
Representative Martinez thank
you madam chair honorable
members of I would just like you
to think of a number think of
this number of three point eight
seven percent.
Three point eight seven percent.
That is how much we took out of
the permissible Fund on January
first in the middle of a fiscal
year.
To fund education in the state
of Mexico the fund is now at
twenty two billion dollars
twenty two billion dollars and
with the with the need we have
among the children of our state
with the educational outcomes
that we're struggling with with
the mandates of the Martinez
Yazzie be state of lawsuit.
it is time to properly invest
money from the permissible Fund
into early education we have a
very conservative proposal here
today madam chair to take one
percent.
One percent from the permanent
school fund one additional
percent of but but your market
for early education your market
for the early childhood
education and care department
your market for our youngest and
most vulnerable children
children aged.
Zero to five children prior to
being eligible for kindergarten
so if I may I just I want to
bore you to death but let me
just go through the
Kind of the mechanics to the
fund and I don't know if I can.
Let's see do you see let me
share my screen.
And the average distribution of
the fund has been of the last
five years has been four point
one three and let me explain how
that it is.
And we have the the amount from
up from December thirty first
twenty twenty that amount is
twenty one point six billion and
it's grown since then to twenty
two billion today but anyway
what we do madam chair as we
take five percent and we
distribute it for education but
we don't do five percent we do
five percent of the average of
the last five years the
preceding five years so here's
what we do we take the last five
years and what I'm talking about
the current fiscal year not
about the budget we're about to
do madam chair so December
thirty first of fifteen sixteen
seventeen eighteen and I do we
get the amounts of what the fund
was in that calendar year and of
course we take it on the last
day so it what was fourteen
point four billion fifteen point
one seventeen point two billion
seventeen billion and then of
course nineteen point seven
million and we average it out
and the five year rolling
average for the current fiscal
year that were and madam chair
is sixteen.
One seven billion.
So even though the fund today is
twenty two billion we're only
taking out on January first when
the fund was twenty one point
six billion or only distributing
three point eight seven percent.
Because it's not I we're getting
five percent of sixteen bit
point seven billion.
Five percent of sixteen point
seven billion we are merely
suggesting that we take six
percent of sixteen point seven
billion which will still be of.
Lower than I and and the reason
I keep harping on the five
managers that has been pounded
into our brain that you cannot
go higher than five you cannot
go higher than I that's on a
fund that gives one distribution
a year say you have a ten
thousand dollar scholarship fund
and every September first you
give the recipient five dollars
it's one big check five percent
of the funds we don't do that
that we do twelve month eight
are transfers from the from the
permanent fund to the general
fund.
This year that those transfers
are sixty nine million dollars
times twelve.
but the point is the fund can
handle one percent additional
distribution Arizona our friends
in Arizona of went to a six
point nine distribution so
anyway just to run up the not
the five percent is derived by
sixteen point seven billion but
the the print out or that the
transfer of funding for current
fiscal years eight hundred
thirty six million divided by
twelve that give us the sixty
nine million dollars each month
so even though we're taking the
five data points from the
previous five years we're
calculating that and we're not
spending it until July first of
the following year up until June
first of the seventh year.
All and so if the fun continues
to grow like we know it will
because it withstood the the the
the the the downturns back in
March and April I will probably
be down to about.
Three point seven percent
distribution that is
categorically unacceptable that
is irresponsible it cannot
continue and and we have to
better utilize this fund for our
children for the reason it was
meant to be utilized.
Thank you madam chair now turned
over to our our expert witnesses
Mr guess ecology.
This country.
Thank you hello madam chair
members of the committee.
I am just a cow tree I'm the
public policy director of CHI St
Joseph's children and I'm really
excited to share with you some
new news I know we've been
working on this for over a
decade but have some new news
off the press eighty three
percent of New Mexicans agree
that the single greatest
investment we can make to build
New Mexico's economy is to
educate our children with high
quality early childhood programs
New Mexicans understand that
today's children are tomorrow's
work force and so this is
according to a really recent
poll of five hundred voters
including independents
Republicans and Democrats across
New Mexicans across New Mexico
it was conducted by Dr Gabriel
Sanchez with LD insights New
Mexicans understand and
recognize early childhood
education kind can unleash our
state's potential if children
are provided with access to high
quality programs like child care
and preschool and home visiting
for families with the new baby
but it's not just about
tomorrow's workforce but also
about today's workforce HR one
will increase economic
opportunity for families across
the state by increasing the
earning potential particularly
for women women whose children
are in programs and women for
the predominant a workforce in
early childhood and particularly
their mostly women of color so
going back to women who have
their children in programs take
me for example each year I come
before the committee a couple
years ago I was pregnant last
year I had a six month old and
and this year my little one is
one and a half and I have access
to high quality affordable child
care for him that allows me to
be with you guys today and with
that with the committee today as
well as return to school for my
masters to further my career and
volunteer in my community in
Valencia County but I had
connections I had help finding
us the end of this road is a
private Spanish.
Immersion home based learning
center
and all New Mexicans deserve
hard working new Mexicans
deserve access to these locally
based programs see I had no
barriers or to save it
differently I had privilege but
so many New Mexicans mothers and
fathers raising children and
working tirelessly for the well
being of their family have
barriers to high quality early
childhood programs so we have to
level the playing field for all
New Mexicans and H. R. one is
going to take us leaps and
bounds in that direction as we
all know and thank you too many
of of of the representatives in
the committee and all of you for
your support for early childhood
early childhood programs these
proven investments will really
help take our state forward so
with that I I stand for
questions thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
miscarriage and I'll turn over
to our second expert Mr Allen
Sanchez.
Thank you Mr chair this is Mr
chair and members of the
committee my name's Evelyn
songes I'm the president of CHI
St Joseph's children we've been
operating for ten years the
largest home visiting programs
in the state of the doesn't take
of government funding but we
advocate for all the children in
New Mexico I'm really happy and
enthusiastic and hopeful that we
have a path forward now for this
constitutional amendment to be
passed it we just imagine to see
you the passage of of this
constitutional amendment and by
by the legislature and the
public they get to vote on it is
going to create an opportunity
that's going to change the lives
of children and families forever
in our operation of this home
visiting program we've seen over
four thousand families and I've
been privileged to witness
families receiving prenatal care
and it would infants and
toddlers some of the evidence
based practices that help those
parents to be the best that they
can be and imagine we have the
opportunity to bring that to all
families in New Mexico and then
these kids going off to a
wonderful child care centers we
have wonderful centers into
magic we're gonna be able to
serve the unmet need the waiting
list and then into three year
old for you all pre K. eight
those brigades are waiting to be
filled up this is going to
change a lot and when you think
about the outcomes for the
families there's always those
cited affect the rating maybe as
important creating four thousand
jobs over a three year period
the number of course I like that
that are that are in here you
know
we're doing a study with four
hundred families that the UNM
institute for research but Dr
Paul Garrett following four
hundred babies for twenty two
years we're already three.
Years into the outcomes.
We're we we see that the the
evidence okay so that's why I
present myself as an expert
after the last ten years to
bring this to but in these ten
years this piece of legislation
has been vetted it's ready the
the red herrings been answered
the hurdles of being crossed and
and we're eager to to move it
forward because the little guys
the little ones are anxious and
ready for this we are going to
make a wonderful change we're
going to defend and protect
children's growth the synapses
growth of the brain they're not
going to work all right behind
they're gonna be ready and for
years we've been putting our
investment one of the most
important vestments of K.
to twelfth an important this
will be putting at risk because
we're bringing the children
behind and they can't take full
advantage of that the investment
now we're going to we're going
to pump this up and take
advantage of that and it's going
to change our graduation rate
and it's going to change the job
market we're gonna track jobs
like we never had before because
the change for New Mexico be
cans with the little guys and
and this is it we can't say no
again another year there's
always an excuse and you know
it's interesting we've been
given excuses for ten years and
the fund has more than doubled
when we first propose this it
was at ten billion dollars and
today twenty two billion.
Once again for one percent one
percent gets us halfway to the
unmet need another for four
hundred million is approximately
the unmet need we can get there
now this constitutional
amendment is going to get is
about halfway there so we won't
be done but when you say how you
gonna spend this money we've got
a wonderful department for early
childhood and well being in
place with the waiting list
ready to go and yes we're going
to have to look over the issues
of the outcomes and keep the
quality but a lot of good
programs out there has set the
bar in St Joe's we've set the
bar for home visiting and we're
happy to share any of that
research that we've done over
the last ten years our own
economist that we brought in
eight years ago the fund has
grown even better than his
projections no one could have
imagined this so the one percent
it's time and the I stand for
questions and assistance thank
you so much for wellbeing this
year to date.
Thank you.
That is.
Here do you have other expert
witnesses at this time.
No thank you madam chair but we
we've invited a secretary
Groginsky with us and with us
that she up.
That you have a time a lot of
the during public comment.
Absolutely I'm going to assume
that she's speaking in favor
right now we'll go to a public
comment and looking at the
attendee list we have thirty
eight folks I'm gonna ask you if
you are here to speak in
opposition to this house joint
resolution if you are here to
speak in opposition please
designated with your little
raise the hand button and we
will move you in gonna ask
because there are so many this
afternoon that you try to be to
the point and breeze it is
perfectly okay to say I agree
with the prior speaker that's
fine we are going to request
that we have your first name and
last name we need that for
recordkeeping purposes so if you
happen to be signed on and you
want to give testimony and you
only have a first name go ahead
log out of the meeting log back
in with both names and we will
get you in so you can be hard.
I am looking for.
Raised to speak in opposition.
And I see none gonna give it
fifteen seconds in case you're
trying to figure out how to use
your buttons.
All right miss all that is I
briefly saw hands.
Hello okay we have no comment in
opposition again folks gonna
save it be appointed be brief
and if you are here to give
public testimony in support of
ACA are one hit your raised
hands but.
When we see you just leave those
hands raised we're going to pull
you in one at a time and turn on
your permissions to speak I
would like to start with
secretary Groginsky.
You madam chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to be here and thank
you representative last this and
Martinez for bringing this
important piece of legislation
as we have all heard today the
importance of beginning early we
know things that we didn't know
even ten years ago about brain
development neuroscience and
that learning begins prepurchase
but definitely when children are
born and the opportunity for us
in this state to systemically
connect families with evidence
based outcomes like home
visiting high quality child care
early intervention services will
be essential for us to get the
outcomes we all want to New
Mexico's families and young
children.
Our administration has set a
goal of ensuring universal
access to prekindergarten we
know that that alone will cost
an additional hundred million
annually for us to achieve that
goal we have currently around
five thousand families who
receive home visiting for state
funding and we want to recognize
our credible private sector
partners you also provide that
but at twenty six million
dollars a year we're still only
reaching around five to six
thousand families we know we
have sixteen thousand babies
born wonderful gifts for in the
state every year seventy two
percent of those bars are funded
through Medicaid we can't
connect those families but it
will take at least another
twenty six million annually over
the next three years for us to
be able to ensure that level of
access to evidence based early
interventions like home visiting
that will change the trajectory
not only for those families and
children but for their children
to come and the one third area
that is so important is our
early childhood workforce for
too long and too often they are
working and being paid very low
wages just recently in our needs
assessment we saw that over the
thirteen hundred people surveyed
the majority of them are making
less that twenty seven percent
of them are making less than
fifteen thousand a year so we
have to do better in terms of
compensation that we don't even
have to fifty percent of our
community based pre K. teachers
with a bachelor's degree or
higher so investments in
scholarship vestments in our in
our higher education at a
minimum be a fifty million
dollar investment in the world
so this access to this in and
permanent fund and additional
resources is critical for us to
achieve the outcomes we all want
for young children and families
and the promise of this new art
so with that I appreciate the
opportunity to make comments
thank you.
Thank you madam secretary we're
glad you're here and I hope you
can stick around in case there
are questions during the later
portion all right if you would
miss alternates bring in area
Holloway.
Hello.
Way we hear you are great.
What.
madam chair and members of the
Committee I want to really
really brief I agree with the
secretary of the public behind
her you want to share my story
as a and home I our program here
in New Mexico I'm graduated on
line I recall.
I have
throughout the year and there's
no one of the wonderful work
and school
students that are I think that
if you can make every effort you
are funded I'm also a member
with and and
to advocate for kids and wealth
thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you for being here.
Let's go with the hand.
Good afternoon and that thank
you madam chair thank you
members of the committee and
also special thanks to both
Sanchez not only for the the
honor presenting today but for
all of your work on this for as
long as I can remember
this constitutional amendment hi
my name's Timothy hand W.
secretary of the Public
Education Department and this
this amendment for permanent
funding for early childhood
right C. R. one as we've we've
kind of come to know it
increases the resources for
early childhood education care
programs throughout New Mexico
and once approved by the voters
this legislation is going to
ensure that we can expand access
to programs that work for
children and for the hard
working families in New Mexico
and help eliminate the waiting
lists the mission of the public
Education Department is rooted
in equity excellence and
relevance and we partner with
educators that communities and
municipalities to ensure that
all students are healthy
securing their identity and
holistically prepare for college
career and life this access to
early childhood education and
care and and the programs
provides an important foundation
for us to accomplish that
mission we want to make sure
that every family can
participate in high quality
early childhood education and
care and we see as as educators
firsthand the long term negative
impacts of when a child does not
have access to these early
childhood programs and with and
when they arrived to
kindergarten and they've not
been supported to succeed.
So our our governor Michelle one
Christian has made universal
access to prekindergarten
priority and this would require
require an additional hundred
million dollars annually it's J.
R. ones funding would help
ensure that all New Mexico
children are ready for
kindergarten on day one that
they're flourishing readers in
elementary schools and
graduating on time from high
school ready to go for college
or to enter the workforce more
likely to succeed.
Thank you again for bringing
this important this important
piece of legislation in front of
us and for this opportunity to
speak in support.
Thank you very W. secretary for
being here we appreciate it.
All right Mr Kirch ranger.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Kurt Reagan on the director
of littering advocacy
administrative The New Mexico
we're state public policy office
of the rocky mountain synod into
the V. and Jellico Lutheran
church in America and I'm also
here to speak today on behalf
New Mexico conference of
churches we support HDR one for
many reasons that you've already
heard of it you will heard here
as to why funding of this type
of this source has long been
critically needed into the
undisputable systematic and long
term benefits that would result
from the voters of New Mexico
approve of this amendment to our
state's constitution we believe
that there's no disputing a
myriad of ways the potential
programs that results will
prepare children our parents for
their future filing a foundation
that greatly increases the
possibility of later education
and life success I'll conclude
my remarks this this afternoon
but in my time with you by
speaking on is the father of a
nine year old my daughter was
born in Germany and while her
mother was serving while her
mother was serving as an active
duty jag officer and I was a
civilian employee of the army as
a program manager in army
community service which was the
organization provided a host of
social service programs that
supported soldiers and their
families one program in
particular a new parents support
program supported families of
children rebirth before your
result one piece of the program
involved classes as well as in
home visits to families
expecting a baby you're had a
newborn.
Even as a staff member I
hesitated to participate due to
believing that I had all the
tools in place already be a good
parent I've been raised by good
parents nurtured by the parents
I've been taught it I had the
extended support system of
sisters and friends who already
had children.
But I relented and I jumped in
with both feet and I can tell
you that by doing so I did learn
new ways.
And I was a better father of
David and I'm a better father
now as a result of my
participation in those in that
early childhood education
program but even more
importantly I witnessed amazing
growth in confidence in many
much younger parents who did not
have the background that I had
or like work from a comparable
support system that I was able
to continually tap I have no
doubt that my classmates from
nine years ago are better
parents today and that the
children have a far better
foundation as does my own
daughter Hannah I urge you to
support this choice to take this
to the voters of New Mexico
thank you for your time.
Thank you very much Mr Reiter.
The hill.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Francis meal and I reside in
the Rio Rancho New Mexico am
also native American from the
public via and also follow
famous nuclear attacks nation.
I join you today the volunteer
from the state the children
action network however I'm also
a father grandfather and
educator and I want to provide
my support for H. G. R. one as a
native American educator who has
worked as a teacher and
administrator at the school
school districts state and
federal levels and now working
of the tribal education
specialist at the national
Indian education association.
In addition to serving on the
board of directors for parents
and teachers and international
home visiting early childhood
education advocacy organization
I know and I witnessed the ships
that intentional and sustainable
early childhood education
initiative can make in all
communities within our state as
brought to our attention by of
the Martinez lawsuit we see that
there are some disenfranchised
and marginalized groups that
have been severely underserved
in particular native Americans
have witnessed an education
system that wasn't created to be
inclusive of native American
communities and tribal needs.
The permanent school fund we can
see to invest in the future of
all children we can also invest
in engaging systemically
shifting educational
opportunities of the indigenous
inhabitants of this great state
the nineteen pueblos the two
Apache tribes Navajo Nation we
have a unique opportunity to
shift the educational landscape
in New Mexico for the future of
our state we already know that
the state of New Mexico is
committed to shifting the
educational opportunities by
creating an early childhood
education education department
and we already see that there's
a commitment to native
communities by creating an
Assistant Secretary for native
American early education and
care position Mr chair members
of the committee as an educator
early childhood is the most
important community component of
any educational system and I
acted to support this funding
thank you for your time.
Thank you Mr Vigil thank you for
being here.
Our next in public comment is
Secretary Blalock.
Hello madam chair on this is a
Lisa deal from the New Mexico
Center on Law.
At least we lost you.
Hello can you hear me madam
chair we can hear you Secretary.
Excellent madam chair members of
the committee a new crime let
let the cabinet secretariat UST.
Reshoot the opportunity for the
committee up to my comments very
short I just there's not a lot
of data point Representative I
just wanna focus on one and
that's the adverse childhood
experiences in so as many of you
know in the state of New Mexico
our children experience four or
more adverse childhood
experiences more per capita than
any other children in the
country
and why that's important why
that that really matters to us.
If you look for example at adult
alcoholism and the New Mexico as
the highest rate of alcohol
related deaths in the country
having four or more aces or
adverse childhood experiences
increases the likelihood of the
door alcoholism about four
hundred percent
if you look at a suicide attempt
and that Lee a New Mexico as the
highest youth suicide rate in
the country right now for
children who experience for more
isn't that increases the
likelihood of the suicide
attempt by one thousand two
hundred and twenty percent we
appreciate this bill because he
continues the the incredible
investment by the legislature
led by the leadership of
governor Lujan and Grisham to
really focus on prevention and
getting to children early so
that we can prevent trauma and
really get to the root causes of
some of the bad public health
outcomes that the face of the
state so for that reason I
strongly support this bill
because they don't think the
state of New Mexico can afford
can afford not to thank you.
Thank you Secretary.
You see the attendee list and
and CLP Education.
Would you please give your first
and last name.
Hello good afternoon madam chair
and members of the committee my
name is Lisa do you all and I'm
an attorney for the New Mexico
Center online poverty and member
of the legal team for the Yazzie
plaintiffs in the Yazzie
Martinez lawsuit I'm here today
of course because and M. C. O.
P. stands in support of HR one
thank you to the sponsors for
all your hard and tireless work
towards this issue.
I will keep my comments brief as
I agree with the comments of
income for me today.
Pre K. is one of the best ways
to close the achievement gaps
for students and creating social
emotional well being it's also
an important part of providing a
sufficient education and equity
for students programs are high
quality and culturally and
linguistically relevant.
Demand for pre K. as high we
know access is limited not all
school districts offer pre K.
those that do have waiting lists
and access is especially limited
to programs that build just
cultural heritage.
For the more funding is that
incremental and not enough to
build programs statewide to
begin to dismantle racist
systems of oppression this
resolution is a step in the
right direction the opportunity
gap begins early in a child's
life and we cannot be content to
simply for pennies a programs
that are transformative for our
children and for entire can
introduce for these reasons we
support this resolution thank
you so much for your time today.
Thank you so much for your
comments.
Yeah ghosts.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Erica diables policy director
at or lady we stand in favor of
H. R. one and view it as a
racial justice issue childcare
teachers are a majority of women
of color and are being he
currently being paid poverty
wages what I'd like to do is
play you a quick thirty second
video from one of our members
who is currently in the
classroom and could not be here.
The.
Is your.
This is.
He.
Okay let's Maestas.
In that
case yet he will be the cranial
just a few clicks.
Thank.
E. as much as they.
Do that
yes making way up in the in the.
This must.
His orders.
And what do not is saying is
that as an early educator her
petition is that legislators
to legislators is for all of you
to take into consideration the
work and service that teachers
are doing every day for children
in their initial years COVID has
brought many difficulties and
limitations and she considers
that teachers have affected we
handled the difficulties that
this pandemic has brought upon
them and have been able to help
these children in their
education and what she's asking
is that it's at the money from
H. sure one be used for wages
and benefits for teachers and
And what we're at the other
thing is that increasing child
care assistance access is also
important for hard working
families who often pay upwards
of thirty percent of their
income and child care and of
funding of robust widgeon career
ladder for teachers and
increasing access for parents is
essential and passing this last
legislation can lend to that we
urge come I'm committee members
to vote in favor of H. share one
thank you.
Thank you Mr.
All right here on us.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee members thank you
Sanchez I am are you're not I
general counsel of the New
Mexico State Land Office and I'm
here on behalf of commissioner
of public lands Stephanie Garcia
Richard and commissioner Garcia
Richard has been a champion of
this issue and and indeed a
sponsor of prior versions of
this bill and is delighted to
see it progressing here
Kading our children really
provides the best possible
return on any kind of investment
that we as a state or as a
society could make and we hope
that this is the year that New
Mexico really rises to the
challenge and makes the
commitment to our children and
to our families that we deserve
for our collective future
success and so we're here today
in support of H. G. R. one and
urge its prompt passage.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Mr green.
Well madam chair I don't know if
you can hear me okay I'm trying
to do multi zoom here because of
the committee following and I
just wanted to echo what I've
heard and I will repeat it you
know I was I was up in the
Senate when we first started
this journey and I lost and a
lot less care and a lot more
great here stand but as the as a
Sanchez has stated so well that
the fund is essentially doubled
and and I think every argument
that's been made over the last
ten years has been addressed
thoroughly terms of preparation
infrastructure economic effects
and of course the most important
effect which is how this will
change the lives of thousands of
young New Mexico youngest New
Mexican so
I just hope that that we can
make it happen this year it's
been a long time in coming in
sadly I think the the the kids
that were but a hundred twenty
thousand kids together were born
between and over the last ten
years
I hope we haven't we haven't
lost the time that they needed
but now we can implement this
and not lose another ten years
with the young people joining
our junior successful ranks in
high school and college and all
the things that we have heard of
this bill will will do so thank
you for up for hearing this and
I urge your support.
Thank you Mr Goodell.
Mister Bill Jordan New.
Madam chair Mr chair members of
the committee of Bill Jordan and
I'm here representing New Mexico
voices for children as you know
where the group that does the
annual kids count rankings and
as sadly sure you also know that
we're fiftieth in child well
being.
One of the things that we know
from the data is that our kids
are behind before they ever get
to school if we really want to
turn around our rankings if we
really want to help our kids and
families there's no better
policy solution that to start
early no better investment than
investing in early childhood
programs we urge you to invest
in our own kids instead of Wall
Street let's not wait any longer
and let's not lose another
generation of our kids thank
you.
Thank you Mr Jordan.
Mister James fall visual on
their give Manheim massacred
your name.
I thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is James Kobe one and I am the
policy director for the center
for civic policy as has been
stated before in the years long
advocacy for this issue
education is a right not a
privilege our state can
constitution mandates the New
Mexico state government is
responsible for providing
sufficient education for all
students in New Mexico yet a
majority of our students cannot
read write or do math as well as
other children across the
country as a member of a
federally recognized tribe okay
we get Pueblo I know that too
often children of color
especially native American
children are disproportionately
impacted by the lack of access
to high quality early childhood
programs so for those reasons
center for civic policies
strongly believes that it is
time to use one percent from the
permanent fund for early
childhood programs we think
Representative my SS Martinez
for their championship of this
bill and we urged committee
members to support this
legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr Paul the one.
And Mister Bryson dean.
Okay hello can you hear me.
Yes we can hear you thank you.
Okay okay
You can't see me but
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Bryce and
dean I am from Albuquerque I am
joining you today as a volunteer
with save the children action
network and as a retired
developmental physical therapist
and a grandmother and in the
interest of time.
I just want to say children are
our future and let support H. G.
R. want to get this done thank
you.
Thank you Mr.
And thanks to all of you who are
here attending watching this
legislation as attendees and all
of you who have spoken in
support.
It is now time to take it to the
committee
but there's a Mr Paul Gibson.
Is a hi Mr Mr garrison my
apologies Mr give sent take a
couple minutes tell us what you
have to say.
Yes thank you madam chair and
committee members and I
especially want to thank the to
Sanchez Representative my Estes
and Representative Martinez for
leading this charge for years
I am the co founder my name is
Paul Gibson I am the co founder
retake Our Democracy and we've
been lobbying at the roundhouse
for five years your twenty five
hundred active members and we
certainly wish we could be there
with you in person
As.
I operated at the and about
research and evaluation from the
bay area for twenty five years
and over the course of a decade
we evaluated early childhood
education home visiting programs
in five bay area counties I can
tell you that all of the
different outcomes that were
described by others before me in
this public comment we found as
well and rather than reiterate
those I want to just ask you to
think about who many of these
programs serve and to the staff
and many of these programs are
there are sensual workers and we
certainly come to appreciate the
word essential in the last ten
months twelve months we haven't
necessarily showed it policy
that we really think those
people are essential this would
be one very positive way to show
that and I strongly strongly
support this legislation thank
you very much for all your
service.
Thank you Mr.
Appreciate it appreciate your
patience.
All right.
Go back to committee but I need
to ask chair and chair Martinez
given amendment that you wanted
to move yes we have one of one
of them up with us the committee
to consider if we can move for
discussion.
Discussion.
Thank you.
Guy yet also second.
Thank you madam chair if I could
ask the members to look at
The amendment for three six
seven three six seven
The number of the left hand
corner is two one nine three six
to.
I want.
Forgive me I grabbed the wrong
one oh three two eight three two
eight.
So essentially madam chair as
you recall I think we will.
I'm sorry madam chair I'm I'm
sorry what was this was the
amendment emailed to us because
I don't see it in my emails.
Posted in our shared Centrex
file are you able to access that
from where you are.
Great question.
I'm I don't it.
I haven't received any training
on this madam chair and so I'm
trying to figure this out as we
go I was.
I will have agency all that is
email it to you or I will.
Thank
that U. S..
Chair lays its shores amendments
what would you read it just in
case there are others who are
having trouble saying it thank
you thank you page one lines
twelve and thirteen strike the
words subject to the approval of
Congress and then on page four
lines twenty three through
twenty five section three and
it's Heidi and the reason being
managers if you recall three
four years ago this this
resolution was like five pages
long and we're trying to get
consensus we're trying to build
coalitions we up it was it was
less stress to just put this
provision and then then convince
people that we don't need it
we're we're past that point
we're we're past that point of
so because we are not changing a
beneficiary.
Because we are not but.
Taking away or adding a
beneficiary were merely spending
money earmarked for the
beneficiary common schools
spending it on early education
and Senate K. through twelve it
is unnecessary to get
congressional approval similar
to the constitution and the two
thousand three and similar to
back in seventy three thirty
four when kindergarten was
invented now early childhood has
been invented and it's part of
our common school system what
that will stand for questions on
the on the amendment or the bill
itself thank you.
Thank you listed the amendment
first is there any discussion or
questions from the committee on
the amendment.
Seeing none do I have a motion
to adopt the amendment.
Thank you Estrada will.
Also.
Thank you chair chair sections.
Is there any opposition to
adoption of the amendment.
Seeing none Terrio have an
amended house joint resolution.
Thank you madam chair.
All right committee please use
your right hand button.
If you would like to ask
questions.
Seeing none I'm gonna ask a
couple and give people a little
more time if they need it okay
the whole hands go up I see
Representative Ferrary does.
And then it will be sent out to
all.
Then dial Representative Fajardo
L. we have the floor no ma'am I
wasn't raising my hand I was
trying to bring attention to.
Representative Dow who did raise
your hand I apologize.
Thank you Anderson and I
appreciate it.
Representative Serrato and then
about.
Thank you madam chair I have a
quick question I'm curious about
how our.
Our child care department and
education department has their
to this comment period.
the sector is we don't mind.
Yes madam chair Representative.
Representative Representative
concert you know it is been
really incredible we
unfortunately we fortunately
have assembled a great team of
leaders and have.
From day one had open lines of
communication with the early
childhood community which has
kept us informed of what's
happening on the ground and
we've been able to act with the
support of the governor's office
very quickly to distribute cares
funding both to support the work
force wage supplement also
facility childcare stabilization
grants clearly more is needed
and and we do have another
stimulus bill coming but I would
say it's been very tough on the
early childhood community over
all we have some of the most
rigorous COVID safe practices
that they must implement daily
they're doing testing
surveillance every other week
for their staff and they are you
know it's it's a lot enrollment
is down families I think our our
focus here is bringing back the
confidence and families to come
back into care and to make sure
that our early childhood
providers professionals business
owners are well supported with
personal protective equipment
access to financial resources
and I think we've done a very
good job you know there's always
room for improvement but I think
we've been keeping in close
communication with the community
on a weekly basis has helped
keep inform our strategy and
keep us very relevant with our
interventions and supports.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Secretary I I will admit that I
had an inkling of that concern
my my daughter is in child care
day care as well having seen how
rapidly organizations on the
ground unable to respond to that
and seeing you will rise as
national leaders on really any
being able to take that on
despite the challenges that so
many industries are facing COVID
and so on you know I just want
to is acknowledge that that work
and and incredible if you're in
Santa Fe were Representative
before COVID we only have space
for about six percent of pre K.
kids in our child care
facilities and that's pre COVID
now with reduced numbers and
protections in place using
harder for folks I really do
appreciate what you've been able
to do and and and lasting also
is considering the you know the
economic impact of social
workers in our state but also
say in in a former life I'd
worked on you know on on Capitol
Hill and you know really trying
to bring industry for say they
love you know industry loves our
state so many you know modern
industries big tax things that
are are making more money in
other places and and really
raising a state budget on that
their hesitancy was that we
didn't have broadband across the
board and we didn't have you
know our our our schools and our
our childcare was really behind
and so as we always talk this
committee about commerce and
economic development I think it
will be a fundamental cool to to
bringing businesses here and
showing that yes we are a leader
not only for the wonderful
things that are colored thank
organically to being New Mexico
but also things that we can help
along the way so thank you
Secretary for work thank you
madam chair and thank you to the
sponsors to this bill.
Madam chair put a point of order
we have a our other sponsor we.
Yup can promote her to panelists
please thank you.
Thank you.
That's what is the name of the
agency office can provide.
Jeez Representative Thomson.
Thank you.
Thompson thank you for joining
us
the bill has been presented
wrong Committee discussion what
would you like to take a moment
and say something about the bill
or where you work sponsoring.
Thank you madam chair I'm I
would love to I I consider
myself kind of the cheerleader
on this bill
and and I say that because I
have worked with infants and
toddlers with disabilities for
More years than I over thirty
years all state and I'm and I
have seen first hand what a
difference investing in their
development makes and and I
think in terms of and I don't
know what's said so I'm going to
be very brief but when we talk
about becoming coming up from
last in education and our crime
rates and our child abuse right
and our drug drug substance use
disorder right.
All of those things can be
addressed by helping families
become their child's first and
best parents and that's what
that's what this really early
childhood program does is
teachers parents other ways
rather than abusing their kids
other ways rather than them
getting so frustrated that they
turn to some sort of substance
to escape it so in it it's going
to take some time it's not a
magic wand but when we start
investing in our youngest human
capital only then will we see
the changes that we all want for
New Mexico thank you for the
time madam chair.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you for joining us
Representative Representative
Serrato where you finished yes
thank you on that one thank you
thank you representative
Representative Dow.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you chairman I ask Senator
Martinez and chairman constant.
I apologize for interrupting
your volumes very low wherever
your microphone is maybe you can
get a little closer.
Better.
Thank you yes well I can't hear
anything.
I'm going.
Sorry about that.
You hear me we can hear you can
hear anything now.
Can you hear me we can hear you.
What you on one second.
Just because I.
Have.
We can hear you.
We can hear you.
Hold on one second.
There we go.
Yes we can.
I can hear you yes thank you
thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Mr chairman I assist
Mister chairman Martinez Mr
chairman Thompson of the
secretaries and those who
presented and it's it's really
exciting my journey in the world
early childhood began when I was
nineteen years old and found
myself pregnant and I was at
first in my family to go to
college I was on a scholarship
and so I I wanted to my degree
and also be able to work and
learn about what I would be
facing as a parent so I went I
got a job at an early childhood
program and I fell in love with
anything working there ever
since and so we've come a long
way in the state of New Mexico
in nineteen ninety nine when I
opened up the first early
childhood program in truth or
consequences at the state of New
Mexico was paying more to keep a
stray dog kennel they're
reimbursing warned to keep a
straight on channel they are
reimbursing for into care and I
remember when the conversation
started around early childhood
investments that twenty million
dollars would fully fund high
quality early childhood in here
we are four hundred million
dollars later and I believe I
heard that we are still four
hundred million dollars short so
but I have a lot of questions
and I hope that you'll bear with
me because I think this is
important and I believe that
this year does this by this bill
will pass and therefore we need
to be intentional we need to get
this right and my first question
for secretary that that W.
secretary might and I can't I
want to try to call people by
the right titles that you
mentioned that the governor has
a vision for universal pre K.
and that we need at least one
hundred million dollars to reach
that goal could you explain to
me what age group would be
released would be served and
what universal means and what
percentage of the increased
allocation you see going to fund
universal pre K..
Chair so you know he is okay
he's and he's in the lobby.
Will move him in.
So madam chair he repeated it.
W. secretary ten hand.
Madam chair am This Is secretary
Groginsky I think I it possible
I can answer that question.
W. secretary hands with us if he
I could maybe start.
Is popping in we have them thank
you.
Yes hello at absolutely
Secretary goodness give you want
to take the first swing at apps
I think that makes sense to me
as well okay I'm thank you madam
chair and Representative Dow M.
as we of often stated in our
administration we would like to
ensure that families voluntarily
have access to free New Mexico
pre K. and eighty five percent
of four year olds would have
access not only including the
state general funds that we use
but through our head start in
our bureau of Indian education
programs are estimates right now
are that were about sixty five
percent would like to be closer
to eighty five percent to ensure
universal for four year olds and
we also include three yearolds
in our pre K. members would like
to be closer to fifty percent of
three year olds having again
access to free pre K. through
our state general fund New
Mexico pre K. head start or
bureau of Indian education we're
currently at about twenty five
percent so that would be taking
us from twenty five percent
access for three year olds to
fifty and from where we are at
about sixty five percent access
to eighty five percent for four
year olds that's with a hundred
million comes in.
Thank you madam chair and deputy
secretary hand what percentage
of this at the permanent fund do
it does that Department C. going
to public education department
in order to reach those goals
for four year olds and three
year olds.
I mean I I heard the slots and
percentages but I'm wanting to
know what percentage of the
dollars in the growth and
expansion would be for three and
four year olds and PED.
Madam chair Representative Dow
that will be determined through
the annual grant making
processes communities come
forward with their applications
whether it's a local education
agency or whether it's a
community based provider though
that is what the new department
that's part of the new role of
our department is to look at
that look at our head start
slots look at our bureau of
Indian education slots and make
sure that we're leveraging both
our federal and our local
dollars to the maximum amount
possible so that number will be
determined through annual as we
as we go through the process and
grant making and looking at the
applications coming from
communities with that goal in
mind to not
supplant federal monies that are
here but to really leverage
those dollars to the maximum
amount of our ability both in
pre K. as well as in our infant
toddler.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Secretary for that I
don't know if anyone from higher
at is on the call that I know I
have not had a chance to go back
and watch your recorded video of
your your released today on the
strategic plan for early
childhood moving forward but I
have heard you mentioned at a
price.
Staff of four hundred dollars
what percentage of that is a
workforce development and
therefore Representative this
distribution will be going to
hire an in order to go out that
the workforce development and
ensure that we have high quality
teachers in this process do you
envision.
Madam chair question for me.
And
it's it's interesting because
you are not a beneficiary your
agency is not a beneficiary of
these funds however you seem to
know the answer so that's where
we need to continue that's fine
what is the price tag for high
qualified workforce which is the
number one indicator of outcomes
not slacks.
Thank you madam chair
representative out I think that
the way that we approach the
work force as we have outlined
is that it's a combination of
looking at compensation which is
going directly to the early
childhood professionals working
in the field scholarships making
sure that scholarships are
available and that we have a
robust early childhood teacher
prep programs across all of our
colleges and universities
including our tribal colleges
and universities so as you some
executive budget we are now
investing in the higher
education program development
fund to make sure that we have
early childhood elevated within
our higher ed institutions.
And then of course we have to
pay parity for pre K. and that
is another four and a half
million dollar investment and
scholarships continue so I think
it's all three of those areas
will be absolutely critical to
accelerating pathways to
credentials and degrees to
ensure that also compensation is
available once those
professionals attain those those
credentials and those degrees as
well so I don't think it's an
amount for higher ed
institutions versus scholarships
right now are executive budget
reflects on that level of
funding for the higher education
which is the three point six
million but I know the higher
education department also invest
directly in in these programs as
well.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Secretary I guess my questions
are specific to what you intend
that the hundred and seventy
million from the distribution to
go to when you hear a hundred
seventy million sounds like a
lot of money but then right away
we heard W. secretary say a
hundred million of that to fully
fund pre K. I believe I heard
you say figures around a hundred
thousand to build out the work
force and to do parity pay much
more than that to do Hey I'm I
mean just with the the minimum
wage increase alone we have now
forced an unfunded mandate on to
these low income minority owned
and operated just in the child
care area I just many many
millions of dollars without a
rate increase so so that's fine
we I.
Yes I just want to say in my
opening remarks I did say at
least fifty million to the force
and what I'm saying is it could
be in one of those three you
know strategy so that that's
just.
Just thank you madam chair and
thank you secretary and out of
this distribution you're looking
at coming from this
distribution.
I think what I'm getting at I
don't know if I have to go much
further and we could talk about
it family of a toddler programs
they have not had an adequate
rate increase for over ten years
their their plans what they need
to fully fund early intervention
have not been met for their five
year plan expired the that our
five year plan I see
Representative Thomson shaking
her head our food providers are
and it's under funded and so you
can have that conversation over
and over.
again I'm sure Secretary Blalock
would say that those are
providing the most urgent
responses to our children who
are have the most adverse
childhood experiences under
funded and so I'm just trying to
figure out where the priority is
because if the priority is to
focus on pre K. and to expand
pre K. to a universal program
and I'm not sure that all the
wonderful beautiful stories that
were told about children finally
achieving school readiness
families finally having the
support they need to overcome
adverse childhood experiences
and all these beautiful stories
and visions that that we're
spoke so well about by the
supporters not share would be
achieved and the and the reason
that I believe that is because
twenty percent of our population
are risk factors when you look
at the statistics and the
outcomes of a public education
it's these twenty percent of the
children who are most at risk
and so as we make the
investments in home visiting and
as we've been expanding pre K.
and now as we're making
investments in early
intervention and parent child
psychotherapy in incremental
health the parents who need it
most the families who need it
most the children who need it
most are the ones who are not
participating with exceptions
there are exceptions but our
families are accessing pre K.
and the research doesn't show
that produces an outcome so when
we talk about expanding these
programs and getting rid of
adverse child experiences the
children who are experiencing
trauma especially resonates with
me when Secretary Blalock is
talking about risk factors but
in practicality we have very low
enrollment in our internal
health programs and the programs
that are targeting those most at
risk children the ones that have
been part of the court system
the one whose parents are in
recovery treatment plans the
ones where children have been
victims of abuse and neglect
those families are very very
hard to engage these programs
remain voluntary for the hard
working but it's easier to fund
slots and so that is where my
questioning is going is because.
We raise the land grant Fund
distribution once before and I
don't know who wants to speak to
this but in two thousand three
when we increased it it was
research the language that it
was for educational reforms and
late and as that money rolled
out we used it to increase I
think the three tier it was
wages to the three tier
distribution for teachers but
also I think it's our
kindergarten to you know fully
funded kindergarten statewide
those are some of the things we
did the last time and had a
sunset on it but the language
was generic and that language in
the last one is that implement
maintain education reforms as
required by law.
How is this language different
how in this with the Martinez
still still in that position and
the final ruling not coming out
but knowing that we're not
funding adequately how is it
that it's appropriate for us to
name just one targeted area
rather than giving local schools
local communities local tribes
or pueblos the flexibility and
public implement the local
interventions they need to
produce student outcomes why is
this different and specific
early childhood.
Thank thank you madam chair
observed of US like three
questions but the one is how it
is different it's significantly
different it's totally different
the constitutional member back
in two thousand three from a
from a financial standpoint we
offset the.
The the the personal income tax
break that was that was given
you know seven months prior so
was a trade off but in terms of
and that was for K. through
twelve that money went to K.
through twelve one up to five
point eight as you recall during
the bank crisis can funding
needed to grow and down to five
point five an ounce but back
down to five we're in real
dollars three point eight seven
as we we showed this language on
page four madam chair observed
out plans twelve to fourteen of
early childhood educational
services
This is earmarked for the
department this is earmarked for
the department early childhood
to be used on early childhood
educational services because
it's the best bang for the Buck
for one number two it's a
relatively new program in state
government that needs a
consistent funding stream and
number three the last thing we
want to do in state government
is F. is cut early childhood
with this kind of consistent
income stream our ability to
grow it you know systematically
and reasonably we wouldn't even
under the worst financial
situations we would not have to
cut funding we can grow this out
of continually Intel L. into it
it's universal for every child
in New Mexico.
So thank you madam chair and
thank you Mr chairman so in on
lines one through four are you
specifically naming the early
childhood departments are are
you think early childhood
services.
Thank you madam chair
representative out early
childhood services the
department is not a
constitutional Department but
and a lot of your questions are
going to be answered by it
depends on the appropriated so
with your leadership with the
current leadership in the fiscal
appropriations of.
Committees of the governor's
office the the secretary and all
of us together it's up to us to
ensure that that money gets
spent wisely and and in the
rural areas.
So thank you madam chair and
thank you Mr chairman but it's
appropriates society and I
correct in saying that this will
be the first time that we
attempted to earmark
distribution and apparently
grant Fund.
Madam chair is.
So much broader education
reform.
Thank early childhood services
do you see that in your work.
Madam chair Representative dot
yes it's it's going to be in the
constitution one percent must go
to early childhood services one
percent is earmarked for early
childhood services in perpetuity
as the fund grows the the
distribution will grow and the
programs will grow right along
with it.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr chairman so so in this
case the dollars for the same
way they do now and so what
happens is then the SCG art with
the funding formula the
distribution of the land grant
Fund portion of the funds go to
each of the common schools the
beneficiaries One sentence the
district it's I'm very strict.
Well you and.
Restrict these dollars in a
system where all these dollars
flow the beneficiaries and
restricted
your it sounds like you're
suggesting that you're going to
capture them somewhere over here
but that's not how the
distribution of apparently grant
funds work they go to each
school districts and each higher
at each car and each special
school and then it's it's
generated.
That's the district is
unrestricted with this so how
are you changing that with this
language thank you madam chair
thank you Representative out
that has nothing to the
constitution that's a state law
and how we appropriate money for
K. through twelve so you're
correct so that begs the
question with this money is
allocated by the voters and and
and appropriators are have it
accessible how are we gonna
shoot that money that's gonna be
consistent with state law
currently and some enabling
legislation hopefully next year
one key point madam chair of
Senate I want to emphasize is
that.
One of the main arguments that
that I find persuasive you can't
put a hundred seventy million
dollars into a system overnight
and that was a big fight in the
house two three years ago will
would since we've learned that
we don't have to do that in the
enabling legislation we merely
changes shall to a may and so we
don't have to spend the whole
hundred seventy million in one
school we can build up you know
say thirty forty million a year
and then once we hit that
hundred seventy then or what it
would grow to at that moment we
still have over three hundred
four hundred million dollars
growing interest earmarked for
early childhood education.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman and I wanna make
sure that I'm understanding we
are going to change through this
bill the definition of education
from K. twelve.
Two zero to try to to to zero
through K. twelve is that
correct madam chair we are not
we're not the the terminology in
the constitution is the common
schools right now five percent
goes to the common schools which
we then spend on K. through
twelve this will increase the
distribution from four to five
with that additional
distribution.
Earmarked for the common schools
go into early childhood
services.
So we are not expanding the
definition of education.
In this.
We're merely allocating that
additional one percent that
that's earmarked to the
beneficiary common schools to
early educational.
Services so madam chair and
chair Martinez when you talked
about as finally funding all
children zero to alter maybe it
was maybe it was Sanchez is that
it but all children would have
equal access to all the services
are we making a commitment that
would open us up to liability
that that.
Are you looking at it every
child K. through twelve highs
eighty at by.
Law access to pre approval
education accessible to all.
And I just wanna make sure that
we're not changing any
definition we're trying to get
to the current grant Fund to
extend the services but not
obligating us to a hundred
percent universal programs
everything.
The programs are needed to be
universal research so they work
best when you target children
thinking about my child doesn't
have a speech that way they
don't need speech therapy and so
I'm I'm just wondering if.
We're not expanding the
definition of education we're
not opening up a lawsuit for the
state if they can't adequately
serve every child in every
community with all of these
programs.
Correct.
And why is that correct.
Thank you madam chair observed
out one is the that the Martinez
Yazzie lawsuit dealt with K.
through twelve this is early
education early education is not
mandated by law parents don't
have to send their kids to early
educational programs but under
the leadership of the governor
madam secretary and the
appropriators we now with this
constitutional amendment and
have the ability to grow this
wonderful system of you know
educate teachers certified
teachers expand private
providers you know X. expanded
capacity in the small towns we
have the ability to grow out the
system that I think we all agree
would would be a game changer
here in the state of New Mexico
thank you madam chair and and
maybe I'll direct this one to
chairman Thompson so
when we did the last expansion
of our land grant funds we did
half the day kindergarten and it
was voluntary it was not
required parents could choose to
send their children to
kindergarten or not and now it
is required by law it was
volunteering out not do you see
in the future that that three
four year old pre K. to go from
being voluntary to required for
families as as we move forward.
That's yes and I really don't
have a guest
I in their I I.
There are things that would be
great about it because
frequently the families that
need the most help are are ones
that are reluctant to ask for it
because of their involvement
with CYFD or their impairment
about their child not having the
right clothes or things like
that so I'm I would I wouldn't
want to speculate on whether
that would and and and that's
not part of this so what if we
need to take that up at some
point.
I would hope that we do a good
enough job of.
Making it.
Making people want it for their
kids that we do a good enough
job to build a good system so
that everybody is winding up to
have their kids go but but out
but beyond that I don't want to
speculate whether we would make
it mandatory or not.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and I guess what I'm looking at
the Yazzie Martinez lawsuit
which is still a deposition it's
not resolved yet New York
they're still gathering data
there still.
I haven't had a final hearing if
I understand correctly we
they're saying that our funding
levels in programming or
insufficient and a specifically
point to include small classroom
sizes K. five plus programs
extended learning time
culturally linguistic responsive
instructions dual language
social services social workers
counselors nurses summer after
school program sufficient
funding for teacher recruitment
and retention in addition to
targeting at risk low income I
mean you you it's a big it's a
law that we have to do for the
existing so what is it where
does like you and the the
superintendents association and
other folks staying on expanding
the beneficiaries beyond the
current ones when we're not
adequately funding the current
thank you for your.
Thank you madam chair I'll turn
over to revenue margin S. as
well but thank you madam chair
of that doubt well not here to
speak on behalf of any air the
superintendents whatever the the
leadership any a and that the
leadership of the school system
that I talked to anxiously await
this proposal to succeed because
they know that those kids going
into the first grade are going
to be better prepared much
better prepared much more well
rounded human beings but higher
social emotional like cubes
and so I think it will save time
and resources in the K. through
twelve system because we'll have
stronger student based but one
last thing on the Martinez
Yazzie the state lawsuit is yes
it's about money yes is about
under funding but it's not about
imports.
So this is not saying the state
needs to put more money into the
exact same thing it's saying the
state needs to learn how to
teach of.
Native limiting the speaking at
at risk students so that we
lower and and and eventually
eliminate the achievement gap
that's what it's about how do we
educate of mouth minority
majority population that exceeds
seven five percent it's a
wonderful task and we have to do
it so it's not just about money
it's about outputs it's about
teaching human beings in New
Mexico how to flourish in a
complex and highly complicated
twenty first century economy
given you know centuries of all
of of institutional racism.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Mr chairman I I
literally without language that
would suit your those dollars
going to the existing mixed
delivery system zero I cannot
imagine why a school district
would receive those dollars are
going to capture them or set
them aside but you're using the
term early childhood services it
doesn't spend these dollars for
every child agency so it sounds
like to me is that the dollars
will be distributed the same way
okay one percent increase the
distribution to the existing
beneficiaries I'm they have
adequate meet with their
school's within our existing.
Programs with the existing
preschool programs that they're
distinction according to third
grade literacy programs K. five
plus programs their career
clusters for preparing the next
workforce why do you believe
that these dollars will trickle
down to the existing of mixed
delivery model of fit home
visiting early childhood program
why do you believe that those
dollars will make it to them hi
how are you.
It is one percent went to the
early childhood the ECECD
department and they distributed
the funds I would get it but
these dollars are flowing for
early childhood services which
by definition are slots or date
if they are they are seeking
time how are you seeing is going
to affect family photographer
program for early intervention
how do they reach that program
Madam chair of that you so much
for that question because that's
been the question has been asked
and that's the kind of the
new of the new argument that
that's that we're being hit with
and it's because it's in the
constitution.
It's in the constitution we're
going to change the constitution
to allow a one percent
additional distribution.
We're going up you were going to
loosen these funds and liquid
liquid data so we can spend
money early childhood education
instead of distributing three
point eight seven percent of a
twenty two billion dollar fund
while we're fiftieth in child
well being and the magic words
in the constitution are going to
be up for shall be shall be for
early childhood education
services administered by the
state that's it that's all the
digital department that's that's
what's going to happen these.
Thank you want to expound on
that but that's that's the way
it's going to be.
No I think I think you've you've
done a fantastic job to remind
us us I mean I think ultimately
the question before us is are we
willing to grow the pie are we
willing to grow the bucket of
funding that is available for
early childhood services
you know as provided by law or
or you know the state and we
have I think a very solid
mixed delivery early childhood
system in place over the last
few years we've made more more
commitments including the
creation of the early childhood
and Care Department I think all
the pieces are in place to make
sure that this happens and as
you stated earlier Mr chairman
you know the reality is that
many of us will continue to
serve on those powerful
appropriating committees whether
it's the legislative finance
committee whether it's H. A. and
see whether it's Senate finance
you know whether it's any of
these companies that make these
decisions and that work in
conjunction with the executive
to build these budgets you know
that's I I in my opinion that's
where that work has to happen
that's for that effort needs to
to take place the question
before us again just remind
panel is are we willing to grow
the pie that is available for
early childhood it's really that
simple thank you madam chair and
and chair Martinez the answer to
that is yes the body has been
doing that with general funds
by millions and millions of over
four hundred million right now
so we have been growing hi
that's not the question my
question is in regards to the
distribution of the funds and
they are clearly delineated and
there has been no cross over
between the federal dollars that
flow to the existing next model
the Medicaid billing child care
development block grant the
state dollars whatever those
are.
And the state general funds that
go to the next delivery model
and the separation and
protection and provision of the
the land grant funds going to
the budget carries only injuries
only the work early childhood
services does not expand
beneficiaries so what you're
saying is that I need to run a
couple more times working hard
make sure I come back and that
you're there to and
representative Thompson is there
to you and all these other
people there to because we're
gonna pass the language to
increase the funding now and
where it ends up is to be
determined at a later date so
what.
But there would be the
appropriating funds the
The legislation would be going
parallel with the so that there
would be a clear picture of
where the dollars are coming
from and where they're going to
go I and you had mentioned
before that we could be talking
about enabling language now as
well we.
I'm I'm seeing thanks.
So we don't know where we're
gonna go yep that's right time
another day we know it's going
to go to start I was going to
live with the service.
Madam chair representative I
appreciate the concern and the
and the fluidity of your of your
argument because it's pry the
new are this because we're tired
of the same old arguments but of
course we know where the money
is going to go it's in the
constitution I I resent the fact
that you're trying to suggest
that that state governments not
gonna follow the constitution
ten years from now fifty years
from now one hundred years from
now we will have the best
universal pre K. system in the
world because we have the
resources we have the the
richness of our land we have the
history we have the the
stewardship of state government
we have a plan by the chief
executive who's fantastic
manager we have a secretary one
of the leading early childhood
experts in the country also know
if you lose I lose revenue
Martinez loses if at all hundred
twelve us lose the hundred
twelve people to replace us
we'll have a constitutional duty
to build the system out just
like we do.
I'm sorry I.
Sorry I'm sure I'm sorry Mister
chairman I'm not trying to
frustrate you and I'm not trying
to I I usually feel like I'm
tracking stuff but I just don't
read the language to think that
that
okay all right let's talk about
the constitution in our
handouts from the legislative
finance committee during interim
committee and and and throughout
the last couple of years they've
have the same comments about the
early childhood distribution so
in this recent most recent one
language from the LFC says early
childhood distribution in the
upcoming twenty twenty one
section the legislature will
likely hear proposals to
increase the distribution from
the land grant permanent fund
with the new allocation
distribution from the permanent
school fund to be dedicated to
early childhood education the
staff at the L. E. S. C.
committee pointed out such
proposals create distributions
from the land grant permanent
fund for beneficiaries that are
not intended recipients a
permanent school fund's.
The state could be vulnerable to
lawsuits because many early
childhood education services are
not administered by public
schools.
This can only be changed by
constitutional action any
confessional action LFC and I
see staff also noticed in
similar proposals the increasing
the grow up for time and reduce
that reduces distribution in the
long run for example within
twenty five years which we call
quarter century twenty years is
pretty fast I can't leave my
daughter's twenty seven the
distribution amount generated
from the six percent
distribution from a smaller than
would be less than distribution
about generated five percent of
a larger fund so the let the
land grant permanent fund could
be about twenty billion less
than twenty five years and the
general fund would receive about
three hundred fifty million less
each year than it would have
under a five percent
distribution from a large corpus
but in the beginning of the
presentation madam chair Mr
chair Martinez you said that the
distribution would go up are are
you missing the mask different
than that are.
How qualified governmental
entities are gonna do the right
thing any ministration regards
through elected why do they see
it.
Thank you no thank you so much
of Madam chair representative
that's a marvelous marvelous
question and that's that's
pretty much the crux of our
decision here today is how do we
best utilize this funds so
you're correct if we distribute
six percent rather than I the
fund will continue to grow and
here's the thing the fund will
continue to grow the
distribution will continue to
grow because the fund goes at
eleven percent now at some point
a mathematician will tell you
twenty years from now if you
take out six rather than five
then you would have got this
much but instead you got that
much so the the number you used
was three hundred fifty million.
Three decades from now so so
that's the question that's the
question twenty eight years from
now.
We will get three hundred fifty
million dollars less.
Twenty eight years from now in
twenty eight years if we cannot
of bill these these early
childhood kids will be in their
late twenties early thirties
their parents will have gone to
school and gone to work because
their children have access to
early childhood education if we
cannot.
Create three hundred fifty
million dollars in tax revenue
by building a first class
economy and and and educating
every child in the state.
That while that.
I mean a small tweak to the tax
code registering a fifty million
I mean so you want to okay let
me get this straight manager of
that also you want twenty eight
years from now have three
hundred fifty million extra
which will be probably peanuts
to the budget at that time and
so we could spend up to into
fifty million on the next
generation of poor kids I I
suggest we don't I suggest we
build an economy.
You madam chair thank you
chairman my Estes thank and and
everyone no I suggest we start
targeting and poor children now
and that we be efficient with
our state dollars and that we
target the children who need it
most now the research simply
does not justify universal
programs and that's what I'm
hearing today is we need four
hundred million more so that we
can universal programs these are
voluntary programs with chairman
Thompson has stated herself the
children who need it most are
the hardest to engage and so
you're gonna grow about these
programs slots gonna pro slots
with no guarantee that the
children who need it most are
killing us lots so no I'm not
I'm not suggest I'm suggesting
that we are are we adequately
fund in target the children who
need the most and I'm not sure
that this ambiguous language
will get us there and I'm
hearing you say as the process.
The voters or increase the
application and then and then
even though and this is just a
side note I've been in office
for four years I've never been
part of these conversations
until they come to committee.
Some help the experts in the
field will become involved in
the conversation we did
appropriating language I I I I
feel like I'm talking in circles
are I think a FINS madam chair.
Thank you Representative Dow.
I see one more committee member
with a hand raised
Representative D. Wonda Johnson.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you colleagues and our all of
that attendees I just wanted to
thank the sponsors for bringing
this bill forward and I
especially want to thank and the
representative from the national
Indian education association Mr
Mahalo for providing there in
that from the national level I
think that's really important
because they have the bird's eye
view of a native American Indian
education within New Mexico and
the entire nation and over five
hundred native American Indian
tribes is who they speak on
behalf of.
So I also wanted to thank you
Secretary for a lot of them I
don't have a question that in my
community I can see that in
addition to lack of access to
high quality education.
During this pandemic.
We our children and our families
are now going to have to deal
with grief.
The HSD
around the pandemic and so I
think you know our children are
already eager to learn they're
sponges and
they need support and their
education so now in addition
because of COVID and their grief
and PTSD they're gonna need
added support and so and that is
why I'm supporting this bill so
that I thought on this and
I don't have anything else to
add thank you madam chair.
New Jersey muted.
Thank you chair I would like to
make a couple of comments and
ask a couple of questions of the
sponsors of the bill is your
primary goal with this house
joint resolution to provide is
able source of revenue for early
childhood or is it to
supplement increase the amount
we dedicate to early childhood
what's that was the primary
goal.
Grow the pie madam chair.
Madam chair I don't I think the
thing questions you ask are not
mutually exclusive I think we we
can in the to do ball.
Thank you that is the answer I
expected I wanted to ask Miss
Sanchez if they had considered
maintenance of effort.
Considerations in that.
Everybody here.
Has come to a consensus and it's
taken ten years to get everybody
on the same page that investing
in early childhood is crucial
that get it gives us the most
bang for the Buck the Nobel
Prize economist says thirteen
dollar return for every dollar
we invest in early childhood I
think I think everybody's come
to that page how are we in in
store if we passed this house
joint resolution that we don't
just reduce the general fund
dollars that we send it to the
early childhood
If the intent is to truly grow
the pie how are we going to
ensure that and have you
considered maintenance of effort
language.
Thank you so much madam chair
Representative Figueroa and just
for folks back home the minutes
of effort is to ensure that the
it's a budget increases with the
distribution that we don't just
trade off and doing accounting
work where we put the
distribution and early childhood
and then take existing money and
spend it on on other government
programs that's the key I don't
think I don't see that happening
for two reasons one because the
distribution is so large
relative to the current system
unlike the K. to twelve system
number two we know what current
expenditures are are and and we
and we would have a mandate
assuming this goes to the voters
assuming it passes consisting
with recent polling of seventy
five percent we would have a
mandate and be ethically legally
and morally obligated to
increase the the to increase the
pipe to use that money to build
early childhood not to supplant
current spending and that's why
it's important to realize we
don't have to spend it all at
once whatever we choose not to
spend as appropriators we've it
remains in the investment
account collecting interest
earmarked for early childhood
education.
Thank you chair.
where are.
This is being recorded we are on
record as a legislative body
that we are making a commitment
that this is to supplement not
supplant funding for early
childhood that is the objective
of this legislation and I think
you're right the public will
hold us accountable to that and
we will hold each other
accountable to that I take
Representative Dallas comments
very seriously the constitution
has laid upon us the
responsibility to appropriated
to budgets.
Has not laid out the house
that's our job every time we're
in session and we must do it
well and we must do it right
especially as we go forward with
this house joint resolution it
has the potential to transform
opportunity for our most
vulnerable if we do it right I
fully support this legislation I
think the people of New Mexico
will support this but I'm in
favor of giving them the
opportunity to vote and make
that decision but then it will
come back to us to budget and
appropriate and make sure the
funds or reach the children and
the families who really need it
and I think we can do it.
Those are my questions and
comments so one more there's
something called the inter
generational equity index
neither of the Sanchez mentioned
that so I want to.
Is a message from our state
investment council that measures
the value today versus what we
are saving and investing for
future generations they want
there to be a balance between
what we're spending now and what
we're saving for the future
generations and right now
according to our analysts.
The land grant permanent fund
intergenerational equity scores
jumped from fifty seven to
seventy nine critically
equitable would be fifty.
Okay so we're a little high and
what that means is we are
setting assigned for future
generations out of balance with
what our current generation
needs.
Yes.
And inequity that we have the
ability to address right now
it's.
So.
With no other hand from the
committee what is the will of
the committee.
We we do pass.
Thank you was that the.
On the motion for a new task.
That was made during
maintenance.
Thank you Representative okay
helps motion for in the past and
the motion for a second from
Representative Johnson met.
Yes.
We were building first on the
amendment.
You haven't voted to adopt the
amendments.
Okay I'll trust you on that
missile that has.
We have it was unanimous we did.
We did there was no objection
the amendments were adopted they
have a joint resolution as
amended so I think we can go
forward the case and was a
Representative cerrado or
Johnson who seconded.
Okay.
Then it was cerrado.
Representative cerrado.
And madam chair just so we're
clear we're voting on the past
as.
Yes we do have some how joys
Representative house joint
resolution one as amended
correct.
Call the roll.
Okay.
Yes.
No.
Thank you.
Dow.
No.
Representative.
Now.
Yes.
Representative Johnson yes
please.
Yes we level.
Representative Culver no.
Yes.
Madam chair you get a.
Yes.
Yes yes.
Six two four.
Don't pass as amended.
Chair Martinez you wanted to
explain your vote thank you
madam chair you know I just want
to thank the the committee for a
lively discussion and you know
all of these questions are are
very good and very important to
the discussion
but again the question before us
is and continues to be and has
been.
Whether or not.
We should it grow the pie of
early childhood funding.
By increasing the distribution
from land grant Fund and even
then it keep in mind that us as
legislators are not approving
that increase we're simply
agreeing to send that question
to the voters of the state of
New Mexico who alternately are
the rightful owners of of the of
the land grant Fund Furthermore
madam chair I I felt madam and
and I Madam myself for not
mentioning in this in my opening
comments but
in light of the murder of George
Floyd in Minneapolis and the
reckoning on race that this
country finally finally.
Came to.
New Mexico.
With the leadership of governor
Michelle hi Grisham took a bold
step of creating a task force on
on racial justice that met over
the course of the summer and
fall in part of the winter and I
am very honored and and happy
and thrilled and in energized
that that council made up of
experts from all across the
state selected this particular
priority as one of their top
priorities to address this
scourge of racism in the state
of New Mexico so thank you madam
chair for the opportunities
planned out votes and to give
you all a bit more context it's
as to the immensity of what's in
front of us here today.
Thank you.
This.
I S. would you like to continue.
No madam chair what a new take
take the next couple of bills.
All right then we are moving on
in the agenda to house bill
sixty.
Yes can you find the sponsors
and the attendee list and move
them and.
Yes.
Representative Representative is
going to be calling in.
I'm.
Okay I'm here right now so thank
you thank you representative I'm
glad you can hear us yes thank
you madam chair we also have
more out mark Howell as an
expert if you can move it then I
may have to leave part way
through as I have a I've got
another committee going and I've
got another meeting to go to.
All right well then would you
please president of bill while
Mr Powell is being moved in.
Yes so I'm.
This bill addresses what is
referred to its current stoning.
Curbstone mean there's two
different ways that of.
Vehicles are curbstone so the
current law says if you sell
five vehicles in a year you have
to become a licensed motor
vehicle dealer.
So if I'm a licensed motor motor
vehicle dealer and I'm using my
location as my residents are
then what I'm doing is taking
the vehicles out and parking
around the city and advertising
them for sale.
And the motor dealers
association who are their
supporters of this legislation I
feel that that is.
Which them are no fair ground as
to
a business transaction.
The other one is I decide I'm
not going to register as a motor
vehicle dealer.
I come to you and you're selling
your car and I buy your car from
you and I tell you don't fill in
sold to me or that sold to me on
your bill of sale you get more
title can you give me your bill
of sale with a blank line and
there are a point person and
there and now I take the vehicle
over and I put it on some corner
lot or whatever and I'm
advertising around and I sell
it.
I now go to the new person that
audit.
And I fill in their name.
on that bill of sale in that
title.
There by I circumvent the dealer
lots one of the most important
things on the dealer laws is the
lemon law and it is an unfair
trade practice with the attorney
general's office if I'm a motor
vehicle dealer and I sell you a
vehicle and it has a defect.
You can bring it back to the
dealer or two who sold it to you
within thirty days to have it
repaired or whatever so they
they circumvent that as well.
That is the thirty second thirty
thousand foot view we have an
amendment on here and I'd like
to read the amendment number and
added to the bill and I'll
explain what it does.
You.
Just a moment I'm not sure we
have that amendment let me
double check.
Is that amendment so loaded into
Centrex yes.
Okay.
The representative would you
please read of the amendment
number.
Yes the amendment number is two
one nine.
Three seven three point one.
All right would you can I get a
motion to move the amendment for
discussion.
Some of Madam.
Thank you representative all
second to go ahead
Representative ring.
Okay madam chair and members of
the committee if you go to page
two one twenty five after sale.
Just strike the remaining
language to the period what that
was is we started looking at
this originally there was some
hot well you could take the
vehicle a vehicle on a dealer's
lot and go over to the bank or
go over to have lunch and it has
for sale on it and we were
trying to do determine what time
frame that should be and what we
want to do is remove all the
time frame.
We're just saying it's going to
have to be on the lot.
And that's the crux of the
amendment our I don't know if Mr
Powell CNN if he has more to
add.
Mr Powell.
Yes ma'am I am here would you
like to add a comment on the
amendment.
Thank you madam chair Mr chair
members of the committee and
Representative Rehm we felt that
the chap the amendment was
important because it confused
existing law regarding where
vehicles by licensed dealers
could be offered for sale and we
did not want to confuse that.
Do we have any further
discussion from the committee on
the amendment.
And.
Okay I will second the motion to
adopt the amendment is there
any.
Opposition to adopting the
amendment.
Seeing none Representative Rehm
you have an amended bill.
Thank you madam.
One other person there Charles
Hinson I don't know if you zoom
in your list he would be an
expert also he's part dealers if
you could move him at.
Thank you representative he has
been moved in Mr Hanssen.
Do you have Committee on the
bill as many as Amanda.
Representative Rehm Mr Hansen is
visible in.
Yes Mister Hanson we heard you
for moments.
Madam chair thank you members
the committee representative
bring thank you of.
We support the in the.
Thank you Mr Hansen.
Right.
We.
This Representative Rehm do you
have more that you'd like to say
to introduce the bill or so we
go to come up public comment.
Madam chair we're we're ready
for questions thank you thank
you I'd like to do a public
comment first at this time we
have several attendees if you
are here to speak and the
opposition to this bill would
you please click your little
ray's hand but.
No opposition.
Thank you representative.
As you are heroes and support of
this legislation please enter a
little raised and but I'm.
Committee members looks like.
Comments so if you would like to
ask questions on this bill.
Your doctor and yes madam chair
to do press.
We have a motion from
Representative Powdrell thank.
Representative Fajardo we have
two hands right so we're gonna
do of the discussion.
Chair lance thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
re Mr Paul great to see you
before we take that motion madam
chair I I move a adoption of the
amendment.
Thank you for following rules
and protocol.
President of the amendment.
I think we did that and we had
to and no opposition to the
amendment so we got that piece
done thank you.
Your what did you have questions
or comments on the bill chair no
chair okay.
Chair Martinez did you have
questions.
Yes thank you madam chair and
and Representative reading just
real briefly what is the what is
the penalty for not.
for not complying should this
pass.
I'm Madam chair on a referred to
Mr Powell because I don't know
all of the dealership penalties
with motor vehicles but it's a
misdemeanor in the criminal code
as well but will be let him talk
about the D. M. V. portion of
it.
Thank you madam chair Mr chair
committee.
The the short answer is a five
hundred dollar fine per vehicle
sold by.
Someone who sells more than four
vehicles a year.
In addition to paying any past
taxes that were due.
Are levied by the D. at the time
of sale on this is one of the
reasons that curbstone is so bad
for New Mexico citizens because
in addition to not receiving the
fifteen day five hundred to six
percent inspection they often
find consumers often find
themselves with bad titles but
also titles that have been sold
this open title says
Representative Rehm mention and
DM B. B. charges the new
purchaser for each of those
previous sales by assuming the
value of those sales so the
ultimate consumer are you the
real wire ends up paying far too
much in tax.
well thank you Representative
chair thank you Representative
Rehm.
Thank you.
representative I have a
question.
Clarifying.
On page two of the bill.
Line two reason less a person is
a motor vehicle dealer the
person shall not sell more than
four vehicles registered to the
person or another person in the
calendar year.
But then be says unless the
person is a medical motor
vehicle dealer.
Sicily used motor vehicle the
person shall possess the title
and it shall be registered in
the person's name so I'm I'm
clear can a person sell someone
else's vehicle or not.
Madam chair that goes back to
remember the open title where
I was describing the curbstone
anymore I don't I don't feel in
I bought that vehicle when you
sell your vehicle to a motor
vehicle dealer on the backside
of the title he puts his name in
there it's now sold him and then
he sells it to you to the next
person.
Okay thank you Representative
Rience.
I see no other hands up for
discussion we have a motion for
a do pass and the motion has
made seconded agency that is
what you call the roll.
This is on house bill sixty as
amended.
Yes ma'am.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Dow.
Representative Dow.
Representative I have all.
Yes.
Yes Representative Johnson.
Ellen Connors.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes Representative cerrada.
Yes.
Representative Dow.
Yes.
Yes yes please.
We have to pass as amended.
Thank
you yes thank you and.
Representative not no we are.
Thank you representative.
We will move on to house bill
sixty six and give
Representative.
Madam chair I am here and I do
not know whether you have
allowed by expert Jack Burton to
appear to yes Bob would you
please allow him to.
Be a purchase.
Thank you Representative night
birds Mr Burke St is in the room
and you have the floor to take
us through your bill.
Thank you madam chair work here
on house bill sixty six for some
reason the speaker has appointed
me to serve on the uniform law
commission and I guess is one of
my duties I get to a now B. B.
sponsor of legislation that
comes through the you know what
uniform law commission to the
house of representatives and so
my first to uniform built at the
I am presenting its house bill
sixty six which is frankly a
very.
Very minor touch up bill to
comport our
uniforms.
Commercial code the UCC our with
the uniform law that has added a
few changes and all be happy to
go through those but I must
apologize to the committee after
we drafted the bill we noticed
one small change was
was a little bit different than
what we saw on the uniform long
sought to happen amendment as
well so I don't know what your
pleasure would be if you'd like
to get the amendment to the bill
first and then discuss the whole
thing or if you want to do the
go through the bill and and not
talk about the amendment
whatever.
motion to discuss the amendment.
Discussion.
Thank you representative Arnel
I will second to go ahead
Representative night bridge and
discuss the amendment.
Okay the amendment is the
amendment to page thirty three
of the bill.
On page thirty three line seven.
It basically changes slight
wording so that the word this
becomes a.
So it says transfer by a state
or a government metal unit of
the state sure yes instead of
the state and governmental unit
of the state so.
I I presume that uniformed law
has a start so that in the
state.
She is consider the state not
just wanted to New Mexico.
Thank you representative.
We have a motion to adopt the
amendment.
So move.
Thank you Representative tab L..
Do we have a second thank you.
Thank you Sir Martinez are there
any objections to adoption of
the amendment.
Seeing none Representative
neighbor and you have an amended
bill and let's all remember we
approved the amendment on this
bill.
Thank you madam chair I'll just
briefly through but Google
amendments and if you have any
significant questions the Jack
Burton is here to.
Provide more detail with respect
to those
this is dealing largely with
article nine of the uniform
commercial code the first change
is on page fourteen of the bill.
And that provides a definition
of groups thank.
The second change is on page
twenty one.
And that the page there is now a
new definition of it of public
finance transactions.
The after there's minor changes
remembering the subs what's what
sections of the bill.
Of the next month substantive
changes on page twenty nine.
And on page twenty nine there
are several minor touch up
Asians.
That are provided in the.
Winds five and six.
I would consider those non
substantive as well.
In on page thirty three of the
bill
We actually get to use of the
new way to define terms of the
public finance transactions.
And that's again in the wind six
we amended line seven but line
six a yes with the newly defined
term of public finance
transaction.
And then
Page thirty four.
There's a really major change we
were yes in line to.
And there was some discussion in
the FY are that it was not
necessary but I disagree with
that I think that just because
on page thirty three line
fifteen it says the US.
We still need the yes in line to
page thirty four because that
puts us secretary of pre
requisite that's associated with
that comment and then finally
page thirty six.
There is repeal of.
Of the fifty five dash one dash
one can.
Of the
Existing users and it basically
separate the law two thousand
fifteen our job alright so.
That brings us in line with the
uniform commercial code that's
been that instituted in many
other states and without the Mr
Burke can do to clean up
something I said incorrectly or
can say a few words and then
we'll stand for questions.
Madam chair.
Mr chair.
Representatives of I think
Representative Nibert a
wonderful job and I don't have
anything to add to it thank you.
Thank you Mr.
We're going to check with the
attendees to see if someone is
here to give public comment in
opposition to this bill will
start with the opposition if you
are an attendee.
Thank you raise hand button if
you would like to give public
testimony in opposition.
All right and supports.
We have a raised hand.
Ms Allred as please move
Christina Chavez and Mr chair so
you yourself and give your
testimony please welcome thank
you madam chair and members of
the committee my name is
Christina Chavis I'm actually
the director of business
services for the New Mexico
secretary of state's office
representative states office
actually has no position on the
bill so I did want to put
opposition.
But I we do we just want to be
here it's going to be myself and
our Council
delivering is also here to
answer any questions our office
does filed UCC so if there's any
questions regarding that but we
have no positions thank you.
Thank you Mr we will use you as
a reference if needed for
questions that Mr Burton are
representative numbers can't
answer it goes to committee at
this point and I'm sure we have
a detailed in depth complex
questions about this bill.
Raise your little hand function
folks if you would like to ask
questions.
Thank you chairman I assess.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative night we're Mr
Burton pleasure thanks for
bringing this for just a quick
comment
Maybe a question but we see that
we saw the Judiciary Committee
has the.
The joy of seeing these a
uniform bit law bills coming
through year after year they and
and I'm really happy for a
Representative neighbor madam
chair these a member of the
uniform law commission I was on
member the commission for about
three four years the uniform law
commission is is also a
centuries old organization that
brings together legal minds from
throughout the country when you
go to these.
Conferences you're known as
commissioner.
Of there's judges there's former
judges there's legislators
there's we will lawyers and but
everybody refers to each other
as commissioner all you're only
going to get there and they
essentially.
Do a uniform laws laws that are
meant to go through Congress.
Are meant to be done at the
state level primarily for
commerce I know they did a good
a good protective order log so
that all the agency about is
restraining orders had similar
language have similar policies.
Our New Mexico shines as an
example nationally because of Mr
Jack Burton and because of other
commissioners so New Mexico's
president that these commission
meetings we have passed more
uniform laws than most every
other state and it really helps
us modernize our economy the the
UCC gives people gives other
lawyers you know the heebie
jeebies because no one
understood in law school but our
own former dean Robert does that
area was one of the main
drafters of the UCC back in the
day so so it's a you know proud
to be a New Mexico with regards
to the uniform commercial the
laws and it's very important
that the words in the bill
tracked the other states that's
the whole point that all the
other state all states have the
exact same language in law
pertaining to state law it that
Congress can't do this stuff but
because of the uniform law
commission
we're able to do it and so my
question chair of the night but
what.
When we did this bill back in
the day of I know that it was
done in two thousand one chapter
one thirty nine did did we did
we Tinker with that and say
we'll we do we Tinker with it
away from you see see or did the
UCC updated it's it's common
language.
Mr Burton if you if you know of
Mr chair if
Let me answer the question this
way it's a combination of both
we we missed a couple of things
in.
in two thousand one the UCC has
been amended since then and like
this type of graphical error
that we talked about the missing
if we tried to fix that and
someone somewhere in the in the
process the editors did the same
thing as the LFC did and they
said all the staff should be
that this if should be there so
they took it out so now we're
putting it back in so maybe
maybe this time it'll stay and
all the way through the editing
process
so yes it
it's a constant battle we we try
to we try to keep it up to date
and every now and then we catch
something and we said oh god how
did that happen so we'll fix it
again so that's.
That's the process we we go
through and we appreciate your
patience and your support.
Thank you madam chair of Mr
Burton representative or so good
luck in House Judiciary and and
now.
And with the former house
judiciary member on Senate
Judiciary good good luck with
that as well thank you madam
chair.
Thank you once the will of the
committee.
Would you pass as amended.
Thank.
Thank you those and the second
goes to chair Martinez I think.
I S..
Yes.
Wow drell.
All right folks.
Jeremiah's sister privileges
and
is this what you call the roll.
Thank you.
A three sixty six as amended.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative though yes.
Representative Dow.
Representative yes.
Representative Dow.
Yes.
Thank you Representative will
yes.
Yes.
Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez yes.
Colbert yes Representative
cerrado yes madam vice chair
Figueroa yes.
Yes thank you.
Past ten yes folks HB sixty six
as amended to pass.
Thank.
Thank you very much.
All right that completes our
agenda for today share Maestas
do you have announcements.
Yes there were meet on Friday at
work we'll see I'll check with
the analysts here the next hour
see what's up
But and I think we'll be ready
to go on the up family leave act
