Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee members, um, this is
Jeffrey with some cannabis
microbusiness producer and
manufacturer only we are not
retail. I do stand in support of
this bill as it is very, very
hard to navigate in this uh
industry when we have uh illegal
players doing illegal stuff, um,
not only these uh campuss girls
that are illegally producing.
We also have legal retailers
that are purchasing from them
and when they drive that
wholesale price down so far that
it makes us very sustainable to,
uh, you know, as, um.
And the failure because we're
not retailer, uh, it really puts
us out of business the way these
guys operate and do all these
illegal, illegal uh growth and,
and activities. So enforcement
for the CCD is a must.
Um, I do want to recommend if
there's any provisions in there
to, you know, not to go after
low hanging fruit and just after
minor violations but really
attack these uh.
Illegal operations. Thank you
for your time.
Captain Kevin Burns.
Madam Chair, committee, uh,
thank you very much. One of the
things that we have to, we have
to remember is that that any
time that we apply resources, we
have to pull resources from
another area and that's where
that responsibility uh typically
falls on in this particular
realm it's gonna fall on state
police and then it'll fall on uh
local law enforcement and so,
uh, that's the one thing
operationally day to day that,
you know, it's, it's not gonna
be as, as big of a deal, but
when it, when it
it comes to operations, we have
to pull resources from all over
the state to be able to uh take
down these, these bad players
and so, uh, just to, just to put
that on the table as well. Thank
you.
Thank you, Captain. Is there
anybody else on Zoom in favor?
OK. Is there anybody in the room
here to speak in favor of the
bill?
OK, if you could please stand
up, make your way to the middle
of the aisle in an orderly
fashion, and we will allow um
one minute each for public
comment. Thank you.
Yes, please allow the attendant
to hold the microphone for you.
Go ahead, Mr. Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is JD Bullington and I am
here representing the Gallup
McKinley County School District
that school district is starting
to have a serious problem with
students getting sick who are
consuming fraudulently
misbranded cannabis products.
The other day they had 3
students who unknowingly
ingested cannabis, gummies,
candies, and this is becoming a
significant problem with the
la be ling of these products. So
we strongly support this
legislation. Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Troy
Wler, chief, New Mexico State
Police, uh, we stand in strong
support of this bill and
appreciate the sponsors bringing
it forward, um, we believe that
combining the regulatory
oversight with criminal
enforcement will enhance the
compliance, public safety and
industry trust, um, you know,
state police, we will continue
to support RLD uh when needed
for high-risk operations and of
course, when we uh encountered
violations of the cannabis, uh.
Control Act, but by creating
This separate dedicated law
enforcement entity within RLD.
We are ensuring that it
continuous focus, uh, is put
upon this industry and the
organized criminal elements that
we're starting to see uh in the
industry.
No existing, you heard a little
bit from Captain Burns, but
existing law enforcement
agencies, we have limited
resources and competing
priorities, making it difficult
to maintain a sustained effort
against organized criminal
elements in the market, uh, and
this will assist with that. The
other thing I wanna bring to
your attention is we think it is
critically important, the uh
portion dealing with seizure or
embargo of uh cannabis products,
um, that has been a major, uh,
issue for us on the enforcement
side. There's a lot of
ambiguity,
um, when it comes that time.
Thank you.
very much.
All right, thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members,
uh, I'm Ellie Bezanson. I'm the
current president of the Mexico
Cannabis Chamber and I run a
microbusiness in Albuquerque,
New Mexico, and I am here to
voice support for HB 10. I've
worked in New Mexico cannabis
for the better part of a decade,
and I'm really proud of the safe
legal regulated, uh, um,
cannabis control division, uh,
that we've developed here. It's
got a strong foothold, but bad
players and illegal operations
continue to.
pose a threat. I'm here to voice
support for HB 10, uh, with the
ability to giving the CCD the
ability to sufficiently regulate
our industry, ensure that
cannabis and cannabis products
are grown in manufactured in New
Mexico and that are they are
tested for, sorry, I'm so
nervous that they're safely
tested for patients and
consumers. Thank you.
Madam Chair and committee
members, my name is Amy May. I
am an owner and operator out in
Astancia, New Mexico, in the
heart of Torrance County. I'm
also an elected board member of
Estancia itself.
My dispensary is 5 miles from
the federally seized illegal
operation that just happened
last week.
Um, I have been approached by
representatives from that
operation over the years.
They've made me feel so unsafe.
They've sat out in front of my
home. They scared my children.
We need this bill. We need help
out there. I've gone to county,
County tells me it's a state
problem. State tells me it's a
federal problem, Federal tells
me it's a county problem.
Nobody will help me.
I'm on the verge of losing
everything out there.
And the town's ready to strangle
anybody that mentions the word
cannabis.
So, please support this bill.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Ben Lowinger. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Cannabis Chamber of
Commerce, where the statewide
association representing
operators in the regulated
cannabis industry. I first want
to acknowledge the tenuousness
between law enforcement and uh
the cannabis industry and its
legacy unregulated form and
acknowledge that that makes
these conversations going
forward that much more
difficult. That being said, if
our industry ever wants to be uh
accepted, and if we ever want to
finally remove the stigma from
Cannabis, we have to do so in
the light. Uh, this bill,
especially in its substitute
form that you're reviewing now,
uh, has the power to um change
our industry for the better. Uh,
it'll make it possible with very
specific abilities, like
seizing, seizing in place,
embargoing product. It'll make
it possible for the cannabis
control division to do a much
better job, and it'll, it'll
help bring our industry into the
light, and we ask that you
support this bill. Thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members
Eranieto on behalf of the 2nd
Judicial District Attorney's
Office, and we stand in strong
support of this bill. Thank you.
I'm Jessie Hunt and I'm here on
behalf of um Field of Dreams and
Critical Elements, and I don't
have a whole lot to add, but we
appreciate that this is really
being addressed this year for
the first time in a real, you
know, in a real manner and with
bipartisan support because in
order for this industry to
thrive, the way that so many of
us, um, you know, who worked to
get it passed, wanted it to, we
need to be able to crack down on
the illicit market in a much
stronger way. So, thanks so
much.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee. My name is Karina
Miramontes. I am a microbusiness
owner, and I'm also an advocate.
I um am against the bill. I am
just very concerned with
creating a new police force. Um,
there are many things built into
the law that are not being
implemented right now. And, um,
like a basic pre and post
inspection. Um, thank you very
much.
Uh, how's it going? My name is
Chalozano. I'm host of A Chad
Grassy Logic. I've been in the
cannabis industry here in New
Mexico for about 12 years, also
an advocate in combat veteran of
the Iraq War, um, there's a lot
of mixed feelings in the
industry, um, when it comes to
this bill, uh, including myself,
there's a lot of fears. We all
come, you know, we all know from
the black market of originally.
And there's a lot of fears that
a lot of us will be attacked or
targeted if something isn't done
correctly. So as I support this
bill in a sense, um, I also
caution you all to remember
that.
you know, a lot of us do not
trust the government, hence why
not so many cannabis businesses
are here. It's really hard to
get people here, hence why I
show up a lot. Um, and if we can
do this the right way, we can
regulate the industry, which I
agree we have a lot of
regulation industry, I mean, a
lot of enforcement issues, but
if we don't do it correctly, a
lot of people will be targeted
in the low hanging fruit uh
issue will continue. Thank you
so much.
OK, and with that, we will move
to Zoom. Are there any comments
in opposition?
OK. Are there any comments in
the audience in opposition to
this bill?
OK, I open it up to the
committee for questions.
Representative Matthews.
Thank you Madam Chair um thank
you presenters.
And all of those in the
audience, um.
My
I'm, I'm certainly not opposed
to the concept of trying to
Um, do a better job of enforcing
the cannabis laws.
And protecting the people who
are following the law versus the
people who are not.
But I, I just want to be sure I
understand how this works. And
my first question is,
The Bill refers to, I'm looking
at the substitute, the bill
refers to the to a division.
And it doesn't ever define.
And I could see which division
we're talking about and I think
RLD has many divisions and it's.
Um, so I wonder if
Somebody could help me
understand that.
Madam Chairwoman.
Uh
Representative
Um, certainly the division that
is um contemplated here is the
cannabis control division of
RLD.
Uh
I
I believe on page 2,
mentioned the cannabis
regulation, so certainly this
would be directly related to um
the cannabis control division,
which is uh what was created by
the Cannabis Regulation Act.
I'm sure, I'm sorry, I'm having
trouble hearing you.
This bill is related to the
cannabis regulations Act, which
created the cannabis Control
Division as part of the uh
regulation and licensing
department, but certainly it is
um pertaining to the cannabis
control division specifically.
Um, man, uh.
I'm just wondering, is there
some reason that
It's not
Clear
That that the
Specific division that's given a
lot of authority in here isn't
spelled out more.
And
Madam, what is the, what is the
name of the division we're
talking about.
Madam Chair, a representative,
the cannabis Control division is
in the definitions of the
cannabis regulation Act defined
as the cannabis control
division. So certainly this
particular bill would be related
to an amendment to the cannabis
regulation Act, which
specifically created the
cannabis control division.
Is it breaking up? Uh.
Man, I've been presenters, I
just find it kind of confusing
that.
One would have to know that.
Oh, I mean, it it seemed to me
to be a fairly simple fix to
just
Name the division we're talking
about, just a suggestion.
Um
In part because RLD does have.
A whole slew of divisions.
Um
My my second.
My second question, Madam Chair,
um.
Is
Um
With this new force.
Uh, I heard the officer from the
state police say that they
organization would still be
assisting. Is that true?
Or will there have to be any
special procedures for county
sheriffs for police departments
or other law enforcement
agencies in the state to to on
the request of
Um, the enforcement agents from
RLD.
Uh, to participate in law
enforcement activities.
Madam Chair, committee members,
uh, this continues kind of the
uh long standing history that we
have with cooperation with DPS,
uh, in the event we need to
cooperate with them, we will
fully do that and we believe we
have that support from DPS as
well.
Um, Madam Chair
to public safety, and what about
the others I mentioned?
Uh, we would also work with
local law enforcement if we
believe that would be uh aiding
with the destruction or embargo
or using this new authority.
Thank you. Um,
And uh Madam Chair, on page 3 of
the bill.
It talks about the inspections
and there's laboratory testing
and so forth. I just wondered
who does.
Is that the crime lab?
Is that
The lab that RLD has or.
Um
Or is it some other laboratory?
Madam Chair, committee members,
uh, we do have uh 7 licensed
labs in the state with 8
premises that we could use to
help test these products. Madam
Chair and I'm sorry, I don't,
I'm not sure who you are.
I'm the director of the cannabis
Control Division, Todd Stevens.
OK.
Um, and, uh,
Those are all
State
prims. These are Madam Chair,
committee members, these are
state labs that we license that
are vetted to the highest
ability to ensure their
accuracy. Uh, we have 7 of these
that specialize in testing
cannabis.
Thank you.
Uh
Madam Chair on page.
I
Refers to administrative hearing
uh line 7.
is a licenseek and ask for an
administrative hearing.
And which agency?
Or which division?
Of
RLD does that.
Madam Chairwoman Representative.
Um, so again, the CCD would be
conducting that administrative
hearing pursuant to the ULA,
which is the um
Sorry, the sound is a little
off.
Uh
Can you hear me OK now? Um, so
they, we, these hearings would
be conducted pursuant to the,
the outlines of the ULA which
the cannabis uh control division
is bound to conduct hearings
under.
OK.
Thank you.
And
Give me just one moment.
Um
Man chair and and presenters.
Um
I'm not trying to be picky, but.
You know, you do
It, it really is sort of hard to
follow kind of who is doing what
this, and I just wonder if maybe
putting a little bit more
language would be helpful.
Um, as a
As a recovering lawyer.
Uh
I, I've read many statutes and a
lot of times it really gets very
hard to figure out where I'm
going.
Uh, because there's a lot of
regulatory schemes and so forth,
plus schemes change.
And if that were to happen and
names were changed or whatever.
Uh, it would be kind of hard to
follow what was happening here.
But other than that, I'm, I am
in support of your bill. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative
Matthews, uh, Chairman Linte.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you presenters. Thank you
for your, uh,
Folks that are helping you out,
uh, clarifying question, is this
for product?
Roan produced and sold in
Mexico, or is it for those that
are imported into our state.
Madam Chair, representative, it,
it would be for both. So illegal
product is considered product
that is sourced from out of
state, sourced from a, a
licensee who's acting outside of
the privileges of that license
or um alternatively something
that's been mis mislabeled in
the packaging, um, so it would
be both, both of those items.
OK, thank you for the
clarification. You know, just
last week I'll tell a story.
This last week I was called by
Larry Barker, who was the
investigative reporter.
13 and for those of you that are
long as ice and maybe in the
public, it's almost the
political kiss of death cause
you you know you're in trouble
for something. But I wasn't in
trouble, so long story short, I
wasn't in trouble. But he was
asking me about was a was a bill
that I passed in 2019, which is
the hemp manufacturing Act.
Which is very similar to what
you guys are trying to address
today in regards to there are a
lot of bad actors, and this was
one of those issues that he
brought up to my attention that
I wasn't aware of, right? We,
we, we put all these mechanisms
into these pieces of
legislation.
Knowing that
There should never be any
unintended consequences, right?
But we do the best that we can
to make sure that things are are
policed in this case, but he
brought to my attention that for
the same purposes that those
products that are being
imported.
Under the hemp manufacturing Act
are, are, are above the, the,
the regulated uh amounts of, of
THC levels.
And so it's becoming an issue.
So my question would be then.
Can we add him to this?
Madam Chair, committee members,
um, the cannabis regulatory Act
and and the division is
specifically regulating Delta 9
THC and presence greater than
0.3, um, so hemp would
contradict a little bit of the
CRA at that point, even if
those, uh,
Levels rise to uh a threshold
above that in the semi-synthetic
or synthetic cannabinoids. OK,
so then, Madam Chairwoman, and
to your point, then, so for
those bad actors that are
utilizing the hemp manufacturing
Act importing product but
labeling it as hemp, but it
being above the THC levels to
which will then trigger.
Violations and
Would it be your
Job to police it or would it be
me to create.
The exact bill like this, but
for hemp.
Madam Chair, committee members,
uh, I think that that would be
best to the experts in hemp.
That is agricultural or most
likely environment where those
products are finished.
Madam Chair, and, and, but to
your point though is that these
are products that are not grown
produced in New Mexic this is
why I let off with the question
about these are all imported
products.
to New Mexico that are hurting
New Mexicans. And so my point is
Would you recommend in your
professional opinion?
That we create the same type of
act, but for him.
Uh, Madam Chair, committee
members, yeah, and my, my
professional opinion, I think
that this would serve the
environment and the agricultural
department in battling that uh
specific challenge.
Thank you.
Um
Those are my questions. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Chairman Chair
Sorato.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank you
presenters for this bill. I had
a couple of questions about the
effect. So in here, and I
believe one of my colleagues
mentioned it earlier on page 5,
section I starting on line 5,
you talk about how a licensee
could uh receive a hearing
within 10 days. Um, you know, as
mentioned during the testimony,
there is some concern among the
cannabis community or cannabis
producing community, um, just
with historically speaking,
working with law enforcement,
can, can someone kind of explain
how that administrative process
would look, um, just
to help kind of clarify what
that would be for a business
that may not be illegally
producing but may have been uh.
Uh, I received uh been subject
to this.
Madame Gro representative. So
you are asking about um what
would the process look like if
we were to identify uh an item
for a recall or a seizure.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
and, um, and expert. I mean
really that uh what would be the
repeal process? I mean, I know
it's basically laid out in I,
but what would that actually
look like for a business if they
wanted to, you know, appeal the,
the
The, the seizure. Certainly. So,
um, right off the bat, the, the
licensee would have 10 days to
request an administrative
hearing. This is kind of a
process we already have laid out
whenever we have a notice of
contemplated action that's
issued to a licensee, um, so, so
kind of something that's already
well established within our
division, um, we would then
offer them that opportunity to
have a hearing, um, and, and
subsequently if they did not,
um, if they weren't happy with
the, the decision from that
here.
they would have the ability to
then um appeal it to district
court. Additionally, um, we'd
have to actually go to district
court to get a condemnation
order to condemn the product. So
there's multiple steps and, uh,
you know, as far as due process
for licensees that would be
potentially impacted here.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for uh laying that out,
expert. I really appreciate it.
I think it's important for folks
to see and understand that they
do have rights in this process,
that they are feel respected in
that, and I, I appreciate that.
I am curious from the expert's
perspective. I, I know it's hard
to, uh, evaluate with an illegal
market is, but how much of the
current market would do you
anticipate would be affected by
this uh proposal.
Uh, Madam Chair, committee
members, uh, all of our actions
that we take against licensees
is posted online, um, of those
we see about 22 to 24% that have
some sort of criminal element in
them, whether it's a legal
product, mislabeled or
adulterated product, um, so this
would be about 20% of what we
likely see.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you expert. That, that is
horrifying, uh, that more than
11 in 5 is an illegal product. I
mean, horrible for our business
community, horrible for our
families and for people that are
just trying to use a product
that they thought was safe. So,
uh, I think that really shows
the urgency of this. The last
question I have was I'm looking
at one of, I think it's RLD, uh,
so you would know this. It says
the operations is a 3-year cost
of $3 million. I see the the
appropriation was taken out. Um,
do you feel that you're able to
cover that with these additional
responsib?
So, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, uh, that the uh
amount that's already in there
and that was slashed, it was
because it's in house Bill 2.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
Madam Chair for that
explanation. Um, you know, I,
I'm chair of rural development,
and this issue has come up in
private conversations among a
lot of our members. I remember
who represents Estancia who's
very passionate about this. Um,
so I'm, I'm really glad to see
that you guys are taking it
serious attempt on this and good
to understand the scope of this.
Thank you.
Thank you, Chair Sorato, um,
Representative Murphy.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representatives.
Um, thank you for bringing this
bill. Representative Armstrong,
I'm also very, very reluctant to
pass any new regulations, but I
think we all agree that
legitimate operators are
suffering because of
illegitimate operators, correct?
And while this is focused on
Canada cannabis. I, I see it
more as a law enforcement small
business protection and jobs
bill, um, and for a particular
area and some very supportive of
it. Now to my question Madam
Chair represent this, um, I note
in Department of Public Safety
analysis regarding the original
bill.
Um, that they fully support this
bill I assume it's I presume
it's safe to assume that they
also support the the substitute
as well.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, thank you for
that question. Um, I would
assume that as well. I can't
speak to that, uh, specifically,
but I would assume because we
cleaned it up and made it more
specific that they would be
supportive.
That's the way I viewed it as
well. Thank you, ma'am I'm sure
that concludes my questions.
Thank you, Representative
Murphy. Representative Mason.
Thank you.
One comes to my mind is the
scope of this legislation.
Well, well we actually be able
to enforce.
Here.
Or
Is it big enough?
Madam Chair, representatives,
yes, I think this is another
piece to help fill in a gap of
where we've, uh, kind of seen
come out this would be something
that the regulation licensing
department would be happy to
fill. We have the expertise to
fill this, and we believe we can
do this. So I think this is a, a
spot where we see a need for it.
We have folks that can do this
and we have a willing, wanting
partner with the RLD and CCD to
fulfill this role.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, only reason I brought
that up.
I've
Constituents and stuff that are
in the legal.
Business of producing the
marijuana.
If
The statistics they've given me
is
A lot more than 20% of the
product being sold in Mexico is
illegal.
That's a huge problem.
According to most of the people
in the industry that I thought.
So I really hope that uh that
this legislation will.
We'll clean it up and
For the safety of the
People that use it
They need to be getting clean.
Legal product
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative Mason,
uh, Representative Parajon.
Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you so much for bringing
this bill. I think it's really
important. I also agree, um,
just from our community,
especially our young community
who um are using these products,
we want to make sure that
they're safe. I have some
questions about the enforcement
aspect, um, specifically in
section 2.
Uh, on line 23.
It says that
The, um, the division and the
enforcement bureau will be able
to conduct these, um,
inspections unannounced and also
announced. And I was wondering
what other uh regulated
industries or substances are
subject to announced and
unannounced inspections.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Representative for
that um question.
Every agency that that uh does
any kind of inspections.
is unannounced or announced.
OK, so this was standard
language that we kind of use for
alcohol industry, tobacco
industry, etc.
Uh, and then on page 3 where it
talks about items that are being
suspected. I, I'd like to know a
little bit more about how, um,
currently RLD identifies
suspected items.
Uh, Madam Chair,
Representatives, uh, through
routine inspections and annual
inspections were able to
identify products that are
improperly labeled that might
have symbols from other states
where they're legal, they don't
have um.
Uh, certain labeling also our
seed to sale tracing system. If
we enter a facility and in that
seed to sell tracing system,
they are supposed to have only
20 pounds of cannabis if they
have uh access of about like 100
pounds. Uh, that's usually a
telltale sign because everything
should be tracked and traced
through uh the state for all
legal cannabis.
and um presenters, um.
And then the last question that
I had is on the penalty, the the
4th degree penalty.
Um
For people who knowingly, um.
Intentionally, recklessly.
Are there other, like for
instance, when we're regulating
alcohol or when we're regulating
tobacco, if someone is found to
um have a product that doesn't
measure up to our standards, do
they also have this penalty
system? Is this like a, a
standard penalty system that we
use for substances.
Madam Charro and Representative,
it's a very standard penalty
that you'll see in um in
products and embargoes, um,
certainly the environment
division has a very um almost
identical provision where
they're allowed to sticker uh
non-compliant products or
products that are under
investigation, um, and then
there would be uh a fine or um
an extreme penalty if anybody
moves a product that's kind of
in that quarantine phase or
stage. So it is something that
we see in other um, other
industries.
and regulated markets.
Thank you. And Madam Chair, is
this?
Why, why don't, why didn't we
pass this initially before when
we um, legalized cannabis.
I would love to answer that.
You know, this is, uh, Madam
Chair, this is part of the
problem, right? When we pass
legislation, things that we
don't think of unintended
consequences and so uh we
didn't, I think probably if, if,
uh.
Uh, Superintendent Balin was
here.
They didn't foresee these
problems.
Or we would have done that to
begin with, and I'm sure.
Uh, the gentleman at the end
would agree with that. I'm not
sure, maybe you have a different
opinion.
Thank you so much, madam chair
and representatives.
Thank you, Representative
Parejon. Are there any other
questions from the committee?
Have a
motion from the community
you're not passing hospital 10,
but I do pass on commerce
substitute for hospitals
as amended.
Thank you, Representative
Representative de la Cruz, I
have a do not pass on House Bill
10, but a due pass on the House
Commerce and Economic
Development Committee substitute
for House Bill 10 as amended.
Thank you, Mr. Fiance to call
the roll.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes
Representative De la Cruz.
Yes, Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente,
yes.
Yes, Representative Matthews.
Yes, but I'd like to explain my.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Parejon.
Yes, and I'd like to explain my
book.
Representative Serrado, yes.
Madam Vice Chair,
Yes. And Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, final tally is 11
votes. Yes, 0 votes no.
You had a due pass with
substitute as amended, um,
Representative Matthews to
explain your vote.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, and just as I read.
Hammer people during the
questions, um, I think uh maybe
like another committee
substitute with a little bit
more more clarity would really
be helpful to people who are
trying to be on either side of
this and understand how the
process works and where you have
to call or go to get answers.
Other than that, I applaud you
for.
Representative Parajon.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh
I think it gave me a lot of
reassurance to hear that this
industry is being brought up to
speed with how we regulate other
substances for me, uh, when I
see legislation on cannabis I
think about the long history
that our state and around the
country we've had in in battling
uh the war on drugs and who
really has been targeted, um,
during the war on drugs,
especially in our communities
are black, indigenous Latino
communities that have been
targeted.
And so uh as this legislation
moves forward, you know, I, I'd
really like to see from our RLD
and from our cannabis control
department and how this will be
regulated that we are still
pursuing justice, um, and how we
are regulating this industry and
ensuring that we are not
continuing to um perpetuate the
cycle that has that didn't work
originally um and how we're
designing policy. Thank you.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank you
presenters.
