Ready when you are thank you
madam chair good morning on.
The substitute for Senate bill
five twenty three is a
compromise between the New
Mexico Medical Society the New
Mexico trial lawyers who have
reached an agreement on a long
term solution that allows
independent clinics to obtain
malpractice insurance the
compromise provides stability
for current practices it also
creates more certainty for new
outpatient facilities looking to
vote in New Mexico and for
patients who have been harmed
it's important that this
compromise keeps the outpatients
clinics within the state paid
compensation fund which provides
for lifetime medical services
what I'm gonna do with let me
introduce our experts Kathy love
from the trial lawyers and
Nick's neck audio from the New
Mexico Medical Society this is a
bill sponsored by me Senator
Baca the speaker and
Representative laying on a what
I'll do is have a leader Baca
just do a an intro and then I'll
come back to me for to some
bullets and then back to him and
then will stand for questions so
ideal to Senator Baca thank you
madam chair good morning members
of the committee Senate bill
five twenty three is a
culmination of a year's worth of
work visiting around the state
with medical providers and the
listening essentially to to
their issues regarding medical
malpractice insurance and and
some of the challenges they had
along with the trial lawyers we
have been through several weeks
of negotiations to come to
Senate bill five twenty three of
which exited the Senate just
yesterday
up now gonna just go back to
senator Wirth and we're going to
give you a little bit more
technical some about what the
what the bill does.
So madam chair and in twenty
twenty four the bill establishes
a prominence one million dollar
cap for medical malpractice
claims brought against an
independent house patient health
care clinic that participates in
the fund the permanency is
important the other proposal
that was presented to session
was to basically defer for two
years leave things where they
were which would put us what
kept us where we were starting
in twenty twenty five there will
be a three year rolling average
of CPI added to the cap you need
here on that's consistent with
there's a CPI provision for the
other caps there's already in
the funds of the CPI is not new
this three year rolling average
is a little different but that's
part of the agreement just like
independent providers
independent outpatient health
facilities will be limited to
three occurrences per year that
was one of the the real
challenges was getting insurance
coverage that would do that and
the parties worked hard to make
that happen and as I mentioned
up front patients will still
have access to lifetime medical
expenses paid out of the fund if
there aren't.
Additionally the bill will
change the insurance
requirements for independent out
of patient visibilities to
require that each facility
secure five hundred thousand of
underlying coverage with the PCS
then covering the cost of the
next five hundred thousand up to
look up to the one million
dollar cap by making this change
in the underlying coverage the
independent outpatient
facilities will be able to
secure appropriate insurance so
the you're fully insured under
the medical malpractice act
additionally facilities that are
protected by the state or
federal tort claims act will be
exempted from the medical
malpractice act this will not
change our state facilities are
treated sincere currently
covered by the tort claims act
this does however mean that all
federal facilities will be
completely unregulated by the
act with that I'm we're open to
questions and ideal to
Representative Lane if he has
anything thank you Senator Baca
it so good morning madam chair
good morning members committee I
think this is one of those bills
were we should all be proud as a
member of this legislature I
think we've put in a lot of hard
work tip my cap to the two
gentleman next to me I know that
put in a tremendous amount of
effort that would work with the
governor's office as well.
and I think we have a fix here
that's going to.
Hopefully provide some relief to
our doctors and and satisfy
everybody at the table.
Thank you is that the conclusion
your presentation thank you
already do we have anybody in
the room that's opposed to the
bill.
Do we have anybody online that
supposed no madam chair okay
then we'll go to
who's in favor of the bill I
don't know that we need to if we
can see show Hanson who's in
favor
I don't know that we need to
hear from everybody because it
sounds like if there's no
opposition why I'd like to give
just the the committee a chance
to to ask some questions as well
so if we can get a couple people
in the if you limit your
limit to your responses and
comments to about a minute of I
will I will go ahead and come up
on the side.
To say that under this I first
what will start hearing and then
yes good good JD what do have to
say.
For them thank you madam chair
members I think there's a
microphone for you the attendant
has that for you thank you madam
chair members of the committee
my name is JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce communities without an
adequate number physicians will
not thrive they won't attract
companies residents or workers
and that's why the chamber of
commerce is greatly supportive
of this legislation we're
hopeful it will result in the
kind of predictability and fair
treatment are doctors deserve
and need to have in order to be
able to grow the number of
physicians practicing in our
state we have to always compete
for Health Care talent and not
create barriers to the
recruitment of skilled
professionals like physicians
and we're grateful for the
solution thank you thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
money and that night yeah and
I'm here on behalf of fairness
for New Mexico patients and for
about the last year I've been
working with patients who have
been harmed by medical
malpractice and we don't exactly
wholeheartedly stand in support
of this compromise but we know
that there needed to be a
solution reached right but part
of this compromise for the rest
on the back of backs of patients
caps are really bad for patients
because that means last justice
for them so I hope as we move
forward we can really Center
patients and what we're talking
about
I do just want to say that
patients who navigate the
patient compensation fund are
having a really difficult time
getting the reimbursements the
need for this suppose the
lifetime of care so it's
essentially putting patients in
a position where they need to
navigate an entire system by
themselves so I hope as we go
forward we can really look at
these transparency pieces which
were patients are really
grateful for in this legislation
thank you.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is bill
Lee president CEO of the
government and the county
chamber of commerce I'm we stand
in support for reasons that my
colleague from Albuquerque
outlined in the interest of time
I won't repeat those but I also
just want to share a quick story
with you that in going through
and talking with our a number of
our members who are independent
doctors and clinicians in Gallup
and McKinley County they were
breathing a sigh of relief when
they heard about this bill
coming forward so we'd like to
thank the sponsors for working
diligently to find this
compromise before the clock ran
out so we stand in full support
thank you madam chair thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is camera
Ganton the registered lobbyists
for southwest gastro I want to
think Senator Baca senator
Morris senator Wirth
Representative lane the
governor's staff and governor
most Michelle Lujan Grisham for
bringing the stakeholders
together to reach the proposal
you have before you today this
compromise is critical for
southwest Castro so that they
can continue to have access to
insurance and continue to serve
patients thank you.
You
madam chair members the
committee Linda Siegel
representing greater Albuquerque
medical association and the New
Mexico nurse practitioner
council and we support this bill
and appreciate all the
compromise.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Julie on a
coop I represent the New Mexico
trial lawyers association sacri
Keelin who's a trial attorney
taught us in this process that
an important aspect of this
compromises protecting tribal
sovereignty I thank the sponsors
and Zachary for insisting that
language remain in this bill
stating clearly that patients
harmed by federal clinics in
Indian country or at clinics
serving veterans should not have
the lower caps imposed on this
bill another protection of this
compromise that we fought for is
transparency knowing how many
medical malpractice claims are
made within the system will help
us protect patients in the
future thank you.
Madam chair members the
committee Kerry robin printer
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico Medical Society we to
really want to echo thanks to
Senator Baca and senator Wirth
and their staffs and all of our
other Senate sponsors that were
so helpful in the other chamber
we also really want to thank the
speaker and Representative lane
we know that they're going to be
instrumental in getting us
across the finish line and we
want to thank our house Sanchez
who really have been with us
from the start in working on
this issue over the course of
the last two years
this is a huge victory for
patients across the state
because they're going to
continue to have access to high
quality care in our independent
outpatient facilities and all we
can say is from the bottom of
our hearts on behalf of all of
the physicians across the state
thank you to everyone for coming
together and really getting this
done.
All right so.
Leri Sonntag on soon you're open
to talk.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
speaking on behalf of the New
Mexico business coalition we
fully support of this measure
going forward it is important
for individuals or employees
services and for all New
Mexicans and reasons we usually
we senator Ortiz L. thank you.
Unless the.
Can you guys hear.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee this is
a list I can Mr chair of a
former state legislator in right
hand now living in Santa Fe and
we struggled with this issue as
well I know how hard it is and I
just want to say how hard it is
to see a bipartisanship in
coming together on this really
tough issue and just close to
all who were involved thank you.
That is all madam chair already
thank you
let's take it to the committee
would like to speak.
This is the start with
Representative Mason.
There was another get my mic to
the madam chair
Senator representatives.
Basically I don't have any
questions I just want to come.
Just make a statement that.
It is great to see what can
happen when we get everybody in
a room with a common go.
Bill nobody gets everything they
want but everybody gets part of
what they want and the talking
my doctors back home they were
all worried.
You know if this hadn't
happened.
You know we were.
With our independence and
private
physicians and clinics you know
we were we can't stand to lose
anymore but any anyway to
reiterate what was said on the
congrats thank you all for your
hard work in bringing this bill
forward thank you madam chair
thank you Representative
Matthews.
Thank you I'm trying to figure
out the.
System here.
Okay.
Thank you thank you for that
I spent the chair of the members
of the committee I spent three
years on the health committee
and up is part of that I learned
how precarious our health care
system in New Mexico is and I
remember the twenty twenty one
debate on H. B. seventy five
And I'm I would like to just
give a little context to.
How monumental this Madam is
because I really do think it is
month monumental and I think
maybe I should direct my
question Mr audio
I'm how many how many physicians
have we lost have left either
retired or left the state
between the time that H. B.
seventy five became law and now
this Madam.
Representative then.
The New Mexico workforce health
care study is is it.
Getting up to speed on that so
it's it's unclear at this point
from twenty twenty one to the
current date how many physicians
have left the state what we do
know is that according to that
workforce report there were
seven hundred eleven primary
care physicians that left from
two thousand seventeen to two
thousand twenty one and that's
what we think this legislation
is so important to try and
attract and retain physicians in
the state.
Thank you madam chair chair and
of presenter
What impact.
Did the decline whatever that
number is seven eleven something
in the in there's what impact
did that have on patient care.
Well it of course when you have
a shortage of.
Madam chair Representative
Matthews I apologize when you
have a shortage of health care
providers in the state it of
course affects the the care
that's being provided to
patients you have fewer for
providers who are stressed out
it leads to longer wait times
and unfortunately it results in
a a a vicious cycle if you will
because patients are getting the
care they need there aren't
enough positions and it leads to
to worse outcomes so that's why
we we were so concerned about
salt solving this problem.
Madam chair Mr idea thank you
for that answer
Along that same line I get many
many emails from my constituents
I have a lot of older people in
my district
Telling me.
How difficult it is to even get
an appointment with a physician
and how long the way to our
What can I tell them and chair.
Presenters of act how long do we
do we think that we may be able
to stabilize and and I'm not
trying to put words in anybody's
mouth but but it can what what
should I be able to tell my
constituents that this Madam is
going what kind of impact this
Madam is going to have on their
ability to have access to health
care in the state madam chair
Representative Matthews this
this Madam itself will it will
keep independently owned
outpatient health care
facilities open and it will
advance our ability to attract
new outpatient health care
facilities The New Mexico we've
heard from X. ray associates
throughout the committee
hearings on this matter they
plan on opening up breast health
surgery center in Albuquerque
which will be vital and in this
will allow them to move forward
with that construction and to
get it open and I think for your
constituents and something the
parties have all agreed on a
long is that this is a multi
faceted problem it's not just
medical malpractice and I think
the legislature up both sides in
a bipartisan effort have have
made huge strides strides this
session both for in G. R. T.
issues loan repayments
credentialing and this bill of
course so lots of steps are
being taken to try to address
this issue and member check and
I just madam chair I think it's
important to understand the
issue with physician shortages
something that have we've all
been dealing with for it's kind
of a crescendo and so this is
one piece I very much appreciate
what Mr audio saying and this
resolution though allows us to
really focus on the whole health
care system and things we need
to do and it and and kind of
puts this malpractice issue.
To the side and it doesn't mean
it goes away forever but I think
what we've come up with is
something that again rather than
a two year study which would
amount we would've spent two
years talking about nothing but
this Mr audio is exactly right
we've already seen in the
session part of the omnibus tax
bill that we're gonna be talking
includes those types of G. R. T.
in tax tools that we can use for
policy reasons to help our whole
our whole medical community and
help patients as well so so
again I just thank you you got
to look at it and the whole
umbrella and and just want to
add that thank you madam chair.
Madam speaker Mr speaker our our
I always elevates to.
Madam chair
Senator thank you for those
comments and Mr idea thank you
for that information I do have a
couple questions about the bill
itself
As I look at that as I was
reading it on page two in
There's a million dollar cap at
the bottom begins life tested
for twenty three and
I just want to be sure I
understand we still have a seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
cap include is that malpractice
cap at UT is that apply to now
houses structure.
Madam chair representative if I
may all all go through with this
what this bill does in and how
it a public Clarke so each each
of these providers so we have
all all call in two years and
then tier one would be the
independent providers whichever
you like your primary care
doctors and low risk treatment
clinics and dial with dialysis
clinics and things of that
nature of the will remain at
seven hundred and fifty thousand
a tier two which is what we've
been talking about which is
independent health outpatient
health care facilities we have
narrowly defined this and to
provide them as ambulatory
surgical care centers urgent
cares and freestanding emergency
rooms that are not directly
controlled by a hospital these
would have a million dollar cap
the last would be the hospitals
the hospitals or hospital
controlled outpatient facilities
will again status as the bill
was before and and essentially
pyramid up to six million
dollars.
Madam chair thank you and
Senator thank you for that
information is there
and in terms of the patient
client fun ages is there some
additional that calms it is not
intentional is is the PCF going
to be a source of payment for
any of these tears.
Madam chair representative
Matthews yes actually all three
tiers and happy to walk through
so for the independent providers
they need to carry an underlying
policy of two hundred fifty
thousand dollars and then the
additional amount comes from the
PCS that's for independent
providers of for the independent
outpatient health care
facilities you also have those
facilities with underlying five
hundred thousand dollars of
coverage through a private
insurer and then the next five
hundred thousand comes from the
PCF and that was a vital part of
this agreement to ensure those
patients still have their future
Mets protected for for the
hospitals up until the end of
calendar year twenty twenty six
they any amount from two fifty
up to seven fifty will still
come from the PCS but anything
below two fifty or above up from
seven fifty to currently four
point five million will come
from a private insurer but so it
every tear you have money coming
from the PCS but in the
beginning January one twenty
twenty seven the hospitals will
no longer be drawn from the PCS.
Thank at Madam chair at Mr idea
thank you so much for that
information that helps me
understand it is a structured
Mr obviously did a lot.
I have one.
I think I have one of the
questions.
This
just a second.
The hospitals madam chair the
presenters the hospitals are
still will be out of the PCF as
of January one twenty twenty
seven is that correct.
And.
What impact is that expected to
have on the.
Financial stability.
Madam chair representative
Matthews you know it's something
that you know I think that it
was structured that way giving
us time for one for the
hospitals to pay off their
portion of the deficit that's
been attributed to them but also
allowing some time for the
actuaries to to wrap their head
around the exit of the hospitals
at that time so that they can
begin to prepare for that and as
you can imagine there will be a
significant decline in the
amount of money being paid in
the PCS but there will also be a
significant decline in the money
being paid out so you know I I
think when it comes that time
you know we've got a an
important part of house bill
seventy five was the PCS
advisory committee that that is
a group of stakeholders that you
know our our meeting multiple
times per year to keep an eye on
how the PCF is doing that has
been a good process and I hope
it will continue to work to try
and and solve the problems
within the PCS.
Thank you thank you Mr audio and
and madam speaker madam chair.
What I did have one other
question
Well I actually don't remember
what what's and I can't remember
writing so I guess it's going to
be the end of my questions thank
you very much thank you
representative Representative
Lundstrom thank you madam chair
I do have some questions for the
senators and thank you for
bringing the bill forward in
twenty twenty one I did not vote
for house bill seventy five and
I think it passed the house
floor by one vote if we will
recall that I do have some
questions I'd like to senators
to explain to me what reasonable
cost to me this is I'm looking
in the S. FIR there is a
significant issue that was
raised.
Addresses payout caps business
but does not address what
constitutes a reasonable charge
and limiting payouts to the
amounts actually paid what does
that mean.
Then try to go to the small
madam chair and representative
the answer to that is that
through out all of tort law
whether someone is injured by
getting hit by a track in an
auto accident or incredible
malpractice the jury
instructions in our case law
find that an injured person is
allowed to get the reasonable
value of medical care and the
value of medical care has always
been established by whatever the
provider decides is the value of
the medical care and then the
other side has an opportunity to
respond and say I'm looking at
all of the care that and the
costs of health care in the
region and I think that those
values actually not right and
then they litigate those issues
but the presumption is that the
value is what our hospice.
As the value of the medical care
and so that's what the law has
always said whether it's in the
medical malpractice context were
outside of it madam chair the
value of it doesn't constitute
what the source of payment just
I mean we we subsidize heavily
through Medicaid a lot of
medical care throughout the
state is that is that brought
into play when you're
determining cost or not Madam
chair representative.
Law called the collateral source
rule and courts have found that
it's inappropriate to interject
into litigation questions around
collateral sources for insurance
information because if you think
about the policy behind that is
that insurance companies and
providers make a side deal and
they make a handshake where
everybody gets a bargain out of
that we're the insurance company
gets a place to send their their
clients their providers or their
insurance and the providers get
the patients and so that's a
side deal and our law has always
sent that is the wrong doer the
person who created who committed
malpractice for who ran over
somebody in a truck or whatever
the situation is doesn't get the
benefit of that I do all it's
the person who's in.
That deal and so that's why it's
it's decades and decades.
Many many district courts around
the state have ruled
consistently without K. off.
Also madam madam chair I'd like
to senators to explain to me the
three year rolling average how
that works.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for that
question this is actually the we
thought a real clever fix to to
smooth out the curves if you
will of CPI we've seen in recent
years madam chair representative
that we've had a adjustments in
CPI that have really been
sporadic and so what what this
rolling average will do is it'll
take the previous three years
and it'll average them out into
the effective it really is to
smooth out the curve of that CPI
adjustment that will occur to
the to the caps and that was the
purpose of that so madam chair
what does it start what year
would you start the rolling
average calculation.
Madam chair Representative
Lundstrom so CPI will begin so
come January one of twenty
twenty for the capital raise to
a million and then in January
one twenty twenty five is when
CPI will begin to go into effect
so it will be an average of the
CPI over the three years
preceding twenty twenty five all
right so it'll start at twenty
twenty five when you start the
rolling average calculation the
rolling average will look at the
three years preceding twenty
twenty five and that will be the
CPI applied in twenty twenty
five so are we taking into
account the economic activity in
this country and how things have
been fluctuating
is any that being calculated or
is it just flat CPI
Madam chair representative
Lundstrom I mean it it would be
just looking at the actual CPI
per year but that's why we
wanted the rolling averages to
is to prevent the big influxes
from having and I do impact on
the practices an insurance so
let me ask you madam chair
Senators we're looking at the
New Mexico medical malpractice
act and we're looking at the
fund what is the source for that
fund.
Madam chair Representative
Lundstrom the the PCF is funded
by surcharges that are paid by
doctors and practices hello and
so is a CPI calculated into that
source.
Madam chair representative
Lundstrom yes it is and what
does that start.
Madam chair representative of
one so it looks like miss love
has an answer to that Madam
chair representative
Representative Lundstrom I also
we're the house.
Advisory board and the way this
works is that on a yearly basis
the website borders an actuarial
study and actuaries have to take
into account the expectation of
all of the risks that the the
participants pose and identify
the likelihood of pay outs and
so what they're going to have to
do is evaluate not just possible
pay outs but also what the seat
the ruling CPI would be and then
charge surcharges based on on
that amount and the actuaries
last year we're actually was
this year we help Helder hearing
made it very clear that this
fund can survive it's a matter
of bringing enough money in to
pay out what is expected to pay
out and actuaries do this all
the time and they expected as
long as the adequate searchers
are collected that the fund
should be able to be flush madam
madam chair is our general fund
going into this is here.
Madam chair I believe that
there's it sixteen million or
nineteen million there is
something in the in the budget
that was put in and I and the
governor I I think was the one
to put that and then just let me
others specifics madam chair
representative the act at the
time that the patient
compensation one of the great
things about this bill the
change in twenty twenty one was
the transparency piece and the
patient compensation fund
advisory board that is
overseeing what's going on to
make sure that the I can get
flash and what we all know is
that there was a large deficit
because there were many many
many years when surcharges were
increased to meet the risk and
so the as you know last year
there was a thirty.
Hey off the deficit it's not for
future claims that the deficit
and then there's another portion
that in House Bill to that
apparently is intended to also
pay off the drive side of the
deficit not the.
in order to catch the fund up so
that the surcharge they can
start collecting enough
surcharges in order to pay out
claims without having to put the
extra weight on the doctor's of
paying off all of.
And it just I could madam chair
and Representative Lundstrom
it's an additional thirty two
million dollars this year
clarify that and part of the
reason for this deficit was the
fact that the hospitals were
brought into this fund a number
of years ago and that wasn't
completely thought through when
that happened the impact that
that would have on the fund
which of course the hospitals
had nothing to do with this bill
they spend we did not change
anything with respect to that
but one of the and and let me
say one more thing that I think
is important there were
certainly discussions about
potentially trying to increase
of the PCS responsibility under
this proposed under this
resolution everyone agreed not
to do that again the idea was to
keep this within the framework
we had and really I think with
this final piece we're in a
place where we're going to give
the PCF a chance to really get
back to where we're it was a
model for something that worked
and and and and madam chair you
know we can't keep coming to the
legislature to put money into
the PCS and I think that's
understood.
We needed to do that yes we have
to get this thing back to this
place with this piece though I
think we're now in a place and
with the transparency and I want
to just highlight that in this
bill will be able to really
follow exactly what the claims
are and making sure that the
fund itself is working so the
surcharges are rehabilitating
the fund and are sufficient to
avoid the need to come back to
the to us for more money so
madam chair Senators we will be
getting some kind of report back
from the.
Representative insurance on this
or how does that work I'll
address that madam chair
representative on page fourteen
of the superintendents other
specific language in the bill or
superintendents designees so
track and make publicly
available the following
information regarding and then
there was a.
Floor amendment independent out
period patient health care
facilities we're talking about
one total number of claims filed
against these facilities by here
to the total number of
settlements paid out on behalf
of doctor patient health care
clinics by year and three the
dollar amount of settlements
paid out by the fund on behalf
of outpatient health care
facilities by here that's the
type of information that really
allows.
All of us and certainly miss
love on the PCF board to be able
to follow this and again be able
to track it to make sure that
this is working and the
surcharges are sufficient to
make the funds self sustainable
so madam chair Senator itch it
your opinion of the thirty two
million dollars that was put in
to help shore up what doctors
were not able to pay and or what
was what was
shortfall is enough now to shore
this fund up so it doesn't need
additional state general fund so
madam chair onsen I see I
certainly hope so can I
guarantee that's the case we
need to see how this plays out
this I think is the final piece
of the overall work we've done
the last number of years the
hospital component in twenty
twenty one and then by now.
could adjusting these caps and
let me be clear these caps we're
going to go to six million
dollars for these independent
providers by now it just thing
this two million dollars I think
we have the pieces in place can
I Representative that there's no
way we won't still need to do
something more I can't but I
really think we finally have in
place a framework to again give
this a chance to get back and
healthy with the fund which is
what everybody at this table and
our experts all want to have
happen.
Madam chair I know that I might
my feeling though is to share
this with everybody in the room
there's nothing worse and then
funds that don't work.
Will come forward and they try
to intimidate or convention that
a fund is solvent when in fact
for years that you know Senator
you know I've been here about
the same amount of time we've
seen it time and time again
where these funds that haven't
been well thought out come forth
and with the expectation it's
great until next year when
there's people coming forward
asking for subsidy from the
state of New Mexico so I just
want to be clear that up I've
been concerned on a number of
different bills that I've seen
in this committee that deal with
setting up funds that don't work
they don't pencil so thank you
madam chair I am just received
at least three local drive text
messages Patty don't try to kill
the bill.
And today I do plan to vote for
this bill but I want to be
clear.
Of where we're getting the money
how this is going to be paid
for.
What the costs are going to be
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Serrato.
Thank you madam chair thank you
sponsors for the bill I had a
few quick questions I want to
believe right I think you guys
with a lot of work and I'm just
help me refresh for was action
to twenty twenty one twenty year
I'm curious you did you there's
a lot of exemptions for the
those are covered by tort claims
department can you explain to me
as a non lawyer and what that
effectively means for a more
providers so madam chair the
committee you'll to miss love
that's the issue that was
Representative tribal
communities and veteran federal
facilities and kind of the
intersection of this law and the
federal law in the tenth circuit
which the federal court of
appeals chairperson committee
members it the this was a very
important piece to us because
the federal tort claims act
says to all the states around
the country that you look to
your state laws to determine
whether or not tribal persons
and veterans are going to be
captain or medical malpractice
and what has happened is that
courts have looked to the
medical malpractice act which
never intended to make a
declaration the relates to our
tribal citizens or our veterans
and in states all around the
country there are if there are
many states that have absolutely
no caps and so veterans and and
sovereign nations that sovereign
communities are not capped when
they go and get care and are
injured at federal facilities
and so this language makes a
declaration that New Mexico once
their tribal people in their
veterans to be treated just like
the people in other states who
are not capped.
Thank you madam chair thank you
that Representative are senators
for that officials very helpful
I'm also curious you mentioned
earlier Sir that you felt this
would sure that we're
competitive and great getting
new providers to the state I'm
curious how our med mail
solution compares to some of our
regional neighbors if there's
any thoughts on that.
Representative Serrato you know
this is something we have we
discussed a lot you know trying
to compare New Mexico to
surrounding states and other
states around the country and
it's very interesting because
there is there thirty five
states with caps
and it it's just runs the gamut
of how they've structured those
caps there are some
there are some states like like
Texas that cap
certain damages like pain and
suffering at seven hundred and
or at two hundred fifty thousand
dollars with no caps on economic
damages like lost wages things
like that Arizona on the other
hand they don't have a cat
they have different tore
protections and in place but
they don't have a cap so it
really it's a wide variety but
but what we focus on instead of
the caps and how they're
structured or the cost of
insurance in the state the base
rates in the state versus our
surrounding states to see how we
are competing with our
surrounding states because of
course that's what physicians
and and medical students are
looking at when trying to figure
out where they want to practice
and we hope that the changes in
this bill will help drive our
base rates down to help us
attract more providers and more
facilities to come here thank
you madam chair thank you team
I've of one more question truly
I think
so I'm looking at this we did
did you will consult with the
OSI in developing this Madam
chairman team or was working
with the US PCF team enough and
that is a filling that need to
to check in with her team and
how they oversee these things.
Not Madam chair representative.
Working on this.
And we have.
Listen to just from OSI the
governor's office the department
of health legislators we've met
a million times and so yes
everybody has been consulted who
would listen to us thank you
madam chair thank you that of
course but bill sponsors for
that we talk about CPR and
increasing on CPI does that also
mean that the the amounts that
are being paid into the PC it
can also increases well and be
adjusted.
Madam chair of.
Surcharges or what they need to
recommend that the OSI issue as
the surcharges you know
fantastic madam chair and and
team I I look at that that makes
me feel a lot better about any
solvency concerns because we do
actually adjusting things with
how the fund is going and know
whatever staging of the bill is
when you do that ensuring that
they can the amounts are being
paid into it are just able to
make sure that is all the thing
I think that's something that is
very responsible will take care
of any solvency issue that we
have on going you know it's as
we continue this I hope that
we'll be able to ensure the PCF
is able to pay out that what's
supposed to patients on a timely
manner and allow us to see that
you know how this is actually
going to affect but I really
appreciate all the work you put
into an answer my questions
thank everyone.
Thank you Representative
Martinez.
Thank you madam chair I just
would like to make a motion when
it's appropriate.
My question Representative
Matthews.
Madam chair.
The funds that are being
proposed in this appropriation
are to pay.
Regardless so if the patient
compensation fund show.
And it has to be.
The state's obligation to pay.
Okay so there's nobody else on
the list I do have a couple of
comments before we go first of
all I want to think everybody
sitting at the table and those
who have been working on this
tires the for for years
I also was one of the eight who
did not vote for this bill the
first time around and I ate the
day Hochman Vigil and I try to
make changes I think it was last
year to this bill and we're
given a very limited scope as to
what we could do and
Just the outreach from the
community on on both sides of
the issue was overwhelming and I
think that you all have proven
that when you get together in
your reasonable and want to make
have to move the ball because
it's in the best interest of New
Mexicans that we can do that so
I appreciate that
I think it's important that we
recognize that New Mexicans
deserve quality health care.
And I that's so important and I
ate I know that we were being
told and I saw it that
physicians were leaving the
state they were no longer able
to practice and so I think that
this address is that
I also think New Mexicans Jr
deserve a path when they've been
hard and we need to make sure
that we keep patients
patients in the forefront of our
minds we make decisions as
legislators it's our job to
find ballots to doing that and I
think that this compromise does
that so I'm very very pleased
and proud of the work that
you've done
I also.
Senator I I I know that it's
worth it you said that this is a
framework.
And I I wanna hold you to that
because in the past I was told
that we were not going to we
were not going to go off of the
path because this is what we
decide but even though New
Mexicans were telling us that
this was not working for them
and so when we say this is a pay
a framework that means is
sometimes if we see that there's
problems we need to bring it
back to the legislator to
address it before it gets to a
break we're I think this is
where we are now you all we're
champions all of you.
And make sure that that we
didn't get into more of a crisis
mode and so I do appreciate that
but once again I expect to to
hold all of us to the fire to
say that when something is is
going to arrive we need to fix
it I do have one question.
Under this bill can are
independent outpatient
facilities secure insurance and
still stay open.
The answer to that madam chair
is yes and we've we verified
that and I want to give credit
to the governor is going for she
was a this was one of the rules
that she helped and she actually
I sat there and she picked up
the phone and we were in the
room and the call the insurance
company for herself you can
imagine the response she got
from that point agent.
To get to get a call from the
governor but the were able to
verify that these policies do
exist which was something that
that had not happened that could
not happen under the old
framework and so I want to
confirm that that that a that is
in fact true and and and Madam
can I just add on because it's a
good story Mr audio was asked to
call the adjuster which he did
and he said I can't remember her
name but he said ma'am I'm here
with the Senate Majority Leader
the Senate minority leader and
the governor and you're on the
speaker phone.
And it it took that because
again one of the reasons that we
had and I just want to say these
parties we look at all kinds of
different options and different
numbers inside the cap outside
inside the fund outside the fund
and it the insurance industry.
Really presented challenges and
it took that kind of effort by
all of us the governor and just
working with the insurance
companies to make sure this and
that this this is.
Because you don't want to put
something in place and then
insurance camp companies are we
be right back here but what
we've done here is something
that that will work and the
insurance is there.
I appreciate all your hard work
so thank you and with that do we
have a motion.
Madam chair I moved to pass
over.
For many seconds
yes if you would please take the
role Patrick.
Representative and in order.
Representative Duncan yes
Representative Hernandez yes
Representative Lente yes
Representative little yes
Representative Lundstrom yes
Representative Martinez yes
Representative Mason yes
Representative Matthews.
Madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes madam chair final tallies
eleven votes yes zero votes for
now have a thank you.
The committee.
Comment zero to put it on the
dock with the.
Senator Padilla.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee appreciate you
have me back to that moment I
found out I I made a beeline to
get to the wrong house I
apologize for being a little bit
tardy and you still hearing bill
senator would let you know
earlier but we didn't get off
the floor so that to this
morning and so at that point I
didn't figure I'd call yes so
you can call me managers you
know we came in the legislature
the same economy are the day any
day of the week any holiday
whatever so madam chair what
we're doing here is we we had a
massive divide in the horse
racing industry as we all know
at different times over the past
couple of decades I am thrilled
that was able to bring was able
to bring together the horsemen
the breeders in the race tracks
to to to get in the boat
together and figure out what's
something that we can all work
together on
so essentially what three
through a Senate bill three
three six does is it takes a
today we have a twenty six
percent gaming tax we take one
point two percent of that and we
utilize it for the hisa
insurance which is a federal
requirement for the state of New
Mexico to be in compliance with
the safety initiatives and and
the other items that that they
bring us into compliance there
and jockey insurance for the the
various individuals out there
the gaming tax remains the same
there's no tax increase
whatsoever it that does not
require an appropriation is an
example as part of that the
legislation did have to be
amended on the on the Senate
floor I was happy to do it just
to make sure that we we
maintained oversight of these
funds by the racing commission
and it also removed any
ambiguity that remained in terms
of how these are to be utilized
in who is authority and and over
them and then also I did put an
emergency clause in this is very
time sensitive that the racing
industry New Mexico be in
compliance with the his side I'm
gonna tell you to look that one
up horseracing integrity and
safety authority at the federal
level and all stand for any
questions thank you do we have
any opposition to this bill.
Do we have anybody in favor.
Okay.
Does everybody want to talk
about this bill because you seem
to be it had already
all righty
However in the committee you do
have one person and so on we've
got one person that would like
to talk one yes at one point.
With us in the us and we want.
is mile.
I'm sure he's the executive
director and CEO of the racing
commission he was gonna be my
expert but I thought I would
just make best use of your time
so thank you thank you thank you
is there one person that wants
to talk on for the bill are we
good everybody thank god okay
what is because on okay thank
you know he's just listening I
think.
So Representative Hernandez you
have a question thank you madam
chair I actually just have one
question Senator
is this in any way going to
increase the racing fees or take
away from purses at any of these
restricts on madam chair and and
Representative zero no that's
the big thing that we had to
crack and it took about fifteen
meetings in my office in about
three in other locations we
finally now absolutely not
everyone's kettle Madam chair
that's the answer I was looking
for thank you senator
Representative that little.
Area and so thank.
Thank you
one question that I'd like to
ask is so this is set the
reducing the the gaming taxes
being reduced to pay for the
federally required health
insurance you've you've
explained for jockeys and
exercise riders I signed the
bill Madam chair and and
Representative in addition to
that with something called his
which is the.
Our racing integrity and safety
authority insurance of the state
has to pay as for all of these
tracks so there's there's two
pieces to it one is the jockey
in one is the compliance with
this okay thank you Senator and
madam chair so is this it sounds
like it's going to assist both
the horse racing industry.
Or is it the private at B. C.
Harper Madam chair
representative actually the
compromise we came to is that it
helps all three areas the the
breeders the horsemen the jockey
one really forced the jockeys
and the tracks as well so all
together they would they they're
going to utilize the one point
two percent to remain in
compliance.
All right thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative Duncan thank you
madam chair just one question
Senator
the start fee on these is this
four hundred thirty six dollars
is that correct chair I I I
don't have that exact figure but
it's in my neighborhood yes and
and is that always been the case
or is that something that's new
I'm chair and representative of
the racing commission has full
authority over that they they
they work you know to to set
those things to this the racing
commission so those could go up
they could go down there they're
typically set for appear to time
it allows the industry to know
what they're dealing with when
they get into it or if they can
to decide to continue racing or
yeah.
Thank you madam chair and
senator and and that's that's
the text I've been getting.
Owner saying.
This is ridiculous and so I I
just I I wondered if it was
prior if it's if it just started
this year we're came from Madam
chair representative the
legislation has nothing to do
with that topic okay I I had to
learn it all myself but has
nothing to do with that that's
something that's completely
separate terms of how those fees
are set and all that that would
be the racing commission the
owners that you know would want
to and the trainers want to go
to the commission to argue their
case and how they want that so
but has nothing to do with this
legislation.
Thank you thank after so
Senator so yesterday you were
scheduled and then there seem to
be some question if
if this was a tax increase or
hit to how is going to hit the
budget so could you talk about
that a little bit thank you
madam chair and members I I did
go and sit down with chairman
and the I don't see in here
right now if.
In his office
there is no tax increase the
twenty the as I mentioned the
the tax the gaming tax remains
actually the same the one point
two percent was collected and
used in the gaming industry in
some fashion or whatever we're
simply saying use the one point
two percent for these two
specific purposes and that way
so so there isn't an increase
there is it simply a a further
definition of how to use just
one point two percent of the
twenty six percent that was
already being collected yes
ma'am.
okay that's that was the
question that I want you to
clarify on the record.
All right thank you any other
questions.
depends on us okay we've got a
do pass and I think a second.
Budget we take the real.
Representative and in order to.
Representative Duncan yes
Representative Fernandes yes
Representative Lente.
Representative little.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez yes
Representative Mason yes
Representative Matthews yes
madam vice chair.
Madam chair yes Madam final
tallies nine votes yes or both
for now that.
I always love your god with.
All right.
It says I got it yes.
They are okay well we are
adjourned we are not scheduled
for any more bills unless
something else comes up but we
will let you know but as of
