Pajon.
Representative Serrado, Madam
Vice Chair, Madam Chair.
Madam, you have a,
OK, everybody,
so we're gonna start with HB
410.
Um, if you all remember, we
started to hear this bill.
Um
We asked for there to be some
cleanup language before it made
its way out of this committee.
Um, I know that when we had
talked originally, um,
There were 2 bills that were
very similar. It was House Bill
307 and the uh sponsor was
Representative Pam Herndon. She
is uh asked that we, uh, remove
it from consideration.
And so today we will be voting.
If this bill is clean, we will
be voting on this bill.
Thank you, go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, we
do have a new committee sub, uh,
that I hope we can move for
discussion.
And just to be clear, it's.
5 MS, so it should be 0.2304 I'm
sorry, 230941.5 ms.
I move the sub for discussion.
All righty, go ahead and so
Madam Chair, we discussed the
original 410, uh, in, in
extensively and so here are some
of the changes that came
forward. The biggest change was
that, uh, the section 13 were
gave a lot of folks a lot of uh
concerns after many discussions,
we were entirely removed section
13. Um, so now when you look on,
uh, let me pull it up, sorry.
Now, when you look on page.
45
That's section 13 is the
previous section 14.
page 45.
Now, out of that, because there
were some definitions that were
related to that. There were some
changes in definitions as well,
um, that we also wanted to be
more in line and so just to walk
through all the differences
between the bill I presented
last week and this one, we
removed the definition of
artificial intelligence
services, we, um, uh, we also.
Uh, we also, um, clarified on
page um see.
I apologize because I have
multiple sections of the same
thing, um, previously on page
31.
So
If you look on the committee's
substitute on page 29.
Those are the restrictions for
uh individuals under the age of
18. There was one section, um,
uh, where it did not have the
line, you know, uh, find it
again real fast that offers any
online services, product, or
features to consumers, and we
put that in on the bottom of
page 29 line D. Now we just
added that languages so it's in
sync with the rest of that
section.
Um
apologize and looking through
each of the pieces, uh, and then
we adjusted some of the language
for the new section 13, which is
again on page 45, and you'll see
it's slightly different. We have
talked to a number of the folks
who uh had concerns with that
section and all of this is doing
is that now says that if you
receive sensitive data from the
federal government or, or
otherwise that it was not opted
into by a New Mexico covered
resident that you need to delete
that data. That is what the page
45, the new section 13 does.
Um, that's at all differently,
uh, different from before and
happy to walk through that
section a little more if there's
any more questions on that. Um,
those are the biggest changes as
well, there is.
One
Last at it that is changing the
word and for the word or.
So if you look on page 9, line
10.
Because it
so easy.
Lien it says, um, the definition
of publicly available
information, um, it says is
lawfully made available through
federal, state, or local
government records or a person
that is reasonable basis to
believe they have lawfully made
this available to the general
public. This is a, a typo that's
through conversations I've had
over and over again, um, that it
was in the when the Connecticut
bill for 2019 and it's kind of
stayed over and over again, a
number of states have changed
that, um, including Connecticut,
I believe, is also already
changed it, and, uh, and
Virginia has also changed that.
Well, so that's just more line
and that would be the only other
addition to this committee
substitute, uh, that we bring
before you and with that my
expert is Julie Meade, uh, with,
uh, the Attorney General's
office. We thought we stand for
questions. Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, I move that we
adopt that amendment on page 9.
Oh
OK.
We have to adopt the committee
set first. That's right.
OK, in that case, we have to do
committee discussion first.
But I do believe we have to do
the amendment because that
wasn't part of your sub, isn't
that correct?
That is correct, Madam Char was
a missed piece from the uh from
the drafters, OK.
All righty. And I know we've
heard public comment, um, I'm
sorry, Madam Chair. So you want
to change it from and to or.
Madam Chair, uh, Madam Leader,
that is correct. Thank you. Just
wanted to make sure I thank you
for clarifying.
All righty. So I, I do think we
should go to public comment. Um,
it is, um, since it's a sub and
we've had some back and forth,
um, I'm gonna go ahead and take
public comment, uh, very briefly
limited to one minute, um, if
you are, um, or.
The bill, please sign up.
If you want to add anything.
Perfect.
Jason register lobbyist for the
uh Albuquerque Hispano Chamber
of Commerce.
We think that this bill, this
version is a much improved
version. It removed this section
that we had issues with, which
was the uh old section 13, um,
there is a new section 13, which
we were fine with. We think this
bill is very workable. We think
it provides broad comprehensive
privacy protections, but it
strikes the right balance by
implementing a bill that has
been implemented in other states
with success. So we stand in
full support, have no
conditioned support. Um, we
think that the committee, we
hope the committee will move
this on.
Um, so we can get it, uh, get it
going through the rest of the
process.
Scott Scanlon, registered
lobbyist for the consumer data
Industry Association, and we
love the, the amendment, Madam
Chair, or is very, very
important, believe it or not,
and we support the amendment.
This is a good bill. Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoz on
behalf of the New Mexico Retail
Association, uh, with the
amendments and changes we do
stand in strong support. Thank
you.
Chair members of the committee,
my name is Alison Riley, public
policy director of New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce, while we're
now in support of HB 410. Thank
you to the sponsor for the
changes, especially related to
small business, by balancing
consumer protections with
business compliance clarity, the
House Bill 410 sub enhances
transparency and bolsters
enforcement mechanisms that
aligns with New Mexico's modern
day data privacy standards while
maintaining key exemptions for
essential industries like
healthcare and finance.
Madam Chair members the
committee art hall on behalf of
Fidelity Investments while we
still remain officially neutral.
This bill is far more workable,
similar to what we're dealing
with in other states and we
really appreciate the
collaboration with the sponsor
in the AG's office on this
improved version. Thank you. Um,
do we have anybody um here in
opposition. We'll go to Zoom
after since Patrick isn't
sitting here.
OK. So is anyone here in
opposition? OK.
Anybody here in opposition on
Zoom.
Yes
Catriona
I'm sure the committee, thank
you for the opportunity to
to 410 Fitzgerald, director of
the electronic Privacy
Information Center.
We're an independent nonprofit
30 years ago to secure the
fundamental right to privacy,
uh, part of the problem existing
state laws is that they're
heavily influenced by big tech
and don't do enough to protect
people online,
uh, and I think largely
modelnecticut and other state
laws.
nearly half failed, none
received an A.
Connecticut, which looks a lot
like 10.
They do little to change the
status companies being able to
collect and use personal data
they like as long as they tell
us what they're doing in a
privacy policy that no one reads
report,
uh, you know that was a much
more. Thank you.
Thank you.
as s
No.
OK. How about in favor on Zoom.
One
Enrique.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
members of the committee on
behalf of the greater Chamber of
Commerce.
We do 410.
We talked about it the last time
the bill was presented, so I
won't repeat that, uh, basically
having the same data standards
the bad actors and limits gain
competitive advantage through
irresponsible data practices.
We, we do ask uh for you on 10.
Thank you.
Thank you. OK, let's go, let's
go to the committee.
Any questions from the
committee?
Everybody's good. OK, well, do I
have, so we've got a vote on the
amendment.
And then we'll go back to voting
on the whole bill, so do I have
a um.
option.
So you need to do it in the
microphone, so we got it on.
Mhm
That's
Madam Chair, I moved the
adoption of the amendment to the
committee.
for
already.
Um, do I have a second?
All righty, Patrick, to take the
role.
Representative Armstrong?
Representative Cruz.
Representative Hernandez,
Representative Valente.
Representative Mason
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Parajan.
Representative Serato, Madam
Vice Chair, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, the final tally is 8
votes. Yes, 0 votes, no adoption
of the amendment. OK, so you've
got an amended.
up and so now we're gonna go to
vote on, um, do we have a motion
for this sub.
Madam chair, we adopt the
committee sub as a no.
00, just regular, OK,
men, right, madam chair.
I move
I do not pass.
On House Bill 410 and a due pass
on
Commerce and economic
development committee said to
House Bill 410 as amended.
Alrighty, Patrick, to take the
role.
Representative Armstrong?
Representative De la Cruz.
Yes, Representative Hernandez.
Yes. Representative Lee,
Representative Mason.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy
Representative Pajon.
Representative Serrado, Madam
Vice Chair,
and Madam Chair. Madam Chair,
final tally is 9 votes yes, 0
votes no.
Thank you.
All righty. If we can go to HB
426, please.
That
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, thank you so much for
having me present today. Um,
I'll be presenting House Bill
426, which is on Mobile Home
Park sale notices.
This bill provides the
opportunity for mobile home
park, um, residents to purchase
their park when this, uh, when
the park goes up for sale.
And I'd like to really define
what a mobile home is in the
current statute where this uh
sale noticed um Bill will live,
and that is that the mobile home
park, which you will see photos
up here of our very own parks
from around New Mexico. It is a
single family dwelling built on
a permanent chassis designed for
long-term residential occupancy.
In previous committees when I've
presented on mobile home parks,
there seems to be some confusion
because a mobile home is not a
recreational travel trailer, a
recreational vehicle, it is a
home that is set on a chasis,
and the problem we are solving
for here is creating a law that
levels the playing field for
people who own their homes and
cannot or are severely
financially impaired from moving
their home and um therefore
allowing them to.
have the opportunity to purchase
their home.
We have a great many number of
mom and pop mobile home park
owners, um, who some of them who
have really great practices.
There's nothing in law today
that prevents, for instance,
residents from getting together
and purchasing a home, but what
we want to do is codify what has
been good practice in law.
Madam Chair and representatives
I have with me two experts, um,
from ROs uh from ROC resident
owned communities and national
organization that helps mobile
home parks, uh, mobile home park
residents purchased their homes,
uh, and Madam Chair, if you'd
like, I can introduce them now
or we can um do so after
comments.
I'll go ahead and do it now,
please.
Hello. My name is Mary O'Hara
with Rocky USA.
We are a national nonprofit
enterprise that provides
technical assistance and access
to financing for homeowners who
live in a mobile home parks to
perform a cooperative
corporation and purchase their
communities. We have uh
assisted, uh, 40 342 communities
um that are called resident in
communities rocks, and um.
we've worked with an equal
number of community owners to
assist them in the sale to
their.
Great, uh, and Madam Chair, I do
have a sub. Um, we have worked
really hard with um with the
real estate works and some uh
mobile home park community
owners here to make changes and
amendments to the bill that we
originally had and we'll
continue working with those
folks, um, I'd like to move this
up.
So.
Great. What the sub does is per
from our discussions with these
uh with our real estate folks
and our mobile home park folks,
it strikes bona fide in all the
sections just to clarify that it
is any offer that the owner
intends to accept.
Uh, we also have reduced the
amount of time previously, uh,
you will see in the handout that
I passed around, um, the blue.
The blue boxes indicate the
different steps in purchasing
and it used to be that each of
these blue blocks represented 90
days. Um, what we learned from
our real estate folks is that
that is a really long time, so
we've shortened that um to 75
and 90 days, uh, we've also stru
stricken on page 3 line 23, a
good faith reason and just
replaced it with the reason
we've also added a clarification
that any.
And he new offer to sell the
mobile home park or a new offer
to purchase it that the park
owner intends to accept is the
specific, um, the specific
trigger that would create the
process from beginning again.
And we also heard that it was
really cost prohibitive to
record an affidavit with the
county clerk, and so we changed
that from shall to me. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Is that the end of
your presentation? Yes, already,
so do we have anybody here in
favor of this bill?
We can get our attendant to step
up with the mic, he will hold,
he will hold the mic and you
have one minute.
If you can get in a line behind
him, please.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Joanne
DeMichel, and I am a homeowner
and a manufactured home
community.
And I'd like to just give a
brief description of what that
means, um, we have, in my
particular community, we have 31
homes, and according to our
county assessor, the value of
our homes is 3 times the value
of the land. We have made a
substantial investment in our
community.
Financially, as well as
otherwise, we are all, we all
work.
Volunteer
And support the economic uh
community.
We also help each other in a way
that.
I believe we reduce the the uh
reliance on social services
because we take care of each
other. It's, I believe the model
community where people,
especially for people that age
in place and
I think it's important to
preserve it. And this is and uh
House Bill 426 that direction.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Maria Grego. I'm an
attorney and the director of
economic equity at the New
Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty, and the center strongly
supports this bill. In fact,
it's one of our largest
priorities this session. Um, in
New Mexico nearly 17% of our
affordable housing stock
consists of manufactured homes.
That's a starkly different than
the rest of the country, which
is about 5.5%.
Um, and manufactured homes offer
an affordable path to owner
ownership for low-income
families and seniors on fixed
incomes.
However, uh, manufactured home
community residents um are
facing more and more challenges
with um private equity firms
coming in, buying up the parks,
hiking up rents, decreasing
maintenance, and, um, in some
cases selling off the land and
displacing residents. This bill
provides a common sense fair
solution that has worked in a
number of other states, and we
hope that it can work and we, we
know that it can work in New
Mexico too.
Um, when residents own their
communities, rents remain
stable.
Thank you
Daniel, Governor's Office of
housing, um, just wanna, um,
highlight that about 35,000 New
Mexicans live in uh mobile home
communities. This is important
source of naturally affordable
housing, um, prior to joining
the governor's Office of
housing, working around the
West, um, and, and nationally
we've seen this rock model work
about 22 states have an
opportunity to purchase
legislation, want to highlight
that this
does not diminish, um, uh,
mobile home community owner from
getting full market value for
their home, it just creates the
opportunity for the purchaser to
be the people who already live
there. Um, so this is an
important, uh, preservation, um,
tactic for saving upwards of
25,000 units of naturally
affordable housing in New
Mexico. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Winter
Torres, and I'm CEO and founder
of the New Mexico Eviction
Prevention and Diversion
Program. I'm also an attorney
licensed here in New Mexico and
in Colorado. They have this um
um system in Colorado and it has
been working well as well as in
other places. I won't repeat
what Maria said about the equity
firms, but that is something
that we are um that folks are
facing, and I just want to say
that I grew up in a trailer is
what we called it in Silver
City, New Mexico, my parents
made $22,000.
a year. Um, and I don't know
what we would have done if we
didn't. We couldn't have moved
it, um, and we've had the
opportunity to help some folks
represent themselves in eviction
court on matters like
Just having the wrong color
sighting or missing a piece of
missing a piece of siding. So,
um, I hope that you will
maintain our housing stock here.
It's always our 1st or 2,
biggest group of affordable
housing in New Mexico,
manufactured housing. Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have anybody on
Zoom? O?
Yes, Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Oamahumi
Advocacy director for AARP New
Mexico. We stand in strong
support of House Bill 426 as
mobile home parks, 10 houses
disproportionate number of older
adults, retirees, veterans, and
those who are more likely to be
on fixed income. This bill is
crucial to help maintain
affordability and housing and
protecting economically
vulnerable families in their
communities, especially older
New Mexicans want to lead happy
lives and dignity.
and live independently in their
homes and we ask you to pass
this important legislation.
Thank you.
Rachel Biggs.
Medicare members of the
committee. My name is Rachels
with Albuquerque Healthcare for
the Homeless, and we stand
strong.
Every Mexican deserves safe and
stable place to call
homefactured homes are crucial
source of affordable housing in
New Mexico, especially for
seniors and low income families
at a time when we're seeing an
alarming increase in the number
of seniors experiencing
homelessness and seeking our
services. We must pursue every
solution possible to preserve
affordable housing, increase
housing stability.
and prevent increased
homelessness for bringing this
forward and ask for your
support.
Alyssa
Hi, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Melissa and I
sent you an email this morning
with some of the highlights from
a 2896 that we passed in 2019
when I was chairing the
committee on Human Services and
Housing in the Oregon
legislature.
Um, we unfortunately up until
that point, so a lot of out of
state
equity owners coming in,
particularly from California
where it's very active who
either raise the rents on the
lots dramatically forcing people
out.
or close the parks in order to
develop the land into more
profitable housing or commercial
malls
that maybe homeowners could no
longer afford um or they
actually lost a lot when the new
owners close the park, moving
their manufactured homes is
really expensive, often not even
feasible for much older homes
and then in addition to losing
their home, they lose their
entire community. Where are they
gonna be located? This is a
really important piece of the
puzzle of affordable housing.
Let's keep what we have.
And we did have a lot of
experience with resident owned
communities and found that very
successful. So I hope you pass
the bill. There is something in
the
about a technical thing that I
hope can be fixed. Maybe that's
part of the setup.
Arlan
Hello, my name is Arlen Lazer
and I live in a small uh
manufactured home community in
the 1962, uh, manufactured home,
trailer, um, I know for a fact
that as the property owners are
aging, they're wondering what
they're going to do, and I've
had a conversation with the
owner who says that every month
they're getting a bit from an
investor group in Indiana, uh,
offering more money than they
thought they would.
Ever get for it, but so far they
have resisted, um, living with
this insecurity at 78 years old
and a 60 year old trailer.
It is very difficult. So I urge
you to uh pass this piece of
legislation. Thank you.
Arturo Castillo.
members of the Castillo,
director of equity conservation
of New Mexico as catastrophes
continue to rag on and then how
population continues to
increase. We must do everything
we can to prevent more Mexicans
from being forced out of their
homes and onto the streets where
they will suffer the most as the
climate crisis continues to
worsen.
Conservation support this
legislation
as one of the many stable
housing for our most vulnerable
Mexicans. housing is not only a
human right, it's necessary for
our most vulnerable communities
to be engaged in the already
exclusionary political process.
Thank you.
Pamela Morgan
members of the committee. I live
in a manufactured home park.
House Bill 426 would provide
much needed protection for
tenant homeowners. Speaking to
the real estate lobby. I know
landlords need laws that serve
their interests. But in the
current trend where investors
buys solely to make profit.
Uh, rents are raised and
services and maintenance are
reduced and we are living
Uh, rents are raised and
services and maintenance are
reduced and we are left living
with uncertainty. Who stands to
lose the most tenant homeowners.
were sold or if parts are sold,
where would we go in uh Grant
County. There's no place to go.
There's no land available for
manufactured homes if one could
even be moved.
Providing the opportunity to
purchase their park if it goes
on sale. We'll give residents a
true home that is protected from
predatory.
Mary Kay. Brady.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
Representatives. I come to you
from Las Cruces, New Mexico, as
a solo ager when I bought my
property 6 years ago. It's not
only my home. It is my
community. I have a network of
friends. I have the ability to
join exercise group as often as
I like, I have opportunities for
spiritualization. I'm not a draw
on the
community because I have my own
network here. We are a gated
community. So I have some
additional safety that I'm not
involved with calling police or
law enforcement. This gives me
an affordable home, and my
biggest concern is the influx
now of private equity and large
corporations coming in that
could price me right out of the
market. And my question to you
would be, which ends first,
which do I run out?
first my money to pay these
increasing rents or my life.
Is that the question you want
your mom to ask you?
Thank you.
That is all, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Do we have anybody here in
opposition?
Or if you could line up, the
attendant will hold the mic.
You've got one minute.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the Mexico Association of
Realtors, and I would first say
that we've had very long
meetings with the sponsor, and
she has diligently tried to
address our issues.
Unfortunately, we didn't get the
committee sub in time to truly
evaluate it. So I would say we
are working through the process
and we've had encouraging
meetings, that being said, we
believe that there are two
issues of concern that might
still be in the sub that would
need to get addressed. Uh, the
first is the language of the
offer. If you look to, and this
is on the
the original bill, but on page
2, line 17, and C1, and this
language is functions
throughout. It says a
substantially equivalent offer,
um, we don't know exactly what
that means, and we're, we would
be pushing for equivalent offers
in terms of the price. Uh, the
second thing is, and I think the
representative has addressed
this. We were concerned about
the full time frame between when
the process started and when it
finished, there were some
amendments in that area. I
haven't been able to fully
address those.
Those were big concerns. We're
committed to continuing our
discussions with the sponsor.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee. My name is Doug
Ottersberg. I'm one of those mom
and pop community owners. Uh, my
wife and I have been doing that
for 31 years, um.
We did not get a copy of, so I
may not have all of those things
there. Um, first of all, first
rider refusal bills my
fundamental issue with this. It
restricts an owner's right to
freely sell their property.
And private property owners
should have the right to sell
their land on their terms
without government interference.
Um, always.
Feel free, residents, if they
want to make an offer or go
build a community there, that's
open to them. This could
potentially lower the value of
communities, uh, because it
requires a super long and I, I,
I understand it's been brought
down, but, uh, time to do this.
The, the other thing that I was
concerned about is the fact that
residents don't own the
community. It's name only. They
have a right to live there, um,
but it's owned by a nonprofit,
and if it ever gets sold, they
don't get any appreciation
whatsoever.
So I think that's kind of
confusing for myself, um, and
then finally, this burden could
disproportionately affect small
community owners like us, um, to
prolonged sale.
already, do you have anybody on
Zoom?
Leslie Gooch
Hi, I'm Madam Chairwoman and
members of the committee. My
name is Leslie. I am the CEO of
the manufactured housing
Institute. We are the National
Trade Association that
represents every segment of the
factory housing industry,
including community owners and
operators. Uh, I would hope that
um I could meet with the sponsor
and members of the committee to
talk about the very important
issues that you are seeking to
address, which is looking
And all of the proponents of the
bill said it's looking to make
sure that people have a safe and
stable place to call home. We
could not agree more. However,
we are in opposition to this
bill because it actually results
in the opposite. Uh, when you
talk about preserving
manufactured housing
communities. This means
preserving the infrastructure
and everything that goes along
with it and what we see is that
the residents will be at risk.
the model of
Some nonprofits who call
themselves nonprofits, and they
help the residents by the
community, but the residents
don't own it. They do not have
an ownership stake in the
community and that should be
something that you should be
very concerned about
you because this is not gonna do
what you Rochelle Smith.
and representatives. My name is
Rochelle Smith. I live in a 55
plus manufactured community in
Albuquerque. We are a large part
with 425 blocks.
We were purchased by a large
corporation called Legacy
Communities in February 2021.
We own our homes, but at least
the tiny piece of dirt it sits
on. They have raised our rent so
high that many of our residents
have been forced to move.
They're scaring off potential
buyers by currently charging
10:30 per month to lease the
land.
This rate keeps increasing as
well.
The amount of lot rent is
decreases the value of our homes
and making it impossible to
sell.
It's looking more and more like
legacy is getting ready to sell
our park. Please help us save
our homes and community by
giving us the opportunity to
purchase our park.
Passing this bill will benefit
other parts in the state as
well. Don't let New Mexico fall
victim to large private
investors and corporations.
Please pass House Bill 426.
Thank you. I think I raised my
hand in the wrong place. I'm not
in opposition. I'm for the bill.
Thank you.
Thank you. Alrighty, let's go to
the committee.
First on the list is uh
Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative for bringing
this, uh.
I do have a few concerns on this
uh.
first off is uh.
Rights of the private landowner.
You know, it, uh
I, I
still believe that, you know.
I, I own the land. I pay the
taxes on the land.
You know, that I should have
some right.
To sell my property.
added
When I, when I would like to.
Uh, in our area, there is a lot
of the manufactured hopes also.
They're all over our state.
And I have lots of friends that
live in.
In our part.
Of the state, a lot of the homes
are on lots owned by the owners,
so that's not such big.
Parks like he's in Albuquerque,
Santa Fe, but anyway.
One of my main concerns is the
time right.
I get a as a landowner I get an
offer and I tell my.
And uh
How long does it take? How long
do I have to wait?
After I
Offer, let them have us.
Like an offer before I can.
Not even know if they're able to
buy my part.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Mason, thank you
so much for that question, um,
so to uh to adjust the two parts
of your question, um, the first
is that the way that the statute
defines these mobile home parks
is um accommodation of 12 or
more parcels, so we're talking
about communities that are 12 or
more large, um, and then the
second part is that uh if you
look on this chart.
What happens is the way that
this statute is written is the
landlord will decide to sell the
park and he'll receive an offer
that he intends to accept um
from a third party now that
could be $5 million if that that
$5 million he, he's like, this
is a great price, um, he will
then notify the residents that
he plans to sell that $5 million
property for $5 million and
what's what I think is really
important here is that the
residents.
And in the other states where
this has taken place, the
residents almost always matched
the price of the land itself,
um, and so.
Really, what, what we're talking
about here is this is not a a
sweetheart deal or a better deal
for the folks who live in the
parks, it's really, um, are they
gonna be able to get together
the resources to purchase the
park at the price that it is
being sold at the market.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, I understand
that, but my question was how
long?
Timeframe.
explained the time
Details the land of the train.
The owners in the of the mobile
homes.
He tells them to what he's gonna
do so how long is it before he
can actually even know if
they're gonna be able to buy the
part.
Uh, Madam Chanpresentative, I'm
sorry for not um answering that
part for sure, so, um, the what
happens after the notification
is the residents have 75 days to
get together, um, and then in
additional 90 days to obtain the
financing. Now we, this was um
actually more uh originally we
had it at 90 days, um, and then
obtaining the financing another
90 days and then after that
completing the purchase another
90 days, uh, so in our
negotiations what we learn.
is that, um, really for the sale
of these parks is about 120 days
or so if this is going through
on the market, sometimes it can
even be faster um and we're
proposing here is about 130 days
or so.
OK, well, on my sheet it says 75
days.
They could make an offer
And they have 90 days.
See if they can get financed.
That's 165 days.
That's
Then if they did not get
finance.
Then
He's wait nearly half a year and
he.
By that time has he lost the
offer that he had to start with.
You know, is, is my concern. You
know you've waited 6 months
before you even know whether
this.
group is going to be able to buy
your property.
And then I do have a little
question. Complete purchase
close purchased within a
commercially reasonable time
frame so that's, that's pretty
open in too as far as I'm
concerned so.
You know, he could be a year.
The time is
Likes the offer before he could
get the.
Property, is that true? uh
represented Madam Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair and
Representative, um, yeah, I
think you're bringing up really
great points. I'm not a uh real
estate lawyer yet, but I do have
um our expert here from ROC, um,
who I think when I heard her
explanation of how um these this
this time frame works, it was,
it was quite helpful. Mary, if
you're there, if you can um
explain.
Sure, sure. I would be happy to,
um, assuming that you can hear
me. Um, Mary O'Hara again from
Rock USA. So we have been, uh,
working in this area of
opportunity to purchase and
resident ownership. And with 40
years of experience, um, with
this type of statute and with
homeowners purchasing in the
community in which they live.
Generally speaking, that initial
time frame.
is simply for the homeowners to
perform their corporation, get
legal, uh, assistance and sign a
purchase and sales contract,
like any other buyer. So the
community owner is looking at a
purchase contract that is
absolutely the same as any other
purchase contract that a
commercial real estate broker or
commercial real estate
transaction would use in our
experience.
It is, uh, essentially 90 to 120
days from contract to closing,
and we have seen a track record
of about 98% of the time once uh
homeowners sign a contract,
they, uh, close on a purchase,
uh, Rock USA does provide
financing to homeowners where uh
national
CDFI financial institution
and
Our lender has made over $500
million in loans to homeowners
who are purchasing the
community. And I do just want to
correct the record, um, of the
30042 resident communities that
Rock USA has assisted those
communities do own the community
that the members, the
homeowners, they own the
corporation and then the
corporation owns the community
and I honestly operates like any
other.
Corporation's cooperative
corporation, it's a community
owner in the same way that a
sole proprietor would be a
community owner or a private
equity firm would be a community
owner or to to friends who owned
a mobile home park would be a
community owner or an LLC, um,
it's simply a corporation that
is owned by the homeowners who
live in the community.
I hope that's helpful.
Uh, Madam chair, yes, that was
helpful. It's still, I don't
know that, uh, Madam chairs
representative.
does not
the
The time frame
Before he even knows whether
this, whether they can get their
corporation.
So get sometimes madam chair
represent getting.
20 homeowners in a mobile home
park is not necessarily a given
deal.
So
That
You know, it
It would take all of them.
come on board to get
That are some of them would have
to buy other lots but uh.
By, uh, one other question.
How many mobile homes did you
say there were in the state of
Mexico?
Madam Chair and Representative,
I believe we have over 35,000
residents who live in the mobile
homes much was that again? Um,
Madam Chair and Representative,
35,000 people who live in mobile
homes. That all.
Thank you, Representative. I'm
sure that really doesn't seem
like.
enough. Hey, I mean, I.
There were a lot of more, but
anyway, uh.
How many of these 35,000 are
actually in.
Ao home heart.
But as we're speaking of this
type of
Scenario how how many of them
are.
Private owned lots about.
Madame Chair, and a
representative, we have, so I'm
not sure the exact distribution
of private versus non-private,
um, but we have 25,000 units of
mobile home manufactured homes,
um, and then I think here I'm
reading 380 manufactured home
communities across our state.
Madam Chair representative,
thank you. Those 380 communities
what's the average size?
How many homes are in a in a
park.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I um don't have that number for
you, um, but I do know there is
a a broad range, uh, my
co-sponsor, uh, representative
Matthews, she has a a very large
park, for instance, in her
district, I have a much smaller
one, of about 100 units um I
believe Representative Matthews
is 500 units.
Madam, uh, chair, uh,
representative, uh, there's 2
million people, no, I'm kidding,
it's not that big.
Um, I in, in my district, there
is one park.
That by itself, and there are a
number of parks not as large as
the the largest it's called
Albuquerque Meadows, and it has
over 400.
Pads to to uh to rent to lease.
And over 600 residents in the
park. It's a 55 plus park.
Um, so it's a very large
community, in fact.
Um
In that when we were doing the
election, it turns out that it
was its own precinct.
Um,
I mean, that's sort of how the
size of and the number of people
who were living in it.
Uh, I actually think there was
that the boundary of the
precinct was a little further,
but that was city.
construction yard or something,
but that was the population of
the precinct.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I'm about
through here, uh.
Just a little observation for
me.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative.
did not
Now the residents of these parks
take a little more proactive
and.
But to buy first.
Little Whitey
They, they have an offer.
But my, my fear is I take, I
have an offer you said 5 minutes
will you.
I give you the chance.
The like a competitive.
And the
I wake my 160 days or whatever.
Then I find out.
There's a problem with the.
Either with getting the
corporation.
Trouble with getting the
financing.
So I still don't know.
Sure if I'm gonna get it sold
and then that 160 days are more
than likely have lost my.
Original
Uh, offer
It's hard to keep somebody on
the line.
6 months with an offer.
Not knowing whether they're
gonna.
They're gonna to me, madam chair
represented, they're probably go
look for other opportunities to
spend their money, but anyway.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, the whole
precept.
Nobody wants anybody out of
their home.
I just don't know if this is.
proper avenue
Got lots of loopholes as far as.
Thank you, Bill.
Thank you, uh, Representative de
la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative
How many parks
Qualify in the category of your
bill.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, it's a park
center over 12 um units or more
and Madam Chair and
Representative, uh, like I
mentioned earlier, um, the, the
breakdown of communion versus
privately owned. Most are partly
privately owned.
Madam Chair Representative, so
how many trailer parks.
Fall into the category of your
bill.
Because you said it's, they have
to have more than 12, so how
many parks are we talking about?
Madame Chair and um
Representative, I believe 380.
380 as listed um in the um
analysis.
Thank you.
And Madam Chair Representative.
How many trader parks that fit
that category were sold last
year.
In New Mexico.
Madame turned representative,
um, I don't believe I have that
number.
Thank you.
Now
I think I heard the number
earlier. How many states have
adopted a similar law?
Madame Chair and Representative
22.
Thank you.
So
If this bill were to were
enacted.
Adam Chair, representative.
Is there anything that the
trailer park residents have to
put up front like a good thief.
Amount of money or anything like
that. Is that in your bill?
Um, Madam Chair and um
Representative de la Cruz, I
have with me here, um, the
drafter of the bill and um she's
prepared to, well, she can't,
she can't support uh the bill,
uh, she can provide us the legal
part of how we drafted it to
ensure that.
Um, Madam Chair Representative.
My name is Christina Vasquez. I
work for Legislative council
service. I'm here for the sole
purpose of providing technical
assistance on the matter before
this committee, and I do not
appear in support or opposition
to the matter before you, but if
you look to page 2.
Um, subsection B, I'm sorry,
subsection C, it says that the
residents shall have the
opportunity to purchase before
the owner can accept the offer
to purchase if 51% of the
residents first submit
documentation. So this means,
you know, that they can gather
signatures or something like of
that matter. They need 51% of
people to agree that this is a
good idea and that they're
willing to obtain the financing,
but there is no down payment
until you look at paragraph 2
under subsection C, it says
obtain a binding commitment for.
any necessary financing or
guarantees within an additional
90 days. So this is going to be
when they're going to finally
have the paperwork and the
documentation saying that they
have financing.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, so.
If
They feel that they want to go
through this process.
They don't really have any skin
in the game up until a certain
point in this process, right?
They don't have to put in any
money at all.
Until they
At some point down the road,
where is that point?
Madam Chair and Representative
de la Cruz, thank you again for
um clarifying the question. Uh,
so the, the proof is in that 75
days and really in the financing
in the 90 days. Now, um, Madam
Chair and Representative, what
I've learned in these
discussions um with uh with rock
and also with um our realtors,
etc. is that, um, you know, even
in a regular commercial process
transaction, the underwriting
process does take some time for
those 90 days and that's.
Approximately the amount of time
that they do it, so really, you
know, the, the biggest advantage
that I see in this bill for the
um for the owners is uh of the
of the homes is that they have
those 75 days to really ensure
that they wanna commit to this
and they wanna make it and Madam
Chair and Representative, I
would just add that, you know,
the skin in the game for a lot
of these folks is that
This is their home, their, their
house that they have purchased,
it's their asset, um, Madam
Chair and uh Representative de
la Cruz I think we saw on the
screen some of these homes, you
know, are $200,000 300 dollars,
$1000 manufactured homes that
people have really put time and
money into and if a community is
organized and really wants to
buy it, um, Madam Chair
representative, that it is in
their interest to do so.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative. If I rent an
apartment, I have no illusion
that I'm gonna own that
building. I guess we could
organize the tenants to buy the
building seems kind of similar
idea to me, but along the lines,
uh, Madam Chair and what
Representative Mason brought up.
There's nothing that prohibits.
folks that live in a trailer
park from.
Incorporating.
Or, or creating some kind of a
of an agreement that they're
going to start to create
funding.
Or
Doing this, whether or not
The Trailer Park is for sale, is
that correct, manager?
Uh, Madam Chair and um
representative.
In a way, I understand where
the, the question is coming from
and that, um, you know, if this
is already something that may be
available, um, but I think Madam
Chair and Representative also
looking at it from the
perspective of the landlord, um,
yeah, the residents may choose
to offer something, um, but
we've heard now how many people
want to buy these mobile home
parks, and how good investments
they are for other outside
companies um because of the
recurring revenue and.
So in the interest of ensuring
that the landlord does get the
best deal, uh, Madam Chan
representative, it, it's, I
think that it, it makes sense
that the landlord would go out
and try to get the best possible
price that they could um when
they are ready to sell it and
then that it would be on the um
on the, the tenants to uh
organize to to purchase Madam
Chair and representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I'm not,
I'm not sure.
How we get to the, the good deal
because
What I've seen with with roller
sing.
You may say, well, it's, it
appraised that.
$500,000. I'm just making up a
number.
It appraises the $500,000 and
somebody says, hey.
There's $500,000.
And then another person says.
I'll give you 600,000. What's to
stop that from happening in this
situation, so that indeed the
property owner, whether it's you
or me or anybody in this room.
To be able to get the most out
of their.
Their property, that's kind of a
fundamental.
American thing.
Madame Cha and Representative de
la Cruz, thank you so much for
asking that question. Uh, so
part of the section and let me
see if this answers it, um, part
of.
This bill, uh, is that if a new
offer comes up, for instance, if
you're in the process, let's say
you're 35 days in the 1st 75 day
period and you've agreed to sell
it for $5 million but like you
said, um, someone else comes in
and says I want to buy this for
$6 million that would start the
process again, so Madam Chan
represented at any point in this
process if a better deal becomes
available to the landlord, they
are well within their right to.
start that process.
Madam Chair Representative.
One of the things that's being
left out of here, at least for
the
For the, the right of the
property owner is.
What if somebody shows up with
$5 million cash.
They're, they're not able to
take that because they've got to
offer to the theater park folks,
right? Is that correct?
And
Madame Chair and Representative,
uh, this was a scenario we in
fact discussed and uh, you know,
part of these deals are that,
um, that you match the price,
um, and, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Ro Rocca may have
some um better explanation on
this because they, they have
some um in their agreement
process they do provide uh
earnest money to secure the
deal, um, if Mary.
Yes, I'm still here. Thank you,
Madam Chair and Representatives,
members of the committee, um,
there is, uh, I, I believe going
back to the question about
earnest money, um, when the
contract is signed a contract is
signed, there's earnest money,
um, that is providing a
forgivable pre-development loan
to the homeowner corporation and
um the
uh requires that the homeowners,
uh, substantially the terms and
conditions as well as the price
and certainly if there is a
buyer who comes with $5 million
in cash, um, the homeowners
would not be able to, if they
came up with $5 million in cash
and uh we're not doing any due
diligence on the purchase of the
property owners would not be
able to meet those terms and
conditions and the community.
would be able to sell that
community, um, to the cash
buyer. I just have to say my
experience, um, that scenario
rarely actually plays out, um,
there's just, there's, there's
rarely cast fires and um
generally speaking, they are all
looking to do the same kind of
due diligence that the
homeowners do before they
purchase the community.
Madam Chair, perhaps.
Perhaps not.
It'd be a friend that knows the
property well.
And has the resources to buy it
outright. So in my understanding
that in this bill.
That if that scenario occurs,
that then they can just sell the
property to whoever shows up
with the money.
Madame Cha represented yes,
because the um the owners of the
park would not be able to match
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Last
question.
What about an emergency?
Should a situation arise where
that owner for
We don't know what.
Might happen
There could be an emergency in
their family, they have to
immediately relocate sell or as
quickly as possible.
And cannot wait.
For this corporation to occur
and all these things to happen.
What about an emergency? Is
there anything in this bill?
That helps our landowner.
Property owner in that scenario.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, I think it would depend on
the offer that the landlord
received, so, um, in your
scenario where there's an
emergency and they need to sell
their property immediately
because they need to move
somewhere to take care of their
um you know a a parent or
somebody who's sick in a
different state, um, they would
follow that, they would still
put the um home on the market,
right? And so Madam Chen
representative once they got an
offer.
And perhaps they're trying to
sell it very quickly, and
somebody comes with an offer for
$4 million or $5 million cash,
for instance, um, and if they
couldn't match those, the terms
and conditions, um, or for
instance if even it wasn't cash,
it was just $5 million over time
and they were uh the terms and
conditions were that they were
going to sell it immediately. My
understanding in this bill, um,
Madam Chair and representative,
is that, you know, the, the
folks would not be able to match
that.
Um, match that deal.
And he would be able to sell it,
Madam Chair or Madam, I'm not
sure because if this law is
enacted,
And if it's a matter of time.
And
Let's assume that.
The I I'm sure if the
Seller
Is a buyer that could do it.
From start to finish within 60
days.
Wouldn't they still be bound by
the law to hold out.
So that the trailer park folks
could try to match that, and
then by by the law, it would
extend to the full extent of the
law. Is that correct, Madam
Chair, Representative? Madam
Chair and I represented, I think
I understand a little better
what you're trying to ask here
and um.
And I can uh turn over also to a
lawyer, uh, Madam Chan
representative, but
You know, I think from my
understanding is we here in the
legislature are we're not just
trying to, um, you know, we, we
want to ensure that we are
providing a fair deal and Madame
Chen represented the way I see
it is that a lot of the folks
that live in these in these
homes, um, they own their
houses, um, on the property,
it's cost $10,000 for a double,
it's sometimes $15,000. Um, we
have some uh great.
and pop, uh, owners back here
who can tell, you know, they can
get a deal to move it for um a
smaller one for 6000, 7000, um,
but Madam Chair and
Representative what we're trying
to do really with this bill is
to preserve um the housing and
preserve the ability of those
folks, so the cost for that in
this bill is 75 days to see if
they can get that, um, get that
deal together, but Madam Chen
represented about if there's
also legal.
Um
Protection here.
So right now in this, the way
that this bill is drafted, um,
Madam Chair Representative,
there is no exceptions to the
certain situation that you're
referring to, but I do think
that if Representative Parejan
was amenable, that is something
that could be added to the bill,
but you're correct right now,
the bill is drafted does not um
speak to those exceptions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I see
this as a flaw, this bill,
because it does not take into
account.
A potential real world scenario.
And, you know, the, the, the
gentle lady that was on Zoom.
You know, mostly it happens this
way.
But I'm sure that not
exclusively this way.
And so it would put it could
potentially put people in a
bind.
And, and they own the property.
And I, I.
I can fully understand,
appreciate, Madam Chair, that
there are people that they live
there and they might might not
be able to afford to move that
that.
Mobile home
But at the same time, it's kind
of the thing that you do, it's a
thing that you understand.
Anything could happen.
And
Anyway, that's all I have. Thank
you.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Matthews.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, um.
Representative and uh.
Uh, rafter.
For your, for your presentation,
um.
As uh
As representative Parhon's
question to me that earlier uh
in the cases I've had a lot of
involvement recently in
connection with
Uh, manufactured housing and
manufactured home parks.
Um
And um
So I wanted to share some of um
the information and other things
that I've been doing to try to
deal with this situation, and
first of all,
What I'd like to make clear is
that there is a crisis.
The continued existence of what
is probably the best affordable
housing that is available to
people.
Um
And
While
um,
Uh, it is just true that it, it
is much less expensive.
To
Um
To have
Uh
600, 700 people like live in the
mobile home park.
Uh, the manufacturing housing
park that is in my district.
Um, because
What's great about it and when
you drive through them, you
really starts to dawn on you, is
they don't need to take a lot of
property.
So the land piece.
Uh, for each manufactured house
is relatively small.
And so I want to go back to the
question of private property.
And private rights, the land
clearly belongs to the uh
Uh, to whoever is the owner of
the land.
Subject to a leasehold, if you
will.
That uh on that is held by
whoever owns the home that the
property is on.
And the point I want to make.
Is that manufactured home.
is private property also.
And so what we have to do in
this situation is try to figure
out what is the appropriate
balance between the private
property rights of the people
who are living in the
manufactured homes and a private
property rights of the people
who own the land that it sits
on.
Um
And it's a tough question.
Uh, one of the things when I
first got involved with this and
I'm meeting with my constituents
and their terrified, I would
tell you they are terrified.
That the property could be sold
out from under them and over 600
homes would have to be moved,
and there is no place to move
them.
Unless you own a separate lot
that you could put a
manufactured Hong Kon.
So the reality that we're facing
in this kind of situation and
this is true, I think in much of
the state. The reality that we
face is
Basically, having
Thousands of people lose their
home if we don't start to find a
way to balance the rights.
And, and I'm not suggesting that
we shouldn't balance those
rights. People who own the land
certainly have rights, but we
got to figure out a way to take
care of this in a way that's
fair to both sides.
Um, that's just my personal
opinion.
But one of the ways when I began
looking at this situation and
talking to my constituents who,
as I say, are terrified that the
property could be sold out from
under him.
And when the property sold out
from under him, what frequently
happens and it's happened in my
district is that then, for
example, luxury apartments are
built.
Um, which has happened right
across the street from the large
mobile home park.
Manufactured housing park in my
district.
So
One of the things, so a couple
of things that I've been working
on.
is clearly
These as these people as
individuals aren't gonna put
their money in a pot and buy
these properties.
And so what we need to do is
find a source of funding.
And so I have been working with
both the mortgage finance
Authority and the New Mexico
Finance Authority.
And in New Mexico Finance
Authority, uh, probably had some
programs already that could
provide some of the money for
down payment and other kinds of
things to help purchase a park
by a tenant organization and the
MFA is very, very interested and
we're working on, they're
working on, I'm not, they're
working on programs where
financing could become
available.
That helps speed up this process
immensely.
And I don't want to misrepresent
anything, we're not there yet.
But there is such concern about
finding a way.
To balance these interests.
That we are talking to.
Um
Major state agencies that
Uh, could play a substantial
role in this.
Um
The 3rd thing.
Um
I'd like to mention is what I
said, this is critical
affordable housing.
In the state
Um
And
Um
What you have to ask yourself
and some of the a lot of parks
are 55 plus.
So it's mainly senior citizens,
but not all of them.
You have to ask yourself, where
are these people gonna go if
they lose their home.
Because there isn't a place to
put it.
And it caused some now,
sometimes 15 to $20,000 to
remove them.
So
The concept of having what I
call kind of a writer first
refusal.
Uh
To see if you can.
get the money together to buy
the property.
Um, seems to me to be a small
Price, as long as the time
limits are are reasonable.
To, um,
Try to preserve this critical
housing.
Um
And I, I support this bill.
Um, not perfect, but.
We're in uncharted waters.
We're in uncharted waters in
terms of our housing crisis that
we're having in the state and
where people are gonna live.
So we all have to have, I think,
some flexibility and thinking
about how we do this, but I
would suggest to you that the
private property rights of the
people who live in manufactured
housing are just as.
Important as a private property
rights of people who own the
land.
And I will support the bill.
Thank you, um, Representative
Fernandez.
You madam chair, um, I just
have.
Maybe 3 depending
I, OK, so what happens if
The if the
A property.
In foreclosure, is the bank
still allowed to
Auction it or do they have to
offer it to the
Residents first.
And depending on the answer that
I might have to follow up.
Madam Chair and a representative
this section would only pertain
to the sale of a mobile home
park. I wouldn't pertain to
foreclosure.
Madam Chair isn't.
Before, OK, so
But the 4, OK, when you're in
foreclosure and they are
Trying to, the bank is trying to
sell it, the selling of a home
so the auction process, what
would normally go towards
auction.
Is still selling it,
Madam, thank you for that
question. Um, sorry, to clarify,
it's only when the owner is
selling it, so we don't have a
provision when something like
that would happen.
OK, Madam Chair, so.
Let's say the bank auctions and
others a new.
Does
That new owner before they take
just.
where my brain went before they
take ownership of it, they, is
there anything in there that
says that before they take
ownership, they have to allow
the
Uh
The residents to have a crack
at.
It, it's apparently happened in.
Is what I would
Looking at is it, yeah, so when
you
is where this whole thing came
down from, so.
There's a piece of legislation
and the state and I can't
remember it. I read it yesterday
that
Once the bank auctions it, then.
New owner
like has to give the resident.
Even though they bought it at
auction, even if there's.
It's super random to me.
Um, but we can go to the next
one. What about, um,
See that's, never mind. The
second question doesn't matter
because the.
have
That's all I got.
Thank you Madam representative,
thank you, um, for that
question, so I it's really
interesting consideration I love
to talk more with you about it
because, um, yeah, for, I think
what would happen in that
scenario is they wouldn't be
able to purchase it because the
new owner wouldn't would.
Not owe anything necessarily to
the, to those residents, so it's
certainly a um something to be
considered, um, but Madam Chair
and members of the committee, I
think, you know, there have been
some concerns have been brought
up about the way that right now
it's drafted and I think
everybody is bringing really
great points to this bill, you
know, this is as a
representative Matthew said
really uncharted territory, and
this will be a completely new
section, um, in our in property
law, um, you know, I think Madam
Chair,
way that I read it is that um
the the owner, the owner of the
community can always take an
offer that the homeowner, um,
that the homeowners can't match,
like a cash offer or really
rapid offer, and that is our
intent is that we want to ensure
that landlords can still make
those decisions, um, for their
properties, um, while also
balancing the need of of those
who live on the on the
community. So Madam Chair, if,
if you're amenable, I'd like to
roll the bill, uh, to make some
of these adjustments, um, speak
with our folks who
um
We're not able to receive the
committee sub on time um to
continue making this better.
Thank you.
Uh
I, uh, I have some more things
that I would.
So if we can talk after maybe
not.
that
OK, we'll roll your bill. Um,
you also have another bill, um.
HB 504, or did you want to
present that? I know that
they're also starting another
bill for you in judiciary, so,
OK, um, but I believe that one
of your other co-sponsors is
here.
Or was here,
he stepped out for a
Or was here, he stepped out for.
No, I think, let's get you
started here and we'll get your
other co-sponsor up here.
OK.
So
I know.
All righty, representative if
you want to go ahead and begin
and if we can find your
co-sponsor, we'll get him in
here.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Madam Chair, uh, what you have
before you is my next bill, uh,
House Bill 504 and um what this
bill is, is, um.
It is really about not leaving
dollars on the table, um, in
order to put that tax capacity
towards other things and um for
for those, I mean, many of us
know we have a GRT, um, and we
normally have a manufacturing
deduction for GRT because we
don't want pyramiding, uh, we
want to encourage manufacturing
industry in our states.
Um, but many of these industries
are very fully formed. They're
very matured and um some are now
starting to manufacture, for
instance, um, the federal labs
are now beginning to
manufacture. They haven't
manufactured in years, um, but
now because of federal mandate,
they will be producing um
nuclear weapon heads uh with
billions of dollars flowing from
the federal government, Madam
Chair, um, and representatives,
this bill was heard last year as
well.
Uh, but these, this bill will
have a lot of impact for um for
increasing our revenues for
uranium cleanup, for funding our
own RICA, um, and really for
taking care of our people, uh,
Madam Chair and Representative,
this is uh one of my co-sponsors
representing Cadena, uh, vice
chairwoman, and she can present
uh why we're doing this in the
spirit of tax, uh, fair
taxation.
Good afternoon, committee, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Thank for giving us a
second to catch our breaths
here.
Um, I appreciate the
introduction from Representative
Barajon and certainly as you
know, Madam Chair and other
committees.
Committee members, uh, when we.
Consider grossers grocer seats
tax exemptions we're doing so
because we're trying to spur
economic development or
investment, we're trying to give
room for an industry to come to
New Mexico with their dollars
and with their jobs. That's what
it that is not at stake here,
uh, for better or worse, there's
maybe two places in the country
where this kind of activity can
happen, um, so without um
compromising the rest of the GRT
exemption, that's for private
investors that do manufacturing.
we're doing here in this bill is
saying that if you are a lab
established by Congress, um, you
don't enjoy the same benefits
and and for us, um, New Mexico.
For centuries has been a place
from beginning to end where we
saw this kind of production, and
my thought is that if the
government is going, the federal
government is going to um
Make these weapons here, then
they could pay their taxes just
like anybody else coming into
the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and um committee, I
also have another one of my
co-sponsors here, I represent.
Thank you, Madam Chair, or vice
chair and ranking member, uh, I,
I also wanna, uh, echo what what
what's been said. This is a uh
my my name's uh state
Representative Joseph Hernandez
from House District 4, you know,
we're, we're at a critical time
right now in our state to make
meaningful difference for all
people in New Mexico, especially
the people that have been
impacted by
um, you know, waste contaminated
waste and also what can we do to
um
write those wrongs and, and this
is a a a critical time right
now, man, there's so much
momentum going on and uh and
we're looking forward to
ensuring that the the the the
legacy was, uh, gets cleaned up
and um we're looking forward to,
to, um, working with many
partners. Thank you, Madam.
Thank you.
All righty, Representative, are
you done with your presentation?
OK, do we have anybody in the
room, um, in favor of this bill?
Do we have anybody on Zoom?
favor of the bill.
No, madam.
Do we have anybody in
opposition.
Hey, if you'd like to come up to
the center of the room and.
The attendant will hold the
microphone. You've got one
minute.
Good afternoon, chair members of
the committee, Alison Riley with
the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce. The proposed
legislation will have an adverse
effect on our national
laboratories, which play a
critical role for our state's
economy. Los Alamos labs, for
example, spent over $1 billion
in procurement within New Mexico
and including 636 million with
local small businesses. In
fiscal year 2024, they
contributed $138 million in GRT.
The projections for this bill,
if enacted, laboratory could
face an additional $30 million
in annual tax burden. Such an
increase in taxes could have
adverse effects on hiring and
procurement practices.
Mexico's overall economic
vitality depends on attracting
and retaining key institutions
like our national labs. Any
changes in tax policy should
support economic development and
maintain competitiveness in the
state.
This bill does not do that and
therefore we are opposed. Thank
you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Valerie
Salimeza, and I represent Sandia
National Labs. I rise in
opposition of HB 504.
The potential loss in the of the
exemption will impose a
significant impact to the labs
and is projected to increase our
GRT uh liability.
The increase proposed in this
bill would hinder our ability to
invest in growth, innovation and
job creation.
To put our impact into
perspective right now. Last
year, Sandia contributed $133
million to GRT in the state of
New Mexico.
We have 14,000 employees in the
state, which equates to $1.8
billion in um
Their labor rates.
And last year we conducted $66
million in procurement in New
Mexico, with companies across
the state.
continues to have a strong
impact on New Mexico, and we
hope to continue to see that
trickle down impact into the
future. For these reasons, I
urge strong support for the
continuation of this
manufacturing tax exemption and
oppose the bill. Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, good afternoon. My
name is David Chua. I represent
Los Amos National Laboratory.
In fiscal year 2024 Los Amos
National Laboratory paid $138
million in New Mexico gros
receipt tax if House Bill 504 is
enacted, it will cost Los Alamos
National Laboratory a projected
additional $30 million in annual
gross receipt tax.
With recent uncertainty at the
federal level, that increased
tax liability will definitely
have a negative effect on future
hiring opportunities as well as
overall procurement, though
Samos National Laboratory
strongly opposes House Bill 504.
Thank you.
All righty. Anybody on Zoom?
In that position.
No
All right.
Let's go to the committee.
Representative Mason.
Ah
Oh thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, uh.
Uh
And I
my question pretty much been
answered by the ones.
is we all know that the national
labs is a.
Very big contributor to the
economy and the state.
Not just in Los Alamos out of
chair representative but all
across the state.
I know even in my territory they
have offices and stuff with the
whip.
Lab and all of that so uh
they're they're.
They are big contributor to our
economy in my district also.
And
Madam Chair represented this
manufacturing that they're gonna
do.
You know what they're
manufacturing.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Mason plutonium
pits.
But
Thank you Madam Chair
Representative, and, uh,
basically these are.
Used for
Are
Weapon system
Correct
Madam Chair Madam Chair, yes.
OK, so basically they are our
national security these.
Is it not true that the what
they're they're actually
replacing old units that are
Of
They're afraid they may have
lost some of their effect.
That true gentle lady.
Madam Chair.
Madame Chair and Representative,
yes, they replacing, um, some,
but arguably there are quite
still many um nuclear weapons
that we have enough as a
deterrent.
But
I that's.
opinion
Which, uh
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
I won't, I have really not many
more questions. I'm not.
to stand in support of this
bill. I, I mean, I, I feel that,
that the work they do is.
Essential to the security of our
country and according to our
constitution, that is what our
government does is protect us.
Thank you, Chair.
Thank you, uh, Chair de la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representatives.
Have the labs.
Uh
Well, let me back up, Madam
Chair.
So is part of the intent of the
bill.
To try to ensure that in the
event of a spill or some kind of
accident that would contaminate
soil, air that they would have
that the state would have the
resources to help clean or that
they would.
I'm not sure how they correlate,
just trying to understand that,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative De la Cruz, and
yes, um, certainly as this bill
is drafted, um, what this would
do would um.
Pull the labs out of the wider
and broader manufacturing
exemption that we have in place
with lots of purpose and
intention behind it, uh, but
what's also real, Madam Chair
and representative is there has
been harm in the lab from the
northern pueblos to the
communities and workers that
drive up from Ria Riva up that
hill, um, and come home.
Sick and harmed and suffering in
other ways, um, those will be
those same communities that tell
you how important those jobs
are.
How important that economic
basis for the vitality of that
region. So nothing in this bill
interrupts the work of the labs
or instructs them to do
differently, we don't have the
authority to do so, and we never
will. um, but it is our sense
that, um.
It, it, it isn't economic
development or the intention of
this manufacturing exemption to
apply to work that's going to
happen there, no matter what.
And as such, we think it's a
reasonable move as policymakers
of New Mexico to include this
back in the GRT base and then
potentially point these kind of
dollars back towards those most
impacted communities, um,
whether it be additional dollars
towards uranium cleanup like
we're seeing established in HB 2
that we just have uh just passed
a couple of weeks ago, um, we
can't directly do that as we
pull somebody back out of a GRT
exemption, but yes, there would
be.
dollars raised or the county
municipal government, I think
you all know constitutionally
Los Alamos is a special little
creature that they're municipal
and county government function
as one, so it would pull those
dollars back into their base
budget, um, and then bring those
resources into New Mexico's
general fund.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That
being said,
So, are, have there been
instances that you can cite at
Sandia.
And at the labs were in the lab.
Or or or Sandia or Los
Alamoslannel.
I failed to react to
To mitigate, to
You know, treat people's health
or there instances at those two
locations, madam chair.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
yes, certainly Sania is
implicated in this, but as we
understand, Sania national labs
don't currently have projects or
projections where they would
actually go into the process of
manufacturing, so it's been
widely reported, understood,
that's what Los Alamos is hiring
up to do, and that's that's
been.
Established, um, it is real
over.
A long time and including the
massive fires that part of the
reports we heard is that the
labs were scrambling because
they had things on that hill
under tarps and in barrels that
they needed to be accounted for
when the fires were raging in
that part of New Mexico.
So there was all sorts of
responsiveness from our
administration and legislative
branches to make sure that the
labs had what they needed to
respond in emergencies like
that.
Um, certainly whether um it's
books and research that's been
done by folks like Mariah Gomez,
uh, who wrote a whole book
around her family's legacy of
being labor at the lab to people
like the downwinds in my part of
the state that have built
collaborations and coalitions to
say, we understand this is an
economic activity, but we also
want to make sure we're caring
for New Mexicans at the same
time, um, but for me and what
I've learned.
Sitting on the tax committee
now, it's my 4th term being on
the tax committee is when we
think about what the purpose of
these DRT exemptions are, it is
to spur economic development and
activity, and this, um.
When, as the labs ramp back up
to plutonium production, that is
not what these kind of tax
exemptions are designed for, so
for me, that's my entry point to
this as we clean up our tax
code, where are we finding
loopholes where people are, um.
Not having a tax liability but
also don't meet the original
intention of what we created
those kind of exemptions for.
And we see it, um, yes, this
would be a positive to the
general fund, uh, but certainly.
It's, it's not an increase, it's
just pulling back an exemption
that uh they haven't actually
been using because they weren't
manufacturing.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representatives. One of the
reasons that
The state and local governments
create inducements.
It is to keep
Either
Big companies here or to bring
new ones in.
You create these tax.
Breaks
Uh
The only concern that I would
have, and we heard folks from
Lane and from Sandia.
Speak
In opposition to it.
Uh
The only concern, Madam Chair,
that I would have is that, that
this in any way would
jeopardize.
Our keeping the labs here. They
are vital.
Many, many, many people work
there. They pay into GRT on
multiple levels. That would be
my only fear is that, that it
would jeopardize us keeping
having in the event that there
were cuts and they'd say, well,
let's just move somewhere else.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Matthews.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you presenters um.
Um, this is an interesting idea,
um.
These are major economic drivers
in our.
Economy
And I
I'm
I would hope that before we
would.
Impose a tax that might
Impact what they're willing to
do in New Mexico.
Um, that we would
Do a study or something to be to
be sure we're aware of the
consequences and that they not
be unintended consequences and
then the second thing I would
note is.
Um
You know, we, I'm sure all of us
watch the news at night, or
maybe we shut our ears to it.
As we watch what's happening in
Washington and
Um, you know, it seems like a
very bad time for the state of
New Mexico to be imposing tax on
our national labs.
Uh, we don't know what
The administration's gonna do.
We don't know what Elon Musk may
do, come out and fire people.
Um, so it's just, uh, fraught
time.
And to change the tax structure
that would have substantial
economic impact seems to me.
And maybe not be the best
decision.
Mm
Madam Chair, and a, uh,
Representative Matthews, um, and
sort of in response also to
representative de la Cruz. I
think those are really valid
concerns, um.
However, the way that uh.
Nuclear weapon manufacturing has
taken across in the United
States, is that really there are
only two places that can produce
these pits, um, and New Mexico
is one of them, certainly the
largest, we really here have um
a a captive audience, um, I, I,
there wouldn't really be, um,
another place that these weapons
could be manufactured, but here,
and so to clarify, Madam Chair,
um, in representing this um.
The current GRT manufacturing
exemption that exists, um.
Really, we, we are just leaving,
you know, this $1.6 billion
which has already been
appropriated for um Lane to
build these, um, to build these
weapons.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
thank you all for your
presentation.
Um
We push so hard.
To grow the economy in New
Mexico. That's what we've been
talking about this whole
session.
We're creating funds to grow the
economy in New Mexico, where
we're creating funds to educate
our children to keep our
children here.
I, I really.
think
Where we have
Spent over 1.5 billion.
On procurement in New Mexico.
Those are small.
Businesses in the local areas
that have.
Um, done business with the labs.
These are
Small businesses that we just
imposed.
Possibly one of the largest tax
increases in the state of New
Mexico on.
And these are businesses that.
Our sisters, our brothers, our
children, our grandchildren work
and to, to think that
They won't pull out of New
Mexico.
To think of maybe.
Maybe this. What if that? What
if this? What if that?
We, we don't know. It's exactly
what uh Representative Matthews
said, we, we don't know what's
going to happen. We can come
back into a special session.
And we can make adjustments if
we need to do that, but doing it
ahead of time.
Just in case
I think is is the wrong avenue
to take, and I respect you all
so much for being.
Especially on the tax committee.
Um, that's one committee I've
never been on and I would
actually like to sit on someday
to learn more about and, and I
appreciate your thoughtfulness
on that.
But I think we're jumping the
gun when we are doing nothing
but pushing for our kids to stay
in New Mexico and have a high
wage paying job.
And so I cannot support the
bill, but I, I understand what
you're saying.
But I, I think that it's just
too, too soon, too fast, too
furious until we really see
what's going on and if we need
to come back.
We can come back.
We have a legislature that's
willing to do that. We have a
governor that's willing to call
us back.
So I think, um, with that, Madam
Chair, I just wanted to state
that we we really want.
Our kids to stay here?
And grow, have good jobs and
this I think would put.
Hamper that. So thank you, man.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Hernandez. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, just a few questions.
So,
It sounds like your real concern
is the manufacturing.
Is that
Is that what I'm getting?
Certainly, Madam Chair
Representative Fernandez, um,
the manufacturing gross receipts
deduction was not crafted with
these labs in mind, and they are
not currently.
Using that deduction because
they
have not been doing
manufacturing, so it was built
for other private entities and
industries to come in, bring
jobs, spur economic activity. It
was not designed for these labs
in mind, and now that they are
ramping back up to get into
production of plutonium pits,
they will be eligible for this
exemption, but it wasn't
designed or crafted with them in
mind and they are not currently
using that exemption.
Madam Chair Representative.
Madam Chair, so there's no.
Significant manufacturing.
Either one of the labs.
Right now at all.
Madam Chair Representative, as
we understand, no.
Not manufacturing that falls
under the provisions of this GRT
exemption, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, um, I understand. I
just didn't go rabbit hole that.
Legitimately asking the
question.
I, I
So with
You know, the shift in
technology. Like I understand
the weapons part, not gonna go
down that rabbit hole that is uh
my, that is not where I live.
Um,
But things like
You know, quantum computing
that.
That is going to be this giant
thing that, you know, we're
hoping that as
Technology evolves now with
significant breakthroughs is
gonna be.
You know
The, the next handful of.
Years rather than handful of
decades, um.
And we're gonna need, you know,
the labs will be open to
Building things like sensors,
optical components that
You know, all of these pieces
that are going to be required in
You know, the future of the very
near future.
Technology.
Um
You know, things that are
Very important for.
which
Using that, but it's true in
this case, um,
I I guess my question is like
why are we trying to limit what
has been this incredibly
important.
Partnership for our state.
Um, especially at a time when, I
mean, I've heard it.
I can't do how many times.
From everybody in this body at,
at a time when the feds are so
closely looking at every.
Um
Is us taking away something like
this, the perfect reason for
something like Doge to come in
and just be like, OK, you're
done, because you're
inefficient.
And that
scares me. That's 35,000 jobs,
that's, you know, billions of
dollars that's.
You know, over a billion dollars
in local small business
procurement that is, you know,
275 million, I think is what I
had calculated in GRT. It's,
it's a ton of money, a ton of
jobs, a ton of families.
If we can't get people to move
here or stay here.
All of a sudden, 35,000 problems
are gone.
What happens to all of those
families. I mean, it's a lot.
Madam Chair Representative,
certainly that would be a
significant.
Shifted in New Mexico and our
economic landscape and the
survival of families up north if
something like.
That were to be entertained, um,
but certainly, Madam Chair and
Representative, it feels like
every committee I'm in it's deja
vu. We're all talking about like
what if the federal government
does this, what if the
administration goes in another
direction and I'm grateful that
we are establishing very clearly
that if those kind of changes
come, New Mexico will be
responsive and ready to come
back to session and and hold our
responsibilities and meet them
with urgency, um, on this
particular issue, um, just like
we talked about with the Permian
like the Permian.
Is our resource, the wind that
we're considering is our
resource. These labs are a New
Mexico resource and that work
cannot be done anywhere but
maybe Tennessee.
And what's significant about
this is that New Mexico.
For centuries now has been the
beginning and end to these
nuclear economies from the
extraction of uranium to the
research and development of
these kind of.
Products and plutonium pits.
To the waste disposal and what's
so interesting to me, we talk
about whether these states are
red or blue. Texas is at the
Supreme Court right now arguing
that they don't want to be the
nuclear dumping ground and they
don't want to be the waste
disposal site.
That's Texas saying.
We don't want that waste, but
somehow New Mexico between with
between the temporary storage
that's on that hill in Los
Alamos, we are beginning to end.
Our bill is not even trying to
interrupt that. It's saying that
if these kind of investments are
being happening here, and this
DRT exemption was not designed
or created.
Or the labs in mind that it's an
important policy for us to
consider, is it appropriate
appropriate for us to extend um
their place in this exemption
when it's not about economic
development or economic
investments, but those jobs are
here and we would argue those
jobs aren't going anywhere. If
something shifted, we would be
the first to come over here and
be in this conversation with
you, but.
That's unforeseeable at this
moment, Madam Chair.
I'm sure, thank you for that
answer, but once again, you went
to my first question, which was,
you are still worried about.
Nuclear weapons.
Disposal and I get all of that
all super important. I was
asking about technology and
quantum and optical and all of
this stuff that is the future.
I guess my, my point is if we
want to.
Take away, you know, you're very
focused on
The nuclear and weapons and all
of that. I get all of that.
There is real significant.
Affs to people and there is real
danger. There's real.
Everything that you stated it's
all very true and it has
affected lots of people for
What, 60, 70 years now in our,
in our state.
And
But like, I'm not so much
worried about that part. I, I
guess why.
Why not just take away the GRT
deduction for manufacturing on
like weapons and
leave
Semiconductors and
Uh, all of the stuff for quantum
and optical and, you know,
sensors and all of this stuff
that nobody can do better than
the labs, um, because they have
the workforce, they have
technology, they have the.
Hiding under the federal
government, they have, I mean,
that's part of it though, when
we're trying to, you know, China
for things like quantum
computing that could
Essentially create a skeleton
key for the internet in.
Literal days and no none of our
data is secure, like that is the
stuff that I am worried about.
A little bit or really a lot
more.
Then
You know, weapons which are also
scary, but in a whole different
way. And so,
You know, the labs and the
people at the labs are gonna be
able to do.
build this technology and the
components that are needed for
this, you know.
Better way than really anybody
else maybe outside of
I don't know, parts of
Washington that Microsoft has,
but when you try to do it at
scale,
I mean, there's no one better to
do it faster.
See for
And bring that economic.
You know, development and that
that.
Those dollars, those jobs, all
of that to New Mexico. So I get
the part about the weapons and
that that's
Yeah, not where I'm really
focusing because there is so
much more than just
Weapons that are, that are going
to be built.
Any of our labs here, um, not to
mention.
FRO and all of the other things
that that we're not even
touching.
Right, that was a very
long-winded but important
question.
representative actually I think
that's a really interesting part
of this discussion that
admittedly we haven't been
contemplating historically, that
has not been the purpose of the
labs is to actually be the the
body that is manufacturing it's
as we've understood it and of
course we lost incredible
expertise um with Representative
Harper, but it's mostly the
research and design. So this GRT
exemption applies to the
manufacturing and uniquely lan
situated to do that, but
certainly, um, I think it's a
conversation worth having and if
this bill.
were to proceed and we could
keep this going, I think the
amendment to tailor that and and
be even more specific on the
weapons manufacturing, if
there's a way we can.
I'm not in the business we we
already tried to amend the bills
on the fly together and it
didn't go that well, but um
certainly if this proceeded and
we wanted to continue this
conversation. I think we would
consider it a friendly amendment
to focus that in, but otherwise,
it's historically not the
practice of the labs to do the
manufacturing themselves.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam,
I, I appreciate that because
you're right, it, it typically
has been, I mean, everything is
named as research lab or, you
know, whatever, but I think
As we're going and getting much
more.
Kind of specialized, um, in a
lot of this technology stuff
and.
Be more
The word for it would be um
security conscious about a lot
of this stuff, especially when
we are trying to
Um
do it faster.
And our
And other countries that are
looking to potentially harm our
country. I think that the labs
are going to be the place where
they put a lot of stuff, so
Um
The other, I mean, another
question that I have is, you
know, there is
Um, other
Entities like DARPA are looking
to to come here and partner with
the labs.
Um, on a lot of this technology
stuff.
Um, without getting too
far deep into that, into that,
down that rabbit hole. So, um,
do we have any idea, um, has
there been any evaluation, any,
anything on how taking something
implementing something like this
would affect future
partnerships. I mean, DARPA
would bring in
A whole slew of jobs, a whole
slew of money, a whole slew of
companies because they're gonna
need research and they're gonna
need, you know, help
manufacturing.
Pacific pieces. Again, it's all
this like.
Next gen tech and computing and
Of where our world is.
Going at
So just curious if, if there's
been any thought to what this
could, what or how this could
positively or negatively affect.
Uh
Potential partnerships in the
future with the labs.
Madam Chair, and Representative
Hernandez, I think that's uh
definitely a good question and
to clarify DARPA, it's the
defense Advanced Research
Project Agency.
Um, I, I believe they have a
separate tax agreement that
prevents double taxation of
their government cost
reimbursement contracts, um,
Madam Chair and representative,
but uh and so I'm not sure how
it would relate to the
manufacturing.
Madam Chair and Representative,
it's, it's not that, it's that
there would be the partnership,
so it would not just be DARPA
doing it, it would be labs and
all of these other, you know,
I guess the companies don't
really matter either, but the
labs would be a huge portion of
what come in potentially do, or,
you know, any of those other
Um, DARPA ask, I can't think of
any because
4:30 in the afternoon. Um, but,
you know, I just, I worry that,
you know, if somebody like DARPA
who has
is looking for a new home for
their quantum computing area.
Um, something that
Tax bills on the Senate side are
trying to help get this DARPA to
come here, um, which will bring,
you know, a whole slew of jobs
and a whole slew of spending for
the next.
2030, 40 plus years. I just want
to make sure that this
is not something that
Would put a
Big red X on our
On our application to become
that.
Mr. Madam Chair, uh, Mr.
Representative Hernandez, um, we
can't clarify it, we understand
that DARPA's established as an
agency, but I'm not certain
whether or not they are a
national laboratory as
determined by an act of
Congress.
Or and they certainly are not a
research facility owned by the
state, so if they don't meet
those two conditions and we're
coming here to do manufacturing,
they would be eligible for the
exemption if they met all the
other criteria. So it is only um
The, the, the two pieces were
pulling back in is your a
national lab.
As stated by an act of Congress
or your research facility owned
by the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Yeah, no problem. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, I think that
those are my questions if
I won't be supporting the bill
at the moment. There are still
other concerns on here, but
I think if this bill does keep
going, I would love to have a
combo with you guys to figure
out or to make sure that
The, you know, none of this
stuff is the unintended.
That we always talk about that,
you know, we don't.
Always think about, but um I
want to make sure that
especially
With this kind of
Turn in.
Technology that we are, that's
going to be in front of this
very, very quickly.
Um, that we are not
disadvantaged.
The labs or the state or any of
that, um,
being somewhere that that
Any slew of people working in
this space, whether that's
Federal or, you know, private
company or any of that, none of
this is going to be like a oh.
You don't want to go to New
Mexico because they're just
going to
Flip
On a coin and this is what's.
So, um, yeah, if we keep going,
I would love to have some more
convos.
Thank you. All righty.
Um
And, and Chairman Linte, you're
off the list.
OK.
Alright, so, um, with that,
what's the?
The desire of the committee.
Yeah.
Uh, I moved the table.
Alrighty, let's.
Let's uh take the role.
Representative Armstrong?
Representative De la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente.
Representative Mason,
Representative Matthews.
Yes the Representative Murphy.
Representative Parajan.
No to table.
Representative Serrado.
Represent uh Madam Vice Chair
Madam Chair.
Yes to table.
Madam Chair, final tally for the
table motion, 6 votes, yes, 3
votes no.
Madam Chair, may I ask you a
question?
I'm surprised that on this bill,
we did not apparently it was not
submitted to economic.
Department for input.
And I don't know who decides
where things go, but I would
think a Bill.
posing a tax on major employers
like this with no it would have
been nice to have their input.
Right. Thank you.
Um
Let's go to.
HP 80.
The representative.
You all ready?
Go ahead, thank you, Madam
Chair. House Bill 80 was
actually brought to me by an
acquaintance who um frequently
asked me, you know, why, why is
why are credit scores included
in auto insurance, he said, when
you get in an accident, no one
asks you what your FICA score
is, no, so I started looking
into it and um.
The
This bill is to keep auto
insurers from using credit
scores, education, and
occupation in order to determine
rates.
And when this bill first came
out, I had 2 insurance lobbyists
come into my office and saying,
uh, you know, yes, we do use
those, and I said so, you know,
so I should trust you, and can I
verify? Well, no, you can't
verify because all the
algorithms are um proprietary.
So, so we don't know how they
determine rates, but what I did
learn, interestingly, the first
time we presented this bill is
that all things being equal at
your driving record.
Everything except your credit
score, the person with the low
credit score.
May pay up to 80% higher rates.
And, and people who have low
credit scores are not.
Um, I mean, you know, of course,
there are some, but a lot of
them are just living in poverty,
they just they can't pay their
bills, um, medical debt is the
number one reason for
bankruptcy, student loans, so
these are not.
Necessarily, you know what you
would think of as deadbeats,
these are people who just can't
pay their bills and we have.
The 2nd highest rate of
uninsured motorists, Madam
Chair, in the in the country at
24.9, almost twice as much as
the the average, and I will let
my expert witnesses from the
office of the superintendent of
Insurance, make a few comments
and introduce themselves.
Don't move it's on.
Madam Chair, representatives um
Alice Kane, I'm the
superintendent of insurance and
uh.
I'm here with my chief actuary,
Christian Meyers. Uh, we have
looked into this bill and we
believe credit scores are not in
indicative of driving history.
They are actually uh.
Uh, probable, but they are not
causation and uh we believe
credit scores have been um uh.
A disparate impact on people
with low incomes, uh, driving
history is still gonna be used
to determine your rates, so it's
not that that's being
eliminated, just credit scores
are eliminated, and there are 3
other states that already have
this in place, and we know a 4th
is looking at it as well.
They're so bad.
Thank you, madam Chair. Uh, I'll
also add, um,
So credit-based insurance
scoring is highly predictive,
uh, nearly every insurance
company uses it. Certainly
everyone that I've reviewed in
New Mexico writing private
passenger auto, um, it's highly
predictive of future auto claim
experience.
Uh, that being said, it is also,
uh, it is also highly correlated
um with risk or with the, I'm
sorry, with um with race and,
and low income and because the
uninsured motorist population is
so high in New Mexico, uh, you
know, the, uh, the medium
household income in New Mexico
is low, the unemployment rate is
high. The average premiums that
New Mexicans pay is actually
really close to the countrywide
average. Uh, so there's a lot of
pressure on
Auto insurance affordability,
um, which is why we believe that
by removing these variables from
rating, uh, we can level the
playing field and make auto
insurance more affordable for
the majority of the population.
And sir, could you say, state
your name and who you are. I'm
sorry, Madam Chair, my name is
Christian Myers. I'm the chief
actuary at the OSI.
Thank you. All righty.
Um, is that the end of your
presentation?
OK. Is there anybody here in
favor of this film?
Is there anybody here opposed to
the bill?
Ready, you can come up to the
center, we'll have the
attendant.
Uh, meet you in the middle.
Of the aisle with the
microphone.
He will hold the attend, he will
hold the microphone and you have
one minute to speak.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Brent
Moore. I'm a registered lobbyist
for the American Property
Casualty Insurance Association,
and we stand in opposition to
the bill. The reason we stand in
opposition to the bill is first,
I would say there are 46 states
that allow the use of credit
information uh to develop rates.
So the greater majority of
states allow for it. The reason
and that credit information is
important to insurers is that it
is highly predictive of the risk
of loss, and
What you have with this bill is
you have a prohibition on using
credit information both to
accurately assess risk, but also
to reward folks with good
credit. So the bill would
prevent insurance companies from
rewarding people with good
credit. That would result in
increases for folks like
seniors, teachers, law
enforcement, firefighters,
shared some information with the
committee that comes from one of
our members, and those are
actual numbers from actual rates
that are currently on file. We
believe that this is
A poor policy choice, and we
think that we should stay with
the greater majority of states
that allow for the use of this
information. Thank you.
Madam Cham members of the
committee, Allison Riley, Public
Policy director with the New
Mexico Chamber of Commerce in
opposition to HB 80. This bill
would ban insurers from using
credit information, a tool that
when used responsibly aligns
premiums with risk.
Credit-based insurance scores,
distinct from traditional credit
scores are proven predictors of
insurance losses and already
regulated under the Fair Credit
Reporting Act and New Mexico
law, prohibiting their use is
not only a necessary, but could
also undermine market
competitiveness. Risk-based
pricing ensures that drivers
represent a higher risk pay
accordingly, while drivers who
have a lower risk benefit from
very affordable rates.
Unfortunately, New Mexico has a
high rate of uninsured motorists
and HB 80 would likely drive up
premiums for hundreds of
thousands of residents.
For these reasons, we ask you to
oppose this legislation. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Anne
Conway and I represent State
Farm. I agree with the
information that's been set
forth. I wanted to hit on
something else that's important
here. If you look at House Bill
80, you will see that it is
amending an existing law, and
this law is the personal
Insurance credit information
Act. It's been on the book in
New Mexico for 20 years and was
was developed as with a
consortium of stakeholders, and
if you will look to page 2 of
the bill, beginning at the at
the top in Section A, that our
law already provides that
personal insurance coverage
shall not use an insurance score
that is calculated using in
income, gender,
Address, race, color, national
origin, religion, or marital
status. And this is important
because this bill is not
discriminate, I mean the current
use of personal credit
information in insurance is not
based upon income. In fact.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza,
representing the national, um,
National Association of Mutual
Insurance Companies. We do stand
in opposition to the legislation
because of the potential to
increase premiums. Uh, in fact,
a recent LexisNexis analysis of
1.2 million policyholders in New
Mexico with policies in effect
from July 2024 to December 2024
demonstrates that the hardest
hit population of HB 80 becomes
law would be New Mexicans age 65
and older.
40% of these seniors would
experience premium increases of
at least 20% and 23% of seniors
would experience premium
increases of 40% or more. Many
in this demographic group are on
fixed incomes and more
vulnerable to price increases.
Uh thank you for the
consideration of our concerns of
my colleagues, uh, and we please
vote no on this legislation.
Thank you. Afternoon, uh, Scott
Scanlon registered lobbyist for
the consumer data Information
Association and we too stand
opposed to this bill,
eliminating eliminating the use
of credit.
information and underwriting and
writing.
Would result in unintended
consequences we believe for
policyholders, including higher
premiums for many.
Uh, because if insurers are
prohibited from considering
credit data, they may be forced
to increase premiums across the
board to compensate for the
inability to accurately assess
individual risk levels,
restricting the use of valid
underwriting criteria.
will only serve to limit options
and raise cost rather than
achieve the intended goal of
fairness and um affordability
and we stand a post. Thank you.
My name is Edward Dunn. I'm a
State Farm agent, at a lobbyist.
I've got 2 offices in
Albuquerque. I actually live in
Representative Hernandez's
district. um, I represent 3500
households with 10,000 property
and casualty policies in effect,
um.
Here's my experience. There is a
direct relationship between
credit-based and losses.
However, the misnomer or the
fallacy that exists that there
is a direct correlation between
income and financial stability
and or credit. That just simply
is not a true statement. There
is no I prior to my time with,
with, with uh State Farm. I was
the general manager of a car
dealership for 8 years, and I
will tell you, look at thousands
of bureaus with thousands of
credit profiles with thousands
of income levels, and there is,
I've seen people with $800,000 a
year.
year with a really poor credit
score and people at 20,000 a
year with a really good credit
score. It's a fallacy to say
just because you have low
credit, you have low income, or
vice versa. Those are simply not
true. What I do know is a fact
from what State Farm is telling
me is that
Our policyholders over the age
60 would see an average increase
of $200 per year or per policy
cycle, which is a huge amount of
number of money for people that
are on a fixed income. It
disproportionately affects those
people. Thank you.
Do we have anybody on Zoom? Yes.
Raymond
Thank you.
My name is. I am a farmer's
insurance agent based in uh,
Mexico. I'm speaking on behalf
of consumers and insurance
policyholders in the state of
Mexico just like yourself, the
committee. This law, this uh
bill would have an average
effect on those people who
already have insurance policies
if we take away the tools of, of
our carers
some of them will leave the
state. One of the states that uh
already uh take
Uh, I'm sorry, credit scores and
California and you can see what
happens in the state of
California where we carriers
leaving segments of the
business, which then affects
those individuals who already
have insurance,
um, based on the bill, uh, the
idea is that we would be able to
ensure people who maybe would
not be able to afford insurance.
This would just increase the
cost of insurance by increasing
the amount of people who are
uninsured and increasing
premiums for people who have
insurance currently.
Um,
I posed as a consumer, not as an
insurance, but as a consumer
because I know it will have on
individuals and those.
Matt Hunton
Matt Hunton
Afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee members and I'm the
CEO of the insurance agent of
New Mexico. This bill.
Across all current insurers,
including senior citizens,
educators, law enforcement and
military personnel.
The report from the LSC states
prohibiting insurance companies
from using insurance source
could prompt some companies to
abandon abandon riding interest
in the state or an increased
premiums for all motorists. This
possibility would result in
large decreases in the insured
voters population.
The best way to reduce uninsured
motorists to use tactics that
are proven to work, such as
allowing law enforcement to
verify vehicle insurance in real
time.
It reduced Oklahoma from 22 to
12%, and I didn't hope from 11.5
to 6.2%. For these reasons and
many more, we encourage you to
both know on House Bill 80 and
use proven tactics as opposed to
this bill that has only proven
to disrupt the marketplace and
then in no way decrease
uninsured motorists. Thank you.
Michael De Long.
Uh, thank you.
I'm Michael Losociated with
consumer Federation of America.
We urge support for HB 80. Our
research has found that New
Mexico drivers at paying much
higher premiums for auto
insurance. We found that the
drivers with poor credit on $730
or 78% more
than drivers excellent credit
record.
We'd also like to stress that
2015 study found that New
Mexicans with poor credit
actually pay more for auto
insurance, 389.
more
than drivers and drunk driving
conviction. That is appalling.
That is not related to risk.
Additions have found that the
premiums based on someone's
education level, their job,
these factors disproportionately
black, Latino, and Native
American consumers and they're
interdependent. People wind up
paying hundreds even thousands
of dollars more in premiums. HBA
would stop the unfair practices
and your auto insurance premium
based on your driving record,
not your credit history, not
your job or where you went to
college. There's a lot more.
detail in our written testimony
and we are happy to answer any
questions.
That is all miniature. Thank
you. Alright, let's go to the
committee.
Uh, Chair de la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative, how many other
states have enacted this similar
legislation?
Uh, Madam Chair, there are 3
states that currently prohibit
uh credit-based insurance
scoring.
California, Hawaii, and
Massachusetts. And in addition
to other states are looking at
it right now. Uh, there's a bill
introduced in New York and
Washington state is doing a
study.
Madam Chair Representative, I'm,
I'm curious.
If in those states what they've
done is
Spread the risk around and
increased everybody's rates. Do
you have any information of
that, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, yeah, I think
that's a good observation. I
think at the end of the day,
it's going to be a zero-sum
game, so if we are removing
insurance-based credit scoring.
People with uh better insurance
scores that are paying less
premium now are going to see
rate increases, and that will
essentially pay for the rate
decreases that people with poor
uh insurance-based credit
scores, we'll see. So yeah, it,
it would essentially be
redistributing the premium, but
at the end of the day, each
company would still get the same
overall number of dollars in
premium.
Thank you, ma'am. So rates will
go up.
One of my concerns is for
Uh, groups that get discounts
now.
Uh
Seniors, military, what, what
groups now typically can you
cite that benefit.
Because they are part of a group
whether it's military, seniors,
or can you name some of those
groups besides those two,
Madam Chair, I have not looked
at um military correlation with
insurance-based credit scoring,
I think, uh,
I guess I'll just reiterate that
anyone today that if you are
getting a price decrease because
you're a lawyer or you've been
to Princeton or whatever it is,
uh, and we remove that from
using, being allowed to use for
reining those folks would see an
increase and the people that
have not had the opportunity to
go to Princeton would see a rate
decrease.
Madam Chair Representative, also
what we're talking about are
people that haven't been
insured, which is really a, a
big target of what we're trying
to do, uh, we have a, we have
the what with the second, uh,
we're the 2nd worst uninsured
motor estate in the country.
What we're hoping is if the
rates go down, uh, for people
with low credit scores, which a
lot of the uninsured are that
we'd be bringing a new group of
of uh insureds into the state
also, as you know it, if there's
an issue.
Uh, if you're hit by an
uninsured.
Uh, motorists and you don't have
the right coverage, you end up
with no coverage at all, so what
we're trying to do is really we
think make it this a less risky
state and have more people
insured and, and uh if there are
accidents that it won't cause
that disruption individually
that we've seen. So I don't, I
think we're talking about the
current insurance, but we're not
talking about the uninsured that
we're trying to bring into the
market.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I went online and did a brief.
Look
And seniors do get a discount
and other groups do get a
discount.
Uh
I'm very proudly, Madam Chair,
carrying a bill that
Will reduce the
property tax for veterans
because of their service.
Uh, so their taxable income, uh,
I'm sorry, they're taxable rate
related to their properties will
go down, so that's one of the
things that that we look at
Madam Chair, that's one of the
things that we do, we try to
bring rates down for seniors,
you know, they're fixed incomes,
military for their service,
those things occur. My fear,
Madam Chair, is that in enacting
this.
Legislation.
While we would do some of the
things that are being noted at
the same time, we're going to be
increasing rates for everybody
else or many other groups that
are gonna be affected adversely,
and that concerns me, Madam
Chair.
So
Madam Chair and representative,
so first off, not all nurses and
teachers and veterans have great
credit scores. I mean, that's,
that's a given. Everybody, any
group can have, can be low it
well.
Anybody belonging to those kind
of groups can be low income and,
and no one has talked about.
How decreasing our uninsured
motorists when we all pay for
uninsured motorists. We pay it
on, so I, I have not seen the
actual, as I said, it, it was
told to me that it was
proprietary, so it may go up for
some people, it may go, I mean,
and, and bottom line, this was
brought up in the last
committee, Madam Chair, is
when's the last time your
insurance went down?
Insurance always goes up.
They're they're, it, it doesn't
come down, so to say it's gonna
go up. Well, yeah, we know that
it's gonna go up. It's gone up.
I mean, our insurance has gone
up every year.
So, so it, it's, it's kind of a
balancing act. Do we want to
keep putting a burden, an extra
burden on people who who may be
work a minimum wage job and
can't, you know, have a hard
time keeping a roof over their
head and, and so we're gonna
make them pay more in insurance.
It it's, I mean, you can see
both sides, but, but it's my
belief that reducing the rate of
uninsured motorists will have a
positive effect and getting
people in.
endured will also have a
positive effect.
And Madam Chi
Can I just add, so the
The result of increasing the
insured population is to
decrease the premiums for
everybody. So if we can get more
people driving with insurance
that uninsured motorist coverage
that we're all all of us
responsible, people that are
buying insurance, our premiums
go down as well. So there's two
things here. We're rebalancing
rates because we're kind of
leveling the playing field and
one result of that is everyone
pays less because there are more
insured drivers on the road.
Thank you, Madam Char. I'm
hearing two different things.
I'm hearing one that
Insurance never comes down and
then that if we get this done,
it all comes down.
Uh, so I'm not sure which one of
those is, is gonna work for me,
Madam Chair, um.
Have you done representative,
Madam Chair, have you done?
Uh, study, can you cite some
information for us that shows
that by enacting this
legislation that wanted either
reduces accidents, or 2 that it
brings insurance down.
Madam Chair, Representative, we
haven't done, done a study on
reducing accidents. What we have
done is looked at other states
and see that if we lower the
premium if we shift the credit
score and lower income people
have access to insurance we the
uninsured driving rate should go
down, and we should add more in
insurance to our roles of, of uh
insured motorists.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative
Have you looked at a correlation
between the lower income.
And.
I have, uh, Madam Chair, I have
not looked at that. I have
looked at the correlation
between poor credit scores and
low income, uh, there is
correlation there. So we know
that uh by allowing this rating
variable, companies are charging
more all else equal uh to
low-income drivers.
Modern Cha seems like an
important piece of information.
It seems like an important bit
of information because
I'm not sure. I've never been
insured, but.
guess that they look at a
correlation between income and
potential accidents, I would
like to know that before I make
a decision. I mean, certainly
now they use algorithms for
everything. I mean that
information I'm sure is
available. I would like to know
if there's a correlation because
Madam Chair, while we don't have
discriminate against people
because of their income at the
same time, if there is.
Uh,
Cause and effect that you're low
income and can't buy insurance
and we should bring it down. I,
I, I need that information now.
Thank you.
Thank you, Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, when I hear the
Some of the most affected people
are going to be seniors and
retirees.
That's very concerning to me,
um, when they are living on a
fixed income as well. Um, is it
against the law in New Mexico to
not have insurance on your
vehicle.
Madam Chair and Representative,
it is.
But we still have 25% uninsured.
Well,
Madam Chair.
Maybe
We should
Enforce the law.
The law in New Mexico is to have
insurance.
Uh, every single time.
Uh, my children.
that have
Insurance, my
Businesses that have insurance.
Um, we've seen some horrific
things where we're held
accountable because we have
insurance and uninsured motorist
hit us.
caused the accident.
And so I'm, I'm very
disappointed in 20, almost 25%.
Being uninsured, first of all.
Second of all, we're going to
affect.
Seniors, retirees, and lots of
others were balancing, were
redistributing.
As some people might say it and
then
You're right.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative.
Insurance and taxes never go
down.
Those are two things that never
go down.
But it's required by law that we
carry insurance.
And we follow the law.
And so
I think, um,
Just because you're low income
does not mean you have a bad
credit score.
And that that's a little bit
insulting.
me when I was 18 years old.
I'm trying to build my credit.
I didn't have a lot of money.
I was working a minimum wage
job.
I worked at Dan's boots and
saddles.
Manal.
It was a great job. I loved it.
We struggled every single day,
but we still
On insurance.
And we worked hard to get our
credit score up.
And so I, I just think it's a
little bit insulting to to think
that.
I, I don't.
Yeah, I have some information
here that says that Washington
Implemented this already, is
that correct?
Anybody? Madam Madam Chair
Representative, they're doing a
study, I think at this point we
have uh 4 states that have
implemented and to one that's
looking at it in New York and
then Washington's doing the
study.
OK, thank you for that.
Um
I, I just think that
We need to follow the law.
And um I, I think that.
When we're talking about uh New
Mexicans.
And um
I choose to live in a home in
the middle of the forest. My
insurance is higher.
My homeowner's insurance is
higher because I don't have a
fire station that's gonna come
to my house anytime soon.
So I pay more for my insurance.
And so
Um, one of the gentleman's
comments, Madam Chair, and in
the audience was.
You have people that make
$8,100,000 a year and have bad
credit score.
So, uh, and vice versa. So I, I
just think that we're trying to
redistribute everything in life,
and let's just follow the law.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Matthews.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you Representative and
presenters, uh, interesting.
Interesting question, um.
Um, and I appreciate what your
intent is.
Um, I'm curious though, um, what
impact does age have on?
Accident rates
And on uh.
Premiums.
Madam
chair, so each company files
their own rates, uh, they
consider different variables.
Age is a very common one.
In general, most companies, uh,
rating factors for age follow a
U-shaped, which means like for
new teenage drivers, you
generally pay more, 1618, and it
kind of dips down, bottoms out
that 35 to 55, uh, age bucket
pays the lowest rates, and then
it kind of ticks back up, um,
different slope, but in general,
you know, at some point in 8,
you hit 80, uh, you're, you're
paying more than that, that 35
year old. So it's, it's
generally a U shape. And just to
be clear, we're not proposing to
remove or change any of the
factors that companies are using
around age, um, even though
there could be some, you know,
maybe different.
Uh, ages have different credit
scores. I, I honestly haven't uh
looked at that, but uh we're not
proposing to revise the age
factors explicitly that
companies are able to use.
OK. Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. uh-huh.
But that answers and
Um
Yeah, if I'm understanding what
you're talking, what you're
suggesting is that uninsured
that if uninsured motorists.
were insured because they could
afford insurance.
Because other people would be
paying more.
There would be fewer accidents.
Is that, is that uh actuarial
sound, uh.
Assumption
Madam Chair, uh, that is not
what I'm suggesting. I'm not
suggesting the number of
accidents would change. I'm just
talking about the overall
premiums that people would pay.
So if they're less uninsured
drivers on the road, uh, then
you would pay less for uninsured
motorist coverage, which is
something that we all purchase
and generally, like, um, a lot
of times if, uh, you know,
there's an uninsured motorist
that accident and will result in
a hit and run.
Because they don't have
insurance. And in this case, it
would just, they would actually
have their own bodily injury,
uh, liability coverage that they
would have paid for Madam Chair
Representative, we also think
that if there are less uninsured
motorists on the road, the uh
the premium for everyone would
go down.
Madam Chair representative
presenters.
Do uninsured motorists have?
As a as a segment.
Have more accidents than insured
motors.
Um, apologies, Madam Chair. I'm
thinking, uh, if I can answer
that question or not.
Um, uh, Madam Chair, I can, uh,
we know the general population
of who is insured and uninsured.
Uh, unfortunately, when I review
rate filings from insurance
company, they submit claims for
their insured population, um,
What does not, uh, it doesn't,
like if there's a hit and run
accident, it's not necessarily
tied to a specific policy,
obviously, because that person
is often run away successfully.
Um, so I, I apologize, I can't
necessarily answer if the
uninsured population has a
higher claim frequency or not.
So Madam Chair representative
presenters.
We could increase the insurance
rate, the premium premiums for
everybody.
So that we could
Make uninsured motors.
Insurance more available.
And it might have absolutely no
impact at all on the number of
accidents.
Am I understanding your
testimony correctly?
Madam Chair, I don't think we're
talking about accidents per se.
We're talking about insurance
rates and using.
Using income and education and
occupation along with credit
scores as a way to determine, I
have read that someone with a
good credit score and a DWI pays
way less than someone who has
never had a DWI and has low
credit score, so, um, it's and
and as I said, I asked a couple
of the insurers who who spoke
today if I could see their
actuary, you know, their, um.
Uh algorithm and then it's
proprietary, so a lot of stuff
we don't know because.
It's not shared with Madam
Chair, uh, Representative, thank
you for the comment, but I'm
understanding that the insurance
commissioner is saying.
That we want to increase the
number of uninsured motorists.
We're gonna do that by making
the insurance cheaper by
charging another group more.
And
Just asking, is there any
evidence that that's gonna make
anybody a safer driver, is that
going to reduce accidents.
Is it gonna reduce claims or
I, I mean, what, what's the
point of this in a, in a sense,
Madam Chair Representative, the
point, at least that we think
because we're only looking at
insurance coverage and claims is
that we think if they're
uninsured motorists are now
covered, there won't be
currently insured motorists are
more exposed when they have an
accident with an uninsured
motorist and don't always have
the coverage that they need.
That's really where where our
intent.
is that the that if we get more
uninsured motorists.
In the pool that the current
insured motorists will be more
protected. We're only looking at
coverages, we're not predicting
accident. The one thing that I
would also say is the unintended
consequence we're not saying
that people with low incomes,
uh, have bad credit scores were
but one on one, we're saying
that when you do the aggregate
that, that's what occurs. Uh, it
certainly isn't uh I having been
uh at a $1.25 my first job for a
long time, I understand.
understand your point and uh we
were able to to do this to, to
pay for our insurance, but uh I
think, I think there's an
imbalance now because we really
think the high cost for the
people with poor credit scores
is, is, isn't, we don't think is
fair and B, uh, credit scores
may be actually predictive, but
the real, the real issue, it's
predictive, but causation your
driving record should.
we think the key place that
insurance companies look as they
um just like the DUIs when they
they uh come up with their
policy,
uh.
Charges and one final thing, uh,
I know people are talking about
uh companies leaving states in
California, but that California
situation is property and
casual, you know, property
insurance, not auto insurance.
Um
I think that's all my questions.
Thank you, Representative Mason.
Thank you Madam Chair, thank
you.
Represented for bringing this
forward, a few questions, uh.
They mentioned it in one of what
states.
Have lowered their percentages
of uninsured motors, I think
you.
I think they were on the zoom.
Like Oklahoma and I didn't write
them down.
You, do you know which states
those were that have seen it
dramatic decrease in their
uninsured motorists.
Uh, Madam Chair, the state
referenced by the caller who I,
I, I can't remember who it was,
mentioned Idaho, um, yeah,
there's a company that tracks
uninsured, um, company or
motorist trends, and it comes
out every 3 to 5 years, um, and
states do generally move around
in New Mexico has deteriorated.
I think last time it was 5th,
now it's 2nd. Uh, and then I, I
Actually, I'm not specifically
sure where Oklahoma and Idaho
were over time, but those were
the two states that were
referenced on the call, yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, uh, I guess
where I was coming that.
As Idaho and Oklahoma, the
states that have seen a
decrease.
If they adopted this.
Law
According to my paper, Oklahoma
had, I hadn't looked about
Idaho.
Uh, Madam chair, no, uh, I'm
not, no, neither of those states
prohibit the use of um
Credit-based insurance scoring.
Madam Chair representative of
what my recollection is
Oklahoma's gone into a a huge uh
effort to try to decrease
insured motorists, but not in
this in this way they've had
another program in place.
Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, out of chair that's I guess
what I was coming.
Well, according to my sheet, I
knew Oklahoma I couldn't
remember the other state, but
uh.
Go back to
Uh, minority leaders Armstrong.
Statement, uh.
And we do have a law.
I know myself.
My insurance company has screwed
up and not.
Bye bye.
Then never a wrong on my
insurance or something, and I
get a letter from.
I mean right now that my bags
are both.
The light you touched that, so.
Ah
Why do we have this problem with
If they're gonna.
I have to have insurance to buy
a car.
Get it registered.
My, Madam Chair, representative,
my understanding is yes, but I
know if I buy a car, I go to out
there I have to have proof of
venture.
Get it. So how do these people
By cars
And have no,
you can get month to month, um,
insurance and also, you know, if
your, if your mother dies and,
and leaves you her car or you
know, I mean that there's a
variety of ways, but, but you
can pay, and that's another
thing that.
It
The kind of sticks in my craw
about a credit score. You don't
get credit with the insurance
companies if you don't pay,
you're not covered. So, so, but
there are such things as short
term insurance policy.
Uh
Representative Madam Ch, yes, I
know that I see it on TV all the
time, so the general or whatever
he is on there but you know but
why?
Do these people
They get their their tags the
state tracks this, so why is
there?
Why, why did they
I get stopped the first time a
cop sees them and their license
plates have been revoked. It
looks like.
Problem with her uninsured is
enforcement of existing laws
more so than.
In
Madam Chair and I mean the state
theoretically tracks, but as we
can see and people are going to
drive without insurance. You got
to get your kids to school, you
gotta get to work to make a
living to keep somewhere to
live, you're gonna, and if you
can't afford auto insurance.
You're really in between a rock
and a hard place, so people are
going to continue to drive
because our society.
Basically requires that public
transportation, particularly in
rural areas, is nonexistent and
it's not great in the cities.
I agree, uh, Representative
Madam Chair, that, uh, gonna do
this, but
It's still against the law.
I don't see how.
So we enforce the law.
That, uh, no matter.
And you, uh, another thing,
Madam Chair representative we're
talking about credit scores.
You know, to me, uh.
Low credit scores would be more
indicative to me as an insurance
company whether they were gonna
keep paying their premiums.
That more so than
That they're
Ability
To ability to pay.
So represent, as I said, um,
you, you don't, you don't own
insurance until you pay for it
and as soon as you stop paying
for it, you no longer own it, so
there's no risk being taken by
the insurer that you drop your
insurance because they don't
cover you once you drop your
insurance. I understood that a
while ago, but
I can't understand.
Why
I don't believe that
The entrance
The enforcement of the laws that
we have.
would be a more logical way for
me to address.
Oh
Then
And right, but uh
It, uh, so.
We'll move on anyway, uh.
The uh
A lot of my questions have been
answered already.
But uh
Look, I had one more.
They uh
Basically, that's it we have.
You know, we went through it
before, you know, we have.
What did you, uh, Madam Chair
Representative.
46 states.
That allow this
3, I don't know where the 4th 1
is at.
But uh
So I don't see a track to say
that this is proven, Madam Chair
Representative, I did see what
uh.
Uh, minority leader was talking
about here in the in our.
What
Questions that we received from
somebody that did say that
Washington State did ban the
credit information.
A few years ago, but then it
goes on to say that they this
discontinued the ban because of
the public.
Outcry against it.
But that's unsupported also just
like a lot of the things we've
said today are.
Hope so, maybe.
This, I mean
It's a hard thing to have
definite answers on have no.
History face it.
But with that I'll, I'll end my
I don't I can't support this
bill.
I thank y'all for bringing it.
Appreciate you coming.
Thank you.
Yeah, OK. All right, what's the
will of the committee.
Madam Chair, move to table.
Patrick to take the one.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative de la Cruz.
against the table,
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente.
Representative Mason
Representative Matthews.
table.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Parajon.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair. Madam Chair,
Madam Chair, the final tally for
the table in motion is 7 votes
yes, 2 votes no.
table.
Alrighty, let's go on to.
Our final bill.
HB 469.
It's been a, it's been a tough
crew today, so I wish you luck.
Go on representative.
I hope that's not in.
Uh, venture, uh, members of the
committee, I'm here to present
house before 69, but before I go
into the presentation, but I'm
sure if it pleases.
I do have
On an amendment.
The amendment is cleaning up
some language in the bill, uh.
Enter
the moves and.
for discussion.
Second.
We wait till everybody's got a
copy it and we'll proceed.
All righty. If you go ahead and
proceed. Thank you,
Madam, the amendment, the first
number one on the amendment, um.
Changes 20 miles to 15.
The reason I'm doing that is
like in my in my zeal to get my
bill out. I I cast too wide of a
net, so I had to roll that back
a little bit.
And the second one is just a a
correction on the on the on the
lettering of the uh on that
section of the bill.
OK.
All righty.
Any objection to that?
Alright.
To adopt the amendment adoption
adoption.
OK, and let's read the 202
number.
To to number of managers
213619.2.
Wait, say it again.
231
619.2.
Perfect.
All righty. And do we have any
opposition? Do we have a second
to that?
OK. And do we have any
opposition?
OK, we've got an amended bill.
Thank you.
Hospital 469 is looking to
change the membership of the
border authority.
And is also looking to uh make
it, make the agency very much
more nimble to deal with the
changes the economic changes are
happening on the border.
Uh, just recently, uh, uh, there
was a a $5 billion.
Announcement made for a $5
billion investment in the.
In the border in Santa Teresa.
And I feel that this type of
investment.
I should also be supported by a
very nimble and updated border
authority as well, so in, in
what I'm what I'm proposing in
this billmen chair members is uh
enhanced legislative and and
local res uh representation.
The bill increases the Border
Authority board from 7 to 9
members, adding voices from the
legislature and local
governments to ensure more
balanced decision making.
It also includes greater
experience and interesting
knowledge by requiring board
appointees to have experience in
key industries or local
government near ports of entry.
The bill strengthens the board's
ability to address the border
region needs effectively.
It also asks for stronger
cross-border and federal federal
uh federal collaboration.
The bill drags the border
authority to invite key
officials from Mexico and
federal representatives as
advisory members, fostering
international cooperation in
economic development.
It also asks for public private
partnership opportunities, uh,
House Bill 469 expands the
border authority's ability to
accept private financial or real
estate contributions,
encouraging investment in
critical infrastructure and
development projects.
The bill also asks for increased
transparency and accountability.
The bill mandates annual project
status reports to the legisins
to the legislative Finance
Committee, ensuring oversight
and progress to uh and progress
tracking on border related
initiatives.
The bill also uh asked for
professionalized leadership
standards. The bill sets minimum
qualifications for the border
Authority's executive director,
ensuring experienced leadership
to guide both border border
development efforts and Madam
Chair, if I may mention that the
current border uh border
authority director will not be
impacted by this at all.
Uh, the bill also asks that the
continued operational efficiency
while broadening input.
The uh House Bill 469 maintains
flexibility so that the board's
work is not delayed by advisory
advisory group participation,
ensuring that with that.
Uh, manager I separate
questions.
Thank you. All righty. Is there
anybody here in favor of this
bill?
Anybody on Zoom? No. Alrighty,
any opposition?
Anybody on Zoom?
All righty, let's go to the
committee.
Thanks.
We've got a question.
We've got a Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you, Representative.
Um, I noticed that the governor
has more appointees.
And are those, is there?
I was trying to read it really
quickly. Um,
And
Are, does she have to do equal
amounts of Democrats,
Republicans, or is it wide open?
Madam Chair and Madam Leader,
um, it's, it's pretty much wide
open now. The, the boards are
current sits has a has a good
mix of, of both, uh, of both,
you know, parties.
Um
All this would, would, would ask
is that.
Some of the members that the
that the that the governor
appoint the local representative
and uh and someone from the from
the city, um, I also uh added
two members to the board because
I thought those matters economic
development matters that
happened at the border, so I do
have one for the Speaker of the
house and one for the president
pro temp.
However, I don't have a problem
with adding 2 more.
And including the minority
leaders from his side that I
can, I thought of that
afterwards, Metam Chair and
Representative and.
Oh, thank you, uh, Madam Chair
and Representative, that's not
really what I was asking for,
but I appreciate that, um, that
intent, um.
I
So how many board members would
there be now, um, how many are
there now and how many would
there be?
Madam Chair, Madam Leader,
currently there are 7 members
and we'll be adding 2 more and
Madam Chair, and Representative.
Would this have?
What kind of impacts would this
have on the border. I know you
stated that there was right
before something, there was just
an, an announcement of some
things that would happen on the
border.
What kind of um action can this
board take?
Madam turn and Madam leaders,
the, the border authority holds
a very important role in the
development, the economic
development of the border.
Uh, also
Um
The economic development side is
they work with partners.
Uh, on our side of the of the
border, including uh the.
Department of Economic
Development, Department of
Transportation, and other
stakeholders from New Mexico. It
also provides technical
assistance or um yeah technical
assistance to any infrastructure
projects that may be happening.
So the border authority
currently.
Or des with local entities, say,
uh, the, the local water utility
or the county to work on
projects that would benefit the
uh the border, the the
industrial park and the
industrial.
Uh, thank you for that. I was
just reading Madam Chair on one
of my analysis where the
executive director.
Hired by the authority must have
a law degree or a degree in
accounting.
business, economics,
engineering, finance.
Um, is that
New information in the bill, or
is that already there?
Madam Madam Leader, yes, that's,
uh, that's new.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all my questions.
Madam Chair, I'd like to move a
do pass as amended.
All righty.
Patrick to take the wrong.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative De la Cruz, yes,
Representative Fernandez.
Yes.
Representative Linte.
Representative Mason, oh.
Representative Matthews.
Yes
Representative Murphy.
Representative Parajon. Yes.
Representative Serrado.
Uh, Representative Armstrong?
I'm gonna say no.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair,
Yes. Madam Chair, final tally
for the DuPass as amin in
motion, 7 votes yes, 2 votes no.
Looks like you got out alive
representative, but you.
All righty, we're gonna adjourn
