So the new mexico and there's
people that wanted to to make
sure to talk about this bill but
we should want to were really
short on time so I just wanted
to put that out there and we
will have to re
format our schedule for friday
i'm so
please watch to see how it would
ends up being heard on friday
so.
I also was told that we have.
And they should be put in the in
the binders next time it.
For today there they are
separated out for you okay and
with that i'm going to hand it
to a representative cadena
I went
to treasure
and I think we're the the mikes.
Representative and you know
representative dunkin
representative hernandez
represented lender.
Representative little
here representative lunchtime
representative martinez yep
representative mason here
representative matthew.
Manager
manager you have a corrupt.
Once a representative
we're proud to be.
Yeah.
Across the day that we're trying
to move things along
why we're why we're holding I
will mention that we do have our
committee dinner to.
Okay.
Representative please continue
thank you madame chair my coast
once a re.
Yeah.
The.
Obligated to.
My name is.
I.
I want to be clear that although
I am coming to you as a provider
I re.
Some of them are.
A family deduction purchase gr
size a business i.
Has that
actually don't.
So I scholarship my family and
but unfortunately.
And over twenty years we've been
able to do it but it's becoming
very d.
Give you an idea of what that
looks like I scholarship my
family's on a cost me about
thirty thousand dollars a month
it's becoming.
Many other families already
across the.
I wanted to be clear.
I have a permission to speak
behalf of one of my families
single mama and her name is she
has four children with me and
her tax on her child care.
When she applied for the
childcare assistance it was
determined by the federal and
state criteria work here to get
this contract that she had a
zero c.
Her pain towards the child care
but I I would have to turn
around and still.
At four hundred.
So this bill would help families
like mississippi so that she ca.
And you to work.
Share before.
We were grateful to after after
building a swell of support
across the island with our
bipartisan friends this proposal
was included in last year's tax
package as you all may remember
with the different range of
emotions that package
overwhelmingly was between but
we are proud that this made into
the package last.
I'm analytically turned.
Rapid.
The.
Yes good afternoon can you hear
me.
Good afternoon i'm cher woman
guy was a members of the
committee my name is daisy
leader and I
was the executive director for
the high education at entities
providing services to children
and then an account for
seventeen years additionally I
do hold a position of president
of the chamber of commerce and
someone park representing small
businesses in my community I
also serve as a vice vice of the
full circle in on profit
organization established a
servant represent families and
providers in the sa.
West area furthermore I am
currently in my six year as a
counselor for district two in
the city of someone part in
lastly in twenty twenty two I
was appointed to service chair
of the early learning advisor
board representing local
government I go everything that
has been said before by miss
angela and representative latter
I am honored to be working with
families and.
The tax exception and I would
like to add to that testimony
that the early childhood and
carry department has submitted
their annual report to the
governor they're key
recommendations for public and
private partnership includes the
exemption of the grt for the
state funding childcare
assistant recipients and then
new mexico pretty funny these
are among other valuable
recommendations provided by
members of the community
throughout new mexico the
easiest he did apartment has
improved access expended
eligibility waived copiements
but the great tis a barrier
following come families the
early told hidden care
department has also increased
the rates to meet the cost of
child care but the family the
families have to pay for the
guarantee on those increasing
rates
we do need to ring this barrier
to make it more equitable for
family successing care
throughout the four profit
providers I am available for any
questions you may have.
Thank you okay do we have
anybody.
Thank you madame chair members
of the committee i'll keep the
short my name is barbara tether
on the provider information new
mexico I have four nationally a
credited center serving over
five hundred children we are in
support.
Contracts equitable.
I know you're under type so i'll
just say
that the providers here really I
think that it best right now the
gross receipts tax especially
for families in child cares th.
That really is.
Income at the same time in new
mexico pre k we don't allow
providers to pass the direction
so that means are not hard for
profit providers are actually
receiving less child when the
direction has been removed so it
really makes things more
equitable for all.
My name is.
Thank you anybody else okay we
do have some.
Billy.
Yes good afternoon matter chair
members of the committee when he
was billy uh president ceo the
gallery we counted chamber of
commerce and we stand in full
support of this great bill and
thank you to the sponsors for
bringing a port forward in the
interest of time I won't recount
what's already been said but we
see this is a way to also
bolster the child care industry
and really make sure that this
this service continues to grow
and thrive in our state thank
you matter chair I appreciate
the time and all of your service
thinking
ruth ported.
Good afternoon members of the
committee I am reporter on their
own less better and such as
development center I went to
echo all the benefits that our
families will have by passing
this bill and a specifically for
my center I can at lower the
premium that my my teachers pay
for health insurance and so
that would be a benefit from my
teachers not to pay thee gross
resident faxing for the new
mexico bricky thank you thank
you
crystal topia
hi there my name is crystal top
your romaro and I am the owner
of new mexico early learning
academy with programs in
albuquerque and the esmal ins
and I wanted to speak on my
support of the spill cause
additionally it will be able to
help us pay our staff a better
way to continue to provide a
competitive benefits and be able
to support our families in a
greater way when we actually
reach the most vulnerable
populations so I do ask for your
support thank you.
Is there anybody on the
committee that would like to
go represent.
Yeah.
Thank you for
this year's.
The.
Looks like it was.
Myself you know we all have to
realize or into the and was
still this one calls the state.
Also.
Question I have.
Or
services delivered five private
program.
Yeah.
It's real and important to name
that in our.
So we have the the public built
into these like the pre k that
happens in public schools we
have the profit entities like
the care that happens in
facebase center is another one
and today because of their tax
status they would may receive
those rebrisbane but all those
dollars back into their programs
in the classrooms it is actually
only the privately operated
providers that you turn that
have been shouldering this drt
so doing everything they can
most of them to down to the
family so this is designed to
bring equity into place that
these credit new mexico small
businesses can go as far as
those reimbursement rates is
everybody else so that's why we
argue it's going to improve
outcomes for families they're
expected to be the same
standards and benchmarks to
shoot for those five star
centers but we've been asking
them to do that with their rates
minus the drt for decades so
that's exactly what we're trying
to think.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Everybody else somebody.
Manager representative document
so yeah she has four children
three of them are infants and
one of them is a pretty school.
Yes
so
it's responsible for the entire
amount of the contract so not
just her call pay but the entire
moment the contract yes.
The.
You have about a hundred and
forty five thousand dollars.
Yeah.
Madame.
I believe education and house
tax but yes it is the same bill.
I appreciate it this is to
alleviate the caught the
guarantee that is levied on
individuals paying for their
child care through eight.
Dictionary is important to say
allowed if those families that
have not met those income
requirements.
Interest but i've been working
with there are no families that
have.
Presentative yeah I think it's
it's portable for my child's new
care it's thirteen hundred
dollars a month and they provide
excellent care this educat.
And they going to conduct like
my first items well ready for
that on as many students
children we can get ready for.
To the state.
We first started that was still
the see why and that's.
Yes and of course my expert.
So.
Four pre k we are not allowed to
pass that on to family that is
written in our contract so
myself as a as a private
provider has to take that out of
my read my grand.
So i'm still required to provide
the exact same services as the
public school.
But I have to do it at about
eight percent.
The.
W.
The.
The.
Thank you already we could.
Representative and you know.
The.
The.
Representative dunkin.
Representative hernandez.
Representative lender.
Representative little.
Representative of lunch.
Representative martinez.
The.
Representative.
Yes.
And manager yes manager final
telling his eight votes yes.
I apologize for rushing us today
I appreciate everybody.
And we will see you friday with
a new agenda.
