Because that
we will.
Double forty nine point lead in
Senator Woods and after that the
committee will please call the
roll.
I don't see Senator Woods in the
attendees were.
There is yes and in the attendee
room got.
Representative Crowder.
Yes Representative Crowder in
and if you see a.
More than on the but at this
time if you could call the roll.
Representative Dow down here
your.
Representative.
There.
There.
All it is working.
Representative Johnson.
Sarah.
Representative the next year.
Representative Culbert here.
Well.
Sure.
I am here.
This thank you and I'm here so
we have a quorum welcome
everyone thanks for a meeting
during the lunch hour are a four
sessions this week will be at
two thirty so are committees
will begin at
At noon so now we want to
welcome Senator Woods who who do
you need in the who do you need
in the committee room with you
senator and the ex I would I
would like to Senator Stefanics.
Senator Griggs.
I would like to have
Mike Morris the more of Clovis
well you could raise your hand
if you could raise your hand
senators and more so we could
find you easier to click you
into the committee room anyone
else Senator Mr John Ryan.
An audible John Reid if you
could raise your hand.
And for the folks at home so we
have six attendees six folks in
the audience.
if we could let in Senator
Moores and Senator Rodriguez
from the audience.
And I believe we have in your
up.
I believe Senator phonics is
still on the Senate floor
a Senator Griggs is with us.
And I believe
I know the more is with us yes
wonderful then Senator once by
all means taken away Senate bill
of forty nine.
Mr Chairman today we have
Senate.
Transportation committee
substitute percent of health and
public compares to.
Senate bill forty nine.
This originally was a bill that
came out of rural economic.
Subcommittee no that's for sure
and Committee everyday of my
life this isn't just the Saudis
terms and senator Senator it up
mute yourself thank you go
please proceed.
Okay and and what we have here
is a.
A bill that will allow
municipalities of any size to
provide financial assistance to
retail business using their own
funds I still can't use state
money.
Currently you can do this but
the population is capped at
thirty five thousand it allows
the state to provide financial
assistance to retail businesses
located in funding corporation
portion of the county and
removes the restrictions that
state funds only can be used for
a project that is more than ten
miles from the closest Mr aliki
what the population of more than
fifteen thousand.
It also allows for the
rehabilitation are remodeling of
the building not just the
construction of which our
current law does.
And it can only be used by
qualifying entity and again Mr
chair our.
Representative Crowder
Representative Serrato is also
co sponsors of this bill and
Senator Stefanics Senator Griggs
is most gracious to be here
today
we ended up.
Compiling his built in with this
one.
And make into the a better bill
all the way around and our I
would like very much Mr chairman
if I could have the bare of
Clovis speak to this bill is
been a avid supporter from day
one.
Well means Mr more good to see
you.
Mr Chairman good to see you as
well and and thank you senator
Woods for inviting me in to
speak on this committee members
it's it's my pleasure to be here
again my name is Mike Morris and
more Clovis and
It's already been explained that
this bill would expand the
allowable uses of the municipal
Leda funding to include
supporting retail as economic
development and as a as a mayor
I can tell you that that I feel
strongly that we need that
latitude we need that ability
the local level in order to
respond to what's happening with
the retail sector in our
communities and our local
economies you know before COVID
we we can tell that the that
that things are changing we we
saw businesses leaving our our
community and and we were
struggling to.
How we would get a handle on
that and of course COVID has
come along and and drugs expose
weaknesses or are exacerbated
the problems that retail sectors
in communities like mine have
been facing as retail at that we
want to have the tools at the
local level to make sure that we
can do what we can to make sure
that that that they're able to
adapt and and and still exist in
our communities and and really
as mayor I see this as giving us
a tool with which to
To.
You know help keep more money
being spent at home I and and
and by that I mean it's a tool
that would help us to address
holes or gaps in the local
retail offering and as you know
your retail as an act.
An economic driver but also
contributes to quality of life
experience fire citizens and so
forth so I'm I just really would
like to ask for your support of
this I'm and and appreciates our
our at that point you give an
I've answered questions or
attempt to.
It Mr chairman if the Mr John
Ryan is on the.
It is here.
I'd like him to speak just a
second thank you senator let me
take a look in the audience.
Yes he's in the audience it does
missile that is of you could
bring him into the committee
room.
Thank you for raising your hand.
Give us a second.
If you could let of Mr Ryan into
the committee into the as a
panelist.
And we'll get him in.
There we go.
All right a marvelous I was on
rand Gordon on mute yourself.
I think that's you at the
bottom.
We can up.
Mr chairman if you it.
It was going and I need yourself
Mister right and address the
committee welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and I I
won't be long I'm I'm here
primarily just to go over the
the specific provisions of the
bill if there's any questions
with regard to that but let me
tell you that this bill has been
through a number of different
organizations and and and and
situations in which it has
expanded a little bit it started
in the municipally and received
overwhelming support care it
went from there then to your
committee Mr Chairman to the
role in economic development
interim committee and got an
endorsement there it changed a
little bit in in the Senate as
it moves through but it but it's
move through rather swiftly
without a few changes and so
I will go over the changes
unless there's questions but it
but it's basically allows
municipalities the local dollars
to be used for retail and it
eliminates a non compete clause
so that the municipalities will
have the opportunity to address
how they're going to work with
the retail on the local level
when they put their plans
together in their ordinances
together and and deal with the
situation where if they bring in
a retail that I won't.
Contradict our or work against
existing retail but there's ways
that municipalities can can deal
with that and that that's it for
the most part but I I'd be happy
to go into further detail as as
a as questions come up thank you
Mr chairman thank you.
And that's all I have Mister.
Thank you very much Senator
Representative Crowder.
Mr chairman thank you for the
opportunity I I think the
senator.
This needs to be cleaned.
Tell you that.
There is a little bit of urgency
to this bill Clovis is lost
their dealers they lost the
state it's a state agents this
huge store there we had Intel
the children's place was one of
only two places you could buy
clothing for children we've lost
that business and our this is a
tool as the more said that we
think would really be good for
our community and for other
communities as well but
especially those that are near
the the state lines for
businesses seem to transition
across the state line thank you
Mr chair.
No excellent point will now go
to members of the committee
members of the audience anyone
wishes to address the committee
on this bill please raise your
hand.
I will let you in.
A good and raise your hand if
you wish to address the
committee Mr Jason Espinoza
welcome.
A good afternoon chairman
members of the committee Jason
Espinoza register lobbyist with
Mexico idea which is the
statewide association of
economic development
organizations and we stand in
strong support of the
legislation providing greater
latitude in the expenditure of
local leader funds will help
local communities
Invested in economic development
projects to better reflect the
needs of their community thank
you.
Thank you very much anyone else
was to address the committee.
Well no now go back up.
To the committee.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you Mr chairman I like
this idea so I'm open to pass.
Rev a motion for a do pass.
And I will second that motion
but.
For for for a.
Further debate or conversation
by the committee.
A couple couple questions from
made us center was so.
You know we got we have learned
this Act by heart it's it's
chapter five of.
Your sections ten dash three of
the the low what we refer to as
leader of the local economic
development act as one of the
best tools we have in state
statute.
To put capital into specific
economic development.
Objects and so we go to paid
seven.
And you know leader has a
through M. and M. is retail
business so you want to
amend the the retail business
portion of this act correct
Senator yes that's true all
right so here's what I'm reading
so get all Lita is
Is available in a municipality
with a population up according
to the most recent federal
census so we'll get those
numbers.
and there's only maybe about
fifteen or sixteen towns that
are there more than fifteen
thousand but anyway says fifteen
thousand are less on line seven
we got that.
And on line fifteen we add new
language in unincorporated area
the county we got that and then
of course.
And then on page nine it does
away with that ten mile
provision that's fantastic we'll
look at the center look at
subparagraph B. lines eight
through fourteen or frankly
eight to eleven it says more
than fifteen thousand if the
economic development project is
not funded or financed with
state government revenues.
So my question is
If it's in the unincorporated
unincorporated area of the
county.
Does it matter whether state
revenues are used are not.
I believe that state revenues
can be used in that on
incorporated part of the county
I'm not if I'm we can get John
Ryan or Senator great to talk to
that subject.
Mr chairman if I lose.
Thank you the the the way the
bill is drafted in the intent of
the bill is to allow
municipalities to have the tax
to utilize their tax.
But to allow communities under
fifteen thousand four
unimportant rated parts of the
county to have access to the
state leader dollars
that is that's the way it's it's
crafted engine tension Mr chair
is because those unincorporated
parts of counties like south
valley of Albuquerque the
Eldorado area Santa Fe you know
they may be there may not be a
tax so they need to have the
access to the state dollars if
they bring in some sort project
in those portions of the state
so that's that's the reason is
granted waited for future I
understand thank you thank you
Sir was think center Griggs so
in other words if you're fifteen
thousand or less you qualify
under current law and under the
bill if you're in the
unincorporated area the county.
You qualify and we took out that
ten mile version as well so
that's the new that's the new
that's the new statute we want
to write and then in the middle
we have if you're a municipality
with more than fifteen thousand.
It removes that thirty five
thousand percent cap.
And says if you're more than
fifteen thousand you can use
this.
If if it's not funded by the
state or finance with state
government revenues basically.
Yes writing all righty thank you
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senators and representatives for
this bill I have a couple of
quick questions let looking
through the FIR
And I don't know if this has
changed approved please correct
that if if it's an inaccurate
but it says that the economic
development department has side
not has not had enough time.
To respond to the request for
analysis
it has that changed is is
language from perhaps the
original FIR before you made the
amendments.
Mr chairman and Representative
I. E..
Maybe I should allow of Senator
John Ryan to address that.
Thank you Mr chairman the and
and chairman of Martinez yes
this bill we has gone through a
little bit of change and you
know we've we've met with the
economic development department
and they they actually liked
several provisions in our bill
in some in some cases where we
combined the senator was built
with the senator great spell
that specific language wasn't
necessarily address that was the
unincorporated area.
but you know the conversations
that we've had with that John
Clark at economic development
with was basically that he
thought lot of the provisions in
the bill we're we're important
were drafted well.
Compared to some of the other
legislative versions I I I don't
know what they mean by that they
haven't had enough time to
really evaluate it
you know there
that this was a bill was
introduced early on it was a
committee bill from the interim
committee and so they they've
had a little bit of time there
and so I think the primary
provision of the bill that opens
up retail to the communities of
fifteen thousand and about is
what the economic development
department did have an
opportunity to to comment on and
I and I think they were either
going to be neutral or
supportive of of that provision.
Got it thank you Mr chair and
and thank you Mr Ryan for that
explanation can you also Mr
chair Senators Mister ranking
expanding the non non compete
clause as well please there's
also a section in the FIR that
deals with that that racism
questions can you just explain
that for me and for the rest of
the committee.
Yes well I tell you the way I
might take on that and now it's
more talk about it in just a
minute Mr Chairman and Mr
chairman.
When we start talking about non
to do.
Who we talked about competing
with issues that are of a
business like Walmart are you
got a business like to
convenience store they may sell
lots of good.
And if you want to say well we
have no complete calls well.
It would be at and and I don't
want to make.
Mr chairman Mr chairman anybody
that here.
But it would be a lawyer's dream
to have something like that in a
bill.
Because you can never to call
anything constitution.
So instead of trying to explain
what competition is to me it was
far above the board just to say
well we'll take that competition
because completely out it is
awful hard to explain what might
be competition and what might
not be competition you may be
trying to track down a state a
retail
automobile tire store and you've
got a
Hey he.
We used to but a gas station
that sold tractors or someone
that Representative did front
end works that so tires so you
know the demand may be there and
that's that's kind of what we're
thinking about this.
Create some kind of survey so
that you'll kind of see what the
demand is for for another retail
store for another retail project
and try to track that project in
so I hope that explains my
thoughts are I can have some of
the other people on the panel
here to help explain that if you
would rather.
No all Mr chair Senator that
that was that was very clear
thank you for for contextualise
conceptualizing that for me
in the example of I think it's
Clovis I think it was percent
Crowder you lost your Dillard's
I think is what you said.
Mr chair Senator Representative
so.
If this bill passes this would
allow you to get back
maybe not Dillard's body you
know maybe case of pennies it
would allow you to it would
allow you community center by he
JC Penney's twelve and is is
that is that what I'm
understanding.
Mr chairman Mr chairman it's
unique that you pick JC Penney's
that's the only other quote here
we've got.
All right we do have all board.
it's in the mall the only about
the only store we have left is
the J. C. Penney so they'll take
that from us it but it does
provide opportunity to retailer
said the children's store the
only children's clothing store
we have now is that Walmart.
So we've had the opportunity to
perhaps help them somehow to
keep that business here it would
really been beneficial so that's
why we're looking at it at the
opportunity to to leave this a
little bit more open a little
more flexible because you're
using local dollars you're not
using state dollars then it's up
to the governing bodies locally
to make the decision as to how
to utilize that money or or
they're gonna wind up just like
us they will get elected and so
they'll be very cautious and
prudent about how they spend
their dollars.
That makes sense Mr chair
representative Crowder so this
is coming from local fund some
I'm assuming from gross receipts
tax revenue is is that the
primary source of these local
dollars that's true yes and it's
ended so gross receipts tax that
they have to especially gross
receipts that they have to pass
state ordinance to do so it's
it's vetted through the local
government vetted through
you know the of.
Public out input through you
know advertised to get this
ordinance in place and it can't
be right those funds can be
raised less is done through an
ordinance so it screw of then it
all went through it thank god
thank you Mr thank you Mr
Senator so if this passes you
have to go back to your commute
will continue to and they have
to enact.
A gross receipts tax hike.
Or they use.
Money that's already available
to the G. R. T. No Way I'm Mr
Chairman way I understand it
it'll be language it will be hi
can gross receipts it'll be a of
language change saying that we
will work to be able to use this
money for retail also.
More well that makes sense.
Thank you Mr chair thank senator
last question
and I'm going back to the F. I.
R..
It talks about I I I always kind
of smile with the fires because
either we level more we hate on
depending on which side of the
issue you're on but there's sort
of a this guy's gonna fall I I
feel are you at the end here
that removing population limits
could create a bidding war
between communities and then
they use Rio Rancho in
Albuquerque is an example where
maybe maybe a retailer would
move from Albuquerque into Rio
Rancho and make use of those
local dollars what what state
what state you to that a this
guy's gonna fall analysis.
Let me ask this question then
NMAA back and answer questions.
Yes.
If there's a very popular store.
Making making good profits.
And someone says you know you're
very I restore and I'd like you
in my community would you come
to my community and I'll offer
this.
If I.
Permian investors that hello I
would probably put another store
in another community are
franchised store into that
community instead of pulling up
a store that is profitable
already why would I do that.
So that's my thought on that Mr
chairman Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator that that would make
sense but now let me flip it on
you what if what if the current
store in Albuquerque is not
profitable.
and this is an incentive for you
to move across the across the
bridge there to Rio Rancho.
If I was if I was a businessman
and I had a unprofitable
business I tried to shake loose
from that somehow.
And I would probably take an
incentive and try somewhere else
Mr chairman Mr chair.
Very good thank you Mr chair
thank you senator always a
pleasure to to be able to do
this with you I always feel like
I learned a little bit more
I know last year we were trying
to do it at the end of the
session on that vehicle electric
vehicle thing back.
In the last two hours of the
session so this feels a lot less
pressure build thank you for the
opportunity thank you for
answering my questions thank you
Mr.
Thank you Sir thank you
Representative and this one last
thing
On the bottle PJ there's another
little nugget and they're
currently current law allows for
leader to be used on
construction and and this adds
the words rehabilitation or
remodeling of the building and
so it's
You know the business folks in
Albuquerque they try to grow the
economy through through the tax
code and we really need to grow
the economy by investing by
fostering competition and like
having better statutory
construction to leave acts in
our other axle want to commend
you guys for working together
bring in your minds into one
bill and we'll make it out to
Clovis first chance we get Mr
more
and then you know because we got
to up and this provision about
doing over you know current law
prohibits us.
Because of this notion of
competition like the center said
it could be a good Walmart can
block a mom and pop from getting
this lead a under the current
statutes of any chance we get to
a.
To bolster competition in
statute we we got to do it you
guys may get that chance tonight
to to make a decision on some
like that but what that we have
a motion for a to pass in the
second please call the roll.
Thank you chairman.
Representative Baldonado yes.
Representative Dow.
Thank you.
Just got to figure.
Yes.
Well yes.
It was yes Representative
Johnson yes Representative ****.
Yes Representative Culbert yes
Representative.
Yes.
By your Figueroa.
Yes and chairman Maestas.
The past.
These four walls what.
Mr chair here muted.
thank thank you madam chair so
you have a do pass I will yes of
I think this is last committee
if I'm not mistaken of it may
said on the house floor for a
while but we'll get on the
governor's desk Mr Chairman I
think it it goes to chairman
Martinez's Committee for the for
all right thank you for that
thank you I'll let him know.
All right thank you Senators
thank thank you very much thank
you thank you Senator Roger
thank you so much for being with
us welcome.
Thank you Representative
chairman members
working the act yes this is a
bill you probably recognize and
I was having problems with a
camera here at the same staff so
well eight is okay Senators are
one of the thank you at aspen
going you yes I have Nancy beer
she's the county treasurer and
the chairman of the county
treasures affiliate she's from
Bernalillo county and she's here
in case we need to part of her
for any other because they could
let your beers the committee
will and thank you for reading.
Thank you one so she's in all
will turn it over to you
welcome and thank you Mr
chairman again thank you members
of the committee this is the
miglior bill to you
Passed unanimously in every in
both chambers all committees
last year but it got hung up as
many bills due in the house
calendar and it is merely a
technical of a change a
correction or correction to the
statutes.
Investments and it the word
register a fight in their it's
is it hasn't account registry
service and you should be
placement services not registry
so what we're doing is making a
technical correction changing
the word registry to placement
because registry is too limiting
and you know it is just not
gonna work for county treasurer.
What it does and Mr chairman
it's at all just a for two for
any questions if you have any.
And thank you and Mister as well
and I think.
Mr chair and members of the
committee.
Afternoon thank you for allowing
me to to speak and thank you for
Senator Rodriguez and bringing
this back to get this technical
correction done I think Senator
Rodriguez explained it well but
I stand for any questions you
may have.
Thank you untested welcome we
are.
I wish to speak.
On this bill good and raise your
hand within the within the zoom
Mr more welcome.
We'll get to us.
We're.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee on Brian Moore
with New Mexico counties course
we stand behind our treasures
and by Senator Rodriguez and
support Senate bill sixty four
the connection easy fix the
small problem thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you wish to speak on this
bill New York.
All righty members of the
committee Representative
Martinez.
Mr chair I wanted to pass.
We have a to pass in a quick
second by.
By out of.
The roll out so motion to pass a
second by Representative
Figueroa.
And.
What what.
Mr.
Mr Chairman give me one second
here it's and zoom quit
unexpectedly as the words I have
but I'm glad you still see me on
the on your end
we ask me what it would do that
it doesn't do now correctional.
Exactly thank you very much the
registry service that is and now
word registry actively.
The promise to enter right
financial network so it it's
limiting to one firm as it's a
privately held firm with the
network financial institutions
located in Virginia and somehow
that.
We should placement is placement
services to allow the county
treasures to to invest wherever
the better returns are and not
with one specific limiting
organization so it was an
oversight and that is why we
brought it back last year but we
got hung up on the house
calendar at the end.
And yes any other questions by
members of the committee.
There's a motion for do pass and
a second please
Call the roll.
Hello yes Representative Dow.
Yes Representative.
Yes Representative
yes.
Johnson yes Representative
estimates yes.
Well Culbert yes Representative
bill yes madam vice chair to get
on.
Is an chairman my Estes yes
congratulations you have a due
process I do believe this goes
to the floor and maybe there for
a few days but no worries no
worries thank you thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee everyone we appreciate
it thank you thank you.
All righty we're on a mission
Senator Moores welcome.
We have a bill of ninety four.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee like to
invite my expert witness on Tony
my Estes to join me on this
bill.
He could this is a bill that are
actually both worlds bipartisan
bicameral bills that actually
deals with social justice issue.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Currently our NCAA rules and
other athletic conferences
programs student athletes for
being employed or are profiting
from their what's called me
image or likeness there's been a
move nationally around the
country including eight
different states Representative
passed legislation to allow
student athletes to be able to
profit from their name image
likeness so think about
endorsements for in this day and
age tick tock or social media ad
placements are campaigns that
would allow them actually profit
while they're student athletes
and not just of those who are on
scholarship with those who are
might be on the soccer teams
where the cross country team or
things like that.
Are currently crop prevented
from taking advantage of this
actually making an income while
they're in college so what we're
this is really important for
specially here in New Mexico is
that to the status of already
passed the so California
Colorado those who are local
friends two of our P. states are
Colorado California medical is
five of the conference opponents
amount was conference those you
are Ag is a New Mexico state in
the big west Lee Mario who just
yes I just like director New
Mexico state is yes I would be
on the Senator behalf of this
legislation on the so there was
tenants property points or
California would give them a
significant competitive
disadvantage recruitment both
for you and M. and New Mexico
state if we don't pass this then
on the flip side it gives us a
competitive recruitment
advantage over Texas schools
Arizona schools are when we do
pass this was really a social
justice issues because as many
of you know our student athletes
architectural firms or or
backgrounds one of my teammates
and have the ability to work
when they're in school to have
the advantages I had with having
them are parents to four send me
to college anymore struggled
immensely with near school and
medical equipment dropping this
of the financial burdens
addition to the student athletes
so I'm really excited about this
and stand ready for our
questions Mr chair.
Thank you senator we try to.
Shy away from acronyms what is
the in this committee what is
the N. C. A. A..
Officially the National to us
but it should all right what is
referred to as the old joke bio.
Was it your bonds worth most
national association of a parent
I believe was the original actor
the National Collegiate Athletic
Association special.
All righty thank you.
Members of the audience anyone
wish to address the committee
please raise your hand.
There's a few folks in the
audience and I'm sure a handful
of others on the webcast members
of the committee.
Do passed Mr chairman.
We have a motion and motion for
do passed by represent Baldonado
a second by Representative
Powdrell Culbert are we have a
there still is debate
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
senator for for this bill and I
believe it's long overdue for
variety of reasons can you can
you walk us through maybe a
practical example of what this
would allow student athletes to
do at any one of our
universities that they cannot do
right now.
Mr chair Representative that's a
great question and there's
actually in Michigan a young
student athletes first to be
able to take advantage of this
she was a volleyball player in
high school and since mission
passes law and the on and I a I
a I a which is the lower level
conference in athletics as allow
student athletes to take
advantage of the new image
likeness she during the washes I
school senior during the COVID
she can but she had in her
backyard into what she cater she
called it one of them being
extremely popular on to talk
**** about making money from
product placement so now it has
to do it yourself to talk fall
we were she does projects are
home repair projects not related
to her student athletic ability
and so now she's in college are
competing on and she's still
doing her or her monetizing
protect yourself under the old
rules if we don't pass that she
would not be able to do that she
would actually have been able to
be required to either play
college athletics or monetize
for tech topics are so that's
example of nowadays were student
but she's now able to earn money
going to college and claimed
COVID sports for her university
and be able to save some money
and explanations for.
Thank you Mr chair and and
senator so say you NMCA UNM
basketball state we recruit.
One of the best high school
ball players in the region.
and say he comes on a full ride
scholarship to your amendment.
Now they would also be able to
be on a gala Chevrolet
commercial is that correct Mr
chair representative absolutely.
And Mr chair Senator what what
about
What what about the other
athletes that are that are
playing maybe they're not the
top recruits maybe they have to
redshirt you know the the the
and have a scholarship.
Gallus to relate probably is not
going to get them to sell their
cars do you see that maybe this
creates
more of a disparity between the
star athlete and the non star
athlete.
Mr chair that is possible on you
know it does allow those student
athletes to actually make a
living and earn money one of the
examples that Mario there like
director New Mexico state uses a
I apologize I'm not fifty so
understand all the social media
aspects of this but there's
apparently websites where you
can actually hire people do
shoutouts or happy birthday
things any use as an example of
where the ball at all to you
sensually the higher to do those
kind of things and it will be
early are a little bit of money
we'll do our best Mr chair
Representative absolutely it is
a free market this was a bill
would allow people to hire
agents to protect their rights
but in there would be an
opportunity for the star
athletes to earn much more money
than say on someone on a golf
team who's prevented you know
using simple that the the call
for now be able to be hired to
do lessons right now all state
university Mexico or Mexico
state or golfers aren't able to
work even though their
scholarships if there are
scholarships don't cover full
tuition board one for rural
tuition and fees might just
cover partial alright what all
in with this password your
scholarship or everything for
attending golf swimming sports
like that usually cover portion
so student athlete might get his
books paid for our your sheet
here folks paid for at UNM also
you now she'll be able to
actually do lasts in provide
lessons for you know what high
school choose your kids are
younger than that operating you
might want to hire or give you a
so what's your golf game right
now she's program for doing.
Thank you Mr chair Senator so I
I I if if if you have a
basketball player.
they can not that currently they
can not only not sell their
likeness for product placement
they also cannot engage in a
money making venture teaching
kids how to play basketball.
Mr Chairman representative
chairman reduced yes yes
Representative we cannot do
that.
He can go get a job at golden
pride making breakfast burritos
but they cannot go to the local
high school and teach kids how
to play ball you know on a
weekend camp Mr chair of Roger
Martinez actually there
prevented it there on
scholarship student athletes are
prevented from having those kind
of jobs that what what you just
mentioned
for instance way back in when I
played I it was I was barred
from having a job outside of
some the summer when we weren't
in school so I was not able to
get a job on after hours if I
wanted to and that's where a lot
of financial hardship student
athletes comes in is that you're
you're limited on what economic
opportunities out outside of
that scholarship.
Thank you Mr chair and and and
senator last question were you a
good football player.
I get better as the years go by
Mr chair.
Thank.
Thank you Mr chan thank you
senator all right
Representative Powdrell Culbert
thank you Mr chairman US senator
I'm just curious of the state's.
That have yes this
How will have the students done.
With their
academic requirements.
I'm working.
Mr chair representative this is
actually the first state to pass
systems last year California so
it is just a new our process
there's been a rush commission
California California or
California Colorado New Jersey
Florida Michigan Nebraska
on some other system with some
of the larger States special
college athletics I've just
recently passed away the last
year so that is moving for but I
will tell you from personal
experience Mr chair you student
athlete and try to balance the
light it is difficult but
student athletes across the
nation and UNM Mexico stated
well schools almost probably
every school higher GPAs and
higher graduation rates than the
general population and now
specially
not so what years we've the
football players have are
usually higher than average GPAs
I'm also because they have the
the coach's how to make sure
that they get losses in sales
will move towards are great.
Okay Mr chairman and senator do
you think this is going to
create an environment as to
where now they athlete just
saying in order for me to come
in and and do this basketball
clinic.
You have to pay me X. amount of
dollars.
Mr chair us a fantastic question
in in the bill it actually
prevents universities from using
it this is that what's called an
inducement so you can't go out
to recruit a of the top
basketball player track star you
say you come here and we will
give you a.
endorsement deal with Dallas or
something like that I'd actually
prevents universities from do we
maps all right so we'll by
Alicia your C. rules are rules
are from doing that but once
they're here they're able to
actually you know participate in
that free labor market you go
out and on women doing that to
us.
So this is not going to
interfere with their volunteer
because I know.
In the past you that these
athletes would volunteer to work
at a community center with some
kids or something like that I'm
more concerned with the athletes
saying well yeah I'll do it but
you gotta pay me X. amount of
dollars in order for me to do
it.
You Mr Representative that is
the that is so they are.
A very valid points
but I think the athletes so the
the the right to get paid for
other name image and likeness in
for the labor on that is
something I think is.
Very open market and it's also a
social justice issue especially
for some of these are for
students who don't have the
ability to do that.
I'm not so much worried about it
being a social justice issue and
all that I'm just more concerned
about some of the kids and and
some of the lower income
communities centers of that
community centers not having.
The funds in their budget to pay
one of these these players to
come into the clinic where as
before that player would have
probably just did the clinic
just for the heck of doing.
So that's that's what my concern
is.
Thank you chairman thank you
Representative thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator some of my questions
have been answered
Representative Powdell Culbert
just ten one of them I'm gonna
ask three more I think could you
speak a little bit more about
the NCA a decision that's
currently pending in the Supreme
Court and when the FY ours
comments about losing NCAA
eligibility if we have a state
law that's in conflict with
their national organizational
terms.
Mr chair were Representative
Figueroa great not a great
question
right now of that is the case
but MCA is looking at losing
they don't change their rules
California media market which is
as you know one of the one fifth
of the national economy lows
floor so you stated a brass the
with the Cork for hosters lose
New Jersey you're probably about
no ten states are looking to
pass this this year quite
frankly Mr chair this is about
forcing the unseeded Water State
Farm for the night state to do
this and then all the other
states Stuart WCHS the they're
gonna lose out on a huge market
gas supply was quite frankly
without Florida California.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator so we are essentially
pushing the NCAA in the right
direction with this okay couple
more questions.
Couple more questions Mr chair
one is I'm looking at the
amendments in context on page
four and so the
talks about a student athlete
who is now free to teach those
golf lessons and club as part of
their earning money for college
experience session B. if I'm
reading it correctly says that
the income they make at that
job.
Can't be used to reduce their
financial aid now they're
getting need bait based
financial aid what would and
their student job income be
considered and reducing that aid
in giving that a to another
student who maybe needs more at
that point.
Mr chair of the great question
that a need is and referred to
student eight I called requests
for things like that this is
referring to their athletic
student athlete scholarships
athletic scholarships actually
called.
Student aid.
Program so that in other words
they make that's a couple
hundred dollars also from
coaching a basketball court
coaching golf what you mentioned
we can take a couple of dollars
off of what they would the
university would pay for that
students books or
she where.
World War two which that's what
we're going to not the
financials to all the financial
part of it such.
Your question your.
I think I need a little more
clarification because paying for
their books are paying for their
meal plan is is part of the
financial aid packages are you
saying that the work they do
that would be allowed under this
bill would not affect their
athletic scholarships.
But in fact affect their
financial aid needs based
scholarships there is that those
are two different things I
understand your question
restated Mr chair representative
correct for instance to be Frank
I could my parents consent four
Senator college time was there I
earned an athletic scholarship
so everything was paid for I
wasn't based on my the corporate
workers to pay for me to go to
college.
Burstow on the west lexical ship
so those who separate many of my
teammates did with that will not
work they work on athletic
scholarship they also qualify
for Pell grants for instance and
things like that so your income
levels would attentional weights
offset whatever your financial
needs was Matt your athletic
scholarship side as I will see
first year athletic scholarship
cannot be deduced what say you
also on how a million followers
on Twitter and you do an ad
placements which actually could
happen with some of these are
high profile athletes and you
earn a lot of money well I thank
you that would you now have the
ability to make a lot of money
and so that would pop up also it
from what you're need based on
need based aid potential could
be she.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator that was exactly my
concern that if the student is
receiving need based aid and
suddenly because they are super
star athlete they start making
quite a lot of money each they
don't need that they stayed any
longer it should go to a
different students so thank you
for verifying that my last
question is Mr chair Senator is
there anything in the bill or
have you considered anything
around protection for students
because some of them are very
young and if their parents
are knowledgeable about the
system.
They can be taken advantage of
by agents of is there any
protection for them in this
bill.
Mr chair noted right simple it's
all the state so learners that
passes is that the student
athlete did need protection for
the examples you just mentioned
and currently they are not
allowed to hire attorneys or
agents to represent them say
you're negotiating your ago
stating that you're a star of
the no call for you want to go
to New York's Midwest title
social.
You as an eighteen nineteen year
old student athletes don't have
the the ability to work on that
kind of contracts and so this
would allow on that student
athletes higher to get higher on
an agency work with go shape for
on so that that is a protection
of the National Collegiate
Athletic Association was
insistent that we did so that
the student athletes would not
be taken advantage of by
the corporations as to do
something to get fair market
value for their name Michelin's
such.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator.
All right does the center do
will one last question so if I.
Purchase a.
Of a claims New Jersey and the
last and and the the look on the
back of the jurors it says
Lawrence and I forget the
quarterbacks number I think it's
sixteen or thirteen.
You know famous famous
quarterback's gonna go number
one in the draft I wanted to go
to New York but New York one
that came.
What it does how much money that
I got a box for this fancy
Jersey that says Lawrence and
the only reason I'm money is
because you know.
You know I.
I'm a fan of that one particular
student or that one actually how
much money of the hundred Bucks
does Lawrence get nothing.
Right now nothing.
All right with that we.
Refresh my memory is there a
motion on the table yeah there
was a two passed I also knocking
on my door lock Mr chair so all
right we have a motion for do
present a second good and call
the roll.
Thank you chairman.
Hello yes.
Dow.
Representative Fajardo yes.
Representative was yes
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Yes Representative.
Yes.
Madam chair to get off.
Yes and chairman Maestas.
Yes you have a do pass on to the
floor up it may be that for a
lot of love.
We'll we'll definitely hear it
thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee the
Los.
All right and that on that pitch
are the hope that mentioning the
Brasco was one of the smarter
political moves I've seen this
whole year what.
But it we welcome up thank you
members will be in touch of plan
on a long meeting once a long
meeting Friday private starting
about eleven thirty thank you.
With that we are.
