Thank you, chair, vice chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Melissa Mitton. I'm
senior director of state and
local government affairs for
the.
Yes, I'm sorry. Can you hear me?
Chair, vice chair, can you hear
me?
I know.
About now, can you hear me now?
Can you hear me now?
Madam chair, vice chair, can you
all hear me now?
Chair, vice chair, members of
the committee. Um, can you hear
me now?
Yeah.
Chair members of the committee,
uh, my name is Melissa Mitten.
How about now? Can you hear me
now? Yes, we can.
Oh great. Uh, chair, vice chair
members of the committee. My
name is Melissa Mitten, and I'm
senior director of State and
Government Affairs for the
American Hotel and Lodging
Association, a national partner
of the New Mexico Hospitality
Association. I appreciate the
opportunity to testify and
support House Bill 506 today.
Thank you for your time. I'll
keep it short. Uh, the New
Mexico hotel industry employees
nearly 53,000 resident. Can you
all hear me now paying more than
$2.3 billion in wages and
salaries.
Uh, the proposed tax credit,
which supports the restoration
and rehabilitation of qualifying
hotels will enable property
owners to invest in the
committee, um, can you hear me
now? Yes.
Yeah,
renovation's 506 really
experiences but also create jobs
and stimulate economies. Uh, I
urge your support for House Bill
506 and ask for a Du pass
recommendation. Thank you for
your time and I'm happy to
answer any questions.
Melissa, give us just a minute.
We're, we're trying to get it
um.
fixed.
So
OK.
But it's not.
No, I'm fine.
to.
Yeah.
You.
That's good.
Yeah.
I'm so glad.
I just.
Yeah
OK.
Testing, testing.
Testing.
OK.
Testing. OK.
Have we lost we lost.
or will be.
I.
We get rid of.
What I think we should do is, if
you all would keep working on
that, um, if we can get her back
up, we would, we would break to
her again, um, it was my
understanding from what I could
read, she was in favor and um
that way we could proceed with
the hearing and hopefully his
eyes is up and people are to see
what we're doing. I'm OK with
continuing if that's the case.
we're on board for that.
OK, so are you all OK with that?
OK, I appreciate that. Thank
you.
All righty. So I, many little
bumps today, but let's, let's
get through.
Madam Chair, I, I don't know
that he called for opposition. I
have not, so.
Was there, is there any
opposition in in the room.
There is not
And how about on Zoom?
No, madam chair. OK, um, so then
we'll, let's go on to, to
committee.
Representative Matthews, thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, presenters and my old
friend Kathy Cuomo, uh, we knew
each other when we were doing
totally different things, and we
won't share with those words.
um, um, just real quick, I'm
it seems like we've given a lot
of tax credits and things, so
all kinds of different
industries and uh I'm not
necessarily opposed to that, but
I'm kind of wondering.
and I'm skimming through here
the uh the qualifications for
this.
Um, but you said it's for the
mom and pops.
And there was some classic hotel
recently, and I'm trying to
remember where it was. It was
gonna close, it's in some town
that I think nobody ever goes to
like much which may have been a
problem, and I'm just wondering,
do these have to be
Do these have to be viable
hotels or in, because you're
focusing on older ones and
smaller ones, it looks like.
If I'm reading it correctly,
um, I don't, I would hope it's
not for Motel sixes.
Um, but I'm wondering sort of
How many of these
Old hotels are in viable tourist
areas. That's my question.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We don't
have an exact account
representative Matthews, uh,
what I can share with you is
that this was primarily geared
and, and just sort of the
committee knows one of the
reasons that Representative
Tarazos readily agreed to a
co-sponsor was because in Silver
City, like many little towns,
Santa Rosa, others, certainly
city of Albuquerque, we have
that Route 66, very important,
dovetails me that, by the way,
uh, it will help those because
where we start off in, they have
to have a
at least 15 guest rooms, and
they have to be willing to
renovate at least 40% of the
rooms. So it's, it's, it's
pretty broad in in qualifying.
But, but we're not, I mean, do
we have a study or something
that says that we're under
resourced in terms of small
hotels in rural areas or
something.
Madam Chair Representative
Matthews, members of the
committee, um, we did do a
study. It dates back to the
pandemic, um, where we had the
economic impact of pandemic
shutdowns and how long it's
taking some of those hotels,
especially in the smaller rural
areas to recover. So that's part
of the, the impetus for this was
the idea that those hotels,
especially in rural communities,
had fallen behind and, and we're
not having a chance.
to catch up and, um, and we're
not being able to take advantage
of other programs.
Come.
any of your your mic is not on.
Can you hear me now?
OK.
Uh, green, the right color, OK.
So my question is, is part of
this some kind of a an
assessment, a planning to to
see.
What, what's out there? What if
we build a hotel, will they
come? Yeah, or what are we
doing? I'm
That's kind of what I'm asking.
Madam Chair Representative
Matthews, a member of the
committee, I can address this
very specifically because one of
the reasons we're partnering
with the tourism department on
this is because they have a
proven track record. They assess
grants, they assess economic
impacts. They have a feasibility
requirement that if you receive
funding from them, you have to
provide data.
I mean, even, even when I do a
conference, I have to provide
them the economic data of what,
what that money brought into the
state and so that's part of this
process is that it wouldn't just
be for someone saying, oh, you
know what, I could do with a
remodel. It's somebody saying,
you know, I'm in Silver City. I
have a historic hotel. I can get
back up to full capacity and
then the tourism departments
process would involve overseeing
their application and having
them determine and
prove the uh the economic impact
and the tourism impact of that
renovation.
OK. And uh madam chair, uh,
representative, uh, I just wanna
be sure this is not for a new
mortuary for.
Our friend in the uh
Whose from Silver City.
That's all the questions I have.
Representative Murphy.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative, I like so many
bills that, that you and I see
eye to eye. I like this bill a
lot. It's a jobs bill. It's a
small business bill. Um, I, uh,
don't given the circumstances of
this evening, I don't want to
take a lot of time. I plan to
support this bill. I'm the only
one that's gonna talk, I'd like
to uh make a motion for a due
pass, um, but there is one issue
I want to talk to you about
offline and maybe be a friendly
amendment in the next committee.
It may be on the floor. I think
the standard, um, I want to
understand the difference in
standard of 25,000 small
communities and 50 or 40, I
believe it's in others. And I, I
think that we could talk about
either um making that a uniform
standard so that the smaller
areas, which seems like where
you're targeting are at the same
level, or you'll convince me
that, that you, you, you've got
the right balance, which I,
which I'll be fine with, um, or
perhaps another standard is the
size of the facility. So I know
we're anxious to move things
along here. I plan, as I said, I
want to see a due pass.
I would like to talk to you
offline about that. Thank you,
Ma. I'd be happy to do that.
Anything that'll make the bill
better, we're happy to do, and
it was driven primarily first
for the smaller cities, so I
think that's a great suggestion,
manager. Very good. Any other
questions from the committee?
OK. We can't go to, have you
make the due pass, but
you can, I can do.
OK. All righty.
Uh, Patrick to take the role.
Representative Armstrong?
Representative de la Cruz? Yes,
Representative Fernandez.
Representativealente.
Representative Mason
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy, yes.
Representative Parajon.
Representative Serrado.
Man and vice chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, yes, Madam
Chair, the final tally 8 votes,
yes, 0 votes no for the Du pass
motion. All righty, you've got a
do pass, representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you. All
righty.
Let's go to
Uh, HB 392.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
committee members, um, today
we're, we have before you
Um, how's energy environment and
natural resources can be
substitute for House Bill 392.
Um, it's relating to the
environment and acting the
single-use plastic Bag Act
prohibiting retail
establishments.
For making uh or delivering
goods using single-use plastic
bags and creating exceptions and
providing penalties that's in a
nutshell, Madam chair.
Members and with me, I have two
expert witnesses. I'll have them
introduce themselves and then
we'll stand for questions.
Good evening, Madam Chair. Um,
our representatives, my name is
Jessean. I'm uh very center of
the Office of the governor and
um myself and the other expert
are happy to answer any
questions you might have. Thank
you.
Good evening, ma'am. uh, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, um, I'm surelene
Sidney. I'm your solid waste
bureau chief in the New Mexico
Environment Department. I'm
really, um, pleased to be here
today to talk to you about this.
I do have 22 years of experience
in delivering municipal solid
waste and recycling and keep it
beautiful programs for local
government and um I really
believe this bill will help
reduce waste and um reduced
litter and help our communities.
Madam Chair Representatives, I
have a question for you to think
about.
If you walk into your bathroom
and the tub is overflowing. What
do you do first? Do you grab a
mop or do you turn off the
faucet?
Our solid waste and recycling
facilities are on the receiving
end of the faucet of these
plastic bags every day.
Plastic bags are not recyclable
in New Mexico in any collection
program, but they contribute 80%
of the contamination of
recycling streams in our state,
costing our recyclers about $3.8
million a year to clean out.
These bags are also a nuisance
to waste facilities from
landfills also spend a
tremendous amount of time and
money cleaning litter um off the
working face um and from blowing
um onto neighboring properties.
Um, but the only tools most of
these facilities have are mops.
They're, um, they're not the
only ones. The, the most recent
Keep America Beautiful national
literary study found 325 million
single-use plastic bags are
along America's roadways and
highways.
And our Department of
Transportation spent over $8
million in FY 24, um, cleaning,
uh, litter and single-use
plastic bags um along New
Mexico's highways.
And picking up that litter
again, it's just a mop. The
litter keeps coming back.
But there are even more people
with mops.
There are 74 local
government-supported, clean and
beautiful organizations across
our state, and they're there to
try to fight the litter problem,
mostly with volunteers.
Our tourism department supports
these efforts because visitors
want to see the land of
enchantment, not the land of
litter.
This bill is designed to help
local governments deal with a
nuisance of plastic bags.
It works by banning um retailers
from using single-use plastic
bags and mandating a fee for
paperbacks. The retailers keep 3
cents to help pay for the paper
bags and then remit 7 cents to
the local government for
education and enforcement.
And if local governments don't
want to receive the funds, then
the fees are remitted to the
Environment department to go
into the raid fund.
To be granted back out to
communities for illegal dumping,
abatement, and recycling
projects.
Our goal is not to replace
single-use plastic bags, and
this is really what we're
talking about. We're not going
after every piece of plastic or
every kind of plastic bag.
It's this ubiquitous
flying in the wind that tree
bag.
Um,
And, and how we won't replace
one for one is is by using that
fee to incentivize consumers to
bring their own bags, um, so in,
in my former role at the city of
Santa Fe, I was responsible for
the education of horsemen on the
city's bag band.
And I can attest that retailers
are compliant and the funds
created from the fee are a great
source for education and
reusable bags for residents.
So this bill is an easy common
sense solution to turn off the
faucet and keep litter out of
our territory. Thank you. Great.
Thank you. Um, do we have
anybody here in favor of this
bill.
Or if you'd like to speak,
you've got one minute.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Sarah
Pierrepont. I am the executive
director of the New Mexico
Recycling Coalition. We are a
statewide members supported
nonprofit. And our mission is
to, is to inspire New Mexicans
to rethink, reduce, reuse, and
recycle. Our members consisted
of cities and counties, tribal
entities, federal entities,
universities and businesses, and
all of our members in the
recycling world struggle with
these single-use plastic bags.
They cost the city of
Albuquerque approximately $4
million just in.
shutting down their equipment
and having to turn it off so
they can safely clear that
clogged item, the plastic bags
out of the equipment. They are a
nuisance and they are also a big
problem for litter along our
roadways and highways, and I
strongly encourage you to
support with a do pass this
bill. Thank you. Thank you.
Anybody else?
All right. Anybody on Zoom?
Marla Schultz.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Marla shows
registered lobbyist for South
Central solid Waste Authority.
South Central Hall's municipal
solid waste and provides
recycling services for Donana,
Otero, and Sierra Counties. Our
mission has always been to
divert waste from landfills and
prior to.
Are we playing again?
We just can't hear it.
Marla, can you hear us?
Yes, Madam Chair, can you hear
me? All right.
I think what we'll do is we'll
just put her down as um in
sport, um, if she's in the
building and she shows up in
here, we'll let her speak.
um but um
her her
so um.
Madam Chair, OK. Anybody in
opposition?
Or if you like to come up and
we've got one minute.
the New Mexico Retail
Association, uh, we do stand in
opposition to the legislation.
We, we do recognize the
importance of sustainability,
the House Bill 392 imposes the
unnecessary financial burden on
both businesses and consumers,
first with grocery prices
already a top concern for New
Mexican families. We cannot
support a policy that increases
costs at the checkout line. Uh,
additionally, the bill creates
unchecked revenue stream for
local governments, allowing them
to raise fees indefinitely.
There are no clear safeguard.
to ensure the funds are actually
used for waste reduction, uh,
and there's no cap, so it's a
local governments can increase
those fees as high as they can.
So this seems to be a revenue
driver uh for local communities.
Uh, additionally, the third, the
bill does not provide a true
statewide standard allows cities
and counties to impose
additional fees and
restrictions, leaving retailers
to navigate a confusing
patchwork of regulations. We do
stand in opposite. Thank you.
Thank you.
Anybody on Zoom that we can't
hear probably, but we can try.
Ronald Brown.
Yes, Madam Chair and committee,
uh, my name is Ron Brown. I run
a small independent
so Mr. Brown, if you can hear
us, we cannot hear you, but I,
we have noted that you are in
opposition, um.
So, that's all we can do for
right now, I guess. Uh, let's go
to the committee. I've got uh
leader Armstrong first. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you for,
uh, your, uh, presentation. Uh,
I'm curious to know, can
counties and municipalities
implement this on their own?
Madam Chair, uh, representatives
is like.
Maybe it's special.
Uh, yes, they can, uh, here in
Santa Fe, we have, we have uh
implemented that through our
local government. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I appreciate that
answer and so that's why I will
not be supporting your bill
because
My, my little small community
which doesn't have recycling,
which I mean so many communities
across the state don't have
recycling. We do it on our own.
We do our the best we can and um
I will not be supporting this
because counties can obviously
and municipalities can already
do this. Albuquerque did it and
then rescinded it. Um, Tao has
passed it but not put it in
place yet and so I just think
that passing a law at the state
level.
Mandating everyone to do it when
counties and municipalities are
already have the ability, so
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative.
Um, any other, um, any other
comments?
Representative Matthews, um.
Yes, and uh, I have my trunk,
madam chair, and
Presenters, I have my trunks
filled with.
bags that
Not plastic bags that I go into
the grocery stores and I think
they follow me around because,
you know, they think I'm
stealing things, um, and so I've
really been into the whole whole
point of not using single-use
plastic bags, um, and have
Pretty successful at it, I
think, but, um, Albuquerque's
tried this.
At least once before and maybe
more often. And I, uh, 22
comments. One is why do we think
this is going to suddenly be
successful since it in the past,
Ah really has not been
successful in community that
it's been tried, at least in
Albuquerque. That's my first
question. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, I believe when it was
implemented in Albuquerque, it
was during the COVID years and
so there were some.
There's some issues with that,
the implementation and, and that
sort of thing and so I believe
that was one of the main reasons
why I didn't come to fruition,
if you will, here in Santa Fe,
we've been doing this and I have
to in Las Cruces, I believe, and
uh there's a few and um Leo
County.
As well, so I think that this is
working and it's to do exactly
what you're doing is to really
change people's habits so that
they are not.
Choosing these, you know, to use
these, but rather um take uh
these instead, something like
this or anything or any kind of
bag which you probably have, um,
and use those instead, reuse and
reuse and reuse so that we have
less of this around and these
things polluting our waterways,
our uh our roads are, you know,
our trees. I mean, you see
these, this is the decor among
some of our landscapes and it's
pretty, it's, it's horrible.
It's come to a point where it's,
it's critical and why we are, we
are now turning to the state to,
to do the, you know, to do this
law, um, yes.
A local governments do have the
ability to make these, um, these
mandates themselves, however, we
know that, uh, and we've been
asked by even smaller, uh, small
municipalities, uh, from their,
um,
elected officials to actually
take charge and do this, Madam
Chair, members, so we feel that
this is really the responsible
time. This is the responsible
thing for our state to be doing.
Thank you.
So
On your right. I'm sorry, I'm
doing it exactly the opposite.
You know, it's Friday night,
isn't it? OK, so I'm turned
around. OK. Um, I, I under I
understand that the use of the
plastic is uh irritating to
those of us who don't like to
see the bags flying around and
all those kinds of things. So
you don't have to convince me of
that, but you have to what,
what, but what you're asking us
to do is impose this, it hasn't.
To my knowledge, worked in any
Major area in
in the in the state so far and
but my other question is, there
are now when you the the plastic
bags I use in the grocery store
are when I'm buying like
produce.
You know, and you don't, you
don't wanna just throw the
lettuce.
In the cart cause God knows
what's been in that cart. Um,
and a number of stores now are
advertising that it's a very
thin product and that it's
reusable and it's uh and it's
not.
They basically representation is
it's not this ugly awful plastic
and you're, you're a fine human
being if you put your
Lettuce in this bag.
Is that
Not true, is it true, Madam
Chair Representative.
It's an exception in this piece
of legislation that that you'd
be allowed to use those types of
bags.
But, but my question is, Madam
Chair, is it, is it really true
that these are better, a better
thing to use than other things,
Madam Chair Representative, um,
The
I'm gonna have my expert because
I have my own opinion on it, um,
as I, as to your interpretation
of the question, and she seems
to understand uh maybe better
what you're trying to say, Madam
Chair Representative, I think
you're referring to the, some of
the produce bags that say
they're compostable.
Um, Madam Chair Representatives,
things can say they're
compostable, but they really
aren't unless they go to a
commercial compost program, and
we have some of those in the
state, but they're, they're,
they're not better or worse than
a regular plastic bag if they're
just going in your trash, but I
do want to stress that those are
all that kind of bag is an
exception, and we're really just
talking about this, this kind of
bag that we're targeting.
Well, uh, Madam Chair, and is,
it's been worth being a
legislator and running for
office to learn that those bags
are pretty much fraud, um.
Anyway, I, I guess, I guess the
thing I'm looking at, you have
pretty heavy fines. These are
for the for the uh merchants, I
assume, um, what if a customer
comes up and says, I don't want,
I don't want that paper bag. I
wanna uh plastic bag.
Madam Chair Representative,
they'd have to provide it
themselves if they, if they had
the, you know, if they've had
them and they, they wanted to
use them or they'd have to pay
for them.
The customer has to the paper
bag, they would pay for that for
the paper. But if they insisted
on using a plastic bag, uh, and
we want these to go away, they
would have to have like a, I
think many of us do have some
storage containers filled with
these, so they could bring it
back to the store and reuse
them.
chair.
Um
Madam, sure, I'm, I'm sorry, I'm
very confused. If the customer
says I want a plastic bag.
They have to pay a fee to get
the plastic back. No, ma'am.
Madam Chair, um, so what will
happen, uh, that these will no
longer be available in the
stores. There would be a paper
bag option, but I, I was saying
is if you kept these at home,
like, um, some people do and you
brought it back to the store to
reuse, you could do that, and
that would fulfill their
objection or their their desire,
madam chair.
Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Just a few
questions, uh.
Madam Chair Representative, I
heard you tell.
Leader Armstrong.
That the locals could implement
this.
Themselves is that, is that true
Madam Chair Representative.
Uh, Madam Chair representative,
if they do and like Santa Fe.
Silver City, Las Cruces.
I already have these will they
still be required.
To charge the 10 cents.
What
I want above what they're
charging now.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
yes, they would be, that would
be what they would be um
required here in Santa Fe. I
know for sure we're already
doing that, and I'd asked my
expert witness too.
Comet. Um, Madam Chair
Representative, to clarify, um,
I'm gonna repeat what I think I
heard. Were you asking if, if
they already have a fee in place
with they add 10 cents to the
fee? Was that the question?
Well, I, you know, if, if I
Yes, in a way, because if I
enact one now.
That's what I have to pay. Well
they have to pay the same thing
I guess is what I'm saying.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
we, we would, um, the reason
that we left it so that cities
could um adjust the fee is, is
so that cities with the fee
already in place, if they, if
they choose to keep the
The same amount they're getting
remitted, it would just give
them that opportunity. But I
agree, I would like to see the
same fee across the across the
state, so that it does make it
easier for the retailers, so
the, the environment department
will put together a a package to
help local governments that
would include outreach
materials, sample ordinances,
um, signs, things like that, and
we'll, and we'll let them know
that, but we, we did leave it so
that they could adjust it in
case the like.
Santa Fe's feet is 9 cents to
the city and one sent to the
retailer in case they wanted to
keep that same 9 cents spread,
but I, I would hope that
everyone would standardize on
the 7 and 3.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
The, uh,
Yes, I know all about your, the,
the, the Madam Chair and
that just
Enacted
A pilot program on this, it is
not actually, I think it's a
two-year pilot.
is what they enacted to see
them.
To you, but uh
They
They had all the stuff plastered
on everything about all of this,
but uh, it, uh, Madam Chair
Representative.
Um
For anytime, you know, it'll be
some burden on this, will it not
be some burden on I have two
stores, so now I have to track.
Every bag and send you 7 cents.
On every bag that I give out, so
that's another.
job that I have to do.
When we enact this this deal.
Amo chair representative, yeah,
it'd be an inventory type of
task, which if you own a store,
you're already taking it should
be, or you might, I don't I
don't know, I don't own a store,
but I would hope that there's
some kind of uh easy inventory
process.
Madam Chair Representative.
Obviously I can't speak for your
store, but having, um, managed
the program in Santa Fe,
although the Santa Fe retailers,
it's, it's a, it's a checkout
device, so it's on the receipt,
it counts the number of bags on
the, on the receipt, and that's
the way they count and remit the
bees. Thank you, uh, thank you,
chair, um.
Work
I
Madam chair, I guess we still
haven't madam chair
and representative uh.
When you come to my part of the
country we're, we're in the
sticks.
We don't use the computer at our
checkout counters.
You know, we, we buy 10,000 bags
and stack them in the back and
they use them until they're
gone.
You know,
It the
We don't count, but don't have
a.
Any
process
Actually count bags that we
would have to implement
something evidently.
But uh I, you know, it's not.
Not every store has.
POS
check out at the, at their
houses, even here in Santa Fe,
you know, with some of the
little
single on the side, the little
ones on the plaza down here
selling jewelry on the plaza. I
doubt that they haven't received
the how many bags they gave out
today.
Um,
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
thank you for that. The, the 10
cents fee is, is really geared
towards the grocery bag. So the
smaller retailers, um, they, it
And in the Santa Fe ordinances
is written, um, probably
slightly differently, but the
smaller retailers aren't aren't
putting everything in big
grocery bags. So, um, a, a
smaller paper bag, um, or, uh,
again, uh, if you, if, if, if
you can carry something, this
is, if you can carry something
to the register, you can carry
it out without a bag. So it, it,
it, it's really not meant to be
for, you know, for everything.
We're really also trying to
drive that.
behavior change because a lot of
times when you go to the
register and you only buy one
thing, it goes right into one of
these, but it's not even
necessary. So we're, we're
trying to drive both behavior
change, um, and reduced litter.
Thank you, uh, representative.
I have a clothing store and
workwear store, you know, they
buy.
He steel-toed boots, 4 shirts
and 6 pair of pants, you're not
gonna carry it out under your
arm. We have to use this
basically the same kind of bags
that they use at a grocery
store.
We're just not this.
about keeping track of all the
bags.
You know, it, uh, but we'll move
on from there. So,
For me, the big problem is, is
the state mandating something as
Gail Armstrong, later Armstrong
said that I believe should be a
local ordinance.
Not a state ordinance. How many,
how many cities are in the state
of New Mexico.
For municipalities.
I have no idea either, so don't
just say that
I don't have,
you probably have a better guess
than I, sir. He says 10606. I
have this pizza.
How many,
how many cities are actually
have this law.
the city of Santa Fe, the county
of Santa Fe, um, uh, Carlsbad, I
had the list.
Las Cruces is um implemented it.
It is certainly a County has uh
That's good enough. I mean, it's
just to my point, there's 6 that
have it in the 100 that don't.
You know, in my, and in from
work a little statement my job.
As a representative, I don't
think it's, as I heard it said
in somebody's testimony a while
ago, change, change our
constituents' way of thinking,
you know, to me, my job is.
for me to do things to their way
of thinking. But with that, I
I'm not gonna be able to support
this bill. Thank you, though.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you,
Madam Chair. um, and
Representative, I just note the
important exemptions that we do
have in this bill, um, loose
bulk items like animals,
newspaper protection uh produce
and meats, dry cleaning,
prepared food with potential
leakage, prescription drugs and
toxic chemicals. Thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair representative, I saw that
and also, uh, we can't make
EBT snap and all of those, they
cannot be charged a fee for
their bags.
Which since in March business,
that's not a big problem. I got
to let that one slide, but thank
you again.
Thank you, uh, Chairman de la
Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative or
cattle. Do you know what year
those bags started being used by
any chance?
Madam Chair Representative, I
don't remember what year, but
I'm old enough to remember when
it happened.
Met Ma'am Chair Representative I
used to. My first job as a
teenager was bagging groceries
at Albertson's, and so
Not try to to predate myself,
but it's probably like in the um
When I started working, it was
in the early 90s and we had just
got, we had the option, so I
think it was late 80s and early
90s when they came into place.
Uh, the reason that I'm asking
is because when I was a kid, and
even into my teens, all we had
was bags, paper bags. You had
bags for groceries, and if you
went to a department store, you
got a bigger paper bag for
clothing or whatever it was.
But Madam chair, what I wanted
to share is that I actually have
a very good experience with
these, with the Burke County
enacted or banned the plastic
bags, and I thought it was gonna
be a hassle, but quickly, my
wife and I acclimated to taking
our own bags, the ones that I
carry in my truck, they folded
this little balls and I opened
them and they're great and I
don't have to worry about the
trash of those plastic things,
but one of the commitments that
I made when I ran for the county
commission was to try to clean
up the the community.
And the biggest problem that we
had all over our fields because
Where I live in the South
Valley, where we're urban and a
little agrarian with open
fields, it's a mixed kind of
mixed combo of pro of of land
and those bags are ever or were
everywhere. They would be in the
trees, they'd be in the bushes,
they'd be on your fence. They
were everywhere.
And, and members, uh, Madam
Chair, I gotta tell you that.
It's not that big of a deal.
It's just not, because if you're
gonna go to the store and you're
gonna have a lot of stuff and
it's gonna be big stuff, you,
you have the bags in your car,
your truck all the time. It's
not a big deal. The other thing
about chair and members, there's
many times where I will go into
the store and I've only, I'm
only buying a couple of items
and I just, I don't even bother
banging it at all. I just throw
in the back seat of my truck.
It's just not that big of a
deal. And also, Madam Chair,
They have these really cool
white ones.
And if you buy 6 bottles, it's
cheaper, so I, you put them in
the little compartments, they
were great. Thank you, Adam.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative for
that, for that uh storyline for
your service as our, our former
commissioner and making that
commitment to, um, Greater
Albuquerque, I think that there
is a huge demand for this and
and it's, this came, and this is
so important that we, we need to
move quickly because this is out
of control.
The pollution that this causes
the, the, the problem that
causes with our drainage, uh,
water drainage in our, our
waterways and all this sort of
thing is a huge issue and I, and
I'll take myself back to that
time as a young teenager. When I
was even then conflicted with
the use of this, and I would
ask, and I would tell the the
customers at that time because
it was a new idea and they're
getting used to it, and we were,
we're getting them used to using
this. And as a as a youth, I
would say choose the.
The paper bag.
Because it's biodegradable.
This is not biodegradable. This
does not help us, this causes
huge enormous problems and I'd
say the cost of those problems
and what happens in our bigger
cities is outweighs the the cost
of what's and the benefit and
economic benefit and the cost of
what we're asking through this
legislation. It's time to make
these changes. It's time for us
to make these decisions together
so that we can combat what we've
been conditioned to do using
this this this bag. It's
horrible and not even
we haven't even discussed what
it does to our animals, what it
does in the contaminants to our
own bodies, our own selves.
And so Madam Chair, um, I, I
just, I can't emphasize that
enough. I've been, I've been at
this um discussion, so to speak,
since I was a youth, and I made
that same commitment as you did.
Um, even then saying,
I, I choose not to use these. I,
I'd rather, I'd, I'd like us to
recondition ourselves in our, in
our population to not use these,
use an alternative re reusable
or biodegradable product, Madam
Chair.dam Chair, just one last
thing.
So I texted my wife cause she's
big on it. I'm really bad at
this aspect, but she gets a a
nickel credit per bag.
So every time we take our own
bag at Albertson's, that's where
we shop in South Valley, so we
get a a nickel credit. My
problem is I always forget to
ask for the credit. Thank you,
madam. I'm done.
Thank you, Chairman De la Cruz.
Uh, do we have a motion from the
committee.
Anybody
I move to best. Do we have a
second?
OK. Substitute motion to table.
OK, this uh tabling motion takes
precedent, Patrick take the
role.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes to table. Representative de
la Cruz, not a table
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente.
Representative Mason.
Representative Matthews.
Pa.
Representative Murphy,
yes,
Representative Parajon.
Yes to table.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair, I'm sorry, uh,
Representative Matthews.
Yeah
Madam chair.
Not a table.
And Madam Chair.
Madam Chair final tally for the
table in motion, 5 votes yes, 3
votes no.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you,
Madam Chair. We will take, well,
we'll take the vote
take manager and
That's a
A 5 to 3 men.
I can't count. It's been a long
week. Thank you very much, uh,
OK, thank you very much, um,
representative comment
Yeah, no, I just wanted to make
a comment. I made a, a
representation to um um the
Representative Lujan that if uh
you want to come down to
Rosville and Chavis County and
make the case, and I stand by
that. So let me know if I can
be, Madam Chair. Thank you, uh,
Representative. Thank you for
your time.
Thank you, Representative. Up
next we have House Bill 457. I
see Senator Scherer here to
present. Come on down.
I
give you
Well,
the story that's the most.
Because if you don't expected.
All right, Senator, we are
getting your amendments as well
as a copy of the bill with
amendments and context passed
out to the committee, but if you
would like to go ahead and begin
your presentation while we do
that. Thank you very much. Um,
thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, so
I'm Senator Sheer. This is
Robert Balch. He's from New
Mexico Tech. Uh, he's the smart
one in in this uh team right
now, so he'll answer all the
questions. But what this does
with House Bill 457 does is it
just clarifies.
The legal and regulatory
environment need to support an
effort.
For New Mexico to seek class 6
primacy wells. So these would be
carbon dioxide storage wells.
Um, today, permitting for class
6 wells is administered by the
federal government, through the
EPA.
But we can apply for it as a
state so that we can do it. 3
states have already received
primacy, 9 more have submitted
applications, and 23, as well as
the Navajo Nation have stated
their intent to pursue the
primacy.
Primacy allows us, the
legislature here, to put in
place stricter state-led
guidelines. It also allows MEd,
our state agency, to administer,
monitor, and regulate this
process rather than leaving it
to the APEPA in Dallas or
Washington DC.
Plastic swells are already
subject to strict rules and
regulations, including site
evaluations that include
geologic capacity,
poor, permeability, natural
geologic barriers.
Financial assurances, approved
monitoring, reporting and
verification procedures,
emergency response plans.
Protection for public health and
underground sources drinking
water.
House Bill 457 offers
legislative guidance to Emert.
It provides additional
requirements in New Mexico,
including tribal consultation.
Community engagement and
community benefit agreements.
Madam Chair, the members of and
the members of the committee,
not only are these bills to be
critical in combating climate
change, but they will also drive
economic innovation, diversity
and economy, and create jobs for
the Mexicans, especially those
who have already been
Displaced
According to New Mexico Building
and Construction Trades Council,
these technologies present new
opportunities for training and
skill development, enhancing the
capabilities of our workforce.
In addition, the School of
Energy, it's College stands
ready to launch training
initiatives essential for the
safe and effective
implementation of carbon storage
products projects.
My co-sponsors and I are proud
to have spent the last 12
months.
Talking with agencies, national
experts, environmental groups,
tribes, community organizations,
and trade associations to craft
legislation that we believe
balances a wide range of
concerns and needs.
So what's that, we're ready to
stand for questions. Well, he
is.
Thank you very much, Senator.
Um, and so all those handouts
have been passed out and there
is also an amendment. Could you
read us the 0.23 number.
The, uh
So the number is 231-706.1.
Thank you. Do we have a motion
to Madam, I move the uh.
The amendment for discussion.
Excellent. Would you like to uh
go over the amendment, please.
So it's very simple here in the
original bill, it didn't have
tribal consultation policy, and
so this does that.
Fantastic. Do we have anybody in
the room in support of, oh,
actually, do we need to move it
for adoption first. Thank you.
I'm sure I move it, the
amendment for adoption, so
excellent. We have a motion for
adoption and a second, uh, you
have an adopted.
Amended bill. Do you have
anybody in the room in support
of the bill?
OK anybody in the room.
You have one minute. Thank you.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Carlos
Lucero with this public service
company in New Mexico. Carbon
capture and storage technologies
is still quite a ways off into
the future, however, should CCS
become a reality, and with this
legislation, New Mexico would be
positioned to be able to
sequester carbon deep
underground, also given the
complexity of the energy
transition, the increased
electricity demand, and all of
the above approach.
Needed with respect to
generation CCC would be a viable
option in the future for
managing carbon emissions from
CO2 generating facility should
CCS become viable and cost
effective for these reasons, PNM
supports this bill. Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have anyone on
Zoom in support of the bill.
No. OK. Do we have anybody in
the room in opposition to the
bill?
OK. And anyone on Zoom?
OK, go ahead. You have one
minute. Morgan O'Grady.
Thank you. Thank you. That's
time. Thank you very much for
your comments, um, committee
members.
Representative Murphy. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair, Senator, and
Doctor Bolt, um,
Remember talking about this in
energy not too long ago. And,
um, Senator and and uh
Doctor Walsh, um, would you
agree that, uh,
Carbon capture technology, in
terms of the mechanics, the
materials, the understanding of
the geologic reservoirs is a
pretty
Well, uh, developed area of
science and practical
application.
Monsieur Representative.
Um,
absolutely, probably the biggest
pure carbon storage project in
the world has been going on
since 1996 in the North Sea out
of Norway about 1 million tons
per year.
For the last 25 years.
Also in the US we have had
projects that have gone into the
3 to 4 million ton range.
We have routinely, uh, permanent
acid gas disposal wells which
are primarily CO2 disposal and
exactly the same kind of
formation using exactly the same
kind of wells, 25 of those in
New Mexico, around 50 in Texas,
another 20 in Canada. These have
been going on for, for two
decades, and then for as well
recovery, of course, more than
60 years, so.
Very mature technology.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Doctor Balch for that
explanation. Would you also
agree that, um, when you're
sequestering CO2, you're doing
it in a very distinct and sealed
reservoir that is separate, um,
both horizontally, uh, and uh
vertically from any other
reservoirs that may contain any
other material including water,
oil, gas, or whatever. And I'm
really, uh, I'm trying to
respond somewhat to the, the
question that came over the
The web.
Amen chair representative.
Uh yes, in fact, what we're
doing here is we're setting up a
framework for class 6 primacy
for New Mexico to adopt classics
primacy, they have to take the
EPA Class 6 bill.
Which is very stringent.
We have added to that, uh,
explicit protection protections
for uh surface owners for uh
mineral rights holders.
And uh you can't in New Mexico,
of course, uh, you know, waste
somebody else's resource, so.
Existing formations, yes.
And, um, Madam Chair and panel,
um, I note that and I can't
remember if it's in this bill or
or perhaps another companion
bill, you, uh, you have actually
sort of the legal framework,
the, the, the unitization
framework, all of the tools that
we that this state has used for
years to make sure that there's
a fair process that people are
able um to, to join in that
should they choose to, um, and
so those are also from a legal
an administrative standpoint,
well understood processes and,
and uh applications, they're now
being applied to to this area.
Is that, would you agree with
that?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative.
Yes
Um, Madam Chair Representative
just about to the end, um, I
think it had to do, oh, I know
what it was, um, this committee
and other committees in this
body, um, it talks a lot about
the various um energy sources
that are available here in the
state. Um, and we are all sort
of grappling with, with how to
to uh to manage those resources
uh as we move forward to the
next transition in, in energy.
Um,
so with that, um, absent this
sort of bill and this sort of
structure, would you agree that
um we would lose a very valuable
tool in our toolbox, uh, were we
not to do this.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative.
Uh, absolutely all of the major
governmental bodies in the
world. I'll tell you in just 6
to 8 billion tons a year of CO2
stored to have a chance to meet
the Paris court.
can't do it with without it.
And Madam Chair Representative.
It's not just talking about
fuel.
So fertilizer.
comes from natural gas.
And so on that nation
Navajoation agricultural
products industry nappy.
They're getting ready to do
this.
So you, you, you split the
natural gas, some of its CO2.
They're ready to put it in the
ground right there.
So the whatever communities was
mentioned of Navajos ready to
put it in the ground right now.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Doctor Baltz, one
last thing, um, New Mexico is
blessed with a number of energy
resources. We've also been a
leader in energy technology, and
it's something that we export,
something that, that makes our
citizens money every day. Um, so
I see coming out of this an
expansion of that, um, it's
certainly gonna create a lot of
jobs, and one of the things that
I'm really excited about is the
fact that it's gonna create jobs
in an area that needs them very
much. And so I'll conclude with
that. Thank you, Madam Chair,
panel.
OK. Thank you, Representative
Murphy, Representative Parajon.
Thank you, madam. Bye, ma'am.
Um, thank you. Oh, sorry. Um, I
just have a few questions. I, I,
I
Heard about this bill and, and I
have been talked to about this
bill and um obviously as a young
person, I care a lot about my
future. I care a lot about um
the future of
Yeah, my friends in this state
and in this world and climate
change has always been at the
forefront of my generation, um,
and understanding what might
happen if we don't take action
and so I, I'm I'm conflicted
when I see this bill, I, I've
been told about really, really
great things that are in this
bill and also I'm reading the
analyses and they just are um
really in conflict with some of
the things I've heard, so I just
wanna really hear um from
yourself.
and um from you expert really
what um what this really is
going to do positively. So I
just have 3 questions and, uh,
the first is about classic
supremacy and um getting that
from the EPA. This is one of the
things that I think is one of
the most positive developments
because um.
As I understand it with classic
supremacy, that means that we as
New Mexicans can determine the
quality that we want, um, for
this industry, but if the EPA
were to establish more strict
requirements, would we have to
comply with those, or would we
be able to do looser
restrictions, Madamture and
experts.
Madame Representative.
Uh, to, to adopt class s
privacy, not supremacy, in
Mexico, um, you have to, to meet
or exceed EPA standards. If the
EPA standard changes to become
more strict, you would have to
adjust your, your rule
accordingly. I think the bigger,
the bigger thing to think about
right now is that next year it
might actually be less strict at
the federal level.
And uh it's a good time for New
Mexico to be looking at it for
that reason.
Uh, Madam Speaker, and I'm a
representative. I, that is one
of my biggest concerns. I mean,
we've seen the different Supreme
Court cases rolling back the
power of the EPA, so, um, it, it
does make me feel a lot better
that we as New Mexicans will be
able to determine what happens
on our on our land, um, so that
was kind of both, uh, rolled in
together and then the other
question that I had is where the
state land offices on this, and
that was something that was uh
kind of mentioned throughout in
the analysis, um.
But if you could speak a little
bit to that.
Madam Chair Representative, I, I
can't speak for the land office.
Uh, I do, I do have a number of
former students that work there
and a lot of colleagues that
that are on the land office.
Land Office has a job. They need
to monetize the uh the land that
they have for the benefit of the
state of New Mexico.
Uh, one thing that 457 does is
it defines pore space.
puts it with the circus owners
and that essentially creates a
new mineral right.
That uh creates another
opportunity for, for the state
land Office to monetize their
resources. So I think at the end
of the day, uh this would be a
positive thing for them.
I can't speak for that.
Absolutely, thank you, Madam
Chair, and, um, senator, uh,
yeah, those are my main two
questions, and again, I, I do
think we, we need more solutions
for the future, um, whether
that's increasing our um
capacity for wind power and
transmission lines, um, whether
it's new technologies. I believe
that we as New Mexico should be
at the forefront of energy, uh,
and, and the future of it.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator.
Thank you. Do we have any other
questions from the committee?
Uh, Chair Dela Cruz.
I'd like to madam, I'd like to
move a pants.
OK
We've got an emotion and a due
pass. I will, I just wanted to
add because I wasn't here for
some of the conversation that
would know, I, I was, uh,
chairing the interim committee
and we were in Farmington, uh,
over the summer and I, I went in
with a very different idea of
what, what this was. And after
the presentation, um, which I
thought was done really well,
uh, gave me a lot of information
and I felt um definitely much
Better about it and I, I do
think it's a, a job, um,
It's, it's good for job
starters, it's good for the
economy and I would like to see
is um pushing at least ideas for
for New Mexico and so for us to
continue this conversation and
so with that, Patrick, um, will
you take the role that has
has a.
Madam Chair, I do pass as a man.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Hernandez, yes.
Oops, I'm, I'm sorry.
Representative Dela Cruz. Yes.
Representative Fernandez.
Representative Lee.
Representative Mason
Representative Matthews.
Yes
Representative Murphy, yes,
Representative Padahon.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, yes, Madam
Chair, the final tally for the
Du pass as amended motion 9
books, yes, 0 votes no. Senator,
you have a pass. Thank you.
Real quick, Madam Chair, I, I
just think that he should bring
us chocolate instead of rocks.
Do we need a second on that
aren't as good as a box of
rocks, but this is really a jar
of space. We can change your
name then. Thank you.
All right, I'll thank you for
moving quickly today. I do
appreciate that and I know my
husband does, so thank you and
we're adjourned. Thank you.
