Representative Serrato.
Here.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Vice chair Figueroa.
I am here.
Chairman my estimates here thank
you so we have a quorum if I
could ask Miss cerebral work to
raise your hand.
So we can find you there is
approximately thirty five folks
in the attendee room we want to
welcome everybody for being here
will here house bill one hundred
forty three and then house bill
one hundred seventy six
Representative set up the we'll
be presenting those to bills.
And then house bill one hundred
ninety one Representative Gaydos
Representative Gail Armstrong.
So if you could let miss up
serve over into the into the
zoom I see her hand and I
believe she's here but in a take
your view but not when you speak
of agency
This buzzword and I will turn
over to you Representative said
after you have the floor.
Thank you Mr chairman I
appreciate your time and the
committee's time stay on today I
am presenting.
Put my notes section here hi
house bill one forty three which
would appropriate five million
dollars of non reoccurring funds
within the higher education
department to support
accelerators are through
community colleges or through a
higher education that we seen
proven successful across the
nation our community colleges
have always and our continued to
fall to be even better hi are
working with the local economy
and look working with local
businesses and workers to make
sure that they are filling the
the Economic beans locally and
we've seen that with the
increase of certification
programs you know in our local
communities to make sure that
workers can get trained and
shorter amount of times so
they're filling those roles were
immediately then I degree
program which typically takes
years and can be a little more
difficult for community members
to achieve.
Well we've left so so what this
does is it allows them to create
such a cohort model for
developing businesses in their
very early stages and connects
them to so many resources and
and support that they may need
and also continuing to support
and build out the work force
that we want to grow has a few
the analyses have shown there's
a few different programs that
already do exist arrowhead and
you and leave you have a.
Sorry you've ever had you also
have ingenuity studio at CNM you
know up here in Santa Fe New
Mexico Santa Fe community
college there working with new
caller and which is not an
accelerator but I believe would
like to become one.
And again across the state San
Juan college has a relevant and
so you that these are programs
that are that are vaulting and
really in my conversations are
eager to grow we looked at the
best ways to kind of connect
accelerators to businesses to
workers and what we were seeing
again again is that they succeed
best when they're either within
a particular business that is
growing in particular slew of
skills or if there through an
educational component and so
that's what we look to our you
know ever growing at community
college resources that are
really being responsive to
what's happening my expertise
Serra of the bill there in she
is with new caller up here in
Santa Fe so if you'd like to say
a few words I'm happy to hand it
over to you.
Sure so we're of lab here in
Santa Fe at the higher education
centers affiliated with MIT and
for one of two thousand labs
around the world and we are also
affiliated with the Santa Fe
community college and so we have
a really robust
of excel reader innovator thank
you bait or a program an MIT and
one of the things that I see in
New Mexico is a gap.
We talk about how we really want
to focus on manufacturing
intelligent manufacturing on the
island there are there are
you're right there are
accelerators and there are
incubators but I'm not seeing
the kind of rapid prototyping of
that people need if they're
truly making a thing of a real a
real object of we did some work
with of a skier in tells who was
wanting to our in the a new a
new design on a ski object we
had someone who had a of medical
device that was actually for he
needs in closure it's for
labeling these syringes for in a
static so it's kind of scary
working with him because it
turns out they have a real
problem with getting the correct
of medications and also they're
not expired and he had taken a
are and we prototyped the.
Closures for hand in us people
tell us that it's hard to find
not it's really hard to find
that kind of hands on and then
the other thing is I come from
manufacturing so I'm I need a
hundred
plus thousand coronary stents
for Johnson and Johnson a month
in a company that I sold in the
years ago and that that quantum
leap from going from the
prototype to how you actually
manufacture in high volume
economically and quickly is also
something that there's a lot of
need for and so when we started
looking at the US you know my
particular interest was how can
we fill that gap.
There is an awful lot of
you know help that people will
get can get on financials and
accounting and marketing and
promotion but I'm I'm not seeing
as much tactical help for the
manufacturing sector which is
one of the seven sectors that
the state is up of promoting
that we dance.
So that was my thought process
to.
Chairman those are that's the
basis the basis of our our
presentation I'm happy to and
back to you.
Thank you very much now let's
hear from the members of the
audience there's thirty nine
folks in the attendee room.
All those who wish to speak in
favor of house bill one forty
three Gordon raise your hand but
it just press the raise your
hand button.
Anyone was to speak in favor and
one was to speak in opposition.
Members of the committee.
We have a few questions so
Representative set up of the
I see this is an appropriations
bill and it'll go to our.
Yes.
The the the the proposed five
million goes to where it goes to
schools where.
I would go to H. G. C. R. M.
higher higher education
department for disturbing those
bonds and so on if you something
else is there couple different
ways they could do it they can
split evenly what we had
discussed was having more of a
compact and competitive process
for programs that we're
developing in again in
educational institutions higher
education solutions the state.
Thank you and Representative
with this with this you just
before your institutions or.
Or or like the me and C. N. M.
for example could could qualify.
Thank you Mr chairman it would
be would be also for community
colleges and in fact that's
where the idea Sanchez so in net
again initial conversations and
all sorry the conversation
developing the bill on we were
looking at if you know Mason
eight right has a wonderful
program.
Okay.
It were the Santa Fe community
college or C. N. M. you know
there are some wonderful
programs going on and even to
enhance what's already exists
with you know San Juan college.
Thank you
And you know if
Some some funding was put in
house bill two regarding this
programs thank you Mr chairman
not at this point we're looking
at a couple of different
pots that exist and that may be
able to can include this in
their so there's for example
some venture capital funding
that we were that that we have
that's already been appropriated
and so working with them with
that I'm and then also working
with the Senate to see if
there's a way that if we don't
get the five million dollar mark
to see if we can do something to
the Senate.
Thank you very much
Representative Figueroa
question.
Thank you chair I think it's
some of my questions were
answered I just want to clarify
is the primary focus here to
expand and grow accelerators
that already exist or is the
primary goal to start new ones.
This is really the data
collection.
Thank you Mr chairman by and
then by chair that's a wonderful
question I think you know again
the idea is to get some of these
off the ground on really support
the creation of accelerators in
more parts of our state and so
that's that's the intention of
it and and and then the the the
reporting is to ensure that the
money is being used.
No not correctly but
responsibly.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
sponsored we'll get all of that
fabulous data that is listed in
the bill to see whether it
really works and whether we want
to dedicate more funds to this
and future.
The.
Go ahead I'm sorry what other
part of the answer should be
clear about is that beginning an
accelerator as you you heard was
there as is not just a an easy
thing that someone could just
come and do there is experience
you have to have in the field
understanding how that works and
really you know bringing those
elements together so even if
these are new programs that
would have to still be wrong or
or pursued by those that you
have experience in the field I
just want to clarify that as
well.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
sponsor did I just hear you say
that the goal is competitive
funding that folks will need to
apply for that okay thank you
that answers all my questions
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you madam vice chair of
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Can you all hear me we sure can
okay thank you
I guess my question is we went
through a period of developing
incubators all over the state
I'm putting off a lot of money
into incubators so how this is
different differ what we already
have in place.
Those dollars being spent in
that due to the
Comment.
That we're never use so can
someone explain that to me.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative for the question
I think that's that's a
wonderful question because it
really does come down to the
difference between an
accelerator and and and and
thank you better to be honest
and that's what we're looking
for at this point because in any
keep and and and need to be to
bring these companies together
in many ways where is an
accelerator gives kind of more
in depth US support to
businesses Sir do you want to
kind of answer that also a
little bit thank you your
experience will speak more that
I can.
Sure thank you the I'm just the
word expresses an incubator is
something we're typically people
can go and get support but it
doesn't have the urgency that an
accelerator has an accelerator
takes people from of the point
that they are very quickly and
so typically in the accelerator
people don't stay for years they
typically will come in it's very
intense the trainings are
intense it tends to be on
companies that have large
potential markets where market
entry is
determined by who's first to
market and so when you're
starting to look at things in
the state like biotech and I'm
on the board of the bioscience
Authority and you know we're
really trying to grow the of
bioscience US secretary and
that's a very competitive field
and so excel raiders are short
term that last and very intense.
And there's are not Mr Chairman.
What is.
I'm thinking as far as time
spent because they both sound a
lot a live.
And it seems like that there
would be just a short transition
from being an incubator and to
celebrate because after I have
an idea developed the idea and
then sell it.
The idea of the product for have
you and so
it seems to sounds like we're
splitting hairs because we
already have some of this.
In place and has funding already
behind.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative I think that's
right you know at NMSU submitted
an analysis of of the bill and
what they really highlighted was
what Eric had accelerator the
accelerator program was doing
and in their example they had
they had a first year budgeted
two hundred thousand dollars and
then they already had some stuff
bills through you know what are
it had existed and it grew
within a year to support for
forty two jobs and their
economic impact that the
anticipated in here on the talk
about labor income of three
point two million dollars of an
effect on the value added a four
point eight million dollars
value added so you know if they
can produce fairly quickly and
again you know the experience of
our community colleges of being
responsive to the economic needs
of our community you know I I
kind of I I I will say I rely on
that because they've been really
stepping up to that challenge as
far as much as they can.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you very much members of
the committee.
Yes Mr chairman.
We have a motion for a do pass.
A second.
We have a second by
Representative Gallegos a do
pass motion by by your Figueroa.
be good for.
The.
Appropriation committee to.
To learn more about this
innovative bills so with that
will call the roll.
Representative Dow yes.
Present at the heart of yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Serrato yes.
Vice chair Figueroa yes.
Chairman Mr.
Yes so you have a I do pass
which are set up though no.
House bill one hundred forty
three thank you well good and
stay in the.
In the proverbial.
The hot seat and we will now
hear with regards to house bill
one hundred seventy six we have
a.
Treasure I can bear with us is
there anyone else you wish to
have it have you to join you at
the at the presentation table
thank you Mr chairman can I also
get cloudy army who's the
executive director of the work
as a program and Lynn Hoffman
who is the chairman of the.
The chairman of Wirth say
this often if you could up raise
your hand in the zone that we
can find your name is here
there's forty six persons in the
attendee.
Rural.
Sodomy was with us.
The gentle lady's name is
Hoffman.
When.
If you could raise your hand to
help us provide you.
With the green app.
So this happens with us miss our
meal what are you brought in
Good and start thank you Mr a
representative set up.
Thank you Mr chairman so House
bill one seventy six whisk was
requested by the work and save
program that is looking to
expand this program that or grow
this program that we are we
passed a couple years ago
what it does is it creates a
three hundred or tax credit per
year up to five years for a
private sector for private
sector employers who enroll in
the work and save hiring program
administered to the state
treasurer's office it also
requires businesses who have
been in business for at least
two years have five or more
employees to register at work in
state and offer their workers
the option to save for their own
retirement there is no penalty
if you do not in role but if you
do Raul you get the three
hundred dollar tax credit
on there is no charge register
there's no employer liability on
new employer boarding it's run
by the state entirely this
enhances our ability to make the
pool as large as possible so
that we can work with the
Colorado workings a program as
well on and get the you know the
best possible coverage best
possible rates for for our
employees are enrolled in the
program
all I would I'm sorry also does
add to full time employees
our financial analyst and
marketing outreach coordinator
which you know to to also
support in that that outreach
the agency Hochman or or or
attorney who if you'd like to
add anything I'd like to add it
to you all as well.
Mr Chairman representative
Serrato this is Claudia army how
may I speak Mr chairman.
The representative at the winter
experts have the floor thank
you.
So Mister chairman members of
the committee is such a pleasure
to be with you today I want to
thank Representative Serrato and
of course senator bill Tom and
for joining her on sponsoring
this bill real quickly locally
Representative Serrato did a
great job of explaining what the
bill does if you look at it it's
seventeen pages long I know that
can seem kind of long but the
reason it's so long is simply
because we had to make minor
changes in a number of sections
to make sure there were no inter
Act conflicts within the bill.
But it's really a very simple
bill it does two things it
requires that as of July first
twenty twenty two so this July
it's going to require six
thousand four hundred and sixty
two private sector employers
that's about forty percent of
the fifteen thousand five
hundred plus private sector
employers right now in New
Mexico that are unable and do
not offer a workplace retirement
plan so it will require them to
register and participate in the
our program.
The all they have to do they
register and then they're going
to upload their employee roster
with basic payroll information
name date of birth that kind of
thing it's free to register the
registration takes about ten
minutes and we have experience
on that with the other three
states that have already started
implementing this program.
And then they will add one new
category to their withholding in
their payroll processing and now
will be a withholding for the
workers voluntary contributions
to their own personal IRA
account it's important to point
out this is not an employer
sponsored account the employer
is not liable for the
performance of the funds and
that's actually stated very
clearly in our statute you may
already remember that the second
thing the bill does is it
provides a three hundred dollar
annual tax credit eighty
employer that would be eligible
for this tax credit would be any
employer that did not have a job
for one K. in place already on
July first two thousand twenty
two that starts sponsoring a
plan on or after that date.
Or if they don't want to sponsor
a planner they can't sponsor
plan they don't want to be
bogged down with with what that
entails legally and otherwise
they can register with New
Mexico work in state the R.
program.
So there is like the Sanchez
said there's no penalty for
employers and there's no
enforcement mechanism we're not
asking for that we're not
seeking it and that's why we
really don't call this a mandate
would call order requirement.
Now I just want to explain
because I don't I don't think
most people understand
understandably so because these
are new programs but what is
required in New Mexico or any
other state to set up an auto
IRA program we have to contract
with to set the third party
contractors outside vendors we
need a program administrator
this is the entity that really
operates the work and save our
program it is the record keeper
they have custody custody of the
accounts the workers accounts
and they work with the worker
when say a worker wants to opt
out which of course they can do
it anytime they don't go to
their employer they go to the
program administrator and they
say I want to opt out the
program administrator relays
that information to the employer
so the price of payroll
processing can be changed the
other vendor that we need to
contract with our for the
investment managers we want to
have we want to be in the
position to ensure that we can
negotiate for low cost
investment products for our
workers that are going to open
these accounts.
Now the way to do that is we
will issue RFPs out in the
financial services provider
arena and we hope of course that
they will respond.
What we have learned through our
three part research research
study that was conducted by both
you and Ms bureau of business
and economic research that you
all know is bureau and Boston
College there center for
retirement research what we've
learned we got those studies
backed by the way that the final
the beginning of January and I
would be remiss if I didn't
mention right now that those
were funded entirely by our
advocacy partners of A. A. R. P.
so we got very index research
projects study's results that
I'm happy to share with anyone
by the way in.
What we learned is that in New
Mexico we have about four
hundred and forty thousand
workers they do not have access
to any kind of workplace
retirement plan now that's a
high percentage of New Mexicos
workforce but in a world of
financial service providers
that's not a very big number so
these vendors both the vestment
managers and program
administrators when they decide
whether or not to engage with
New Mexico under that R. F. P.
that we issue they're gonna look
at numbers they want to know how
soon will we be profitable if we
contract with the state of New
Mexico and even if we had a
hundred percent participation
which of course unfortunately we
won't four hundred and forty
thousand.
It's not a huge number these are
accounts by workers that aren't
making most likely upwards of a
hundred thousand dollars a year
so five percent of their
paycheck is going to use slowly
but surely increased but it's
gonna take awhile for these
vendors to see any kind of net
positive results so they're
going to look at our numbers and
they're going to project how
long until they are cash flow
positive.
So.
Started looking at other ways.
I'm sorry misery I just wanna
make sure we had enough time for
the the chairwoman as well so
that we can get into the COVID
stays on there if you want to
wrap up.
Absolutely I can I can summarize
by saying we're we want to
partner with Colorado so we can
combine those potential accounts
from our four hundred and forty
adding in their nine hundred
eighteen thousand we're looking
at one point three million and
I'll I will yield the floor
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative set up
to what you just so take your
visitation and then we'll go to
members of the committee I was
speaking you could tell.
Mr as for the chairwoman of
health care would often if you
like to say a few words and then
we will move over to a public
comment in the committee thank
you thank you very much Mr
chairman thank you very much
Representative Serrato for
letting a set percent today L.
as was indicated this is an
important initiative to address
what ensure hand is a looming
retirement poverty crisis for
our private sector workers sixty
four percent of workers in New
Mexico have no money saved for
retirement.
The number four hundred thousand
is a good number to work with in
this category and the median
income for this worker category
is about nineteen thousand.
Well social security can be
counted on for about forty nine
percent of pre retirement income
well and our partner in research
it bureau has estimated that the
demands on the state budget if
we fail to address this by
creating a workplace savings
option will be close to two
billion dollars by nineteen
thirty five so we have a mandate
from the legislature to address
this in a meaningful way and we
are the only state in the nation
that has not required the
employers and the secretary to
register and enroll their
employees as Claudia indicated
this is a requirement but it's a
soft one it's a not up mandate
or penalty we prefer a positive
incentive based approach which
is what the tax credit is
designed to provide and by
moving from this voluntary to
required enrollment system we
will move from the very low
participation level that is not
financially viable and will not
attract any of the financial
services provider's required to
stand up a program to getting
the participation over a
reasonable period of time half
of this population we also have
the opportunity by moving in
this direction and aligning our
statutes of partnering with
Colorado it will be the first
multi state partnership in the
country
New Mexico wants to be first.
Thank you Mr chairman on.
us we also Senator Tallman who's
a cosigner on this bill and has
a competing bill in the Senate
as well.
If you can save your marks by
all means Senator.
Welcome senator co sponsored.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair can you hear
me we sure can't but thank you
for giving me opportunity I'll
be very brief.
In two thousand twenty Senator
Padilla myself for the prime
sponsors of the original what
work and say fill in the
governor thought it was such a
big deal she had to sign the
signing ceremony in our office
this I have thirteen bills is
here this is one of my top three
priorities very important to me
is already been said we have a
more than three four hundred
forty thousand private sector
workers who do not have access
to retirement savings thirty
percent of the retirees in New
Mexico are living on social
security only which average
payments forty fourteen thousand
hours which this is not enough
to lead a dignified and safe
retirement we are one of a.
The top three states as far as
the number of people who have
very little or no savings so
what that means is the less
savings people have the more
that the state is going to have
to.
That.
We have to both create for
social services so the more they
say the less.
This is the more that the
citizens save the last the state
has to provide for social
programs so this is very
important that the bill with me
and I appreciate the time and
The answer any questions thank
you Mr chair and tastic thank
you senator anything else
Representative set up the.
No but we do have state
treasurer I might have to make a
point here is well sept you Mr
chair this is your committee
he will he will be first up for
public comment thank you Sir
that's all we have thank you all
right thank you we're going to
go to public comment now the
terrible treasurer Tim
Eichenberg is with us here in
the on the Dyess so he's a he's
a panelist for the entire
hearing as a courtesy.
Of the attendees that wish to
address the committee please
raise your.
Zoom hands and we will call a
new one wanted time well folks
are raising their hand of the
zoom why don't we go to a our
first a person for public
comment welcome welcome I will
treasure I can for.
Thank you Mr chairman that very
kind introduction
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you first of all
for your service and
specifically for your time and
support to discuss legislative
changes needed to make Wirth say
the I will programs moving
forward.
Four years ago we started this
program to give hundreds of
thousands of New Mexicans and
opportunities save for their
retirement it was voluntary for
the businesses and voluntary for
the employees hi sorry don as
many of you do it because it
gave us a chance to help so many
people that have no savings
accounts good legislation that
helps people.
With the last year shown working
J. board through several those
studies that caught your Vigil
mentioned.
UNM's bureau of business and
economic research in Boston
college's center for retirement
research is that this program as
it is will only reach about one
percent of its intended
population that's one percent of
its intended population with a
voluntary provision for the
justices.
That's why I'm proud to support
the changes laid out today that
will require participants by our
businesses with five or more
employees that's participation
are businesses with five or more
employees I say our because my
wife owns one of those
businesses with five or more
employees this legislation also
gives us the opportunity to
create a partnership as Colorado
to maximize our economy at
state.
Of scale Mr chairman my
understanding is that treasurer
gave young from Colorado was on
the call may I introduce John
treasurers young from Colorado
and also a former public school
teacher to allow him to speak at
UC on on the
Let's get em let's bring a man
up a radically raises hand first
this spring and then and then
I'll allow you to introduce him.
A treasure young if you could on
meet yourself we have muted you
on our side.
Representative Mike are a
treasure I can but please.
I'm thank you
Mr chair again the reason why we
want to partner with the state
of Colorado is because the
economy of scale on this army
help you do that at great so I
will not I'm.
No introduction for me other
than to to.
Great changes hard to all of New
Mexicans I will tell you again
he's a former public school math
teacher so treasury on.
Sh
sh.
Welcome.
Mr chair can you hear me your
can.
Very good afternoon Jeremih
Estes but sure Figaro Figaro in
members of the house commerce
and economic development
committee treasure I can Berg is
such a pleasure to have this
opportunity to work with you and
I appreciate the kind words I am
in fact the thirty five years in
education to ten and I are read
but the twenty five years as a
junior high math science and
technology teachers so.
But currently I am the treasurer
of the state of Colorado and I'm
here in support of house bill
zero one seven six the
retirement savings facilitation
tax credit thank you for
allowing me to share comments
with you on Colorado's approach
to its retirement crisis in the
importance of a multi state
partnership promoting retirement
security for workers and
businesses half of working age
Coloradans in the private
sector.
A lack access to retirement
savings plan at work.
As costs of living rise social
security benefits alone are
insufficient to support retirees
needs this problem
disproportionately affects
minority and low wage workers
the Colorado General Assembly
created the Colorado secure
savings program in twenty twenty
recognizing that eighty two
percent of Coloradans agree it
is getting harder to prepare for
retirement.
A viable impactful multi state
retirement savings program must
be attractive to the private
sector a program administrators
that the agency army talked
about and be financially proven
prudent for both state and
savers alike partnerships with
strategic minded states like New
Mexico will help foster
economies of scale the drive
down costs for savers and
taxpayers the principles of
simplicity and accessibility are
critical is we design and
impactful state facilitated
retirement program employer and
employee role that will and
should only take minutes we
appreciate the strategic
thinking and collaboration of
The New Mexico's treasurer's
office and New Mexico working
state program and board as they
continue pro adjoining Colorado
or consider joining Colorado in
becoming the first in the nation
first in the nation to provide a
multi state retirement program
house bill zero one seven six
inch course that New Mexico's
private sector workers can find
a path to financial security and
a dignified retirement I ask
careers full support of this
bill Mr chair that concludes my
prepared remarks hunter really
the program director of the
secure savings program here
Colorado is with me today and
both of those are happy to
answer any questions that you or
the committee members may have
thank you.
Thank you judge I can work thank
you chose young what do you stay
with us here on the Dyess
obviously if you have to leave
no worries when I got tremendous
responsibilities will now go to
members of the audience up all
announce your name will bring
you into the the zoom room and
then on mute yourself first
we'll hear from Melissa Coleman
followed by hunter Raley.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members and that.
Sponsors of this bill my name is
Melissa Coleman and I am the
owner and president of the party
originals in Santa Fe I have a
company that is a manufacturing
facility I'm and are
consistently have twenty plus
employees I'm at my company in
the last twenty years that I've
owned my company at not aren't
in able to afford a our savings
program fire a program at to my
employees are because of the
cost as an employer and they
required and
Costs that go along with those
the employer sponsored programs
and also because of actuation
and income I do my industry so I
am here to arms support yes
bill and not only as an employer
in the state of New Mexico but
also as a member of the board of
the working safe.
Program and I had the honor of
serving on this board and I
believe I'm that with the
opportunity to offer this to and
workers in New Mexico that and
my workers in particular and it
will all be able to save I'm for
our retirement institute here so
I thank you for the time and I
appreciate the opportunity to
speak to you today.
Yes or a hunter Raley followed
by Carter Bundy.
Thank you Mr chairman I am just
here I am the program director
for the Colorado secure savings
program so I'm just here to
support of the Q. and A.'s
should any be directed towards
Colorado.
Thank you David we'll go out and
keep you here up next thanks to
us on that I just Mr Carter
Bundy followed by Eric can done.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee Carter graduated
with actually I'm also a member
of the work in state board our
members actually have a good
retirement with peril and some
with the R. B. R. but we have
always fought for good
retirement you get paid for all
workers what we especially like
about this program is that it
really is important some on the
employer there's no liability
there's no cost there's no on
going operational activities
really just making a sign of
available to workers and also
representing state employees one
of the things we're always
concerned about is sometimes the
cost of social programs
especially for seniors can be
incredibly high this would be
something that allows people to
retire with dignity to be self
sufficient to not be as reliant
on government programs and it's
a real source of pride and
dignity for people so not only
is this good for the state of
New Mexico and for taxpayers we
think it also gives employers
something that they can say Hey
you could get a retirement plan
with us that the employer
doesn't have to do anything to
run and most importantly it's a
humane and decent thing to do to
give workers the opportunity to
say for themselves and their
families thank you so much for
your time.
Thank you Sir Eric internal
followed by Is there is empty.
Thank you Mr chair my name is
Eric in town I'm the owner of
performance maintenance
incorporated or PMI located in
Espanola New Mexico and I'm a
proud board member of the New
Mexico
saving aboard safe
I've got done hundred eighty
employees
are based out of Espanola New
Mexico and it would be awesome
if I could offer them a
retirement.
This put it next to be second
throws a retirement plan and so
I'm advocating that this so this
legislation gets passed thank
you Sir.
Thank you eyes is empty followed
by Sarah fitzgerald.
Yes good afternoon Mister
chairman I asked to send
committee members my name as I
said is that the and I am a you
representative for the sheet
metal workers local forty nine
of New Mexico I represent over
nine hundred sheet metal workers
in the private industry all of
which have access to retirement
benefits such as defined
contribution plans also known as
four one Kays and defined
benefit plans also known as
pensions I also recite as a
committee member on the work and
state board my main concern is
not for the members and
Representative but for the over
four hundred thousand workers
that do not have access to a
retirement plan.
If we do not require employers
to provide this benefit the work
in state mission will not be
achievable and workers will not
be able to live a dignified
retirement therefore I am asking
for your support on house bill
one seventy six and thank the
sponsors for bringing this
measure for thank you.
Sarah fitz Gerald followed by.
Rob black.
we're actually in opposition
would you like me to hold off.
Yes please of the if you wish to
speak and in favor of the bill
please raise your hand if you
wish to speak in favor of the
bill if you wish to speak in
opposition.
Of wait a moment and then I'll
I'll you know I'll give the word
so good and we're gonna allow
allow Mr Cheryl to jump out.
And
Mr back here in in favor
opposition.
All right great next will.
Representative chairman I'm in
opposition okay great we'll
we'll escort you that doubt and
then invite you back in.
So if you wish to speak in favor
please raise your hand if you
wish to speak in opposition
you'll have plenty of
opportunity momentarily welcome
of the economy.
Thank you chairman my Estes
members of the committee my name
is O. T. on the to me I am the
advocacy director for A. R. P.
New Mexico and on behalf of the
more than two hundred fifty two
thousand A. R. P. New Mexico
member statewide we've been
working to find common sense
solutions to support small
businesses by making it easier
to offer retirement savings
option for their employees so
they can better prepare for
their financial futures now we
all know that the retirement
crisis in this country is not
new challenge but one that has
persisted for several decades
and is continually growing over
half of the nation's households
are at risk of not having enough
money to maintain their standard
of living in retirement and
being unable to afford
necessities such as food
utilities and health care and
although some individuals are
merely not saving enough a vast
number not saving at all in fact
nearly sixty percent of
households nationwide have no
assets save for retirement and
at least two thirds of New
Mexicans having nothing save for
retirement with many of them
retired with more debt savings
earlier sure sure Hoffman
alluded to the fact that about
sixty two percent of New Mexico
workers aged eighteen to sixty
four and the private sector work
for businesses that don't offer
retirement plan and it's been
shown that individuals are
fifteen times more likely to
save for retirement they have
access to wait to do so at work
and more importantly twenty
times more likely if they are
automatically enrolled into
workplace saving option not only
can this program help people
save their own money for more
secure future reduce wealth
disparities but they save
taxpayer dollars as well this
bill helps address helping close
to retirement savings gap in New
Mexico we urge you to vote for
house bill one seventy six thank
you.
Thank you Sir anyone else wish
to speak in favor of the bill
any other proponents of the bill
already great.
All right great we have a forty
five folks in the attendee room
guess you can't see that portion
now those folks who wish to
speak in opposition is going to
raise your hand within the zoom.
We can identify you go out and
raise your hand if you wish to
speak in opposition.
Cool well we're gonna go to
We're gonna get Santo and go
through three seventeen please
introduce yourself and address
the committee.
Are your we have one person that
which it wishes to speak in
opposition one moment please
please escort them to the Mike
sure well.
Mr chairman this is Charlie
market is I'm here
Representative is a registered
lobbyist for New Mexico Chile
Association.
Both
are playing New Mexico health
care and New Mexico Senator
assisted living.
We are concerned about.
This type of program is not out
type of program and I think some
individuals quite honestly would
take too much to to figure out
you know what they need to do
our work order want to opt out
or.
Those liability to a business
that they might not otherwise.
Back to her.
additionally no R. this type of
program again put your business
in a position of.
Having to educate your employees
on what their responsibilities
are.
And rather than them being able
to opt into a program that they
will want to willfully
participated.
Also bill as written.
Claims to have an exemption.
But Representative people with
I do for more than one word on
them does the opposite.
Sentiment includes those people
five people more and.
are includes the remaining with
four people or more.
So for those reasons we stand in
opposition thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Munoz.
Thanks for being in room three
seventeen I appreciate that of
syrup this general followed by
rob black.
Mr chair members of the
committee I'm sorry if it's
Gerald senior vice president of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce we respectfully
oppose this bill many of New
Mexico small businesses simply
didn't survive this pandemic and
for those that have time to
continue to be very challenging
our small businesses are dealing
with ongoing uncertainty supply
chain disruptions persistent
work shortages and inflation the
likes of which we haven't seen
in decades an additional burden
another mandate is the last
thing they need for the
businesses who wants to offer a
retirement plan for their
employees whether that's from
the state or the private sector
they should have that option we
should encourage them to offer
one but option is the key word
we've been hearings on this
topic several times over the
past years in the state of
public intention has always been
the state run plan would be
voluntary not mandatory as this
legislation would require and
what we why would we want it to
the state to start competing
with the private sector on this
front page can now offer pooled
employer plans under the federal
secure act certainly wouldn't be
in the interests of the
employees for the state to
undercut these efforts so
probably is reasons we urge you
to oppose this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr black welcomes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is rob
black and the president of the
New Mexico chamber of commerce.
Two years ago the New Mexico
chamber of commerce agreed to
change its position from up
propose to support of HB forty
for the work and save act
because of the programs
voluntary nature and a
commitment to support private
sector market place we change
our position because of the
commitments from the bill's
sponsors in the advocates that
they would not pursue a
mandatory program.
As you can imagine we are
disappointed at less than two
years later before the program
is even in enacted those
commitments seem to have been
forgotten.
Well we continue to support
creating more savings
opportunities for New Mexicans
we also continue to strongly
oppose a mandate I believe it is
fundamentally unfair for state
government to compete with the
private sector by creating a
government mandate to use a
subpar product IRA's are much
less beneficial than a four oh
one K. because IRA contributions
are not pre tax working
employers match those funds.
Recently federal law change.
Allowing for the creation of
political your plans which allow
for four oh one K. to be
available at a reduced
administrative costs we believe
an IRA mandate will actually
reduce the number of four oh one
K. plans available in the state
and make it less likely that
drugs like PDP's we will be
successful as we enter the
market we ask that you oppose H.
B. one seventy six.
Thank you very much anyone else
was to speak in opposition.
Good and raise your hand if you
wish to speak in opposition
thank you all very.
For your patience all yes of Mr.
No we have Mister weeks welcome.
Thank you Mr.
But in on mute yourself on your
side.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
committee I don't believe any
point to repeat what's already
been said but we do feel like
this isn't just a requirement it
is a mandate I represent the
Albuquerque Hispanic chamber of
commerce on on this and that we
do stand in opposition to this
we do think it should be
optional and and and and not
mandate and again rural land you
know the the relevant comments
from other folks thank you.
Thank you anyone else was to
speak in opposition.
Members of the committee those a
few hands up earlier.
Members of the committee.
What do you questions of
reserves of set up of the
Tell me tell me about the time
line and and the relationship
with Colorado I'm looking at the
bill now.
It says a.
You know section three of the
bill.
Section two of the bill was up
the law of the bill that was
passed by Sierra another stream
twenty twenty was chapter seven.
You know lost twenty twenty
chapter seven.
Those were put in place and
those laws went into effect when
and and what are and then my
second question is are we are we
joined was called out of now
where is the goal to join with
the state of Colorado.
Thank you Mr chairman if I may
if I have Mister mojo answer
those questions does it far more
eloquently than I do.
Is.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative and members of
the committee I think I'm not
sure but I think what you're
referring to in last year's bill
the board asked for an extension
of time to implemented to
programs the market place and
the IRA program and that was
extended to July first twenty
I'm sorry yes July first two
thousand twenty four under
Senate bill one twenty nine last
year this year we're under a
mineral our memorandum of
cooperation with Colorado that
expires on March thirty first of
this year the purpose of that
memorandum is to form a
partnership by that time through
an inter governmental agreement
and so if we form the
partnership.
The timeline that we're looking
at with Colorado is to launch in
October late October of twenty
twenty two at testing phase
where we would have selected
employers in each state
participate with our program
administrator and yes the system
to make sure it's working then
we would go live with our first
phase of rollout in January of
twenty twenty three starting
with the largest employers
probably but we haven't landed
on this probably does with a
hundred or more workers in
January of twenty twenty three
that would run for approximately
six months before we would start
the second phase perhaps worker
employers with workers between
fifty and a hundred and then a
final phase after that so we
anticipate that through the
partnership we will actually
implement this program about
eighteen months sooner than if
we try to stand it up on our own
I hope that answers your
question.
Thank you and I may have more
questions we're gonna turn to
vice chair Figaro.
Thank you Mr chair I just want
to confirm some things that I
think I heard we currently have
over four hundred thousand
workers with no access to US
savings or pension plan
and what this bill does is state
businesses must register.
I'm and yet if they don't
register nothing happens to
them.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam vice chair I'm of the
chairwoman often if you'd like
to answer as well.
Thank you very much Mr chair and
and Representative Serrato yes
you are correct vice chair all
we need this requirement for
employers to register an auto
enroll so that they open the
gates for their workers to then
customize their choices they can
opt out they can change their
level of savings they can
suspend their level of savings
they can increase it over time
so at the worker level they have
a great deal of voluntary
discretion in how they want to
say but without the requirement
that the employers open the gate
it's very difficult for the
worker to gain access.
Thank you.
Okay Mr chair and miss Hoffman
thank you I'm I'm just kind of
stuck and I almost hate to say
this with representatives of
Colorado in this is a listing up
but we get to join with Colorado
we get to get this moving at
better rates sooner because we
say we're requiring this.
But we don't.
Really enforce it we have this
we have this carrot this tax
credit.
Three hundred dollars but we
have no penalty and no fees and
that's that's good enough for us
to join with Colorado and and
it's the representative from
Colorado you just pretend you
don't hear this part.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam vice chair yes that is
overall correct I don't know if
they need my my expert witness
on that I think so I'm nothing's
Mr chair that's that's fine
Let me go through a little bit
what's required of the business
because miss Hoffman mentioned
workers can opt out or they can
change the amount of what they
want to save increase it reduce
it that actually sounds like
work for the employer to deal
with all of that to to make sure
all of that is offered so can
you elucidate I did hear you say
it takes ten minutes or so to
register.
Beyond that.
What is the burden because it
sounds like there might be a
little bird and they're put on
the businesses so so let's be
really Frank about that.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr and I'm
not sure Mr meal or sure would
like to go into details about
the process I'd like to ask
Claudia New Mexico to do so with
it's a simple four steps and she
hasn't well summarized.
Thank you Mr chair
representative and members of
the committee and vice chair
Figueroa is so you're talking
about the burden on the employer
there is a a task for the
employer initially they register
that's about ten minutes they
upload through a secure of
process to the program
administrator their their roster
of employees with basic
information at from that point
on the interaction is between
the program administrator and
the employee.
If the employee makes a change
the program administrator will
alert the employer to stop
withholding if the let's say the
opt out of the employee ops that
stop the withholding and then
the employer will do that now
there won't be a constant
changes my constant number of
employees because the program
administrator although they're
going to we will require that
they allow people to opt out
into even opt back in there will
be restrictions so that employee
can't opt out one paid here it
popped in the next paper it opt
out again and so the only Byrd
and if you want to call it that
on going is there may be changes
to individual workers
withholding that the employer
will have to put into the
payroll processing but we the
experience in the other states
is that this is not an ongoing
issue it's not it hasn't become
a burden on that once these
people once the workers have all
are in in may have an account
unless they opt out they tend to
just stay with the status quo
course we give them the ability
to change it to reduce the
contribution rate but they don't
tend to do that because quite
frankly I think they just it was
what Mr Rooney said before want
it's automatically taken out
people tend to adjust to it.
But any changes will be between
the worker and the program
administrator.
Thank you I hope that answers
your question.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Mr me ho yes it does just that
there's that start up I'm start
up task and then there will be
adjusting payroll if the
employee adjust their mouth so I
think I've got it and then it
would be adjusting every time a
new person is hired and fired so
that that essentially is the
employer task.
With this we can offer.
Valuable benefit.
Two business owners that they
can offer to their workers.
It it's.
It seems like a big win I guess
I'm I'm.
As long as there are no T. as
long as there's no penalty and
no feet and it boggles my mind
that we are the only state in
the country that has no penalty
and no state
For for employers not offering
this.
To their employees Act that's a
perk New Mexico has I mean we
should be recruiting businesses
here on that right.
I think those are all my
questions Mr chair
Appreciate the time thank you.
By the chairman said it is step
out for enrollment so.
Okay then I will now be chair we
will go to Representative fired.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I just have a
few questions
what.
Requirement and a mandate.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative of our mission
he'll would you like to answer
that as well.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Serrato and
Representative program yes
because this is been a topic of
discussion with most of the
people the legislators that I've
spoken to I did that what we all
do nowadays and I Google that
and it was what I found was what
my dad was telling me which is a
mandate com support usually
comes with a penalty or some
sort of compliance mechanism for
for
Enforcement whereas a
requirement is generally seen
seen as a strong ****.
There is there is no penalty in
our long we haven't asked for
that we through the research and
the modeling that Boston College
did for us they basically told
us sure if you had a penalty you
would probably get eighty
percent participation from your
employers but no one that we
spoke to in the on the
legislative side was interested
in a penalty and we understood
that so we talked about the
incentive of the tax credit and
they think that with the
incentive of the tax credit and
a strong outreach which we are
fully prepared to embark on that
we can bring those numbers up to
the fifty percent participation.
Thank you and what your
participation right now madam
chair.
Madam chair representative.
The program is not up and
running it's not implemented so
there are no participants.
We are we're hoping to partner
with Colorado and like I said
before we would do a testing
phase in late October and in the
first phase of rollout would
start next January with the
largest employers.
So Madam chair representative
so.
We have we have we have it's not
it's so it's not up and running.
But we already made we already
have a pro we already have this
in statute why are you changing
why are we going back on our
word why we
I'm not giving this
our program a chance first
explained that to me.
Executive director site thank
you Mr thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative well the first
thing that the board set out to
do and I and I will tell you I
was hired to start up a
voluntary plan the board was
appointed to start up a
voluntary plan but what we did
in the course of studying it so
that we could build it design
and build and implement it is we
commissions the research study
bility.
And that and the ability
unfortunately show does that it
won't work and that we would be
spending millions of dollars of
taxpayer money to get after ten
years twenty four hundred
accounts and it would be
completely irresponsible of the
board to just move ahead with
this knowledge without first
coming to the legislature and
explaining why we're asking for
a change again it will only
affect forty percent of our
employers so that we can make it
a success and not just throw
money at a losing proposition we
felt like we had to come to you
and tell you what the research
showed us.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for that and I I yeah I have
issue when you sit there and say
it only affects forty percent of
the businesses that half of our
businesses those are half of the
of the people that are trying so
hard to stay open especially
during the pandemic there's a
half of the businesses who may
not have the ability to do this
complicated formula that you
guys are have created
so I I it is obsessed me when
you like the
The.
You know these these small
companies they're trying so hard
to to succeed in this type of
environment I don't like the
fact that that we had a
compromise and we went back on
our word you know we're
concentrating eles that come
that comes in front of our
committees and they're always us
going back on our word this is
not been employed implemented
yet we having tried it yet you
guys compromise and now you're
going back on your word and I
it's one of my pet peeves it's
the thing that bothers me the
most when when we did the
legislature we we react to and
we don't do things.
And we also this is that I think
we need that we need to stop yes
pushing things through because
we need it we have the ability
to push things through we need
to stop this and we need to
analyze things before it happens
in the first place and this is
just another example of that.
So I'm sorry it just.
We we need we need to do better
be better at that Pat at credit
policy passing good legislation
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Fargo
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Serrato and your
team
I have a clear plan questions
reading the bill and
Let's see if I wrote this down
right so on page five lines
three it's it's the mandate will
only apply to employers with
five or more employees but on
page I buy it line seventeen
little bit down the page the
definition of eligible employer
says that means a person engaged
in the business industry
progression trade nonprofit or
other enterprise New Mexico
employees four or fewer
employees or is self employed.
Right it's confusing and it
sounds like everybody with zero
employees or more will be
required to apply to this
program can you just clarify the
differences between the two
former.
I am on the yes I'm I'm happy to
do that I'm interested
chairwoman Hoffman or is army
take your Turkey held like to
instead of trying to all I'm.
Representative Serrato madam
chair and representative.
Hernandez yes thank you for
bringing that up
What you're looking at is we had
to add in this bill two
different definitions for
employers want to take care of
employers with four or fewer
employees that you're looking at
starting online seventeen those
are eligible employers the one
that the employers that are
required to
register our on page four
subsection D. as in David and
that's a covered employer so
what covered employer is subject
to the requirement and an
eligible employer with four or
fewer employees is not subject
to the requirement.
Okay okay madam chair and Mr me
I I appreciate that answer just
got a little confusing and more
And then I might my other
question in this this bill was
originally Platt past in you
know twenty twenty eight so it's
been my eighteen months since
it's been a thing and I know
that you guys are having issues.
Getting businesses to sign up
but can you tell me what has
been done to promote the program
or educate businesses about
program I I talked to several
several of my local businesses
in Rio Rancho New not a single
one of them even know that this
program existed and I think that
that might be the the lack of
promotion Education might be
part of the problem and that
that might be a way to do it
instead of imposing the mandate
with or without a penalty it's
just another mandate on business
so if you could up if you could
give me a rundown on what's been
done to promote or educate.
Madam chair representative and
so.
There is no program yet so
there's nothing to promote we
can only promote it once we have
a program administrator in place
and we have our investment
managers we have to attract them
first designed the program and
build it and then we will be
hitting marketing and outreach
very deliberately and very hard
but right now.
There's nothing to promote I'm
unable to other than what I know
the model that that this program
will follow that's been
implemented in the other three
states so far that's all we know
so you are absolutely right if
if what you're indicating is
that we need to market and and
plan for outreach part of this
bill is you know is for two FTE
ease one of which is for
marketing director so we
understand the need to do that
and we plan to do that.
Okay madam.
Your own health and if you like
to also answer thank you very
much madam chair and
representative super might just
add to that comment I'll.
This is an entirely outsourced
contracted program so a
condition precedent for having
any ability to service
employers and workers and stand
up savings accounts is to be
able to enter into contracts
with these financial service
providers prior to putting that
infrastructure in place we have
no ability to provide any
savings services.
And we are.
Very much committed to the
partnership to both xcelerated
our time frame by a year and a
half.
And to provide those critical
service providers a target
population to be served of one
point three five million people
that is going to give us and the
state of Colorado a tremendous
advantage and building the
infrastructure so that we can
find that saving services and
begin a very active education
and outreach program which we
will do throughout the state and
it will give us an opportunity
to meet with the chambers and
with the businesses and to
address all of the information
concerns that will be parent
thank you.
Madam chair and
Representative Serrato steam
I I just don't I mean I don't
understand why we're imposing
mandate on something that we
have not been amended on
businesses and and that word is
just you know in the business
community is something that.
A lot of us in the legislature
don't want to impose on small
businesses in our state when we
haven't even reached out to
these businesses and let them
know that this is here so I'm.
It's not a question it's just I
I don't want to impose another
mandate on businesses whether or
not there's a penalty I so those
are my questions all or what the
next person go thank you guys
for your answers.
Thank you.
As Representative now.
Thank you madam chair and and
thank you Representative I mean
a lot of my questions have been
asked I'm sorry.
Trying to multi Tasker a lot of
my questions have been asked
that I'm just I'm just.
I have I share the same concerns
as Representative Fajardo
Representative Hernandez
Madam chair representative one
of your presenters mentioned
that millions of taxpayer
dollars would be invested with
little outcome if we make this
mandatory.
Is the millions of dollars
shifted to the burden of the
business.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you Representative as I may
briefly and I candidly it was Mr
me know that that stated that
earlier I'm gonna let her get
into what that is the answer is
no but but what it what I think
is important member is that
without this there is no three
hundred tax credit for these
businesses and you know any any
person running any books would
you say we want three hundred
dollars worth of tax credit
especially for the difficult
climate that a lot of our
business and facing it's one
aspect I want to mention in with
regards to the concerns that you
were expressing any also just
knowledge of the catch twenty
two that a lot of that this
program is it because in order
to get the the the the managers
that they need to be on board
for this they need to get to
capacity to attract those
businesses and not not
businesses but type in to track
those initial situations I
should say to participate with
us so it really is catching both
ways and the way to make that
work the best would be to do
that so the answer is no would
not be shipped to businesses but
I'm happy to add it to executive
director New Mexico who can kind
of explain what that millions of
dollars she was referring to you
for but and madam chair and
representative before you do
that isn't there an end date on
the tax credit.
The end it thank you I'm sorry
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative at the end date
for the tax credit as I believe
twenty twenty eight.
City.
Yes it's to get to that capacity
for what we're looking at this
point.
And and you madam chair
representative you did or did
not survey businesses to find
out if in this troubling time
right now that they're able and
willing to participate in it but
that they're able because now
it's not a willingness it's a
mandate.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative I
appreciate the question I think
well actually no let me turn it
over to second director army
held for about the study and and
what that they were able to
surveillance to settle this
because no one.
Thank you Representative and
thank you madam chair
Representative doubt you know
the answer to your question is
no we did not work in state did
not survey businesses on this
issue now I will tell you and
you may already know this that
prior to the enactment of the
work in state act section twenty
twenty A. A. R. P. commissioned
and did a small business survey
in New Mexico and the responses
were very favorable toward the
idea of such a program but no in
answer to your question we did
not survey them so just thank
you madam chair thank
representative just yes or no in
the survey that was done by A.
R. P. was it a voluntary program
just yes or no.
I.
I can't say yes or no madam
chair because I'm not sure what
the survey questions stating.
And what percentage of A. A. R.
P. members are currently I'm
employed and would be
participating in this program.
Madam chair I have no idea okay
I'm so so even if every employer
with a stable workforce was
interested in us and said yes
mandate give me another mandate
what how does that affect
transit workforce like
construction or hospitality here
seasonal workers are they also
mandated.
Madam chair the program is a
hundred percent voluntary on the
workers and if they want to opt
out they absolutely can.
At any time actually.
So yes it I see on page five
online thirteen through sixteen
it talks about the rate is
established by the board but it
doesn't really say that that's a
fixed rate.
So so but but I think they're
automatically rolled in they
have to opt out right sorted it
automatic enrollment on a
mandatory program but if they if
they figured out they can opt
out.
They they can opt out if they
need to so it's it's not it's an
opt out not opt in and that I
have a concern about that but on
this page I online's thirteen
through sixteen and it says that
the rate is established by the
board House board determine a
range not everybody has the same
incomes we have lower income
people we're really struggling
right now we're in the middle of
a pandemic a recession economic
recovery and so how does this
board can establish the right
and how do they know that it's
fair to a lower income person.
Madam chair if I can answer that
question what you're talking
about Representative is the
default investment contribution
right the way this works is the
board will land on a default
contribution rate however the
employee does not have to stay
with the default rate they can
lower it they can raise it they
could potentially are lower it
down to zero if they wanted to
for like six months say they
wanted to quit contributing so
most all of these programs
establish some kind of a
default.
Is something easy for the
employee to say oh yes I can
handle that as default
contribution rate this default
target date investment fund.
This is simple excuse me I'm
sorry where did it's the idea is
for it to be simple and portable
and easy to understand.
Mr me how I'm gonna drop in
right here and say.
That page lines thirteen through
sixteen are not part of this
bill they are already in statute
so that might change what we
wanna debate about here thank
you Representative now you have
the floor.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative the entire
bill is up for discussion when
it's mandatory not voluntary
when we haven't talked to are
struggling businesses forty six
percent which are already closed
permanently and we've got other
bills that also affects my vote
on this bill whether it's a
mandatory minimum wage increase
it's a paid sick leave it's a it
or whatever other myriad of
bills that are also being
imposed on small businesses
right now and and I I I think
that all of that is relevant
whether it's underlined amended
or not but I'll just I mean it
keep going here so I'm.
When did you when did you first
decide Madam chair
representative that the best
thing for us to do would be to
partner with Colorado.
If I may madam chair.
To.
It is Representative Serrato its
UT absolute.
Thank you very much the original
statute included a.
Statement of intention that we
explore partnerships with other
states so this was dissipated in
the original bill as I thank you
madam chair representative and
you can go through this question
as well did you know that
Colorado's was mandatory.
If I may continue to explain
thank you very much Madam chair
representative all programs
throughout the country other
than New Mexico have a
registration requirement New
Mexico is the outline here in
not having a requirement on the
part of the employers to open
the gates for their employees.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative and thank you and
how many states have this
program.
Your approximately twelve states
in various stages of development
three are implemented sure often
I'm just remind you to please go
through the chair thank you
thank you very much madam chair
my apologies for overlooking
that well.
The three that are implemented
and do have a new employer
requirements are now
successfully accumulating assets
for savers in your accounts that
number is approaching four
hundred million dollars.
There are thirty three states
throughout the country that are
in various stages of
implementation all with auto
enrollment and all with the
employer participation.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and thank you Representative so
really it's three states and so
do you think that the other
thirty eight plus states decided
that mandatory in positions on
employers and businesses was not
something that they could can
take right now and and I'm
telling you I don't know why our
little state continues to be the
Guinea pig and everyone brags
about being the first this and
the first that and so.
It's it's it's it's really
discouraging to me to know that.
When you know when your primary
Sanchez from before and I know
that many of us voted for it on
the promise in the expectation
that it would remain voluntary
because we believe in the idea
and we want to promote savings
in addition to this were respond
we're pushing things like
financial literacy for high
school and and and helping folks
be able to have small loans
small interest loans no interest
loans so that they can launch
their businesses and they can
recover in this economy and I'll
tell ya I.
Between this we're gonna we're
gonna increase the tax on the or
the cost of the of fuel I I have
a farmers and ranchers in my
district and the I had a truly
producer called me and they're
just they're gas bill loan for
their processing plants had gone
up.
By over forty thousand dollars
in one month we can not make
these decisions in a silo we
have to think about the issue.
Number of bills.
That are prioritized and
planning on being passed in this
session in the middle of the
pandemic in the middle of a
recession in the middle of a
time when we're having to
subsidize people's basic cost of
living in order for them to
survive.
And this bill was a beautiful
intense as voluntary to the
employer not talking employer
and the employee.
And then reneging on our deal
I'm really I'm I'm tired of it
I'm getting really tired of it I
have a lot of questions I'm but
I guess I guess my question is
if the Representative is open to
an amendment that that makes
this voluntary.
What you're saying this program
doesn't work unless it's
mandatory.
Already volunteer volunteering
now that these amendments and
the way it's presented makes a
mandatory.
I'm sorry my headphones were
kind of going a little busy
right now politics can you Madam
chair representative getting
three
Madam chair representative I
heard from your expert witnesses
that this will only work if it's
mandatory is that the case.
Madam chair and representative
get with the studies that
they've been able to school
again with it not being a
punitive or penalty based
mandatory requirement you know
from my perspective I don't see
that we're going back on that
word that was that was that
forward especially because there
it's it's based as an incentive
I would like to keep the bill as
is and just as it's.
Thank you well that's
unfortunate I have an amendment
that would gladly be able to
vote for it I'm I'm very
disappointed actually my heart's
breaking for the people who
worked really hard on this last
year and supported it and put
their good name on it their
business to all business
advocates they believe in the
state they made investments in
the state this is really really
sad when ability past that had
happened before when a bill that
I passed comes back and gets
amendments and I go back on the
word and then my needs
associated with the launching a
programs and so you know if
you're not willing to have an
amendment that I'm gonna have to
that now thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Dow
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me.
Yes we can madam chair I move to
table.
I will second.
To table and the second to the
tabling motion.
Miss moon.
Well yes chairman masters it.
Thank you madam chair thank you
reserves that that was a I was
gonna debate no just preparing
some note so somebody else
wanted to they can go now if not
I can go.
All right thank you know all of
this.
If there if the table the most
emotional being it but at this
time I'll take my hand thank you
Madam.
Thank you Sir tabling motion
takes precedence we need to call
the roll.
Sh.
Representative Dow.
Yes the table.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes to table.
Representative bagels.
Able.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes to table.
Representative Johnson.
Please.
Representative Martinez.
I'm sorry.
No okay.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes able.
Representative Serrato.
No to table.
I share your.
The table.
Chairman Maestas no.
We have a sixty for both
treatment madam chair.
Thank you Mr.
Senator yeah you have the floor.
Local we're okay thank you madam
chair.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and and.
Thank you Representative
chairman I asked us to do have
continued debater questions.
Thank you madam chair I had to
step away apologies so this
these questions may have already
been answered but
One one argument was peculiar.
And that.
And like some opinions madam
chair up.
Yes Representative Serrato maybe
you treasurer young the the the
argument was that.
If if the IRA's are mandatory.
What a business then opt out of
their current four oh one K.'s
with this with this lower the
use of four oh one K.'s up
obviously you know what are what
are.
Your thoughts on that madam
chair Representative set up.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you chairman you had directed
towards of the Colorado
treasured and trying to do that
I did not that was true
intention.
I'm here it's up to you call on
whoever but it's in a sector
younger treasure I can Berg or
any of your other experts please
chime in.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman
treasure I I can young you'd
like to tune in I I know that in
Colorado they've had this
already in place would like to
hear how that's working out that
way.
Thank you Representative Serrato
Mr chair I can speak from the
cholera perspective all defer to
treasure I compared to speak
from the New Mexico perspective
we and and I'm let me make sure
I understand the question again.
Our is it about forcing
businesses that already offer a
retirement savings plan to end
that and join the program no
Madam chair representative set
up though treasurer young in
your opinion with this bill.
Lower the amount of four oh one
K. in the state of New Mexico
two workers.
Employer can can contribute.
I and I'll and I'll also press
bring in our program director as
well Mr chair our experience so
far as been heightened interest
from businesses knowing that
that they're gonna have
opportunities to market to
businesses that might be
competitive so in our state
there is no room you know if you
if the business already offers
as a retirement savings program
our program does not affect them
they can continue to do that
work but what we discovered in
the market places that you know
for the longest period of time
this this group of savers was
not marketed to the no one was
interested in actually bringing
in small dollar accounts but
that since and that this program
is is on the brink of of lunch
that the financial services
sector is now began to market
and and make competitive their
products and certainly if
if a company or a small business
wanted to go with a different
program and establish a four oh
one K. with someone that's the
direction they want to go.
I would allow that to happen we
certainly wouldn't want you know
the program to over run that you
know at the end of the day the
goal is to create savers.
And it and so I'm exhausted
about how that happens frankly I
mean it if they if they can do
that through four oh one K.
we've heard the advantages to
that great but a lot of
businesses find it very
difficult financially difficult
and legally difficult in order
to stand that up and what we're
attempting to do in Colorado is
to reduce those barriers to take
that fiduciary liability away a
lot of the legal liability away
and make it as simple pod
process for savers to save and
frankly you know as savers
accumulate assets under this
program if later on they decide
to remove them ours is a a Roth
IRA they can certainly do that
without penalty in the bill with
a.
A provider in the private sector
that that they choose to go with
instead of keeping it in the in
the a program that we're
offering so again number one
goal let's create savers and and
that's that's the key we want to
have people with a dignified and
sustainable retirement and we
write one reduce the burden on
safety net or social programs
that cost taxpayers dollars
missing does both of us.
Thank you Sir Madam chair
representative set up though and
then also from.
Say that twenty year old I get a
job.
When does when does a.
What is money taken out for
savings six months down the road
a year down the road what if I
only stay six months in a
particular job for the from the
age of state eighteen to twenty
four.
What happens then.
Madam chair representative set
up the.
I'm sorry I'm sorry about that
German yes it may I have the
character you know just that
thank you thank you
Representative madam chair and
Mr Chairman.
Excuse me
one of the things that's built
into this requirement is that
the employer will not even be
required to upload an employee
until they've been working for
them for a hundred and eighty
days we did that to make sure
that employers are not
constantly having to upload new
employees that last one week
before they move to another
position when an employee has
been there a hundred eighty days
their account will be opened if
they leave after that and they
go to another similar job with
another employer they take their
account with them you will they
take their account with them
regardless of whether or not
their next employer offers a
four one K. prior so
I think that was your question
wasn't please let me know thank
you madam chair Representative
set up the.
Mr meal know that answers my
question
And those are the.
Kind of the thoughts I had thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative set up.
Thank you Mr chair.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
your hand is not for the second
time I was that when an error
for second time thank you madam
chair can you hear me OK yes we
can okay thank you I guess my
concern.
You know for many years I have
my series six and seven.
And work for equitable as a
financial planner.
I guess other than the fact of
going back and and making.
This mandate.
That there was a time when you
companies would allow agent
financial planner to come in and
speak to their employees to set
up.
Different types of investment
accounts.
And so I'm just trying to
understand.
How that has changed.
In regards to joining Colorado
because what I'm hearing is that
there are some agents who would
make a sizeable.
Amount of money by selling these
various products so for your
team Representative Serrato.
I'm.
What they're commission is going
to be if we make this mandatory.
Here in the state of New Mexico
because nobody's doing this for
free even though it's not going
to cost employee.
The employer I'm sorry anything.
But.
The cells the marketing nobody's
going in for nothing so that has
not been addressed so can
someone tell me how you all are
going to to set that up because
that is a real issue and no
one's doing this for free and
you know years ago you wanted to
a company and discussed it with
the company owner and they start
update.
Talk about retirement
investments and and set up
accounts that could be directly
is the monies could be directly
taken from their payroll checks
are from their checking account
so Representative can you
address that for me please.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative I if I may
add to the at Sharon Hoffmann of
the the work of the board.
Thank you very much and madam
chairman Representative Serrato
and thank you for that question
I'll let me offer a couple of
perspectives first of all the
Sabres we're talking about our
beginner savers the average
account size for those three
states that are in early
implementation is under a
thousand dollars so these are
not people who will be targeted
by individual of financial
planners or matters of that
nature on the fees one of the
advantages of the program
structure is that these are
limited so under our statute and
of the Colorado statutes the
fees cannot exceed one percent
and will decline to seventy five
basis points all further into
the purpose maturity well that
is the problem you are
absolutely right people will not
do anything for free so without
a critical mass of savers and
employers.
Our study showed that on a
purely voluntary basis without
any enrollment enhancement and
incentives we would reach twenty
four hundred savers and it would
take a financial services
administrator seventeen years to
make their investment back
that's why it's a non starter
without a requirement and a
critical mass of employers and
do it and workers benefiting
from the program to track these
providers.
You madam chair.
Thank you Representative.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you chairman I move up to
pass.
Do passed from representative
Martinez.
A second.
And the second from
Representative Johnson.
Miss more doing it would you
call the roll.
Representative Dow.
Representative Fajardo.
No.
Representative those yes.
Representative Hernandez.
No.
Representative Johnson yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Serrato.
Yes.
Representative Dow.
Madam chair Figueroa.
Yes.
Chairman I just.
Yes.
We have a six four vote.
Thank you Representative you
have to pass on house bill one
seventy six.
Thank you.
Share my status.
Thank you madam chair for
that'll go to take the gavel
from you and have a great chair
house bill one ninety one when I
think you address your young for
your time we'll see you up in
Denver soon and treasure I can
read thank you so much.
House bill one hundred ninety
one of Representative read a
script you could text
Representative Armstrong or and
who else do you wish to bring
into the.
The table with you.
Thank you Mr chairman I've got
a Linda Segal and Linda M.
Trujillo.
I'm and possibly Representative
Hochman Vigil and Representative
Gail Armstrong.
I was Representative Armstrong
is here with us Mexico is here
with us as well.
And superintendent to heal.
You could raise your hand.
that way we can find you easier
there's thirty five people in
the.
In the audience.
Wonderful
All right great then I'll turn
it over to you Representative
Gallegos house bill one hundred
ninety one.
Okay have you explain it I was
gonna have the committee sit
down and read it to themselves.
But I have an engagement at
about nine o'clock tonight so.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman actually I've got just
a and so I'd like the the
committee to consider
Moving this up for for
discussion purposes.
I will I will accept a motion
from you as a member and good
and I discussed the the bill in
the sub as you wish okay thank
you Mr chairman
So Mister chairman I I started
up with with my nose today and
it was that good afternoon I'm
gonna start with good evening Mr
chairman and committee because I
see that we're getting right and
so I will start with good
evening Mr chairman and
committee this is the committee
substitute for house bill one
ninety one was necessary because
we needed to add expedited
licensure to five licenses
licensing type under the
authority of the nursing board
the committee substitute retains
all of the original and much
needed updates to the
professional and occupational
licensure losses that was in
house bill one ninety one the
committee substitute for house
bill ninety one we're remove
barriers to doing business in
the state of New Mexico I will
briefly highlight some of the
important changes.
These changes will make the
process to apply for and receive
a license faster and more
efficient if you already hold a
license in another state US
territory or the district of
Columbia if your license is
current in good standing and you
have been practicing a minimum
of two years thank you get a
license in our state.
It provides time limits specific
to issuing a license an
applicant will receive the
license within thirty dates.
It defines a process to issue a
provisional license and the
timeframe for it for issuance of
a regular license it provides a
process that will address
incomplete applications of both
the regulators and the
application at the applicants
are aware of the status of the
incomplete applications and it
cleans the.
And Luminate language that is
outdated or incorrect it we
compiles three sections that are
incorrectly placed in the U. LA
and places them in the correct
order and with the appropriate
within the appropriate section
and most importantly in the
lines uniform license act with
the state rules act Mr chairman
and committee I would ask you to
allow my co sponsors and expert
witnesses to also weigh in at
this time.
So Representative Armstrong if
you like to go ahead and.
Chairman.
Thank you Mr chairman with your
permission.
Welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I along
with the other representatives
it was brought to our attention
by
let the Trujillo who is R. LD
and what's this actually come to
our attention a couple years ago
actually last year.
Did a hop and Representative
Hochman Vigil and myself carried
some legislation that what makes
it makes it easier for
Reciprocity in the state of New
Mexico in these trying times Mr
chairman members of the
committee this is sorely needed
thing not only because of the
man of the pandemic but we need
to get people to work so this is
an expedient way to receive a
license but at the same time
still holding accountable the
people that are applying for the
license is here in New Mexico so
I think Representative majority
whip leader Doreen guy a ghosts
for allowing me to be part of
this process and look forward to
Talking about the bill thank you
Mr chairman.
Mr chairman I speak by all means
welcome great to see you thank
you thank you Mr chairman and
thank you members of the
committee and and first I would
just like to thank the sponsors
for being willing to carry this
this is another incremental step
to trying to remove barriers to
licensure this one addresses
specifically those who may be
coming from out of state as we
know state law plays an
important role in protecting the
health and safety of the public
but it can also impose
significant burdens and costs
that discourage particularly
underserved populations such as
women and racial minorities from
participating in higher paying
professions this is just one
more step as we move closer to
having licensing be more
expedited thank you.
What I will what I will
and it is because.
This is a hundred and eighty six
page bill
the superintendent has really.
Put together a comprehensive
summary of very the for the
committee to review and she
really has a step by step by
section she's broken down all
the changes that were made and
really put down even what was
not included into what was not
going to be changed and what was
and then she wrote down what was
in in each section so the
committee could review that
And so with that I'm gonna stand
for questions so we can get
started because I know it's such
a big deal that we can we can
spend a lot of time and and so
we could just start that way and
and if you let me to go back
it's up to you Mister chairman
how you like thank you so much a
quick question
You introduce the bill and then
you made vast improvements
what's the big is there any big
distinctions between the the the
bill and the committee
substitute proposed areas what
and I'm gonna let Linda Siegel
the speech it out when the the
first bill was dropped we did
not have the the question on the
the nursing portion and so we
wanted to make sure that was
included and so miss if you
could please
Join us in that conversation
thank you welcome.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative guy goes yes we
to to give you a little tone on
this it has been very difficult
even before the pandemic for
nurses who come to this state
from another state with a live
gentleman license and no
disciplinary action against that
licensed it has taken them
months at times to get a New
Mexico nursing license and one
agree just simple is our very
own dean at at UNM dean of
nursing who came here four years
ago and it took her seven months
to get an RN license even though
she had a license and for other
states she could not prove she
could she had taken the in
collects yes in the late
seventies they had to go into
the archives in California and
pull it out and send it to the
New Mexico border nursing that
is ridiculous and that is
happening day after day two
nurses who want to come here who
are operating on a compact and
need to get their licenses right
away so that is why we talked to
our Representative guy a goes
and superintendent Trujillo to
make sure that we put nurses
into this act thank you.
Thank you for that
Representative Madam chair
representative again go some
miss and just for the folks
keeping score at home with a
bill this large you can come
with an amendment and the
committee members have a you
know whatever hundred sixty page
bills twenty page amendment and
so we encourage House Judiciary
insist on it and and this
committee has adopted some of
that culture where we would
prefer a committee substitute
which incorporates the proposed
amendments into the original
language it's much easier to
read it's much easier to pass on
to subsequent committees so it's
not
it's not like somebody's
dropping on an eighty six page
bill on our lap you know.
Ten minutes for the hearing this
this bill was online for the
members the summary was provided
which gives us a marvelous
synopsis of the bill I think we
have a good handle of this from
a policy standpoint so I just
want to thank you for that
members a we're to go to the
public Representative rebels I
am thank you thank you.
Thank you very much now let's
hear from members of the public
we have thirty two folks in the
audience those who wish to speak
in favor of the bill those who
wish to speak in favor of the
bill please raise your hands we
will bring you into the zoom
room and adjust the committee
everyone take about a minute
then a half there is
approximately twelve thirteen
folks who wish to address the
committee Rachel Bevin followed
by Karen Browning.
Can you hear me.
We should okay good thank you Mr
chair my name is Rachel Bevin I
am the executive director for
the New Mexico nurse
practitioner council
I'm going to speak on my behalf
of the organization but then I
would also like to speak on
behalf of our president to
is currently seeing patients
but I support this bill it's
greatly needed I get numerous
calls and emails from providers
on a weekly basis that they
can't get a license here in time
they're trying to practice
they're trying to help serve our
community but they can't get a
license in time so this is a
great way that we can make sure
that our community is taking
care of
Our president Michelle peacock
who is a nurse practitioner at
the VA she's
there's supervisor for
ambulatory care which covers the
whole state
and she works to ensure that
staffing for clinics across all
rural New Mexico that serve the
veterans that they're staffed
properly this past couple months
she is running into and this is
this is been happening for a
long time but the very simple
she gave me are pretty fresh in
her mind
but she's had a nurse
practitioner who her license was
delayed and it took the provider
over three months to get a
license here in our state
the other two she hired from
Oklahoma and South Carolina
both of again it was three to
four months that they could get
a license and the patients and
the Gallup in Albuquerque area
then could be served because
they couldn't staff these
clinics properly
so again I.
Really support this bill and I
hope that
If you guys have any questions
to for me I'm I'm happy to
answer.
Thank you so very much.
Is a Karen Browning followed by
Crespo's on.
Thank you sure can.
Great.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Karen Browning I am currently
serving as the president and am
here on behalf of the American
up there occasionally New Mexico
chapter on I believe are given
up the most recent New Mexico
healthcare workforce report what
they're what they're and I think
shortage chair New Mexico by
roughly five hundred and thirty
nine individual and that is
actually critical in our rural
areas of New Mexico so we
support legislation as we know
that this will help eligible PTA
that PTA apartment in here to
practise any more and more
timely manner.
Look at temple that we are just
part of the legislation.
Thank you Crispo Zainal followed
by rob black.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
I'm Chris balls on on with the
New Mexico association of nurses
anesthesiologists association
strongly support the House B.
one at one ninety one committee
substitute.
For the same reasons that the
sponsors New Mexico already
stated so we echo the explain it
perfectly the reason is and what
we are facing here in the state
of New masks so we appreciate
the Sanchez we appreciate that
the revelation last department
approached laws got some
feedback from us as well and we
ask please the committee to pass
this piece of legislation thank
you.
Thank you Sir rob black followed
by Paul guessing and then Kelly
may Douglas.
Mr chairman members of the
committee first I'd like to rob
black with New Mexico chamber of
commerce of course I'd like to
thank the bill's sponsors and
superintendent Trujillo offer
this were in twenty twenty the
chamber concluded a year long
research project in partnership
with the US chamber of commerce
the dedicate file Kellogg
foundation regarding the
business case for racial equity
which examine how to
meaningfully incorporate all of
New Mexicos residents into our
con but really never reserves
with their economic strategy
work the chamber focus on a
couple of key initiatives and
one of those key initiatives was
regulatory and licensing reform
we believe that barriers in
these areas disproportionately
affect low income people and
people of color four point fully
accessing and participating in
the economy we think this is a
really strong staff in the right
direction and we strongly
support this effort thank you.
Thank you Sir Paul guessing
followed by Kelly made a.
Can you hear me now welcome
thank you good afternoon Mister
chair members of the committee
my name is Paul guessing on
president the Rio Grande
foundation New Mexico based
public policy research institute
we support this legislation and
specifically provisions like the
elimination of the New Mexico
residency requirement for
initial issuance and renewal of
licensure expedited licensure
and.
The explicit creation of a
procedure for boards to grant
temporary or provisional
licenses to applicants from
other jurisdictions also the
provisions on military military
spouses are welcome and the
elimination of the requirement
for a four year high school
education or equivalent for
being a barber or hair stylist
cosmetologist etcetera
in the elimination of moral
turpitude
criteria are there are few
things that we would like to
possibly see our improved our
the expedited license.
Axle is really a temporary one
year license which can be
extended under certain
circumstances but applicants are
still required to apply for
receive a regular Lysons
in the bill does give boards a
lot of leeway too much perhaps
in our opinion so.
That being said overall the bill
is definitely worth supporting
and Rio Grande foundations
worked on occupational licensure
issues in the past and and
supports are good reforms like
this one thank you.
Thank you Sir Kelly made Douglas
followed by Paul Cassidy.
Afternoon chairman my SS and
members of the committee my name
is Kelly may Douglas speaking on
behalf of department of defense
in support of H. B. one ninety
one individual economic issues
experienced by military families
as a result of licensure and
employment barriers
Representative key reading this
issue that translates into a
broader recruitment and
retention issue that can
undermine personal numbers and
therefore our nation's security
military families like most
families across the state and
the nation often require two
incomes to make ends meet if as
a result of economic barriers
faced your no fault of their own
military spouses are not able to
secure employment
Throughout their spouses service
service members can be put into
the difficult position of
choosing between serving their
country or the economic needs of
their family this is why in that
twenty twenty one national
defense authorization act the
military services are now
required to incorporate specific
quality of life measurements
such as the extent of state
support for military spouse
employment in licensure into
their future basing decisions
potentially affecting the
economic impact of the defense
community on individual states
the changes proposed within H.
B. one ninety one would
streamline licensure processes
and significantly reduce the
burden of time and effort
experience by military spouses
through the application process
when they relocate to New Mexico
allowing them to more in a
quickly integrate into their new
communities obtain employment
and contribute their expertise
to the work force Department
appreciates the bill's sponsors
for bringing fight this been
beneficial policy change and we
respectfully request a favorable
vote thank you.
appreciate your time Paul
Cassidy followed by.
It is you're gonna.
Thank you share my Estes and
members of the committee Paul
Cassidy I'm with the.
Mr Cassidy got in on you
yourself on your end.
I believe you unmuted on ours
all right is that better Mr
chairman absolutely we can thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee Paul Cassidy a member
of the New Mexico military base
Planning Commission as well as
the curtain partnership
committee we exist to support
the military missions here in
New Mexico thank Kelly may who
spoke before me
For also supporting and
encouraging adoption of this
measure one thank superintendent
Trujillo and her staff for all
the good work they've done to
implement house bill thirty from
two years ago and house bill one
thirty last year which are put
in place well a lot of great
measures to help our military
community and and many others as
well so thank you for your
support.
Thank you Mr that I welcome
followed by a Andrea Maloney.
Good afternoon chair Maestas and
members of the committee my name
is the staff are not and the
policy director at New Mexico
based nonprofit will futures
will futures has worked for many
years to reduce barriers to
employment and occupational
licensing for people living with
former convictions we are
incredibly excited to see this
bill and think it continues that
work for people living with
former convicts and we also know
that our state is in a serious
crisis lacking the health care
providers we need for everyone
in our state and that has been
drastically impacted by the
pandemic so we also support the
provisions that make it easier
for people to practice health
care in our state.
Thank you chair and we ask you
to support this bill.
Thank you Andrea Maloney
followed by secretary to boil
Senator.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is under Maloney and
speaking first hand on
experience I have been a nurse
and now nurse practitioner for.
eighteen years but I began my
nursing profession and access
because of the delay in getting
my New Mexico license I lives in
Los crucis at the time and
commuted an hour because I got
my license there much sooner
and that's sort of my nursing
career and then became a nurse
practitioner five years ago and
it took me about forty five days
to get my application even
acknowledge with the board of
nursing and a total of almost a
hundred and twenty days if I had
my license so that prevented me
to working as a nurse
practitioner and as everyone has
mentioned our state already
suffers
a great deal because of there's
health care so I am in support
of this bill.
Thank you Secretary Alicia the
foil followed by a.
Lawrence around.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members thank you so much for
letting me speak today our first
want to just expressed
appreciation to madam
superintendent to heal and to
the sponsors of this bill this
bill really would be an
excellent bill for our
populations are we we have great
needs in behavioral health and
with medical and this would help
us hopefully recruit bring on
board more folks to be able to
provide those services to our
populations and then of course
also and I believe as mentioned
by another gentleman earlier but
the removal of the language of
moral turpitude which is a real
barrier to people interested in
entering into careers in as
barbers and cosmetologists and
our facilities we do provide
training in this area and would
really love to be able to expand
that and make those job
opportunities available to more
people Mr chair and members
thank you so much for your time
today and I urge your support of
house bill one ninety one thank
you.
Thank you very much Secretary at
Lawrence around followed by
Sandra well where
thank you Mr chair members the
committee Larry R. and
registered lobbyist for
Christian Health Care Services
one thank the superintendent and
my good friend Linda Siegel for
working on the committee
substitute which included nurses
and the expedited licensure as
fast as you all probably
painfully aware during this
COVID crisis we've had
experience shortfalls shortage
of nurses throughout our
hospital system and our spin
tire system as well and so the
addition of nurses to that extra
this expedited licensure is a
great addition and hopefully
maybe next we can come back to
work on cemex but I'd licensure
for doctors as well because
that's another issue that we're
having and so we've seen that
the strains on our health care
system and we appreciate you
working to improve that access
to care for New Mexicans we urge
your support of the legislation
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Sir Sandra bull were
followed by Jason Espinoza.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee thank
you so much for this opportunity
to speak to you on house bill
one ninety one I am a nurse
practitioner in Los crucis New
Mexico I I practiced also in
Alamogordo so in two counties
and I speak on behalf of our
clinic and R. six providers who
provide care within three
different hospitals and one of
our largest issues right now.
Or as you know with the pandemic
is not so much a bad issue we do
have budget we don't have nurses
to take care of these patients
and so the support of house bill
one ninety one and helping us to
expedite patient our expedite
nurses to receive their
licensure would actually help
the people in our county receive
care so thank you so much and we
ask that you support house bill
one ninety one.
Thank you.
Thank you Jason Espinoza
followed by Robert Loftis.
I chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza the
state director with the national
federation of independent
business obviously
Representative small independent
businesses across the country we
stand strong support of the
legislation as you all know
during the COVID nineteen
pandemic the labor shortage is
one of the significant
challenges faced many employers
but even before the pandemic
NFIB members perennially cited
the lack of qualified workers as
the top ten problems and
priorities that needed to be
addressed we really think this
bill does brought in the work
force pool that is available to
small businesses and an industry
across the state and it really
does go a long way in providing
assistance and we appreciate
bill instead of support thank
you.
Thank you Robert Loftis to.
Thank you are.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is Robert
Loftis I'm a licensed landscape
architect I'm here representing
the New Mexico chapter of the
American society of landscape
architects why we strongly
support the
intense responsibility and
expedited and reciprocity and we
do have a concern of with the
language specific to landscape
architects about the two year
year of practice order and that
that may actually cause a
barrier to school or younger
professionals seeking licensure
from out of state so if possible
I know the committee is very
busy but we love to follow up
with you early next week I'm
interested as concerns so that
we can endorse the bill thank
you.
Thank you very much anyone else
was to speak in favor of house
bill one ninety one anyone at
which to speak in opposition I
have any concerns they wish to
express.
There's twenty nine folks in the
audience we welcome them yes
please that's welcome in Jim
Archibald any other concerns
please raise your hand in the
zoom welcome Sir.
Thank you chair Preciado the
opportunity to address the
committee of sounds like it
might be one of the only ones to
speak opposition to this bill I
see a lot of great things
possibly for the nursing.
Community and is well correct I
just in the audience however
this bill has limited
consequences which need to bring
to your attention and that is
for the.
Health safety and welfare of the
built environment which
architects responsible for want
to speak about four points here
if I could.
Architecture is long led the a
licensing model that supports
mobility and endorsement in
other states.
Ability bills that require
boards to automatically grant
out of state licenses about
proper such would complicate an
already streamlined past
architect applicants seeking
reciprocity in New Mexico.
This would create unintended
consequences that would put
exiting the existing mobility
and reciprocity models risk.
Proposals to create greater
mobility in endorsement must
maintain high consistent
standards across the states
established in the professions.
So architectures led the
licensing model that supports
mobility to door spent
architects are are licensed in
all fifty states and four
territories of the United States
Guam Northern Mariana is Porter
Rico and US Virgin Islands as
well as foreign architects
through different pathways.
We have national mobility
systems in place that have been
proven to be effective.
The licensing requirements for
architects in New Mexico include
education experience and
examination standards that are
built up on by knowledge build
up the knowledge and the skills
in areas of practice related to
the protection of the health
safety and welfare of the
citizens of New Mexico.
In accordance with previous
Senate bills The New Mexico
board of examiners for
architects has taken action to
expedite the licensure process
for military members and their
spouses was we have also reduce
the barriers to entry for
individuals with criminal
records.
Applicants for for super for
licensure can use the in carb
certificate the National Council
of architectural distribution
boards certificate as a
credential which was developed
by licensing boards across the
country that signifies that an
architect applicant meets the
national standards and can be
granted registration without
further qualification.
The provisions of house bill one
ninety one would complicate an
already streamlined path for
architect applicants seeking
work reciprocity in New Mexico.
In twenty twenty over half
approximately sixty seven
percent of the fourteen hundred
twenty five applicants for
architectural license were
approved by the New Mexico
architectural licensing board
with first typical for several
licensure the average time for
an applicant to receive
reciprocal licensure New
Mexico's less than thirty days
currently.
This shows the endorsement
models in place for those
seeking licensure in New Mexico
are both effective and
streamlined.
The provisions of house bill one
ninety one would create
unintended consequences that put
existing architecture mobility
and reciprocity models or press.
The bill is not tailored to
remedy mobility challenges for
specific professions or
occupations that actually need
it the nursing board obviously
being one of those.
Park for architects the bill
would create redundant and plug
potentially conflicting laws for
professions that already have
effective and efficient mobility
and reciprocity systems in
place.
Overlapping laws would create
confusion for applicants and
threaten well established
effective mobility models.
Proposals to change.
To to create greater mobility
endorsement must maintain high
consistent standards.
Licensing mobility and
endorsement depends on the
confidence that the licensing
standards New Mexico are strong
and consistent and quibbling to
licensing standards in other
states.
That's why New Mexico's
architects mobility and
endorsement system.
Systems work and can be trusted
architects have established
consistent education examination
and experience standards across
all fifty plus the US.
Territories.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you very much anyone else
was to speak in opposition or
expressed concerns with regards
to the bill.
Members of the committee.
By your federal.
Thank you Mr chair I would like
to say this is an amazing piece
of work an absolute coup to
those two.
This Trujillo because this is
long overdue and it's got so
many moving parts and highlight
a couple that I think especially
stand out one it is really rare
to see an agency set deadlines
like this for itself so setting
a thirty day deadline to these
expedited licenses is really
impressive.
I wanted to point that out my
question actually over the other
and the other thing I think is
super important to note is that
you built in the bill a pathway
to exclude certain licenses
states or territories if they
don't meet our criteria for
state and that is very important
you did just throw open the
doors and conditionally so I
appreciate that.
I'm.
About.
The areas that did not get an
expedited licensure
and some of them make sense to
me for example the real estate
didn't.
And real estate laws are
different in other states than
they are in New Mexico so
real estate license in Maryland
might not really be useful here
or sufficient about some things
veterinary medical pharmacy
engineer
Wondering why they do not have
the expedited license process
and I'm noted that architectures
and not list and I'm thinking
maybe that's because there's
already a mobility pathway that
our previous public testimony
just mentioned but clarify for
me why some and not others.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Representative I can
go through the list of the
boards that were not included
and then I'll allow
superintendent you're here to to
explain
white white not so that would
include the medical practice act
the pharmacy act that Neri
medical act architecture Act
engineering and survey practice
act private investigations acts
nineteen ninety nine public
accountancy Act real estate
Commission licensing act real
estate appraisers Act funeral
services act you're a
utilitarian raiders certificate
at sign language interpreting
practice act tobacco products
act in home inspectors act and
so with that superintendent if
you'd like to to take that taker
the question over.
Thank you Representative and I'm
Mr chair and representative
thank you for that question we
act the those license types you
are absolutely right some of
those at the top of the list the
medical board the pharmacy act
the veterinarian the
architectural and engineering we
honestly just did not have the
time to go work with those
populations that was why the
nursing board was originally
excluded we hadn't had an
opportunity to communicate with
them to find out whether any
challenges that might be that
might happen by just including
them in and so we left them out
in this first round this really
is just a first step for us and
I think we've seen that the
military expedited licensure has
been very positive as it is
taking us some time to begin the
implementation of it that also
have a thirty day time limit and
so by eliminating some of those
you know examination barriers if
you're licensed in another state
you are you can get license here
without any other barriers and I
do appreciate you pointing out
that we did give a pathway for
boards to say Hey this other
state over here is not up to our
standards and so they are
excluded for this very specific
reason some of the other boards
that are listed on there like
the public accountancy Act
they're already doing a very
good job and for the most part
all across the country they have
the same standards their
challenge was that they were
requiring in some instances that
you be a resident of New Mexico
so the residency requirement
being removed was was was
directed short specifically
towards that type of a barrier
on the real estate the appraiser
Commission the appraisers a
utility operators some of those
are just really unique to New
Mexico and need to be considered
in a different way.
Tobacco.
Back on home inspectors are
brand new licensing types and I
didn't want to mess with them
until we have a little more
information about it the private
investigations many of those
individuals carry guns and we
wanted to make sure that we have
an opportunity to do the
background check and thirty days
to rush through a license type
it's not necessarily a quibble
and in other states even even
the name of the license types
not equivalent so there was a
variety of reasons but it that
there there were there was a
reason for each type.
Mr chair and madam secretary
thank you I knew there would be
a good reason and I really hope
that PED takes a page from your
book here and streams lines and
straightens up there reciprocity
in licensing for educators who
are also in short supply thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Can you hear me.
We.
Mr chairman I think this is
great some of the new bass.
There's a motion for a do pass.
There is a second by
Representative Dow there's
further discussion
Representative part of.
You Mr chair thank you I I
support the bill just will it
one quick question is
construction workers are they
include and or they are not
included in this and can you
tell me why.
As.
Can you answer that question.
I was needed Mr chair
representative thank you for
that question know the
construction workers are not
included in this
you that might be something that
we move on to another stage but
at this point we again didn't
have enough information didn't
have enough resources this is
was really put together very
quickly as you might recall it
was an executive order in
November they gave me thirty
days to pull together a
comprehensive report to identify
where there were barriers thank
goodness we already been working
on that type of activity and so
we're able to take a lot of the
work that we've already done and
compile it into that report but
when we got the go ahead to
begin drafting this we had about
a month window and I I just had
to like move forward and kind of
figure where we could find some
wins and and we we have another
sixty day session coming up
another year thank you thank you
so much appreciate it.
We were Representative Powdrell
Culbert a second time your hand
is a.
All right members of the
committee anywhere further
discussion I know they our short
just one week a few comments.
I think it was
Oklahoma did a similar rewrite
three four years ago.
We up Senator Moores and
Rep Deborah metal then
Representative he'll many others
worked on a three page bill.
That
That was vetoed by the honorable
governor because we needed a
hundred fifty page bill and that
was a list goes struggle there
and now we came with a hundred
fifty page plus bill which is
which is the right way to do it
it's tremendous work to do this
in a and as soon context in a
thirty day session is is just
remarkable there's a book behind
my desk up.
License to work national study
the burdens of occupational
licensing is just amazing you
want you want safety what
professionalism you want to have
a rite of passage.
but when folks get the license
it's you know sometimes is not
in their interest for other
folks to have that very same
license.
but it's in all of our interests
for there to have multiple
licenses multiple options
choices for consumers
You know reasonable prices are
as long as there's there's as
long as the excellences up held
and I think that this does that
there's there's more work to be
done I think there's in addition
just barriers of entry that this
covers there's particular lives
is that we need to start looking
at and ask ourselves is this
right of passage on reasonable.
You know I know there's just a
lack of certain professions in
the state that we need to
bolster.
I will mention by name but will
will bring them up from time to
time and hopefully deal with
those professions.
Reasonably if in fact there's
there's just a.
This line of folks there just
line up Oakes they're doing a
particular job
and that folks could easily get
into that profession with with a
few tweaks to the statute and up
and a few what tweaks to the.
To the to the respective boards
and things of that nature so
what I will keep moving forward
and because at a professional
license is a permission slip
it's a permission slip by the
government.
To not only have a job to have a
profession to have a life to
have a wonderful experience on
the server raise a family New
Mexico and keep your keep your
kids here and and and and add to
to all New Mexicans so this is
tremendous I thank everyone
involved up to the madam chair
representative guy restrictive.
Armstrong and and one of the top
five how many state employees we
have like twenty thousand we
have a top five state employee
here with us in a superintendent
to heal so with that let's of
call the roll.
Representative Dow yes.
Representative part of yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Martinez.
Yes please Representative
Johnson actually forgive me I to
be rude but.
I'm gonna be a stickler for
procedure that the motion was
inappropriate will I believe we
want to adopt we have one up
past the committee substitute.
What a way to start all over.
And and I'll go back to
Representative Powdrell Culbert
with.
With the precision appropriate
motion thank you Mr Chairman can
you hear me Mr Chairman I'm.
What do passed.
No I move to table.
Maybe somebody else better do.
We'll go back to you for the
second for a second.
Mr chair over Representative
Fajardo do you want to do it
doesn't matter.
I do not without them I'm sorry
I do not.
One ninety one and you just the
house commerce and economic
development committee substitute
full house bill ninety one.
Do I have a second
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
I.
And testing so there is a motion
for a do not pass and also when
I wanted to do pass and where's
Committee substitute for house
bill one ninety one we have a
second by Representative by
certificate a second by
Representative Powdrell Culbert
so proud of the committee.
Almost as much prior to the
committee of the bill so thank
you for that motion please call
the roll.
Representative dial.
Representative Fajardo yes.
Representative thank you yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
Culbert yes.
Representative Serrato.
Yes.
Representative Dow.
Vice chair Figueroa yes.
Yes Representative Dow is is
excused.
From this boat well thanks
everyone thank you for your work
let's keep an eye on this bill
next couple of weeks we have
done our work commerce committee
we have done our work all of our
bills have been drive the table
and debated and decided upon
there's a memorial that was a
sign today will deal with it in
due time and a weight of maybe
a.
Maybe a handful of bills that
they will come to us last and
then bills from the Senate but
everybody enjoy their weekend
turning your capital outlay
before you leave the building
today.
And and not appreciate of the
three weeks we've put in and we
got
How many twelve days to go so
let's reenergize and get to work
thanks everyone have a great
weekend.
I'm sorry I was at a residence
at the.
Thank you.
