Fence or folks you know sitting
in the Committee rural economic
are if you will.
I know everyone's here for us
Senate bill sixty six well the
federal hearing on that you have
to.
One or two very quick hearings.
If
So I could ask
House.
These.
Portion I can.
There's a committees.
Is
you will.
Actually I'll take it back let's
go to three twenty seven welcome
Representative Hochman B. hill
House Bill three twenty seven
there isn't any substitute is
there a motion to discuss.
All right great discussed the
committee substance.
In.
Be able to figure but it can
turn out there
Their audio thank you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee the
committee substitute for house
bill three twenty seven
immensity Mexico to
telecommunications Act require
equal application of regulatory
requirements for local exchange
carriers competitive access
providers and inter exchange
carriers except for the
regulation of rates pursuant to
that statute and with that US Mr
Chairman I'm going to introduce
my expert Mr Leo Baca di can be
pulled over as well.
Thank you all.
Thank you dear there's seventy
five calls to the audience.
Okay can you hear me.
Yes the canister back I do want
to give a statement certainly.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Leo Bach
the government affairs director
for CenturyLink in New Mexico
here to talk about house bill
two twenty seven this bill will
benefit New Mexico consumers
over the years consumers are
disconnecting their old voice
landlines and switching to cell
phones.
Currently the law only regulates
the old voice land lines which
is the dying part of our
business we have lost many
customers over the years twenty
eight thousand and in twenty
eighteen twenty six thousand and
twenty nineteen forty thousand
last year twenty twenty this
affects our ability to keep our
well paid jobs for employees by
losing that many customers
consumers want broadband House
Bill three twenty seven will
help us focus on investing in
broadband and grow jobs to
provide service to our broadband
customers thank you.
With that Mr Chairman will stand
for questions thank you very
much and let's see if there's
folks opposed up there spoke
supposed we.
Try to be as transparent as
possible on this bill it was a
it's similar to Senate bill
twenty four and so briefly there
some three hands in opposition
let's hear what they have to say
up what we have first we go to
Ricky Keyes and David Cameron
Graham.
No you yourself welcome when we
take about a minute each and if
you can't if you can.
Mr Graham Cameron Graham wanted
to proceed.
Yes Mr chairman my name is
Cameron Graham I'm a volunteer
advocates with a a RP New Mexico
and it's hundred forty eight
thousand members.
R. as the introduction said this
bill apparently just was dropped
yesterday and we've had a very
short time to look at it.
But it appears to us that what
it does is it removes the
requirement that CenturyLink
have affected competition before
it is entitled to deregulate its
telephone service.
Now I understand that sentry
link loses a lot of their
wireline services what we are
concerned about and have been
throughout the deregulation of
the telecommunications business.
Is that in rural areas where we
have a large number of our
customers CenturyLink really
does not have affected
competition their places where
there's no cell service and of
course there's no voice over
internet protocol where there is
not a cable provider.
Or that they don't offer.
Their DSL service so we're very
concerned about regulating
CenturyLink in those locations
without a showing that they have
affected competition to ensure
that they continue to provide a
reasonable price service and
quality service.
Later the rural areas of the
state.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
appreciate the opportunity to
present our conclusion based on
a very short period of time to
evaluate this legislation thank
you Sir Dennis Conner T..
Mr Chairman my name is Janice
Carter T. R. what The New Mexico
alliance for retired Americans
also are retired tell co workers
reporter parties experience
we've dealt extensively with
Senate bill twenty four working
with the committee the Judiciary
Committee table the original
bill we should now work from
last night some of the languages
we moved out but the one major
concern from day one is
protecting the customers let's
CenturyLink service appreciate
your returning look at this bill
this morning
all told us that.
Well definitely stop G. R. C.
program enabling you to call
central accountable for service
quality which we have just part
years has always been calling
the wrong direction hello hope
you will consider tabling this
bill and stop the project the
people of New Mexico that just
desire and need good quality of
service thank you very much for
your time.
Appreciate you Sir anyone else
wish to speak in opposition
anyone else wish to speak in
opposition anybody who is really
really briefly wishes to speak
and support.
Super briefly Mr Jason Espinoza
welcome.
Chairman members the committee
Jason Espinoza registered
lobbyists with the New Mexico
technology council in New Mexico
idea the statewide economic
development association we stand
and support thank you.
Miss Ashley Wagner.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy with the New Mexico
chamber of commerce the voice
telephone market is going away
because customers have switched
to cell phones and broadband we
support this bill because it
will help companies to focus on
investing more in broadband in
New Mexico thank you.
Thank you very much we have a
one of the person with their
hand up.
When I do welcome Sir please I
say Mr chairman and committee
members and my name is Suman had
a TV to WA I also urge you
strongly to oppose this bill hi
this is a new regulation telecom
deregulation bill for
CenturyLink ridge has a full
service quality New Mexico I'm
disposed specifically get rid of
service quality provisions that
many rural and low income
customers depend on
unfortunately many customers in
New Mexico do not have access to
alternative forms of
communication such as wireless
and I think members in this
committee are very familiar with
wireless problems so I hope you
will vote against this bill and
one last point I would like to
make is that while these
regulations apply to telecom
CenturyLink provides internet
service using the same
communications cables that is
phone lines go true so when
service quality for phone lines
is better their internet service
and speed is better to thank
you.
No thank you and that was in
opposition great we'll go to
members of the committee.
What we for the record.
Up
up up the committee said once
you.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Yourself please.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you Mr Gramm okay thank
you.
Mr chairman and Representative
you know for years we've.
Try to work with CenturyLink and
we each year we had the same
concerns.
And to no avail.
And so can you explain to us.
Really why I guess the best way.
To ask this question I know Mr
Baca as lobby this for many many
years and so not opposition is
always the same issues.
Service service service so
Mister Bach and Representative
can you briefly.
Tell us how you address some of
these concerns over the years
because I know I've been here
and it at least ten years.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative how they'll help
Culbert I'll speak briefly with
regards to how that that issue
touches on the issue at hand one
important distinction that needs
to be made Mr chair members of
members of the committee is this
bill has nothing to do with a
regulation on service quality
CenturyLink CenturyLink
continues to be regulated on
service quality that has nothing
to do with what we're discussing
and this bill today and for the
the rest of the answer Mr
Chairman I'm going to turn that
over to Mr Baca who can address
your concerns Representative.
Mr chairman members of the
committee in addition to the
bill to the service quality
remains consumer protection
remains if this bill is passed
this bill does not even address
effective competition so there
are no changes to the existing
law on effective competition
this bill does not even address
that is a very simple
straightforward bill.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Or thank you members members of
the can of pleasure the
committee.
I move a do pass.
We have a motion a do pass of no
one in our no one left for
discussion but.
Delivery please call the roll.
Passed house bill three twenty
seven to do past.
This is the thank you thank you
madam secretary
Forty worded amendment I move a
do not pass on house bill three
twenty seven.
But I do pass on Canadian
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill three twenty
seven.
And I just.
Thank you.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes Representative.
Asked.
Johnson.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Culbert.
Yes thank.
This is Cheryl here's.
We get all.
I have to go back and.
I apologize.
Yes.
This.
Greg was please yes.
Yes.
Thank you and chairman Maestas
yes SO Representative Hochman do
pass on the committee
substitute.
Thank you very much Mr chair
members of the committee.
Turn the gavel over to vice
chair Figueroa.
I'll be presenting briefly House
Bill three twenty eight this is
a exact more version about a
vice chair of a.
Of Senate bill twenty up Senate
bill two sixty two which is
brought up for no not for policy
reasons but just for practical
reasons in a Senate committee
and if if you could allow of
Morris Chavis into the zoom.
The.
We all timers can recall the
former superintendent of
insurance for the state of
Mexico.
Mr Travis if you could briefly
explain the bill and thank you
and welcome Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman I hope
you may be some extremely old
but Mr chairman my name is mo
Chavez and you're serving as an
expert on behalf of the national
association of professional
employers as you said is the
former insurance commissioner
for the state I'm very familiar
with this issue about a year ago
the office of the superintendent
adopted a rule dealing with the
regulation what's called a
me what a multiple employer
welfare arrangements essentially
their association health plan
like up which converts converts
would offer unfortunately the
rule did not expressly exclude
peels which are professional
employer organization.
as a result the rule was written
with almost exclusively H. P.'s
mind deals were absolutely
unable to comply with the rule
and immediately ceased offering
P. L. sponsored health plans in
New Mexico here's the kicker
this resulted in the loss of
comprehensive and affordable
health coverage for thousands of
New Mexicans we do believe this
was an unintended consequence
PO's are not association health
plans and they're not.
PO's are single employer plans
and cannot so we offer health
insurance the offer payroll work
comp and health insurance it's
not like Blue Cross Presbyterian
this legislation cures and
treats the problem as the vast
majority Mr chairman of other
states do you just single
employer plans we've talked in
superintendent is okay with the
bill as evidenced by their
fiscal impact report in the
Senate and with that Mr chairman
I'll be happy to answer the
question is.
Thank you Mr Janice appreciate
that and I'm sure my answers are
a do you have any comments or
going to Madam.
Just
muted J. hearing.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Would you please mute thank you.
All right we're gonna go to
public comments if you are here
to speak in support of this bill
you are here to speak in support
please raise your hands and
let's hear from Jason Weaks.
Good morning miss madam chair
members the committee Jason
Weaks I'm a registered lobbyist
for eighty P. eighty P. is the
largest professional planning
organization in the world we
offer numerous services for our
clients payroll etcetera we also
offer
Health care benefit packages
yeah this is dramatically gonna
affect our business in New
Mexico if we don't get this fix
that is being in business
committee today in law we we
really want to make sure that
we're continuing to offer the
relevant benefit packages that
we've always been able to offer
this really truly was an
unintended consequence of the
superintendents rural and this
legislative fix puts us back in
status quo on quite frankly
allows us to continue to offer
our services are full services
to our role of clients and PO's
are huge employer in the state
count for millions and millions
and payroll and we have employed
thousands of people through our
relative Services so this will
allow us to continue to operate
in offer the benefit packages
that we've been able to offer in
the past also businesses that
utilize PO's are are typically
more likely to succeed and more
likely to grow more quickly
because we're taking care of a
lot of the ministerial stuff
that you know employers get
bogged down in and when we take
care of that they can focus on
actually the content of their
work in growing their business
so we stand in strong support of
this legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr weeks.
On the line a.
Will move in Mr Nye here.
There you go Mr line please on
mute yourself.
It I I made an error I do not
wish to speak on this bill and
its bills Senate bill sixty six
excuse me.
Mr line no problem I see and no
other hands raised to speak in
favor of this bill is there
anyone here to speak in
opposition to this bill.
All right let's go to committee
then.
Do passed please Maestas she.
My eyes and Representative
Powdrell Culbert moved to second
and I still see no.
Committee so madam chair in my
on a motion.
Since
we are.
The house bill and do do pass on
the.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
I assume that your second as
well.
Yes it is.
Chairman Karen this piece of
legislation.
Chairman is where he can make a
motion for discussed on is on
legislation thank you.
Would you like to make the
motion.
That's fine.
Okay.
I'm sorry go ahead.
All right.
I see no discussion I also see
is there any objection.
We are.
Redistricting issue.
Now you might want to mute your
slide.
Sure you have a do pass County
everyone present voting in
favor.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr Chavez and now I appreciate
everyone's patience it's twelve
o'clock any time.
Was.
Senate bill sixty six and it's
very important to a great many
people and I think.
For opposed to this legislation
over the past five years we are
going to
Senator souls if for Senator
Duhigg.
Raise your hand Senator.
Your hand yes Representative
student
and it
is raise your.
It is Gail Armstrong in please
raise your hand thank you for.
And so as.
In the economic are.
And there's an echo.
Okay.
The echo this.
Yourself.
And then I will get get Mr
Representative Gail Armstrong
into that weapon are we gonna
turn over to the Sanchez taken
away and then we're going to go
to the advocates instead of
giving people a minute or a
minute happened cutting people
off we're gonna give the
proponents of the bill approach
then our to present
the
statements I know it's hard and
we can go on the highway
coordinates and we respect that.
All of the bill all the similar
to about an hour.
What is back in.
One forty five or so hope not.
The bill.
Welcome centers close that said
that a lot welcome not.
Sixty.
If I could ask everyone to
themselves.
But.
This are you ready for me to
Representative at this point we
sure our welcome center and
thank you for bringing this
forward.
Thank you and thank you for
having me here in the committee
I I appreciate being here Senate
bill sixty six amends the New
Mexico bank installment loan and
the small loan act if the
governor priority and endorsed
bills the main function of SB
fifty six is the cap the
interest charges on all small
loans at thirty six percent A.
P. R. all in cost.
Thirty six percent was applied
in New Mexico from nineteen
forty seven until nineteen
eighty one in the late seventies
and eighties hyperinflation that
the of us remember our prime
interest lending rates up and
the user the laws that have been
in place for decades we're no
longer appropriate New Mexico
along with many other states
remove the caps in triple digit
interest and in some cases rates
over a thousand percent interest
we're legal.
SB fifty six returns the state
to the thirty six percent APR
cap that was the law for over
thirty years.
Over seventy percent of New
Mexicans supporter cap of thirty
six percent with most of those
who oppose it do so because this
week thirty six percent is
unconscionably high.
About a fourth of the calls that
I get on this bill are angry at
me for supporting such a high
interest rate.
The current legal interest rate
in New Mexico is a hundred
seventy five percent and it's a
drain on local economies and
slow our economic recovery from
the band Democrata downturn.
Eighty five percent of the
businesses affected by SB sixty
six are headquartered out of
state.
Topics generated in New Mexico
leave the state robbing the
state of the capital needed for
strong economic base used by all
businesses I rating and
expensive predatory loans
millions of dollars will stay in
our communities where the money
will be spent and turned over in
the New Mexico economy.
The economics when money moves
the economy improves.
Hi you're just won't stop the
movement of money by sucking it
out of the bottom of the economy
instead of being spent in the
local community where it used to
buy groceries Services medical
care childcare and close high
interest loans destroying the
very base of the local economy.
Predatory loans harm families
and push people towards poverty
they prey on people who are
living paycheck to paycheck and
are on the margins they weaken
the foundations strong
communities and economies are
built upon.
This is been in the works for
years.
I first became involved in two
thousand fifteen while serving
on the Indian Affairs interim
committee.
We were the chapter house way
out on the Navajo Nation about
noon when a number of very high
and well paid powerful lobbyists
showed up I asked one of the
colleagues why are they here and
he showed me the afternoon
agenda at a discussion of
predatory lending concerns on
the Navajo Nation and it was one
of the topics we're going to
discuss that afternoon they were
there to protect the profits of
their clients from any actions
the legislature might be looking
at.
Similar to the tobacco liquor
and pharmaceutical industry they
were there to protect the
lucrative bottom lines of the
out of state corporations.
In two thousand seventeen
introduced a bill to cap
interest rates at thirty six
percent due to the economic
devastation it because for so
many New Mexicans there were
several other bills being
circulated that year Senator
that were clearly designed to
protect an industry that was
averaging three hundred fifty
percent interest rates with some
over a thousand percent I pulled
out of the discussions when it
was clear the industry with
setting the interest rate at a
hundred seventy five percent of
profits and eliminate some of
the reporting requirements I
could not justify supporting
something so outrageous.
One of the consistent concerns
that we've heard expressed by
industry was that they were
providing capital for unbanked
work credit customers who no one
would want to it was often
stated that even credit unions
would not lead to this
demographic.
In preparing for Senate bill
sixty six we heard that
concerned allowed and clear the
thirty six percent interest cap
build that I carried in the past
didn't have any perfect
provisions for what would happen
if there was hyperinflation into
the future.
This was a concern for the
credit unions this bill as a
huge compromise over private
prior legislation if high
inflation occurs again this bill
of the escalator to increase the
thirty six percent cap to match
the increased that the prime
interest rate has hat as a
result you will your several
credit unions.
And their industry group who
will support this bill they are
poised and ready to make loans
at rates under thirty six
percent APR.
When Montana move to these rate
caps the credit you saw
significant increase in their
business as they picked up the
need for the short term loans.
I did that with several
lobbyists for the industry.
In preparing for this bill went
over the last couple of weeks
into us for a unique part for
their particular client.
When we talk about the industry
it is not one concern that they
have each has a different model
for the product that they are
operating and each one to
special card out for their
particular product.
I can't negotiate with up to the
minute type of industry when
everyone is on their own it
doesn't represent the same need
and therefore we tried to
Representative the needs of the
people that are affected by
these loans and ensuring that
the requirement and the need for
relatively low interest rates is
there and available through the
credit union to have agreed to
do well here are ready to step
up.
You'll hear some in the industry
report that they can't make
money the thirty six percent APR
cap however some of the same
companies are functioning and
making money in other states
that have a thirty six percent
interest rate cap.
They are all ready for Prague
there are over the for profit
companies operating in New
Mexico who are making short term
loans at under the thirty six
percent APR and they are ready
to step up and continue to make
those I've heard recently that
because the cost of money is so
low right now they actually are
reducing their range from I
think it was twenty nine percent
down to somewhere around twenty
two percent and they are making
money making those short term
loans I believe those companies
are opportune and one made.
If a company can't make money on
short term loans without
charging rates about thirty six
percent and they should not be
making those well.
Several years ago and I think it
was in two thousand seventeen
when the industry when there was
again at thirty six percent cap
proposed.
One of the dinners that we all
go to.
A lobbyist was flown in from out
of state and the chair that he
sat next to me at dinner then by
here about how important it was
that we don't cap our interest
rates they will in a lobbyist
from out of state to protect
their interests in New Mexico in
the profits they were making.
We often perpetuate this myth
that if you just work harder if
you just have a little more grit
then you can get ahead.
No one enters into the loans
planning on getting track these
interest loans are not available
people will ask for help earlier
there are many nonprofits ready
to help people who find
themselves in financial
difficulties.
we only need to look at what
happened in other states we are
not the first that you do this
there are yeah and and research
they call it natural experiment
other states have been these
caps and you can look at what
happened the people and when the
cap was put on more people did
not fall into poverty in fact
people at the lower end were
better off than they were before
the caps were put in high
interest loans don't just heard
individuals their families their
children their communities.
In two thousand nineteen this
industry repossessed two
thousand two hundred and ninety
three vehicles from New
Mexicans.
That's two thousand two hundred
ninety three families that
didn't have a able to get to
work find groceries you get to
the doctor's office or to take
the children to school further
pushing those families into
poverty.
On Wednesday of this week either
stop them all by staff the
number here at the capitol she
asked if I was the one very low
tech built she said I'm not dumb
but I got one of these what I
thought would be easy to borrow
the money for a new table and
pay it all at table ended up
costing me more than twice the
original price and ruined my
credit I'm still trying to get
out from under the problem that
caused me please get your bill
passed.
So in closing two days couple of
bullet points and then the
coalition of support and you'll
hear from many of them in the
the supporters.
Six eight for thirty six percent
APR all the impact on interest
rates.
The fifty six has a provision
that if the prime rate rises
beyond ten percent thirty six
percent cap also rises it was a
huge compromise but what in the
credit unions as partners not
providing capital for under
resource people.
It increases from five thousand
dollars to ten thousand the
maximum loan covered under this
thirty six percent cap.
Because of potential loopholes
to get around the thirty six
percent all in provisions.
It matches the interest rates of
many other states and the
federal military lending act
that was implemented to ensure
the reading this of our troops.
We're not the only state that
isn't acting this type of
legislation we joined other
states in protecting their
citizens communities and
economies you controlling
interest rates this will take
millions of dollars in New
Mexico where the money can work
to lift up our families and
provide economic base for other
New Mexico companies and
businesses.
Over seventy percent of New
Mexicans supported thirty six
percent it just cap with the
with much of the opposition
building because they still
believe thirty six percent is
too high this isn't about access
to credit it's about exposure to
debt.
We say that again this isn't
about access to credit it's
about exposure to debt.
The coalition that supports this
is the credit association credit
union association of New Mexico
Guadalupe credit union
ProConnect.
Of the Navajo Nation Navajo
Nation Human Rights Commission
center for responsible lending
New Mexicans for fair lending
coalition New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty prosperity works
A. A. R. P. New Mexico AFP New
Mexico native American voters
Alliance education project New
Mexico Asian families New Mexico
voices for children New Mexico
cafe New Mexico thrives progress
now New Mexico education on Ole
retake our democracy The New
Mexico yes hedge New Mexico
groups are Lutheran advocates
the ministry in New Mexico the
New Mexico conference of
Catholic bishops New Mexico
conference of churches the City
of Albuquerque the city of Los
crucis McKinley County New
Mexico County and alleged County
and again over seventy percent
of New Mexico New Mexicans and
so Mr chair with what if I could
turn it over to my co sponsor of
Senator Katie Duhigg and I think
she has a shorter than that that
we we would like to make as well
at this point so Senator Duhigg
thank you Senator welcome center
doing and I will up to prevent
the sake of native for
discussion your amendment do you
have a tool to number.
Thank you Mr chair no I'm sorry
I don't
I move that discussion of the
moment that you're going to
discuss welcome.
Thank you very much
so there is on the American of
fintech Council on it the often
partner with other finance
financial entities to make loans
that are well below thirty six
percent
and we want to make sure that
the the section of this bill
that that really tries to
capture help folks seek to abate
regulations doesn't apply to
those loans and so in order to
do that I would offer an
amendment on page seventeen line
twelve.
before the a insert the words if
the loan exceeds the rate
permitted by chapter fifty eight
NMSA at nineteen seventy eight
so that would so for loans that
are exceeding the cap that that
we would seek to put in here
then they would come into at
this inquiry about evasion but
for those that are not they
would they would not fund to.
They would not.
Recovered.
That makes sense.
It all makes sense thank you
senator a we will if you could
email me that and we'll get it
drafted we're going to have
about two hours of public
comment and then we could look
at it thank you you have the
floor.
You know and and and senator
schools really covered a lot of
of what I would say at I'll just
add you at a time when it New
Mexicans are facing an economic
crisis I think it's more
important than ever to make sure
that New Mexican dollars state
in New Mexico and that we're
giving the poorest among us a
path to prosperity rather than
than being stuck in a debt trap
and senator souls mention at one
point the this is an issue about
access to credit it's it's about
it it I I just want to explain a
little bit when people talk
about access to credit if you
are giving people access to
credit at triple digit interest
rates that is like offering a
starving person poisoned food it
doesn't actually help them and
and it actually makes things a
lot worse so I would encourage
the committee to us I look
forward to the debate that's
going to happen encourage the
committee to is to support this
bill and and support a path that
that brings more prosperity to
New Mexicans over all thank you
Mr.
Mr chair if I might if I can
have Winona knob up to the CEO
of while at the credit union is
one of our expert witnesses that
you can do that in the hello and
thank you senator I I've failed
to do that any experts that you
have that's not a raise your
hand anyone else Senator.
Hi Karen Myers may also be on
the list as one of our experts
welcome miss Myers so we'll let
them into the committee room.
Anyone else.
As an expert.
I'm sorry I I thank you you're
asking out to the audience out
not that I'm aware of it this is
the.
Miss Myers I think the part of
that this about public input
this is not a are sitting next
to you in the virtual weapon are
so up please proceed.
Let you kind of chair and chair
doesn't so so if I miss law that
you'd like to speak please as
one of our experts.
Okay Mr chairman members of the
committee New Mexico credit
unions do service entire state
of New Mexico we already make
small dollar and secured loans
and loans secured by car titles
I recently discussed with other
credit unions that have
expansive branch networks a
concern that houses of this bill
would limit borrowing options of
New Mexicos and we are committed
and working together to make
sure we continue to deliver
products to ensure this doesn't
happen and a cap well below
thirty six percent.
one of the biggest differences
of these types of loans granted
by credit unions is that we want
to make sure that we're insuring
financial health of the people
going into the future and you
know average person doesn't
understand the impact of the
interest rates I know I sure
didn't before I order some of
the contracts from these
companies for example we have
one bar or was injured at work
they received a settlement they
used their funds to purchase a
new car and make some needed
home repairs keeping just enough
to tide yourself over until she
would start receiving disability
income well and and expected
expense happened her furnace
stopped working and it couldn't
be repaired she's seen these
great commercials on TV for this
title one company and she had
purchased this two thousand
eighteen auto so she thought
this is the perfect thing I can
do I'll go get a loan from them
they sound wonderful the
payments were one thousand three
hundred and thirty four dollars
a month for forty eight months
the interest rate was a hundred
fifty point six eight and the
total interest to be paid on
this loan was fifty four
thousand dollars that's just the
interest without sufficient
funds to make the the payment
when it came to she went to
another store front lender and
she brought nine hundred ten
dollars from them so that she
could make the payment on it
because she didn't know what
else to do so for for money she
paid over five thousand dollars
in interest on this loan.
With one of the big credit union
and we were able to help her we
lowered her payments down to
five hundred seventy a month
amount she could afford a
disability that state or seven
hundred sixty four a month.
Instead of a forty eight month
term it was a thirty three month
terms and for the whole loan
should pay three thousand four
hundred fifty dollars that's
less than the interest you pay
the title loan company in four
months and saved over fifty
thousand dollars and we've done
this with many borrowers and one
here we sit the server we stayed
sixty nine borrowers over three
hundred thousand dollars that
money was kept in New Mexico an
average of forty three hundred
dollars each in interest that's
a lot of money especially if
you're living in poverty.
The average loan amount was
forty five hundred dollars and
many of these people have
several loans because they had
to go to one company to borrow
to pay the other company and so
forth and so on just getting
into this debt spiral members
everyday people that brought
stay with us they're the ones
that on the credit union we
don't have to make profit for
our investors and stockholders
and out of state people so we
can offer much lower rates and
we're focused on improving the
lives of New Mexicans we don't
want to make their situation
worse we want to make it better
and many of our birds have even
reported that these loans have
heard both their physical and
mental health due to the stress
they encounter when they realize
they cannot afford the payments
and how they're going to pay
them and there is also as you
mentioned Senator solstice this
great concern over losing their
only transportation to get to
work and so this this is what
makes them go to another store
front lender and get more money
and get deeper in debt and many
of us
if I can interrupt we got lots
of people who want to be able to
speak in the public comment and
we'll keep you around because
you're right in the middle of a
thank you the loans to people if
their questions about that
particular area also Karen Myers
use or other expert and really
is our technical expert on
How the the the APR functions
and works and we'll get of this
Myers ready for questions that
also so I think chairman at this
point if you would like to go
out the public testimony I think
we would be ready for that.
No thank you for that and thank
you miss more as it was not for
understanding we have a maybe
two hours of public comment we
we we want to take action on
this if we can well before we do
that up what are you up share a
short presentation
representative that I welcome
welcome.
I thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee and I'd
like to thank my co sponsors in
the Senate this committee heard
from me for three hours about
three weeks ago I think we we
talked long about this bill this
is a this is the companion bill
the plan was always to see if we
can get it through the Senate
first and then bring it over to
the house I and I would just say
the stories are and must in my
district the guy who buys this
kid a computer and ends up
losing at track.
The woman who needs a thousand
dollars and ends up losing is
our home I mean they are endless
and I actually think this is not
a partisan bill I think this is
a bill for all New Mexico and I
think this is one of the most
important pieces of legislation
we have before us in this
session so with that I will in
my remarks and because they took
a lot of time three weeks ago
and not I thank the chair thank
my cosponsors thank you.
Thank you so very much now we
have a eighty three attendees in
the room.
so for those who wish to speak
in favor go ahead and raise your
hand.
Are going to raise rental count
the hands and then we'll see how
it's going.
let's see.
Read about proximity twenty one
folks twenty one folks so
Why don't we go up I don't think
that our and our will work.
So what we go up.
The cognisant go about two
minutes to enough minutes or so
try not to repeat everyone's
arguments but we're not gonna do
a hard and fast time it is
twelve twenty three of so we'll
we'll go to about one twenty if
we have to hopefully forty five
minutes but given two minutes to
about minutes of comments
In all announce your name and
then whoever's at whoever's up
next up miss Sylvia Fink and
miss Margaret gray so we'll up
will allow you to talk and then
you on mute yourself.
thank you welcome.
Chair may station members of the
committee show this thank
representing eight hundred KA
you W. New Mexico members we
support SB sixty search reducing
the hundred and seventy five
percent sure yes landing right
thirty six percent.
These right to tractor most
fiscally vulnerable populations.
These bills are also prohibit
you were right lender fees and
other charges which had been
used to boost loans absorption
chillers.
The research done by thank New
Mexico recommends thirty six
percent rate based on the
federal small long right chapter
thirty six percent for military
families were often young man
with little savings as are many
of our most fiscally vulnerable
populations.
These predatory lending
practices have a lot of lifelong
debt from some of your
constituents since about eighty
percent of these loans are
refinanced rolled over lower
interest rate will improve three
payment and reduce default
rates.
This reform is consistent with
loss and growing number of
states thank you for your
support into my senator Senator
junior co sponsoring.
Mr chair.
Welcome it's great we hear you
miss Great Falls I Mike Doyle.
Thank you Mr chair Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Margaret gray and I am here
is an eight A. R. P. New Mexico
consumer to advocate from Santa
Fe.
A. R. P. New Mexico is in strong
support Senate bill sixty six
because all New Mexicans deserve
access to their loans.
This bill will not shut down the
small loan businesses.
It will cap the rate at thirty
six percent APR instead the
exorbitant rate of a hundred and
seventy five percent.
Small businesses are still
operating in the states that
have enacted the thirty six
percent cap.
Our business is in New Mexico as
you would just hurt they're
already let.
All Lente at or below thirty six
percent.
We thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward thank
you Mr chair for allowing me to
speak.
Thank you Mike Doyle followed by
Alan Sanchez.
Thank you madam chairman and
harmful Committee members for
this time to speak hi I am
speaking we have so much salt
there is a workers compensation
attorney and a member of the New
Mexico trollers Association we
strongly stand in support of
this bill.
Mr chairman you and I have
spoken in the past about how the
workers compensation system
hurts workers cutting their
wages to sixty six and two
thirds in some cases even hired
others the result of these low
rates they receive one of the
workers compensation act.
Result and then turning to the
store for a loans for companies
for loans and what I see.
Repeatedly in my practice is
that people who are strong
members our society workers
contributing to our community
get injured and then they fall
into this trap of these loans at
the end up losing their house
they lose their cars and they're
no longer really beneficial
members citing it and we end up
supporting more I ask.
That the committee voted in
favor of this bill thank you for
this time speak so mostly
needles.
Thank you Mr Doyle Allan Sanchez
followed by Terry Greer.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Alan
Sanchez I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
conference of Catholic bishops
the bishops are worried about
the user re being so high in the
state but our our charities
Catholic charities in Vince to
Paul other organizations
throughout the state we see the
hardship for twenty years we've
worked on this and the
heartbreaking stories just don't
go away so I think it's time to
define the fix this the bishops
I encourage you to pass this
legislation thank you.
Thank you for joining us Mr
Sanchez Terry Greer followed by
Ron Morehead and here's what I'm
doing everyone I really
appreciate you I'll kind of my
own little timer if you get to
two minutes I'll tell you but by
all means say your piece.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Roger
career and I'm here is the
volunteer state president with a
a RP New Mexico I speak for over
two hundred forty thousand A. R.
P. New Mexico members.
A. R. T. New Mexico isn't
Strawson order Senate bill sixty
six because will help seniors
and others from going into debt
rates fees that they can afford.
This bill is one of a a RP New
Mexico's main priorities in
twenty twenty one it would like
to thank the sponsors Senator
resources Senator Duhigg for
bringing this much needed bill
forward thank you.
Ron Moore had followed by Nick
Madison.
Afternoon honorable on German
masters and members committee
meetings run more had and I'm
the president and CEO first
financial credit union and like
Winona Guadalupe we see a lot of
tragic happens in our state and
now when that happens people
need money to get out of it
we need to make sure that they
have.
The opportunity to get back on
their feet once someone's charge
a hundred seventy five percent
interest for Senate periods of
time it makes it very difficult
and just like what no up what
looked a first financial just to
clean up that mess and you'll be
great if they never got into
that debt trap in the first
place first financial is similar
to many other parties on the
state we've got sixteen branches
nine communities but there's
over forty credit unions in the
state that would be glad to step
up
and take over whatever Lente
whatever capital is needed for
the people of New Mexico we have
plenty money to land and would
be glad to step up and do it
first financial we do loans as
small as a hundred Bucks you
can't make money a hundred Bucks
but we do it because we know the
people of Mexico needed and we
know that when the people get
back on their feet that
eventually they're gonna need a
car to get to work or cargo
brush we shopping will be there
to help map that time so it does
work out in the end increase
your here to help the people of
Mexico no matter what you hear
from others thank you very much.
Thank you.
Nick Madison followed by.
Maria Griego.
Mr chair committee members my
name is Nick Madison I'm private
consumer protection attorney in
Albuquerque and for this I work
for legal aid out on the Navajo
Nation and over the course of a
dozen years I've spoken to
hundreds of victims of predatory
lending and I can tell you about
the heartbreaking stories of the
effects of these types of
predatory loans on families
employment health and and really
just people's happiness on a
daily basis the problem is that
the legislature currently has
given its seal of approval two
one hundred and seventy five
percent APR loans to this kind
of triple digit landing and I
want to give you all an example
of of the impact that has on
people's lives I believe that
there's been a hand out
one of my clients is named this
is P. consumer number two on it
handout if you don't have to
handle describe what happened to
her basically she was she was
living up in Santa Fe she's
disabled getting about a
thousand dollars a month from
social security and and
depending on her car.
For food and medical
appointments but she ended up
being
deceives and then pressured into
a series of car title loans
and it really illustrates what
happens these loans well she
borrowed only about six thousand
dollars she was required to pay
back thirty four thousand
dollars over the course of four
years and the payments were
seven hundred dollars a month
almost three quarters of her
total income there was no hope
for paying it back and you can
imagine the kind of stress in
the source of the fact that it
had on her life this landing at
a hundred seventy five percent
triple digit interest rates is
not about access to credit it's
about taking advantage of
vulnerable people the
legislature now has an
opportunity to correct that and
I urge you all to do so.
Thank you Sir Maria Griego
followed by renowned Samuel.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and and this is when the colors
and my name is I'm an attorney
with the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty along with my
colleague Maria Griego
The New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty.
Right advocacy to be a comic and
social justice as well the whole
opportunity for families across
our state and we strongly
support this bill because it's a
fair and responsible interest
rate cap and it will stop
hundreds of millions of dollars
to be extracted from lowincome
New Mexicans each year I would
also like to share a story of a
borrower that I work with about
a year ago it if you have at
hand that Mr Madison mentioned
front of you.
in this is far we're number five
and his name is Mr Pete he was
an elderly New Mexican the
veteran and like so many elderly
people in our state he lives on
a small fixed income from social
security at the time he was
experiencing homelessness is
living in a vehicle emergency
medical procedure ended up with
a bill he could before the one
to a car title lender barged
into the dollars.
You are the hundred dollars and
a hundred and sixty four percent
APR the lender to the title to
the vehicle.
Less than a week later he could
of course our payment so the
lender will the loan over again
and again when you could report
the payment the second time.
Within a month that company had
left him a thousand dollars and
a hundred and fifty three
percent APR despite the fact
that he was struggling to make
each payment and within a month
that will went from the total
now he open from three hundred
eighty two dollars to almost
four thousand dollars you can
to us for help because he was
struggling to make those
payments doing everything he
could to keep that vehicle we
were able to help him get his
car title back and provide
apartment within the month
within the month and again this
is this is just not not common
story these loans have ruined
people's lives
it with eight astronomically
high interest rates and Mr
chairman members of the
committee we asked you to
support this bill to enact a
fair.
Responsible all inclusive thirty
six percent APR cap thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you and thank you for your
work if your name is different
than your computer let us know
renown Samuel followed by Erica
gaggles.
Thank you Mr chair for this
opportunity to speak my name is
Rhiannon Samuel and I'm the
executive director of the county
New Mexico County New Mexico is
a non partisan grassroots
nonprofit that seeks out
legislation that works across
the aisle to fix our education
crime and economic opportunity
issues we're in support of this
bill because we believe that
it's going to help New Mexicans
get out of this cycle of poverty
that plagues family after family
this is a necessary step in the
right direction to make sure
that everyone has the
opportunity to succeed in our
beautiful state so thank you for
your consideration we hope that
you will vote for Senate bill
sixty six.
Thank you miss Erika guy goes
followed by Jeffrey so Lynskey.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Eric today
of those policy director at or
late we stand in favor of Senate
bill sixty six and view this as
a racial justice issue.
Headed toward the landing
disproportionately targets black
indigenous people of color with
triple digit loans causing long
term debt and lowering their
purchasing power you do
decreased credit scores we urged
committee members to vote in
favor of Senate bill sixty six
and in favor of protecting New
Mexicans from predatory lenders
thank you.
Thank you very much Jefferies so
let's keep all by Paul stole.
Thank you chairman and and and
representatives
the
I'm a member of retake our
democracy to retake our
democracy for accuracy we have
over twenty five hundred members
statewide and this bill is just
one of our high priority bills.
and it just make it real short
the power of of compound
interest that we've been hearing
about is equivalent to and
Economic addiction the chairman
and and clearly has ruined the
lives
just as much as those plagued by
drug addiction.
And so I urge you to please
support SB sixty six in light of
the fact that about eighty
percent of the people that do
end up borrowing on these high
interest rates only have to
continue to refinance and
refinancing refinance and we've
heard of course from others
about the disruption it's done
thank you very much.
Thank you.
Paul still full by Dennis
analytical.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
very pleased to be here today to
represent the credit union
association of New Mexico hi
Representative forty credit
unions in New Mexico and we
serve over nine hundred and
fifty thousand New Mexicans
I have been told that
the
the folks that engaging payday
lending would leave our state hi
if this bill were to pass and I
just want to point out that
credit unions has been here
making these loans for a long
time and making loans at under
thirty six percent a couple of
examples our military bases
Kirkland airforce base cannon
Air Force base at Holloman Air
Force base are served by credit
unions that follow the military
lending act which has for years
cap that right at thirty six
percent we've been serving our
military and doing it quite well
with those restrictions so the
idea that you can't make money
are these loans won't be
available is just not true I
would like to point out that
credit unions are experts in
small dollar low cost loans and
why because of our history in
nineteen oh eight Edward Filene
who was a department store owner
in Boston Massachusetts so that
is employees couldn't get credit
from a bank and the only place
they could go would be a loan
shark.
He saw the loan sharks in his
stores trying to collect money
from these people and so he
started the very first credit
union to make reasonable loans
to his employees to keep loan
sharks out of his stores that is
but our founding it was how we
started it's how we continue and
I guarantee you that credit
unions will do all they can to
meet the financial needs of the
people of New Mexico and to do
it in a way that does not
suffocate them in a cycle of
debt from which they cannot
recover I do ask the members of
the committee to please consider
do pass on Senate bill sixty six
thank you very much.
Thank you Sir Diane Santa gonna
go followed by J. and corona.
Thank you very much for hearing
me today yesterday members of
the committee actual local
contracts the last time we spoke
other was concerned about not
being familiar with the type of
loans and how they are
structured with fees and
interest I did submit five
examples of loans that we've
been able to refinance your
equitably the credit union and
some starry backgrounds around
Which is that they don't analyze
the capacity to repay loans
others examples that I sent you
for the simple number two that
gentleman was only receiving
social security benefit of
twelve forty eight a month and
monthly payment was nine hundred
and sixty two because of this
where people are defaulting on
these loans of the damages
twelve can you get packed
employment and they're just not
able to handle the types of
payments that they're being
granted
these other extremely predatory
for the simple reason that of
the letters are actually
following the due process to see
if the member can actually
afford the loan
Because the state are willing to
support this we feel that the
thirty six percent rate cap is a
sound way to keep these loans at
reasonable terms allowing these
letters to operate at a hundred
and seventy five percent flights
lower income New Mexicans and as
a systematic barrier that keeps
our constituents and poverty
areas you to vote in support of
Senate bill sixty six and thank
you senator is also the
committee for your time.
Thank you.
Shy and corona full by Charles
good marker.
Thank you chair members of the
committee my name is Sam Corona
I'm a senior policy and
government affairs associate
with the center for responsible
lending thank you for the
opportunity to voice my support
for SB six six which would put
an end to abusive and predatory
interest rates and I think the
Sanchez for bringing this
important legislation forward
the center for responsible
lending is a nonprofit
nonpartisan research and policy
organization dedicated to
protecting family wealth by
working to eliminate abusive
financial practices Cyril has
long been warning against the
because of high cost lending in
recent years we have noticed an
industry shift away from
traditional payday loans to
longer term larger dollar
installment loans installment
loans do not provide our high
cost installment loans I should
say do not provide access to
credit rather exploit COVID
racial and economic disparities
that cannot be solved with the
triple digit interest rate loan
these predatory drugs do not
provide access to credit they
provide access to debt I'm here
today to tell you the sky
doesn't fall when interest rates
are capped New Mexico can look
to South Dakota as an example of
this in two thousand sixteen
South Dakota captain small
dollar and loan interest rates
at thirty six percent inclusive
of all fees and charges since
then research has shown that
credit is available and the
credit Connie for individuals in
South Dakota stable New South
Dakota payday alternative loans
and unsecured consumer loans are
made available by credit unions
and community based
organizations native led
commuted element financial
institutions have provided
twelve million dollars in loans
and created or retained over
eight hundred jobs people in
states without these high cost
that traps are better off as
such we urge the committee to
pass SB sixty six thank you.
Thank you Mr Charles good marker
followed by Dorothy Taylor.
Mr chairman and members the
committee thank you very much
for this opportunity to speak
today my comments today on
behalf of myself although I am
also doing work with New Mexico
forces for children and I'm a
member of many of the groups
supporting this measure
You know what what you've heard
from many of the folks with the
credit unions starting with the
person from one of the federal
credit union those stories are
just I think unconscionable
stories and are the stories of
activities that I don't think
should be permitted in any so
called advanced society
can't believe actually that that
these practices are still out to
you to your go on
You know the Dick Merriam
Webster dictionary definition of
use every an unconscionable or
observant rate if interest.
SB sixty six is your opportunity
to stop usury in New Mexico
thank you.
Miss Dorothy Taylor followed by.
So for a nap Ishq.
Liz Taylor welcome.
I believe you're on good on
yourself your.
Permitted to talk.
Hang hang in there Mr.
Support is what are you go
ahead.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee
thank you for the opportunity to
speak my name is Secora Nefish
and I am the registered lobbyist
and executive director of New
Mexico thrives the state
nonprofit associations and
nonprofits throughout New Mexico
service members of the community
helping them with all kinds of
aspects of their lives and we
stand in strong support of
Senate bill sixty six thank you.
Thank you let's go back to Liz
Taylor you have the floor.
Dorothy Taylor.
All right so you're in with us
miss Taylor hang hang in there.
We'll get to you.
Good I just check your device.
Let's go to Scott.
Scott is that are followed by
Bill Jordan.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee my name
is Scott Estrada I'm here on
behalf of the American fintech
council as one of its board of
directors members has been over
ten years in the financial
services law and policy space
for many of those years at the
intersection of consumer
protection and financial
technology.
Yes he was recently formed as a
unified voice of the content
industry bringing together some
of the most responsible industry
actors with more than fifty
members across banking.
Read tax wealth management and
other fintech segments the LFC
advances programs or policies
consistent with those principles
of financial inclusion racial
equity and embracing regulation
to promote responsible
innovation.
So it is a small business bars
bill of rights and hearing to a
military lending act thirty six
percent APR cap on all of our
products.
I have discussions with some of
the advocates I'm here on behalf
of the AFC recorder support for
SB sixty six with the amendment
discussed previously by Senator
do eight which would allow our
members to continue to serve New
Mexicans at our current thirty
six percent right or lower right
Mexico's installment loan
interest rate caps should be
reduced because it hurts low and
moderate income borrowers
especially communities of color
we're struggling to get by in an
economy ravaged by COVID as a
sponsor lenders we know it is
possible to adhere to an all in
thirty six percent APR cap and
offer affordable loans to
borrowers including non prime
credit worthy individuals.
Supported interest rate caps and
other states in here in New
Mexico and members demonstrate
that it is possible to make
loans under thirty six percent
APR our members provide millions
of dollars of credit every year
to tens of thousands of working
New Mexicans all under thirty
six percent and I are APR we
will continue to do so after
this law passes.
I have seen believes that SB
sixty six is good for New Mexico
moves the needle to ordination
white cap on consumer loans at
thirty six percent all in.
If she is a strong proponent of
supporting measures nearing the
federal military lending act the
working with lawmakers to
eliminate triple digit interest
rates that put distressed
families into debt traps
recognised SB sixty six is
especially important to
communities of color who are
affected disproportionately both
by COVID and unaffordable hybrid
landing thank you for the
opportunity to Notre support for
SB sixty six with the amendment
a previously discussed by
Senator Duhigg thank you.
Thank you service Starkey Taylor
give it a shot welcome yes can
you hear me Dennis Taylor
welcomed.
Wonderful wonderful thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Dorothy
Taylor and I'm here is another
A. A. R. P. New Mexico volunteer
advocate and I'm here in Los
crucis A. A. R. P. New Mexico
strongly support Senate bill
sixty six because everything has
been said already and because
next New Mexicans deserve access
to their loans not loans that
get them trapped in the repeat
cycle a taking out one loan to
pay for another this isn't a a
RP New Mexico priority bill that
will help so many New Mexicans
and we thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you thanks for letting us
skip you for a second Mister
Bill Jordan.
Followed by Kurt rager.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children.
We've been fighting this fight
for two decades and we're hoping
that this is finally the year
that there's enough political
will to get this done I hear the
opponents say that let's wait
for the data.
Seriously how long must our
families wait for financial
protection if ever there was a
proper role for government
regulation to protect the very
people who elected them this
bill is it.
New Mexicans overwhelmingly
support thirty six percent cap.
With this one piece of
legislation you can put more
money back in the pockets of
struggling families then the
low income comprehensive tax
rebate.
Working families tax credit in
the state general assistance
program combined.
All without spending a dime of
taxpayer dollars simply by
reining in an industry that is
targeting are poor our families
of color and siphoning off
hundreds of millions of dollars
a year for people who are
struggling to make ends meet.
This bill is one of the most
important racial justice bills
of this session and certainly
one of the most important bills
for are struggling families we
appreciate your support thank
you.
Thank you Sir Kurt rager
followed by Leonard Gorman.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Kirk record I'm the
director of leaders advocacy Mr
New Mexico we also speak on
behalf New Mexico conference of
churches I'm here today to state
our strong support for SB sixty
six we believe there's simply no
justifiable reason to condone
triple digit interest rates know
whether business model depends
on continued refinancing such
loans.
We do not take lightly the fact
that the industry employs the
Mexicans and that some industry
jobs may be lost at this bill
successfully passed.
But we believe that that
possibility does not outweigh or
justify the proven harm being
done to our communities indeed
are most bolts and actually
vulnerable neighbors that are
targeted by the majority of the
players in this industry we
would absolutely created this
issue must be addressed from
racial justice concern
standpoint as well as seen from
the where the storefront lenders
are actually located in our
communities a recent survey
showed that Americans are taking
out such loans at a trip at
triple the rate prior to the
start of the pandemic research
conducted has also should by the
consumer financial protection
bureau has also found that one
in four of these types of loans
were borrowed nine times or more
there are currently seventy
states and the district of
Columbia that of cap loans at
thirty six percent in New Mexico
simply must be the eighteenth
close by saying that such a cap
was necessary and the right
thing to do for active duty
military and their families and
it is the right thing to do for
our most vulnerable New Mexicans
as well Mr chairman members the
committee thank you and I are
just or for SB sixty six.
Thank you Senator Corman
followed by Austin we aqui.
Thank you Mr chairman.
My name is Austin we are I'm
here on behalf of an inmate of
both and we stand today in
strong support of SB sixty six
because we understand this as an
issue of equity we know that
sixty five percent of these
wonders of and fifteen miles of
tribal lands all you need to do
is take a drive around Gallup
Espanola or the international
district you know that these
landers will centralized around
committee of color or
communities border towns and
areas with less access to good
financial literacy we understand
that the committee has a choice
between real strong consumer
protections for an endorsement
of predatory rates which
permanently hinder the economic
mobility of historically
marginalized communities as an
organization we have spoken with
thousands of orders for Paul but
we would allow capital fire with
no means to pay them that
doesn't take a degree another
thirty six percent rate is just
absolutely more painful than a
similar amount of a hundred
seventy five percent and this
current right you're absolutely
unjustifiable for community the
voters made it clear in twenty
twenty that they want to feel
strange and dated the
legislature multiple years over
predatory industry should not be
allowed to play on those least
able to pay we have worked for
decades on a thirty six percent
APR cap with anyone interested
in providing real access to
credit and specifically to bring
New Mexico only up to par with
our state of the neighbors we
hear a lot about the many black
market while we install it what
what we allowed.
Chart black market based legally
and recommend predatory that as
credit we always New Mexicans
people of color elders people in
poverty and voters the right a
real credit not recurring
exploited that for those reasons
we are to the committee that
about to pass on this
legislation today.
Thank you Mr rocky.
A letter Gorman hi this is
Leonard Gorman I'm with the
Navajo Nation Human Rights
Commission the Navajo Nation has
submitted its legislation in
support of SB sixty six capping
the interest rate from one
seventy five to thirty six
percent as you've heard from the
rest of the presenters the
Navajo Nation Human Rights
Commission datums their concerns
and their interpretations over
sixty percent of the small
mending Agency storefront stores
are near and on the map near the
Navajo Nation to prey on Navajo
people your constituents in the
northeast part of New Mexico are
suffering from these high
interest rate loans they vote
they voted for people that are
not in the office.
Please understand that these
businesses don't vote the people
that are suffering are the
voters passed SB sixty six thank
you.
Thank you Sir we have a seventy
six attendees we have a little
more time is there anyone else
who wishes to address the
committee in support anyone else
in the audience who wishes to
address the committee and
support a welcome Mr nascent.
Go ahead hi can you hear me Sir
can.
Thank you chairman my Estes and
members of the committee my name
is Fred dates and I'm executive
director of think New Mexico
which is a bipartisan public
policy think tank serving New
Mexicans.
I just want to emphasize the
passing Senate bill sixty six
will benefit not just low income
consumers but also local
businesses which I know is the
mission of your committee.
Think about what will happen if
you pass Senate bill sixty six
in the interest cap is reduced
from a hundred seventy five
percent to thirty six percent
those savings will go back into
the pockets of low income New
Mexicans but once state stay
there very long because as you
know these folks live paycheck
to paycheck and the money will
be spent immediately on local
businesses so low income
borrowers will benefit but so
will local businesses like
restaurants which are struggling
right and right now.
We're talking about a lot of
money here according to the
regulation licensing department
six hundred and sixty six
million dollars of loans were
made small loans in New Mexico.
We know that eighty five percent
of the companies that made those
loans are located out of state
so those profits are sent to
share holders we're out of state
so bottom line is Senate bill
sixty six will not only help the
most powerless among us think of
Senate bill sixty six also as a
private sector relief package
for local businesses like
restaurants will benefit from
this legislation along with
their customers and it won't
cost taxpayers anything at all
we hope you'll support Senate
bill sixty six and I'd also like
to thank our sponsors Senator
schools and senator do Hank and
Representative Herrerra we have
been then magnificent thank you.
Thank you for joining us a
couple more Mr Jeff Kane
In support I'm assuming welcome.
speaker down.
Give it a shot Mr king is a lot
of feedback what you have the
floor.
Instead.
And.
Percent.
This
is.
Which.
Thank you Mr curated just for
the record we are are a.
Our subtitles that we have on
this web in our system.
Did not pick up what you said
and so we picked up a little bit
that was just a lot of feedback
in a lot of.
Like from an old rock concert
static but anyway welcome Mister
cannon thank you anyone else in
support anyone else in support
all right great so that was
about
you know forty five minutes or
so of you know we promised
decided our we want to thank the
advocates for
for that for their discipline
before we go to before we go to
the of I don't everyone
opposition wouldn't raise your
hand in the zoom what a raise
your hand opposition will we'll
go ahead and count you but in
the meantime with your
permission Center souls given
two minutes to miss Myers in in
support of the bill if miss
Myers if you have just two
minutes to talk in general but
we really want to answer
technical questions thank you
yes.
Thank you chair members of the
committee my name is Karen Myers
I am.
And the consumer journey in
Albuquerque.
I had to the consumer protection
division at the New Mexico
attorney general's office for
eight years after that they will
to the consumer financial
protection bureau in Washington
I've successfully litigated
cases against high cost
storefront installment lenders
who are operating in violation
of New Mexico laws and that's
the perspective that I bring
in assisting with this bringing
this bill forward
we have looked at a number of
reports data from financial
institutions division of New
Mexico from the federal
government on research and
rulemaking around installment
lending and car title lending
reports produced by lenders
themselves low level data in
over nineteen national and state
level research reports on high
cost lending the results of that
review you've heard from the
advocates and Senator schools
and Senator Duhigg quite
eloquently about the problems
that are demonstrated over and
over and over again I'm not
going to repeat that in all
probably so let's leave most of
my two minutes to answer
questions but I want to make two
points one is that
There are there's a lot of
discussion about why rate caps
are central rate caps are
central because they control
Lente and make it responsible
and the enable borrowers to make
progress on actually paying down
the principal and they make the
loan cost reasonable.
Allowing borrowers to pay off
the loan and build credit and
avoid default.
It's firm it can be enforced and
it can be regulated and it
provides a hard and fast
limitation on how much a lender
can charge for the loan that
includes an all inclusive rate
cap which was what we
appropriate pose which will
limit the ability of lenders to
invade the loan cap by adding on
ancillary products or by
charging fees outside of the
loan rate which is why this bill
is an all inclusive proposal
we also have expanded and
strengthened the anti evasion
provisions in the bill and I can
go into those more specifically
if people have questions but the
purpose of these is that other
states have seen very creative
approaches to invading laws that
states have passed and needs
address these get these are pro
active preventive measures.
Prevent that kind of the
vacation we want this bill to
stick we wanted to work and in
order to that to happen these
anti vacation provisions are
critical to protecting the
efficacy and the enforceability
of thirty six percent all in and
I think the Sanchez both all of
them of for bringing this and
I'll stand for questions after
other comments thank you.
Thank you miss Myers for your
work and for talking about the
technical aspects of the bill
that's what we want to get into
when we get to committee there's
approximately twenty folks with
their hands raised in opposition
well about forty five minutes or
so so I'll tell you when it's
two minutes I know that you want
to you know educate the
committee so if any one person
you don't want to go over by all
means but collectively let's try
to keep their own forty five
fifty minutes or so when you get
to two minutes but I apologize
for not having the time on the
screen I don't want to cut
people off but all when you get
two minutes I'll tell you no big
deal but just because this and
that here are the two minute
mark if everybody goes two and
half minutes of.
And I should be approximately
equal welcome are we have an
announce who you represent and
maybe like a quick phrase about
about you know you're.
Your company that you represent
because we really want to get a
picture of who's who where they
are and what they do because
it's it's not a monolithic
industry we want to welcome of
Mr Ramon Sanchez followed by
Ricky keys.
Well it's not afternoon good
afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is Raymond Sanchez I represent
the consumer installment lenders
association of association
composed of installment lenders
from throughout the state of New
Mexico and some of which
incidently are from out of state
let me be clear we disagree with
the characterization of the
installment of lenders as they
is B. their expert as us being
predatory
our concerns center around three
areas we are and have always
been committed.
To making sure that your
constituents have access to fair
and transparent loans for
everyday emergencies we are not
predators and we don't do car
title lenders lending
secondly we ask that you take
into consideration the
tremendous unintended financial
cost to citizens in New Mexico
if lenders are forced to leave
and open up online and
reservation predatory loans
thirty that we and this
legislature live up to the
agreement reached by all parties
in twenty nineteen and which has
been verified by the lead
negotiators for.
For the proponents.
The information
that was said that
Representative Lewis is twenty
nineteen compromise up will be
available within the next twenty
days by FID.
In order lenders have been
operating in New Mexico long
before I was elected in nineteen
seventy one and during my term
they were never described as
predatory with the subject of
controversy they have been
provided services here for over
fifty years and only recently
because of abuses by payday
lenders been cast as predatory.
Complaint seem to center on the
car title loans and I will admit
that those are egregious they're
not there.
Do I need to be look at and it's
nothing that we want to deal
with as mentioned this thirty
six percent APR all in will have
unintended consequences adverse
economic impacts on New Mexico
employs local landlords it's
possible that thirteen hundred
ninety five employees.
Will lose your job and I know
salaries of forty six thousand
per year sixty five million
dollars in total compensation
six million company an employee
taxes paid to the state sixty
million paid to landlords and
nine hundred and fifteen metal
million total economic impact.
The committee is been provided
with a very young district this
great break down Mr Mason's says
that you know I'll put they say
by not getting taken out their
loans I'd like to ask the simple
question where does he think
that these loans are paid you
know what people use their loans
for its for local businesses
this you know this whole thing
can be avoided if we proceed as
agreed to in the nineteen twenty
nineteen legislation to face
facts rather than fantasy would
land the data being complied
compiled by house bill one fifty
it was crafted to allow industry
and advocates to be able to
objectively evaluate empirical
evidence rather than rely on
speculation in crafting
legislation for the next session
Stahlman under the wrong for
leaving the payday lenders which
work with the Sportback plants
eliminated in twenty seventeen
their business model contrary to
the opponents is provide
transparency and a portable
credit to those unable to secure
the mall loans.
The question to all of us is why
take the chance of the economic
loss to online on regulated
lenders on working together on a
fact based solution find all
parties an opportunity to
resolve our differences while
offering small loans to New
Mexicans start safe and
transparent we stand in
opposition SB sixty six.
And.
Come firm our willingness to
shut work towards setting out
what was that what was described
in house bill one fifty thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee we will have people
who will go in much more detail
that money thank you very much
thank you Sir for your
presentation Rikki keys followed
by Janelle Jordan.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is Dr Ricky
keys.
According to Bankrate dot com
sixty three percent of Americans
didn't happen five hundred
dollars to address the household
emergency and this was about
study that was done in two
thousand sixteen.
The situation has become even
more drop dire since the
pandemic.
This is equivalent to one point
three million New Mexicans
unfortunately New Mexico already
has one of the highest rates of
poverty in the country and the
inability to access mainstream
forms of credit will make an
already bad situation words.
Unlike many who are advocating
this bill like pew charitable
trust I believe that payday
lending that installment would
be is the problem.
While some believe that debt is
a more significant issue I
believe that hundreds of years.
I believe that for hundreds of
years ordinary consumers have
used that to state property.
My story in millions like me is
one of using debt to finance my
education purchase a home
address or term emergencies and
perform other essential
functions unlike others
accessing we needed resources to
family and friends was not an
option for me and thousands of
New Mexico residents I just all
of my career working with
organizations like in the CSL in
eight CSL Nobel women African
American pastors local branches
of the N. double ACP among among
others to ensure equal access to
community resources like food
desert's Health Service does its
pharmacy does is and others
Credit desert's is a real thing.
Consumers who lack access to
mainstream credit like banks
today will not all of a sudden
building would not all the
second gain access to these
resources in the future.
Banks have been leading black
and brown communities for years
banks have been sheltering of
low performing high cost urban
and low to moderate income
branches and relocating to
communities with more fluent
demographic profile.
It is my firm belief that this
trend will continue and that
banks and credit unions will not
come to the rescue in New Mexico
one installment in is priced out
of the market I conducted
research and will make available
New Mexico maps that clearly
show the current credit does is
that exists throughout New
Mexico I believe that the passes
of this bill will exacerbate
these that these debts thank
you.
Thank you Janelle Jordan
followed by Andrew Morrison.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
My name is Janelle Jordan I'm
the VP of operations for
security finance in New Mexico
The New Mexico all my life
we've done business in New
Mexico for the past thirty years
and I've been with the company
for twenty two years and I we
care about the well being of our
customers and our employees and
we have one of the largest
footprints in storefront small
dollar lending and work with the
with almost twenty nine thousand
customers to help them with
various financial needs we have
over a hundred and twenty New
Mexico resident employees and we
offer a generous benefit package
including family coverage when
you consider that with rent
utilities tax license fees
And what we're contributing
member contribute millions of
dollars per year to the economy
in New Mexico our loans are not
secured by collateral and we do
not offer payday or title loans
we do not used cars or homes as
collateral our loans are safe
affordable and fully under right
in we take the time to look at
applicants debt expense and
credit history to determine if
the long open in their budget
even then we reject over seventy
five percent of new loan
applications and about fifty
percent of our overall
applications that we receive
even then we you know maybe try
to look at and offering them a
smaller loan that would fit in
their budget we do consider
whether we may be able to help
them with their needs we report
two major credit reporting
agencies and help people to
establish and improve their
credit during the discussion on
this bill and even today I've
heard speculation that credit
unions and banks will set up
will step up to make these loans
in this is misguided thinking
they would already be competing
with us that they were able to
do that at thirty six percent to
be profitable the fact is that
they don't tell us all that we
need to now and by the way
before coming to us many of our
customers have already been
rejected or turned down by a
credit union where I think.
we don't we don't have automated
rejection programs that we take
into consideration the hardship
people are facing even with
their credit history if it's not
perfect we still are looking to
see how we can help them we look
for ways to help and give them a
chance to rebuild credit we did
we late charges and we all
perfect flexible repayment
during the COVID hard I'm sorry
hardship and even adjusted our
credit reporting beyond that
what the federal cares Act
required with with Alamos where
will they go.
my family depends on me and as
the families of the over the
hundred twenty members of our
team depend on them jobs
opportunity here are very tough
to come by and they will only
increase if we along with other
small dollar lenders in New
Mexico shut our doors what what
will we do then and thank you
for your time and thank you for
hearing me and I do ask for your
help in not passing this bill
thank you.
Thank you Andrew Morris involved
like Tom keepers.
Good on yourself Mr Morrison.
Can you hear me now you sure can
well thank you thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Andrew
Morrison I'm with frontage
Management some loan company and
we've been providing safe
responsible installment loans in
New Mexico for about twenty five
years.
Thanks about APR is on difficult
to understand because they are
counterintuitive.
While it may make sense to cap
of interest rates representing
the lender's variable costs and
use representing its fixed costs
it is never right to cap the
Beyonce this is because the
Etios being a combination of the
two principally a function of
the size and length of a low.
APR on not an indicator of cost
in fact they're all contra
indicator of cost what some
people insist on calling high
cost loans are in reality
actually the lowest cost it's.
The general rule and I know
there are both honorable and
dishonorable exceptions to this
but the general rule is this the
big of the loan the lower the
APR on.
The higher the cost both in
dollars and as a percentage of
the amount borrowed.
The longer it takes but borrow
it to pay off the loan.
According to the federal reserve
the smallest one that can be
made without incurring a loss at
thirty six APR is two thousand
five hundred dollars someone
mentioned one may that they make
loans of thirty six percent well
there average loan is eight
thousand dollars so yes they can
make loans at thirty six but
even they do not make loans
under a thousand dollars.
Thirty six percent APR caps act
as a ban on smaller loans and a
ban on the loans that cost the
least.
I know it's counterintuitive but
rate caps do not save people
money they cost them money and
keep them in that long.
Now we could claims that once
the sources of safe affordable
state regulated credit the gone
somehow other even lower cost
options will magically
materialized but maybe banks and
credit unions will suddenly
decide to make them on a
meaningful scale these claims
are amply disproved by looking
at the experience about the
state's.
New installment loans by state
regulated entities drop to zero
or close to zero after rate cap
like this is tossed meanwhile
new payday loans increased by
the same amount these are made
by rental bank introduce or
tribal lenders outside the
effective enforcement of state
or federal authorities and carry
a P. oz's I sent the Dimond's
doesn't change only who supplies
that and with what.
So who came from a little like
this only the internet payday
lenders operating outside states
through all state role meanwhile
the biggest loser is the
vulnerable lower income
consumers who is being pushed
into precisely the kind of
predatory product we succeeded
in banning here in New Mexico
four years ago.
Please continue to protect
consumers from these dangerous
drugs and vote against this bill
thank you.
Mr Mr timekeepers followed by
Katherine Posada.
Good afternoon Mister chair and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to
participate today I'm not here
to discuss the rate cap in this
bill I'm here to address the all
an act of the APR calculation
respectfully this bill should be
reshaped to exclude voluntary
protection products in the APR
calculation because it's going
to take away a financial safety
net that your constituents are
purchasing today I'm timekeepers
president and CEO of CCA where
we work to foster consumer
financial security by ensuring
healthy markets for voluntary
protection products like credit
insurance and that protection
your constituents purchase these
products to protect ability to
make loan payments from adverse
events such as death disability
or involuntary job loss and
these drugs don't exclude losses
caused by pandemics like COVID
nineteen one hundred and eighty
five thousand of your
constituents help products like
these to protect their finances
at the end of twenty twenty.
One hundred and eighty five
thousand this bill will put tens
of thousands of New Mexico
households at risk by exposing
their debt especially and
ironically during these
difficult times which we
understand could come again.
This bill includes the cost of
voluntary products which are
distinctly separate purchases in
the APA our calculation this
problems of the ability for
traditional installment lenders
even offer these value products
to their customers after
covering for lending risks and
expenses they're just will be
room left in the A. P. R..
Yet academic studies show eighty
five percent of consumers
surveyed think these products
are a good idea.
So let's not expose the debt of
so many of your constituent
households by taking away a
financial safety net updating
this bill to exclude voluntary
protection products in the H. R.
collect that calculation will do
just that.
Thank you again for the
opportunity to comment I'm happy
to entertain any questions you
may have.
Thank you Sir Catherine pro shot
up photo by David Emery.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Katherine Kirk Shawna and I'm a
registered lobbyist for all
loans I just want to add on a
couple of points that we've
heard covered for a throughout
the discussion on this bill and
that is this recurring argument
about what other states are
doing and and while it's true
that a number of states have
passed thirty six percent caps
on loans what's not being stated
is that the state still allow
payday lending
actually Arkansas New Mexico in
the text district of Columbia
are the only three states who
have actually outlawed payday
lending in statute thirty seven
other states still have specific
statutes that allow for payday
lending and eleven jurisdictions
do not have specific payday
lending statutory provisions
additionally Connecticut and
South Dakota are radically
different from New Mexico both
Connecticut and South Dakota
have higher median income The
New Mexico New Mexico sits at
forty nine New Mexico also has
proportionally twenty cases many
unbanked people South Dakota so
there some vast differences
there.
I'd like to point out also that
a trans union report came out in
the end of twenty twenty shows
what happened in California when
a similar measure was passed
placing thirty six percent cap
on installment lending and
looking at the grant you see
installment loans bottoming out
not being offered and payday
lending in sovereign lending
increasing dramatically so you
know where are people going to
go we're pushing them to options
that aren't regulated that
aren't safe for consumers and I
think what we need to be talking
about is true consumer
protections things that we can
do to protect consumers but is
still allow them to acquire
credit in acquire loans when
they have needs when they have
emergencies and the reason why
state that wanted to stay away
from this because this is a
personal statement here is I had
installment loan about eleven
years ago I was in a very
different place in life but as a
middle income person my house
flooded for a second term and I
found myself with nowhere else
to go and I absolutely could not
have pulled myself out of that
emergency and out of that hole
without Strom at land so we
stand respectfully in opposition
to Senate bill sixty six thank
you so much for your time.
Thank you David M. right
followed by Kenya Public
Affairs.
Mr Amery.
My apologies the good afternoon
Mister chairman members of the
committee my name is David every
by the New Mexico regional
manager for QC financial I've
worked in our beautiful state
for twenty two years Mexico is
my home this is where I put down
my roots this is where our tire
one of our state.
Let me tell you a little bit
about our company in New Mexico
we have nine locations
throughout the state employee
twenty four happy and successful
Mexican team members last year
we were be approved Levin
thousand one hundred and eight
loan request and those requests
we help our fellow New Mexicans
pay for everything ranging from
home repairs the holidays to
keep in the US.
If you would please permit me to
illustrate typical five hundred
dollar loan and the cost to our
customers I would appreciate a
five hundred dollar loan taken
out today and paid back in
thirty days would have a total
interest cost up sixty six
dollars and seventy four cents
if so what we're director term
meaning six months the total
finance charge for the loan
would be two hundred and seventy
three dollars and thirteen cents
with the total of payments of
seven hundred seventy three
dollars and thirteen cents now
if I could please also tell you
about one example we have a
customer named Andrew you the
single father who is recently
divorced and found himself in a
position where he needed to
purchase some specialized
medical equipment for his
daughter and replaces hot water
heater in this call.
Thank you so I do have to take
the whole.
He thought he would be able to
borrow money but when he was
unsuccessful in his attempt to
borrow money from his employer
who by the way the major bank in
the metro area and turned to us
and we were successful in
helping and encouraging.
Now if Andrew was able to borrow
money from a bank being an
employee of the bank how
difficult would you imagine this
situation to be for our fellow
New Mexicans and these types of
situations we understand it's
important that.
Part of the we important that
data New Mexicans the New Mexico
needs to be cleaned up and rein
in the rogue actors but it's
important that people like
Andrew have a safe efficient and
practical way to have that need.
If the regulated industry goes
away as a result of the proposed
legislation the need will not.
Uncorrupted excuse me corrupt
offshore lenders will continue
to work.
Offered outside of the
regulatory environment we accuse
the financial welcome being part
of the conversation regarding
future regulations thank you for
your time today.
Thank you.
I Mr David followed by mark
Mexico.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee David
Pena register lobbyist for
select management resources.
The fleet the small industries a
regulated industry New Mexico
and small loan companies are
subject to annual licensing
examination of requirements
pursuant to the New Mexico loan
act of nineteen fifty five
financial institutions division
if ideas charge of licensing and
regulating the approximately
five hundred and sixty one small
loan companies licensed to do
business New Mexico in twenty
seventeen HB thirty four HB
three four seven reform
legislation did away with payday
loans small loans which required
to be paid in two week loans and
replace with installment loans
loans less than or equal to five
thousand dollars and are to be
repaid in a minimum of forces
substantially equal payments of
principal and interest with
maturity rate of not less than a
hundred twenty days to maturity
APR went from four percent to
one hundred seventy five percent
required data reporting and
businesses required to pay into
a fund to establish a financial
literacy program which to date
has not been launched by FID
data reporting did not stop as a
result of the enactment of this
legislation payday loan
reporting via Veritex sees
because payday loans were no
longer legal in New Mexico data
for loans less than five grant
is available in the form of an
reports on the FID website
twenty ninety legislation H. B.
H. B. one fifty was a result of
compromise is reached for
stakeholders and included no
change in APR rates it did
include customer protection such
as a right of recision an
extensive annual data reporting
requirements due on April
fifteenth of every year if ideas
charged with compiling
information and generating
annual reports by July given
that the effective date of this
bill was January one twenty
twenty the twenty twenty
calendar date the data is due to
FID on April fifteenth of this
year when a way for the data to
be reported and analyzed before
making more changes that will
negatively impact the small
businesses small businesses are
are and are working families
continue to suffer under the
pandemic unemployment rates are
high in many small business of
shut down permanently folks with
no credit history or low credit
scores unable to part.
Small short term loans at banks
or credit unions because they
don't offer these type of short
term loans and they're on
willing to assume the risk if SB
sixty six is enacted as it is my
client will have to lose
fourteen storefronts throughout
New Mexico this will have an
impact on local communities and
employees will lose their jobs
landlords will receive these
payments taxes will be paid and
more importantly folks with no
credit history or low credit
scores will be able to acquire
these loans accordance if IT's
twenty nineteen and report five
hundred ninety two up in three
hundred ninety eight of it's all
over which region eight in the
amount of five thousand dollars
or less totaling over six
hundred sixty six million
dollars the stark reality is
that the demand is going to go
away what will changes where
folks acquire these loans on
regulated offshore internet
lenders were not license to do
business New Mexico and charge
upwards of seven hundred percent
APR and sovereign tribal lenders
is who they will turn to.
That's a good for New Mexicans
Mr chairman and members of the
committee I'm certain that these
this committee will be amenable
to considering amendments that
will provide increased consumer
protections as well as allow
these small businesses to
continue to provide it's almost
a folks with no credit history
for bad credit scores we look
forward to working with the a
collaboration with the bill
Sanchez proponents and
interested stakeholders to
collectively arrive at a
compromise will be in the best
interest of it of all the mix of
for the reason for these reasons
although the reasons of stated
previously we stand respectfully
in opposition to SB sixty six
thank you.
Thank you Sir more coal followed
by J. son Janice.
Can you hear me yes Sir welcome
thank you Jeffrey masters
members of the committee my name
is Marco in the district manager
for one main financial services
here in New Mexico I've been
with the company twenty five
years
we work for you know one main
financial services is the
largest responsible consumer
lender in the United States and
we actually are not opposed to
the thirty six percent rate cap
in fact we have a self imposed
thirty six percent rate cap
we've been abiding by for over
twenty years where we have an
issue is how the rate cap is
calculated so it's the fact that
it uses the military APR
calculation so the widely used
truth in lending calculation
what this will do is prevent
some New Mexicans from
protecting the finances should
they face job loss due to the
ongoing pandemic or other
unplanned life events a death
illness injury involuntary
unemployment this standard the
truth in lending standard has
been proven to be effective in
other states including
California Virginia what we
would like to see is if we could
introduce an amendment to
address the calculation it
doesn't affect the thirty six
percent right captain anyway we
agree with that we just would
like to see a different
calculation so that we can
continue to protect the citizens
of New Mexico you know I can't
tell you chairman masters how
many times I feel calls.
We up mother for single mother
of four recently laid off to the
COVID nineteen calls up and says
Hey what am I going to do next
and with the protection that you
like to take I can tell her
safely take only about your
payment take that money go ahead
the groceries on the table pay
your light bill put gas in your
car so you can go find another
job how about Mary who had eight
spouse passed away unfortunately
he was a customer of ours she
approaches said when we get to
do more I have this car with you
I don't know what to do next I
said you know what very good
news your husband elected to
take the live coverage on this
loan the loan is paid in full
sure sure title and by the way
your some extra expenses for you
for bereavement cost those types
of things is Mr keepers brought
up earlier that we would like
addressed if possible in an
amendment so we respectfully
agreed with thirty six thirty
six percent rate caps we would
like to see is a bill that would
instead of calculating the
military act we would like to
see calculated through the truth
in lending standards chairman
masters thank you for your time
Sir.
Absolutely Sir J. some DNS fall
by John nine.
Mr chair members of the
committee J. Sundowners
registered lobbyists for ten
court finance which is
headquartered in New Mexico.
Host Senate bill sixty six
degrees.
I agree that there have been a
bad players in this industry in
the past we don't know of their
current users won't be till the
current reporting is complete.
Thirty six percent is misleading
in short term loans.
What should be considered in
short term loans is the total
interest rate or the tip.
APR is about perception the
short term loans are not
mortgages.
Sample of a hundred fifty
thousand dollar mortgage at four
percent a PR for thirty years
seven hundred sixteen dollars a
month that equates to a total
pay back of two hundred fifty
eight thousand dollars on a
hundred fifty thousand dollar
loan which is a hundred and
seventy one percent.
Tip total interest rate.
Ten point finance company is
currently at about eighteen
percent total interest rate on
their on their six loans.
Well thank the committee given
the opportunity to speak.
Absolutely Mr centenas de niveau
by a hobby ed a you.
Thank you chairman my name is
John nine our family owns and
operates three small landings
stores were part of the twenty
seven excuse me the twenty
percent of store Lente stores
that are family owned in the
state.
As a note sixty two percent of
our loans are under one thousand
dollars.
We have serviced over hundreds
of families and never had a
complaint in addition to landing
we have given many borrowers to
pass the re establishing your
credit.
Senate bill sixty six as with
other bills with cap rates that
are not financially sustainable
and this cap rate is not
financially sustainable will
result in a six step significant
void of licensed and regulated
lenders they'll be replaced as
been proven in many other states
where cap rates are put in that
are not sustainable they'll be
replaced by sovereign internet
lenders whose rate started three
hundred percent in range to one
thousand plus these tribal land
based and offshore lenders are
not licensed not regulated or
subject to any control by New
Mexico FID for example Montana
implemented a thirty six percent
cap one year later commissioner
of banking report stated that
complaints of illegal tribal
based lenders increased
significantly with AP ours
annual percentage rates of over
one thousand percent of higher
study by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York when Georgia
North Carolina instituted.
Cap rates that were not
feasible they had an increase of
seven excuse me chapter seven
bankruptcy of nine percent they
had an increase of bounced
checks which is a collection
methods that.
Internet lenders use of thirty
five percent.
And the district of Columbia
when they implemented their.
Thirty six percent it shows
that.
Licensed lenders closed media
there were gone currently I'm
license internet lenders took
over with complaints about the
two thousand percent there are
other examples if you want to do
the work and do the research of
unsustainable cap rates creating
severe results for borrowers
that's who gets hurt on his is
the borrowers Arkansas New York
Oregon Pennsylvania Virginia
Washington state and South
Dakota have this problem.
The cap rate of thirty six
percent all in is not
financially sustainable I've
worked with my County will
crunch the numbers and I've not
seen any financial analysis or
pro farmers that support this
bill there's no data it is been
done financially that show this
shows that thirty six percent
and works you're not my
apologies I think you time for
you but tenure colleagues are
still on the board keep that in
mind I'll be real quick.
C..
Of the seventeen states that
have thirty six percent.
Cap.
To have a thirty six percent cap
that is all inclusive like this
bill and they are Connecticut
and South Dakota I did direct
research with their financial
division there and there are no
storefront lenders.
Left in South Dakota or
Connecticut.
The way the people all there is
to internet lenders summer
license and most of them are not
they can charge whatever they
want they can use whatever harsh
collections they want.
And in South Dakota the largest
wonder that they have there is
an illegal.
To.
Reservation based lender that
works in the United States and
is one of the largest single
place.
Lenders in the United States
renaissance for ten of your
colleagues are up on the board
okay I'll I'll I'll sign off
with that but there is a void
here this created when you go to
work to a cap right it doesn't
work cap rate that is not back
with an agent financial data.
And this is this bill will hurt
thousands of New Mexicans that
need a place to go to that is
not that is based within the
state itself thank you very much
Mr chair you've been gracious in
allowing us this time today.
Absolutely and also there's ten
folks on the board.
Of.
You know we want to be fair to
both sides there was a late The
presentation.
Everyone wants everyone say
their piece for those who don't
have to speak for two three
minutes please don't and we very
much appreciate it.
And.
During strong Mr line up to hi
yes dot eighty you followed by
might take a thank you.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee can
you all hear me.
Yes Sir okay my name's have you
know we're live in Las Cruces
New Mexico since eighty seven
proud to be a New Mexican I work
for some company and been in the
industry for twenty three years
there's a lot of misinformation
on the installment loan industry
and we are not predatory payday
lenders I would like to tell you
how much time it loans are
structured in the benefits and
why customers choose to get a
loan from an installment lender
versus credit card for online
speaking of credit cards look at
how much you charge for late
fees from thirty five dollars a
pop up to fifty under the under
our small up under our current
small loan bank act of nineteen
fifty nine we only charge five
percent of the payment amount in
the late fee cannot exceed ten
dollars to put it in perspective
a late fee on a forty one dollar
payment is two dollars and five
cents a late fee on an eighty
five dollar payment is four
dollars and twenty five cents
this is not predatory customers
choose installment loans because
unit eight and not very able in
other words the interest rate
will not fluctuate in the
customer's no interest as
refunded for paying off early
with no prepayment penalty the
loss we offer very from one
fifty up to forty five hundred
to accommodate the customer the
consumers needs from car repairs
to bake it's Spence's like AC
unit we do not take collateral
for loans are secured by the
customer's signature and their
credit our loans are based on
how thirty has been at the job
and the residents in the credit
history in the room the ability
to we pay back the loan
We should not be judged on here
say we should be just on how the
loans are structured and the
facts.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I
opposed Senate bill sixty six.
Thank you Sir and everyone I'm
gonna shout thirty seconds in a
minute we need to go to
committee.
but this meticulous.
Chairman my Estes and members of
the committee to take us on the
honest registered lobbyists for
ten court finance a family owned
and operated business which is
headquartered in New Mexico and
from New Mexico my client has a
store in Gallup and one in
Farmington and has been in
business for over thirty years
my client twenty ten or is also
in the queue to speak tend
toward finance offers refund
anticipation loans.
The business's stays in
operation for thirty plus years
says a lot about the respect and
trust between the customer and
the business owner we
respectfully oppose Senate bill
sixty six this written.
We would still like to to and
welcome the opportunity to meet
with the sponsor to come up with
a solution that the consumer
advocate support and keeps
businesses open is Senate bill
sixty six passes it will close
business in New Mexico as an
example a three hundred dollar
unsecured loans at thirty six
percent APR for three months the
interest is twenty seven dollars
it's hard to stay in business
one three dollar per one hundred
dollar unsecured loan per month.
Respectfully credit unions have
the option to capture this
market and put small loan
companies out of business
through basic free market
understanding they're offering
loans at less than one half the
proposed thirty six percent
interest rate and have access to
money to loan respectfully banks
have the opportunity to do the
same but I asked what is the
required credit rating for
credit unions and banks to loan.
We oppose Senate bill sixty six
Mr chairman and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak with you.
Thank you.
Danielle are low followed by
president.
Thank you so much this is Daniel
our love for the American
financial services association
thank you Mr chairman and
members the committee a little
myself to a question and request
the question is if credit unions
love this bill so much I'm
wondering whether not included
in the bill I've heard so much
testimony about how they plan to
make these loans and yet they're
exempt from it and the request
is with respect to the sponsor
and the sponsor's and the
proposed the bill I ask that the
please stop saying that lots of
other states have laws just like
this and everything is great in
those states there are only two
states that have all in rate
caps for small dollar loans and
those are South Dakota and
Connecticut are members who are
all over the country in almost
every state do not operate at
all in this space in Connecticut
and only one that we're aware of
operate at all in South Dakota
and there they have a higher
average loan size there are so
many other ways to deal with
abuses by bad actors without
acting one of the most draconian
laws in the country thank you.
Followed by Paul guessing.
Chairman Maestas and members of
this committee my name is
federal money Scott and I am
vice president of operations for
regional finance here in New
Mexico regional finance has
fifteen branches in the state
and serves approximately twenty
thousand New Mexicans regional
six to offer affordable and
responsible loans to our
customers were otherwise would
not have the ability to get
credit elsewhere regional
finance does not offer payday or
title loans additionally all of
our loans are fully
underwritten.
I've been living in New mac
Mexico since I was two years old
I don't look in Santa Fe County
went to Bernalillo high school
and attended New Mexico State
University and New Mexico
highlands university I have
lived and worked in my entire
life and know what it means to
be a New Mexican and we will
make you got and is in New
Mexico and I'm speaking to
oppose Senate bill sixty six we
do not disagree with the concept
of an interest rate cap itself
but we are concerned by the all
in nature of the rate cap
proposed by this bill but using
all in APR this bill would cut
off access to credit insurance
products which help New Mexicans
to navigate life's uncertainties
without financial turmoil for
these reasons I urge the
committee to reject this bill to
ensure fair and equal access to
credit insurance products for
all New Mexico thank you for
your time today.
All guessing followed by Tracy
Sandlin.
Mr guessing can you hear me now
your can't welcome thank you.
Chairman my SS members of the
committee I urge you to oppose
SB sixty six politicians often
claim to be helping the poor
with policies they enact the
most people live paycheck to
paycheck and struggle to manage
expenses from time to time.
It means generally have equity
in their homes or can access
government subsidized loans for
college they would not provide
loans with interest rates in
excess of thirty six percent to
be attractive but the reality is
that most Americans in an even
higher proportion of New
Mexicans lack four hundred
dollars and accessible savings
whether facing a car break down
or another unexpected expense
working people deserve access to
quality credit regardless of
income or credit history what
alternatives to the forty two
percent of consumers with non
prime credit scores have the
full bar does not have
collateral your borrowing
options are constrained as the
risk lending the money rises
passing at thirty six percent
interest rate cap in New Mexico
amounts to the Legislature
telling predominately poor
working class minorities they're
incapable of making their own
financial decisions I urge you
to oppose SB sixty six thank
you.
Tracy Sandlin followed by Tony
Turner.
Chairman can you hear me we sure
can all right great I chairman
my SSN members my name is Tracy
stand then and I am the senior
vice president for government
and public relations with
security finance we are a small
dollar traditional installment
lender we do not take people's
cars or homes in exchange for
loans the entire Lente community
is being painted as predatory
our products have been tried
true and endorsed by national
caucuses even recognized by
former director Cordray as safe
and affordable because of people
balanced affordable monthly
payments as practice we do not
take legal action against
customers we do not charge here
a hundred and seventy five
percent APR on any loan in New
Mexico interest rates on our
loans have never exceeded more
than sixty percent of the
principal balance and that is
even below the pew foundation
standards for installment loans
you'll try to take you're trying
to take care of a problem and
you will end up throwing the
baby out with the bathwater it
is that we take millions of
dollars out of the state however
we only make about one dollar
profit for every ten dollars of
our investment in loans to New
Mexico customers expenses paid
to New Mexico businesses and
government these expenses
include employed by payroll
benefits varies states local
taxes licensing fees that
federal and anything else
related to doing business in New
Mexico obviously farmers
reinvested here than we are able
to realize as profit all of that
investment in money that Ramon
mentioned as a jeopardy yep
that's right bill passes
recognize also that the dollars
don't stop in the communities
but alone this maybe I call this
the trajectory of economic
impact we loan bill four hundred
dollars he is able not he is
able to pay the mechanic to fix
this track the mechanic can now
take his family out to dinner
and that's better it just keeps
rolling along and impacting your
neighborhoods if this bill
passes I know for a fact
security fine.
Nance will no longer be able to
extend small loans to anyone the
proposed rate model is not
sustainable and would not re and
it would require us to operate
at a significant loss on every
loan we may first think for any
legitimate small dollar lender
to supply it in New Mexico.
There would need to be something
much different coming out of
this committee I know there are
others in industry here today
ready to discuss real workable
alternatives that will continue
to serve those who need access
to credit please allow us the
opportunity to continue the
discussions that we started last
session I'm positive we can find
a solution that will allow your
constituents to access the small
dollar loans upon which many of
us rely thank you Mr chairman
and members for allowing me this
opportunity to share my thoughts
with you today.
Tony Turner followed by Jason
Weaks.
Mr chairman could you hear me
yes Sir chairman Maestas members
of the committee good afternoon
I'm Tony Tanner owner Canaccord
finance were small the Mexico
family owned business operating
in Gallup in Farmington since
nineteen eighty nine thirty plus
years we offer refund
anticipation loans which have a
high APR.
They have a tip we're totally
interest percentage rate of
about eighteen percent which is
the interest collected as a
percentage of the principal
loaned.
I appreciate credit unions and
alternative lenders poised and
ready to step up and fill the
gap we welcome credit unions to
lean in and help New Mexicans at
this time.
free market competition not by
legislating others out of
business chairman my Estes
members of the committee we ask
you to hold this bills we can
work with Senator souls keep New
Mexico businesses open all
ensuring consumer protection
thank you.
Thank you Mr Chanderpaul you do
out there Jason Weaks full by
Linda Siegel thank you Mr chair
members of the committee just
weeks I'll be happy to see
holdings well intentioned this
bill was as written what the
unintended consequence of
cutting off an important access
point to credit that is below
thirty per or above thirty six
percent APR will drive the
lenders that currently operate
in that space that is out of the
state I'm not gonna believe the
points made by my colleagues but
the reality is that this will
lead to longer term loans for
higher dollar amounts which
quite frankly will have more
significant negative impacts on
folks with the lower credit
scores we think there are turn
it is we do think that there are
ways to protect people against
predatory practices but at
thirty six percent all in APR
rate cap is not the way to do
it.
Linda single followed by a P..
And we're back on time.
Linda Siegel good and on mute
yourself thank you madam Mr
chair members of the committee I
will be brief we know that
lenders will close and leave the
state taking with them access to
needed credit closing storefront
lenders in New Mexico does not
eliminate the need for capital
by consumers and customers of
the Smalls of the State small
loan industry other financial
institutions like credit unions
and banks in reality has shown
very little interest in serving
this type of customer if the
credit unions were really
interested in in serving this
customer with the subprime
credit rating why haven't they
been doing it in two thousand
nineteen there were four hundred
thousand loans given by the
small loan industry how many
were given by credit unions it's
just not credible that this is a
market that the credit union's
really or they would have gotten
it already so we hope you will
oppose this bill thank you.
Thank you I'll park.
Thank you very much good
afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee
likewise I will not belabor the
point I am the registered
lobbyist on behalf of the New
Mexico consumer credit
association
We do in fact support a thirty
six percent rate cap Mr chairman
members of the committee we
believe it is an important part
of consumer protection
Unfortunately and regrettably
and frankly reluctantly we stand
in opposition to Senate bill
sixty six because we believe
that the legislation still needs
final modifications that will
provide maximum consumer benefit
traction.
Last.
This.
Access to credit.
Thank god no right we state that
those last couple census Mr park
policies no no my apologies Mr
so what was simply saying is
that the consumer credit
association Mexico does stand in
support of the concept of a
thirty six percent cap some of
the opponents spoke earlier they
did not believe and we believe
that we should be subject to the
truth in lending act
requirements as opposed to the
military pay act but we believe
that this legislation with minor
tweaks would allow for the dual
goal of consumer protection and
access to credit we would ask
this committee do what it
historically has done which is
San the advocates and industry
out into the quote unquote
virtual hallway to come back
with a compromise piece of
legislation that protects all
New Mexicans thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Sir and I kind of cut
you off with might with the rush
we have one more present.
Back to this but take us on the
on.
Hi Mr chairman this is my take
us on the on this and I have
provided comments to the
committee thank you for the
opportunity.
Your hand was up yeah I want to
pre should everybody for staying
on point we're right on schedule
the.
Of both the both caucuses have
meetings either now or at two
thirty that we go on the floor
but we got time we're gonna.
To the business of the committee
and with that of Representative
heart of.
I'm thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator I'm also just for
bringing this bill forward this
is this is since I've been a
freshman legislator this is
always something that has has
come up you know trying to
make sure that the consumer's
protected and
one of the things that I always
have a problem with is as we're
trying to protect the consumer
sometimes we don't sometimes
what happens is we're ignoring
the needs of those who cannot
get loans and other places who
cannot qualify for loans and
other places and if we're not
careful we're gonna be taking
these rate these these
at our constituents and you know
put him online to online
predators where the interest
rate is three hundred percent
and up
I I've heard a lot about the
South Dakota I've heard a lot
about Connecticut how they have
a thirty six percent cap.
but what nobody else to talk
about without everybody fails to
mention is that both of the
states have payday lending.
And
can Medicaid all the storefronts
are shut down and it's all
online lending up to three
hundred percent.
So what happened is the states
have tried to create some.
To protect their the consumer
but again but they've actually
created a bigger problem because
now they're going to and other
lenders tribal lenders online
lending that way exceeds the
thirty six percent.
I
also have with the bill is that
there is no
there's really no no.
But what I'm looking for no
consumer protection.
I'm there's a lot of if there's
a lot of talk about you know
there's rollover fees I used to
work for a bank back in the day
and when you have a somebody who
could make their payments we
would just we
at I'm.
What I apologize refinance them.
And it was a way to keep them in
the system and you could do that
over and over again and their
several states that do that as
well some of the state South
Dakota for one you can even have
the refinancing so you put
people into the situation where
they never get out and so I do
have an amendment I'm to address
some of these issues and Mr
chairman do you have that man
has that been given to the
committee so I can go over at
thank you Representative Fajardo
center souls yes these
amendments were provided thank
you to the analyst the analyst
make reference to the amendments
of by the pool to number.
And so you of so please mention
the two oh two number and
proceed.
You Mr chairman and I do have
one question why do we call it
into a two number because it's
to to
What is the sixty four thousand
dollar question up since the
beginning of time the first
amendment our the first drafting
of the bill or amendment was
one.
And for the record we're at two
hundred twenty thousand five
hundred so two oh two is the
thousands that we're in right
now so okay so our number is
adds to its two twenty four nine
nine point one.
I up for for brevity's sake I
move for discussion please
proceed thank you thank you Mr
chairman thank you senator thank
you for everybody so what so
what this bill does is it keeps
the cat is keeps the cap of the
thirty six percent but for those
who cannot qualify because that
that's the biggest thing at all
the credit unions are are
talking about how they want to
do these lines but I think you
know let's be completely honest
here if you don't have a certain
credit score they're not going
to offer these loans we need a
place for people to go so it
keeps the thirty six percent and
then for those who cannot
qualify it goes they can it
reduces the rate right now the
state New Mexico is one seventy
five and it goes to one twenty
five.
Those who cannot qualify for
this for the thirty six percent.
The other thing that this
amendment does it actually has
real consumer protections
basically so so when the first
is you can't do the ten year
term for more than twenty four
months.
And that includes no we we
financing that keeps doing that
spiral of constantly going
through I'm there's no late fees
no NSF charges no no origination
fees no prepayment penalties are
any of those well over fees
included.
There are no blue balloon
payments.
I'm you it at interest in
accrued interest after ninety
days.
I'm with some of the information
that we heard was talking about
the military loan programs and
others and those types of of
programs and there's a
garnishment programs and
everybody fails to mention that
those checks and those payments
are coming directly out of their
paychecks so we're excluding
wage garnishment for protecting
the consumer by put by
disallowing those wage
garnishment.
And the so those are the big
things those are the consumer
protections in this ammendment
the other thing that we're doing
is we're protecting the
predominant the predominant
economic interest I'm it strikes
out.
This amendment strikes out on
page seventeen and all that
language and why are why I think
that's part is right now without
that language you have you know
if I'm one of by and so I or I
wanna buy it gym equipment and I
want to get those and zero
percent interest four hundred
twenty days or sixty days.
What you're does is prevent
those lenders from coming to New
Mexico so by striking out that
language and what it does is it
keeps those those plans.
And.
Representative interest for you
know
so takes out that language.
It's a lot and that was my
explanation Mister chairman
Senator and.
I do have been experts to help
with any questions or issues.
I'm what is the name we get
about expert raises right there
four.
If you could raise your hand
within the weapon are we could
bring you in or bring to the
room
Sanchez Senator souls.
Reserve it up Representative
Lundstrom Mr chairman I have not
been given a copy of that
amendment and so I have no idea
what any of these are we haven't
had a chance to analyze what it
does how it functions or
anything of that sort it sounds
like it's relatively extensive
and such as the numerous parts
within the bill and so yeah why
a couple of things on the
surface yeah why I can sort of
understand but their major
pieces here that are very
detailed and we haven't had the
opportunity to look through and
analyze exactly what it does.
Okay let's just take up take a
minute just take a breather and
my apologies Senator these
amendments were given to
To the committee Alice in the
committee and I cannot find it
of and lose I cannot find it on
my phone I cannot find it in my
computer I have paper copies.
So and and it's also on our
The the internal.
Files that we have do you have
access to those internal files
of that do you use those in the
Senate okay I tried to grab that
the PDF from the internal files
and email it to you so when we
just take a short recess if
If I and I will get the three
PDF that there's three members
that I'm aware of it and then
there's a fourth amendment that
Senator doing is working on so
give me.
So I just email them to your NM
Legislature and all email into
your personal whichever gets
there faster thank you.
We're still in recent.
Thank thank you chairman my
personal one because the other
one goes the Los crucis my
secretary has to find it without
it being important and then
that forward it up to me to the
other channel so that will take
a little bit longer these are
very complicated issues that you
know it's hard to determine
exactly what things do on the
fly yeah we'll we'll see what we
can tell from that.
All right a so what so they were
sent to all of your personal
email servers as well summer
faster summer slower.
So we'll give that a minute to
happen and and normally I go
immediately to the sponsor.
But maybe we can
Take one or two questions from
the committee you.
Mr chair thank you I I have I
have several questions on the
bill I've got a couple of them
on the amendment if it helps
while everybody else gets to
read the amendment I I'd be
happy to ask those at this time.
Let's do that let's take five
minutes addressing your concerns
while the Sanchez go over the
amendment
Just wait wait when you guys are
ready to to to go back to the
Sanchez
thank you Mr chair and and
Representative Fajardo thanks
for the amendment why the one
twenty five what words that come
from.
That's a great question and I
would have to say where is the
one seventy five come from where
did the thirty six come from you
know we and I think we all
understand the goal of the
thirty six percent and I don't
think anybody wants to have the
predatory and.
Lente and so right now it's at
one seventy five percent so so
basically we're reducing the cap
by fifty percent.
Got it got it and I I I agree
with you I don't know where the
ones and I came from the thirty
six percent I understand is is
modeled after the federal
Right cap for military personnel
so I that would make a little
bit more sense although quite
frankly a thirty six percent
loan I I I would advise anybody
against that I'd still pretty
high Mr chair and Representative
Fajardo in terms of you so you
mentioned if people don't
qualify for the thirty six
percent been there at a
medically put into the is one
twenty five cap so I take that
to mean maybe you qualify for a
forty percent maybe you qualify
for a fifty percent maybe you
qualify for a hundred percent
interest loan in my reading that
correctly.
I'm Mr Chairman representative
so yes so what we're all we're
doing is our planet cap so
there's no reason a lender can't
do forty percent now there's no
reason a lender can't do seventy
five percent they have that
option today so what we're doing
is we're taking the cap the
ceiling right now is one twenty
five percent rate for bringing
the ceiling back down and so
there's no reason a lender can't
go underneath that there's no
reason reason to keep the credit
unions right now can't be
landing you know and in doing
what they're doing so what we're
reducing but the the problem is
and this is the the the thing
that nobody's talking about is
that credit score is going to
kick people out of being able to
borrow money at all.
They're going to get kicked out
of the system so those people
who who who need that this this
what we're doing is now
providing a safety net for them
so if you can qualify for under
that one the thirty six percent.
Those people who cannot they
need something and this is their
safety that thank you Mr
Chairman representative I
thought so who if your if your
amendment is adopted in the bill
passes.
Who qualifies for thirty six
percent who makes that
determination will lenders
decide who qualifies for thirty
six percent and if so.
Does that mean nobody qualifies
for thirty six percent because
then I can charge them a hundred
and twenty five percent.
Well I'm a I'm not a lender so
I'm gonna do you know kind of.
As as I know now when you go and
you apply for your mortgage
your mortgage rate is based on
your credit score when you go
and you buy a new golf by a car
lot of that is based on your
credit score so it's going to be
the lender that makes those
decisions on on what they
qualify for and and keep in mind
one of the things that that is
in this ammendment that I think
is extremely important is is the
consumer protections that do not
exist right now and that is the
twenty four months that is the
rollover fees that you no longer
have know what we in this
ammendment we're taking out late
fees this is a consumer
protection no more balloon
payments no more to wage
garnishment and Mr chairman and
Representative one of the things
that you talked about earlier
was as military loan to that's
what this thirty percent thirty
six percent comes but those but
those are guaranteed there's a
secure loans they're going to
get their money back and that
does cut does come out of at a
wage of payroll garnishment and
what happens is is those those
loans are also so sick so sick
here that if you do not pay them
back there is consequences
within the military.
That happen that don't that
doesn't really apply to you know
the general public so we're
actually adding a lot of
consumer protections that do not
exist in statute today.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative thanks for
answering my questions this is a
big tough issue it's a
generational issue and and I
appreciate you taking the time
to explain and answer my
questions thank you Mr chair
thank you Representative.
Thank you very much was senator
Representative is what position
on the amendment.
Mr chair all all different
Senator souls as the primary
sponsor on this I'll defer to
him on that and if I may Senator
up just for the folks listening
and and and everything this is
amendment for ninety nine.
And it does
It allows and I'll just read it
straight up
You know you're capped at thirty
six percent pursuant to federal
law provided that the borrower.
If a borrower is denied a loan
at thirty six percent.
Or less.
That that person can get a loan
at a rate of up to one hundred
twenty five calculated percent
provided that.
The borrower submits written or
live electronic proof to the
lender that the borrower
previously applied for and was
denied a loan at the lower rate
and then it adds protections
one you know a through F. two
and three that is my understand
those protections are not only
to that hundred twenty five
percent loan but also to any
loan.
and then in the middle in the
middle of August three to six
that deals with the.
The.
The example that the that was
given buying up furniture for no
interest at all.
Well as I go through it again
I've got it on my computer but I
also have zoom on my computer
it's trying to get back and
forth and then actually have the
the copy of the bill here and
trying to find where it changes
this ammendment has three pages
to it that makes some very
significant changes to.
SB sixty six and trying to do
that on the fly to where we we
understand everything that it
means is is very difficult to
try and do
on just on the surface a couple
of the things where I've got
some concerns and possibly
questions for the the sponsor of
the amendment is it doesn't
indicate what qualifies as being
denied thirty six percent who
makes that determination what
time do they get a certification
that they can that didn't carry
next door to the loan company
right next door that shows they
did were denied their and so
their buddy next door to not
make a loan for a hundred twenty
five percent yep how what means
that they didn't try we heard
through what and what lots of
the testimony that credit unions
are there and ready to prepare
to do these at under thirty six
percent.
Yeah there was a what the
testimony one indicated they
make loans down to a hundred
dollars at under thirty six
percent APR does this require
that they go and check with our
Guadalupe be credit union that
says that they will do this for
and they only have to go check
with the yeah I make something
up is go check with Wells Fargo
we are no testimony that that
major banks are prepared to do
these and so what the bank says
no we're not going to does that
now make it where they can go
would be charged a hundred
twenty five percent when in fact
there may be thirty six percent
lenders in the area is that
clearly undefined and doesn't
make any sense of that's one of
the first things that I thought
as I was looking through it so
we have the the sponsor of the
amendment would like to respond
to that but again there's lots
more details through the next
several pages of the amendment
if I may let's talk about the
the amendment itself then we'll
go back to the then we'll see if
it's funny or not then we'll
talk about the policy that the
amendment would create but on
the amendment Representative
part of thank you I'm thinking
that chairman thank and thank
you senator and I'm gonna have
to disagree with you that did
that that the denial doesn't
make sense if it's you so
basically your legal it so that
you're legally required to it is
that the lender is legally
required to Senate adverse
action if denied for credit so
that's that's a document that
the consumer is is supposed to
get their violation if they do
not so so that's already set set
up so I have to disagree that
having to prove something
doesn't make sense because
that's already that that exists.
Mr chairman Mr chair yes.
They're doing if you will please
one and I was just going to have
some other observations just
looking looking at this so
number one what this would set
up is that the folks who are are
in the worst position to repay
their loans are the ones that
are the highest credit risks are
going to be the ones who are
getting the most expensive loans
and that's an excellent point
let's talk about the amendment
and then let's go back to
committee let's that just I just
want you to understand the
amendment but but I do and
there's there's one there there
are a couple parts of that but I
do want to make sure I
understand Mr chair
for example.
Because I Representative Fajardo
you you would referred to it
looks like it's.
Subsection R. one SUB Hey saying
this would limited to twenty
four months.
But it says not including any
refinancing terms.
So this would actually limit
these loans to twenty four month
twenty four month term because
they can be refinanced that
later on there some other
language about when it would be
eligible for refinance but but
this is not if you're allowing
for a refinancing terms that's
not an actual limit on on the
loan like.
And there is but but I wanna
make sure I'm understanding that
because.
Is that the language there
doesn't match what what I
thought I heard.
Thank you chairman and and thank
you senator for that so yeah so
I'm in your can you give me what
section of the amendment that
you're talking about so I can be
on the same page looking at the
same language absolutely I'm I'm
looking at page three and
sources subsection are and then
there's a sub one under our and
a sub a under one and that's the
subway that I'm looking at thank
you and I'm gonna I'm Mr
chairman I'm gonna bring in my I
might witness Mr outboard as
well make sure that as I speak
finance that that there is no
miscommunication and that we are
getting everything right because
this is important.
And I want to I want to thank
you guys so be made for talk of
a greater than twenty four
months not including the
finances are but then if you go
down the section are the
eligible for refinance for for
the loan by the lenders unless
the bar is not a default so let
me refer to my expert Mr
outward.
well so what this is providing I
guess three five programs
perspective it is obviously it
prevents your instant.
Reflect.
Chairman sorry thank you so much
I'm sorry
okay you're fine.
Mr chairman
So I guess the question is on
this one how does require
provision working houses work
overall.
Just to clarify.
Mr chair Mr offered.
Yeah well so what what I thought
I heard was these protections
limit alone term to twenty four
months
But this language that says not
including any refinancing period
would make me think that that
that that's not correct.
Mr chair and Senator dentist
you're reading that correctly
yes.
Okay so Mr chair so I have a
question about some other stuff
in here because for example.
This would say
You can't do pre payment
penalties but Mr chair
Representative Fajardo I think
those are already not allowed in
New Mexico.
or and it requires disclosures
that comply with the truth in
lending act but Mr chair
representative part of that's
already required so I'm just
trying to what I'm trying to
suss out here is of these the
consumer protection parts of
this ammendment.
I'm I'm not sure some of them I
really like like like you can't
with Gardner someone's wages for
one of these loans but.
But I think a lot of these don't
actually either are already the
law or don't would not apply to
these loans so if you could
address that I Representative Mr
chair thank you.
Mr Chairman I'm Senator I'm
going to read my notes real
quick I'm gonna refer to my
witness why I make sure see if
you have an answer on that why I
also get an answer for you.
Mr chair Senator
Yeah obviously this is
A list of consumer protections
which would greatly assist
consumers and and finding
certain predatory actions
especially now we decided wage
garnishment the securitization
that we've seen that are.
To a lot of writers of use
Obviously not having security in
someone's wages on livelihood is
is a strong protection for
consumers a half.
some of these other protections
although not exhaustive of what
your credit.
Industry's doing itself
Are also helpful I mean
although.
Some of them are already
provided an in this law says
reinforcement that yes her
strong protections are needed we
need to make sure consumers
have.
Actual backstops in actual you
know protections not just at the
will of all these wonders and
sells.
Okay so Mr chair representative.
I have a question about about
the the act I think this is an
aspect but I'm not sure that
there's there's been a clear
answer yet about that if they're
denied for the thirty six
percent and.
And I think I think when
Representative Martinez was
asking I I I think.
We got part of the answer there
it's that the lenders let so
this isn't based.
The letters would be the ones
deciding whether they're whether
they're accepting or denying
someone for thirty six percent
regardless of what they're
looking at to to make that
determination is that correct Mr
chair representative well Mr
chairman Rep I'm Senator yes
because right now we cannot
require any banking company to
to land we can't force the
company to to land if you have
somebody that comes in and they
do not qualify for the thirty
six percent based on their
credit are based on their
situation financial situation
then they're locked out of the
system entirely.
And so so I would love to be
able to to you know to to to sit
there and say you can't deny
somebody.
But that's not an option for us
so we have to create something
that allows them to have access
and that's and that's basically
what that section as if they
don't qualify for this thirty
six percent then they get they
get the email confirmation and
then they can apply up to a
hundred twenty five percent
doesn't mean they're gonna be
charge of the one twenty five
percent but they they need that
we need that safety net.
Mr chair representative if I am
a lender who can make my own
determination about who will
qualify or not what methadone
what I have to say the anyone
qualifies for thirty six percent
we will getting into the policy
arguments of the amendment I
just want to I just want us all
to understand the amendment
itself and then we can argue the
policy I I I apologize Mister
chair.
I I I I believe that I do I do
understand the amendment thank
you Representative bows
Armstrong and it it a.
Thank you Mr chairman.
It is also based on a Senators
comments we will confirm what in
current law and if there's any
duplications will definitely
deal with that.
Representative Armstrong and and
it it out of what are your
impressions of the amendment
have any questions on the
amendment or.
Or opinion whether it's from
your own family thank you Mr
chairman and and I my apologies
for being late I was in another
committee I was in the waiting
area earlier but I appreciate
the bill I appreciate the
amendment I think my personal
opinion on the amendment is
there are a lot of really good
things of this ammendment that
have been talked about is the.
Opposition.
For the bill the things brought
up like.
Sorry I'm getting a really bad
just.
You're not.
Yes this.
Sorry Mr chairman that was
distracting I lost my point but
I believe there are a lot of
good things in this ammendment
that need to we need to look at
this I don't really have
questions I do really like
the section.
Are
and and L. on page one so I will
defer to the main sponsor thank
you Mr chairman for the time
thank you Representative any
impressions on the amendment.
Thank you thank you
thank you kind share with the
very quick read I I consider
this an unfriendly amendment I
think a lot of things that they
have included are are part of
the that the good things in this
bill I think part of Senate bill
sixty six I think I I think this
is an unfriendly amendment that
you know we all need time to
kind of go over and and come
back and have a
an argument that ties to our
building makes sense so I'll
just say that and keep on
reading keep on trying thank
you.
Amendment.
Thank you before I I before I
recognize Representative
Powdrell Culbert let's let's go
back to the committee on the
amendment.
Well we can take action or not
and then go back to the
committee.
We up we have a packed agenda on
Monday so I want to go to
Monday.
If the sponsors one up you know
at some point you know of bump
into tomorrow we could do that
so those of us try to
communicate the best we can with
our state that but for now let's
just move forward with the with
the committee as best we can I
think full responsibility for
you guys not getting these
amendments
but every bill that comes to
this committee is subject to.
Amendment substitution or or.
Or anything else so let's try
our best and thank everyone for
their patients zoom.
Representative Fajardo has move
the amendment or actually we're
just doing discussion
Representative Powdrell Culbert
thank you Mr chairman and and
Representative on the amendment
I've taken the time to sit and
read this this ammendment.
Don't pass on the amendment.
You have a motion for a do pass
on the amendment.
Mr chair.
One moment center as a second on
the most second Mr chairman
there's a second on the motion
and do pass there's the believe
there's further discussion but
but let's let's go back to the
sponsor us Senator souls the.
Thank you Mr chairman and I'm
not sure it was cleared but from
us as both boxers this is an
unfriendly then that as best we
can tell having had it for only
a very very short while and the
main reason it's unfriendly is
it actively changes this bill
from being a thirty six percent
interest rate cap two hundred
twenty five percent interest
rate cap that is.
Understood.
That we would like to have a lot
more time to analyze what the
other portions of the amendment
of exactly how that would you
should and work and yeah I'm
trying to do that on the fly of
financing and financing small
loans is a very complicated
thing it is not simple and easy
to just talk about a specific
number of their what the details
that go into that and is is not
something that I certainly am
capable of doing on the fly of
my co sponsor Senator Duhigg as
a little bit more background in
that area but for even people
that are very
low within Fassel with working
with financing this is not
something that they're going to
tell you a specific opinion for
what something does go having
looked at it for one or two
minutes.
And let us just take a step
back.
The because you know this is our
weapon are you know this is a
web in our we're in the same
room you know we go out in the
hallway things like that
everyone has different skill
sets everyone you know all the
lawyers that I see in court
everyone brings a different
skill set I.
Of try to make it a habit on all
my bills to go to the committee
analysts and get their analysis
all of our analysts have an
analysis of the bill and the
amendment in their analysis help
the committee unfortunately it
didn't help the Sanchez so so I
let me check with the Senate and
house leadership with regards to
the schedules tomorrow
committees for things that
nature we have time now we're in
the same weapon are I say we
take advantage of this time of.
And then and then talk about
this amendment and other
amendments and see if we can get
in our
so we can reconvene tomorrow and
take action on the amendment on
the bill does that
How do other committees
committee members feel about
that.
Mr chair of you know I I think
the.
I'm I'm a little bit point I
mean I would love to Senator
commute cells except
Representative.
Representative Martinez thank
you Mr chair you know I'm a
little bit torrent being part of
me definitely want to take
action today understanding that
time is is of the essence and
and you know the longer thinks
it the harder it is to get them
all the way through having said
that if the sponsors have not
yet visited the amendment fully
you know I I I I feel like they
probably need to do that so
I don't envy you are role as
chair right now this is a tough
decision to make I do I do have
more comments on the amendment
if it's appropriate at this time
I can hold off until until later
on.
Thank you Representative
Representative in a public
comment on the.
Mr speaker and and
Representative on the amendment
you know you're not talked about
me being the longest serving
member on this committee a
number of times and having had
the opportunity.
To look at this and that since
two thousand and fifteen.
I think.
That this issue is certainly big
enough and important enough.
We take the time necessary.
To meet tomorrow and look at the
amendment which I happen to
think is a good amendment.
And given the Senators the
opportunity to address the
amendment because we're
affecting the quality of
people's lives.
And this is important enough in
my opinion that we take the time
to to do this.
It's very important and if we
have to meet tomorrow then we
meet tomorrow and make sure that
this great amendment is adopted
and to this piece of legislation
we've made a commitment back in
fifteen sixteen to address this
issue we brought it from four
hundred percent.
Down to a hundred and seventy
five we did it during the
interim with both sides of the
industry.
We made the commitment to look
at the data.
Let's do it like everyone made a
commitment to do it and get it
done right for the people of New
Mexico so let's meet tomorrow
and look at the amendment given
the Sanchez the opportunity.
To look through the amendment
and we make this a good piece of
legislation or wait until we
receive the data thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Representative
Powdrell Culbert so we heard not
only from the ranking member of
this committee but the ranking
minority member in the chamber
so we want to thank you so
here's my proposal there is a
motion and a second on the table
there is there is a
There is a debate however what I
would prefer to do is to talk
about these amendments talk
about the bill and then we could
come back tomorrow
and take action but in order to
do that resembled record I would
we need to withdraw that motion.
Want to withdraw the motion all
right thank you we're back on
the amendment and let's go back
to committee Representative
Martinez.
The minutes for discussion
there's no motion to adopt the
motion is be at the a motion is
before the amendment rather is
before us for discussion let's
continue with the hearing we're
not now back to committee of
committee members thank you.
Thank you Mr chair I'll be brief
on the amendment I have more to
say on the actual bill although
I guess it depends on what
happens with the amendment
because that will affect what I
say about the bill
so one of the problems have the
amendment Mr chair and
representative I don't is that
it does not appear to create an
option for a.
Lower interest rate.
Assuming your credit score
doesn't live up to whatever
these private companies set up
for themselves and so I I can
easily see companies saying all
right if you don't have a credit
score of say six fifty or
higher.
You will not quite you will we
will we will lend money to you
but it's going to be upwards of
a hundred percent a hundred and
twenty four percent hundred
twenty five percent and I think
that alternately the impact of
the amendment will be to.
Take this bill in its current
form which is a thirty six
percent cap rate and create a
one hundred and twenty five
percent cap rate which.
Which I Alec knowledge it's
better than a hundred and
seventy five percent
but it's still far from what
these the sponsors are proposing
through their bill.
I think that
Since we've decided to let the
Sanchez go through that
amendment proposed amendment and
and really understand it.
You know comprehensively and and
hopefully both sides can talk
and figure it out over the next
few hours all all stopped there
but I think if if we adopt this
amendment I I think it has the
effect of simply lowering the
cap from one seventy five to one
twenty five are far from what
these proponents are are
proposing to the bill thank you
Mr chair and thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative
Representative Baldonado.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chairman I want to make a
motion to adopt this amendment.
We have a motion to adopt.
Second second there's a second
is there any further discussion
on the amendment.
But we have a couple of a couple
of things tests to discuss the
So anyway this is a novel
concept I know that the
advocates are pushing like
thirty six percent of their some
other policy choices the folks
can make on.
This is
When it says the borrower is
denied a loan at thirty six
percent.
You know and then it says they
provide proof to the lender I
wish you would say proof to a
different lender to a different
lender.
I don't know if we could do this
or not law but if it's as if the
borrower is denied a loan.
It's just above if the bar was
denied a loan at a bank or
credit union I don't think we
could do that at all but I would
be the ideal situation there is
a huge huge huge
there are about four.
Not having that consumers the
the folks are trying to help not
having access to any capital at
all and we all know the
unintended consequences of that
reality
I'm Mr chairman we are a it's
Representative Fajardo on on
that point and maybe just
because that that that something
that Senator Duhigg brought up
as well and in those are very
very valid points yeah I I have
to you know to take a little bit
of you know what Representative
Martinez said you know that this
is going to.
What yes and it's gonna just
reduce the cat the cat to one
twenty five that's not what's
happening you have a group of
people that can't qualify and
they need that safety net but
the point about not qualifying
them to force them to a higher
rate is a valid very valid point
and so in so I have to agree
with you that putting language
in there to sit there and say
that and I'm I can't remember
exactly what you said chairman.
to it so that so that doesn't
happen I have to agree with you
because what it is in the end
this is that consumer protection
so we have to add a line in
there that includes that
syndicate syndicate protection
to make sure that they're not to
nine and just to put them as a
seventy five or one twenty five
percent that makes perfect sense
to me and I have to agree with
that and so I'm you know that's
something that we can definitely
do.
All right anyone else on the
amendment.
The Senate sponsors are centered
with.
Thank you Mr chair
one I think in I don't think
that's language that I can craft
right now on the fly
But to and frankly without
without that language in there
there is there's there's nothing
in this to give any reason for
anyone not to deny every single
person who comes to them alone
at thirty six percent
there would be quite the
financial incentives to to do
just that.
But I I I I just feel compelled
to point out that all of this
the parts of this that are
saying that they're adding all
those consumer protections these
aren't real there are we are we
don't have ballooned repayment
schedules on these loans we
don't have like a lot of the
things that are in here don't
apply to these loans so while
this might look like it has a
bunch of consumer protections
and it it does not this is all
it does is is essentially it
allow hundred twenty five
percent cap with with no
limitation on anyone on
requiring anything lower or
giving lenders any limitation or
incentive not to go to a hundred
twenty five percent cap every
time so.
The if if if consumer protection
is something that is important
to this committee this amendment
does not achieve that.
Thank you senator Senator souls
Representative at I. any
comments before we go back to
committee.
Thank you Mr chairman and
certainly Senator Duhigg yeah
exactly the the concern here and
there is not a chart somewhere
that says if your credit score
is six fifty you qualify for
this you have a credit score of
eight hundred you qualify for
this level of low and it doesn't
designate goal you might go to
again using my example would go
somebody could go to Wells Fargo
and Wells Fargo I will
absolutely that does not make
loans at a hundred dollars all
well the hundred dollars at
under thirty six percent they
don't even talk to you about any
kind of a lot of that sort and
so if somebody goes there and
gets denied then they go back to
the other and said Hey I was the
night I get a hundred twenty
five percent loan or for someone
to walk in the even that
storefront and the cold we'll go
over and see if Wells Fargo will
give you a loan at thirty six
percent and then when they don't
come back to the yeah there's it
doesn't talk at all about how
good someone more qualified yeah
what does that required there
isn't a chart somewhere that
says for whatever your credit
score is this is the percent
credit for the loan percentage
that you qualify for that
doesn't exist it is all up to
the individual companies as to
how much they're going to charge
on each individual loan and
there isn't any set standard for
being qualified for thirty six
percent we're not and so I think
Senator Duhigg headed exactly
right up all that this really
does is it changes the hundred
seventy five cap two hundred
twenty five percent cap which is
unacceptable the sponsor the
amendment also indicated where
thirty six percent from.
It was the law before it is in
the the military lending act you
did not just get pulled out of
there absolutely Representative
are your thoughts will go back
to committee.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
you know I was I was approached
by by the installment loan
companies during the summer and
they said you know we could do
this at a hundred twenty five
percent I wasn't interested then
I'm not interested now I think
it's I think it's a rate that
will really crippled people and
it it at that this make no
mistake this is a man in an
amendment to kill this bill
that's what this is about and I
would I would remind everybody
in this on this committee and
we're trying to protect people
in New Mexico and I would urge
you to vote against this
amendment thank you thank you
Mr.
Thank you and we will now go
back to members of the committee
any further discussion on the
amendment.
Of we could not.
What are you because there's
hands up right there's hands up
within that within the whether
it could you just wave your hand
physically if you wish to
address the amendment one what
Representative us at.
Thank you Mr chairman the
committee members to wave their
hands
thanks everybody thank you Mr
chairman offer this you know I
I'm I'm a little I'm
sorry we go back for seconds I'm
a little overwhelmed with this
because I do know that our
committee really prides itself
on the ability to like going to
the hallway have Sanchez an
amendment folks come together
really have a conversation and I
really find myself in agreement
with Representative Powdrell
Culbert which is you know we
have an opportunity really get
this right and what I appreciate
about this amendment was when
the state is that well there are
things that already protected by
law there are other things that
aren't and there are new things
in here and again I think you
kind of made mention this really
Mr chairman but you know again
the the cruel after certain
updates the the wage garnishment
you know all these pieces seem
to be protections that are
valuable and then I I
particularly thought there was
one I saw doctor accrue interest
after ninety pays days of non
payment and so you know what I
do really appreciate all of the
work of the credit unions you
know to create these new
programs the fact matters that
may not actually fulfill the
demand that exists out there and
you know Mr chairman and you
know as we talked about before
on this bill and again now so
many people rely on this there
is a demand that exists you know
I want to make sure that we will
do that so I really am I'm I'm
vexed see Mr Chairman just
because I would like this
opportunity to see you know the
the sponsor of the amendment the
sponsor the bill come together
and really talk about this
because it seemed as though they
had places where they had
agreement on that I'd like to
see the more it is our way we
talk about they got to nine to
thirty six percent
Representative a a loan from a
credit union and then they would
have to apply for this I would I
don't know I mean I you guys
have been waiting for this that
I have but I just want to I just
want to put that out there and
that makes a lot more difficult
for me at this time knowing that
folks haven't had the
opportunity to really
collaborate.
Absolutely absolutely if you are
a.
Discussion on the amendment.
Delay can can call the roll on
the motion to adopt Tuesday two
two zero four nine nine point
one Mr Chairman tadacip make one
very very fast point though you
it's something important I think
the committee should understand
all means please but because the
all the anti evasion languages
taken out by this ammendment
this actually would mean that
there would be could be
unlimited interest rates on
loans in New Mexico all of the
invasion language in you get
patient page online visual
language so I so I'm looking at
so that where it is in the in
the amendment is on page two
numbers six I yes number six
okay okay thank you know we.
What will look consider that I
was kind of the those are how
much money eligible interest
wait.
Thank you generated call the
roll on the adoption about the
amendment two zero four nine
nine point one.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Dow.
Yes Representative Dow is yes
thank you.
Representative.
Yes.
It was.
No I like to explain my vote.
Representative Johnson.
No.
Representative.
Bills.
Representative Coltart yes.
Yes.
Chair Figueroa.
Share my instance.
A no that government has been
adopted.
That part of sure.
Yes.
I lost connection for a second
term he repeat that.
Representative part of your
amendment has been adopted you
still have the floor thank you
thank you I'm so I just.
Right you do this on the part so
I so I just want to make a
couple comments so as far as
this doesn't increase and I'm
amid interest and and Matt with
this is that one section is
dealing with the at P. interest
rates is that simply different
section and there is no consumer
protection this is what this
does and so did so I I take a
take you know I'm.
It's it's it's you know I I take
issue with the news that said
this doesn't do anything this is
the first this is the first time
we've actually had real consumer
protection and so I don't have
anything else Mr chairman.
Thank you members of the
committee I have Representative
forgive me forgive me
Representative that goes to
explain her vote thank you you
know Mr chairman and committee I
was I wanted to consider voting
yes for this because I do want
to make sure that there's
consumer protections and I just
don't feel that the did the
Sanchez we're giving and we're
given enough time to really that
the the bill and so based on
that I felt like I had to vote
no and so I I'm sad to see that
that that didn't happen because
I feel that we can to make this
bill better.
Thank you Representative and
we'll go back to members of the
committee what Representative
Martinez on on the vehicle thank
you Mr chair thank you thank you
Mr chair I can finally pull my
notes up until although it's a
different bill now so I I I I
hope this still applies.
I don't I don't think I have any
questions for the Sanchez at
this point given given the
different bill that is in front
of us I do want to address some
of the things we heard Inc in in
public comment Mister chair and
and Sanchez
you know this is as I said
earlier this is one of those
generational issues you know and
and.
Since I can remember there's
been
a push to cap these types of
loans whether it's installment
loans or or title loans or
payday loans and clearly they're
not all the same but the
operating very similar spaces it
in very similar ways.
I think the first issue we need
to we need to think about is why
are so many people considered
bankable in New Mexico.
and and that is.
That really goes to the heart of
our public policies in the
state.
And their share responsibility
for that Mr Mr chair
for a long time I saw advocates
of a thirty six percent rate cap
going to the legislature on
their own no credit union behind
them no community bank behind
them no financial institution
behind them.
and to me was always very sad to
see these well intentioned
advocates.
you know we left on their own.
In these community banks in
these credit unions are supposed
to be grounded in community that
are supposed to be places that
service.
Well who are in poverty we're
just not at the table.
I'm glad to see Mr chair and
sponsors that finally we have
those folks at the table I did
receive some emails over the
last few days one was with one
of the credit union without very
clear examples of how they bank
with people who and you know
very low credit scores and how
they lend money to people of
very low credit scores that's
encouraging I know that then you
send the credit unions do
fantastic work providing very
low interest loans and by very I
mean loans at like five percent
interest rate without checking
people's credit based solely on
the relationship all of the
potential borrower to their
community.
The question of Mister chair and
members and and Sanchez is.
Should.
Again I guess at the matter now
because it's not a thirty six
percent cap rate and and these
lenders are not going to leave
the state
you know so I guess it's a moot
point but the question was going
to be.
If the thirty six percent
interest rate was adopted by the
legislature and signed into law
in all these lenders would leave
if these credit unions regain a
step up and lend money clearly
again that's an irrelevant
question now but as this work
continues over the next week.
And over the next year to.
I'm glad to see more more credit
unions jumping on board with the
idea of banking and lending
money to people in crisis and
people who are deemed bankable
people with low credit scores I
would love to take a couple of
our all of our credit score see
see what those average out to be
you know it's it's just it's
it's it's it doesn't represent
anything about you.
A credit score is a number.
Credit score was imposed on us
by god knows who god knows when
to the gym I just.
The way they treat us.
Quite frankly.
And for some odd reason we deem
people who are not credit worthy
based on a credit score and if
any of you have had any type of
incidents with the credit
reporting agency you know how
difficult it is to fix that
sadly
so Mr chairman of the committee
you know.
Office are okay you know our our
economy our system is building
capitalism and capitalism is
built on profit.
what really breaks my heart
though Mr chair is the idea of
profiting off of people's
desperation
and we created a market you know
we we've adopted policies that
put people in those places of
desperation.
and we created a market where
somebody can come in and make a
Buck after that this patient is
there something wrong with that
I I mean I guess not I mean the
system is what it is.
But I think there's a lot of
work that needs to happen to
ensure that people are not in
that place of desperation
and if they are that.
We as a society can come
together to help support and not
leave people to the devices of a
profit making venture again
nothing wrong with the profit.
If the market is there
somebody's gonna take that
market.
Mr chair and Sanchez you know
what my grandmother she worked
in a Micaela Lara for ever in a
bustle.
and she would stage the back
pocket of genes and she did that
for like forty years
and I don't even know what the
minimum wage was back then I
mean it must have been really
low but I remember every payday
every other Friday we would get
to cross that bridge from what
is where we live into a bustle
and
she would she would take us out
to eat and should take us to the
store and religiously every
other week we would make one
final stop before you cross the
bridge back and all I remember
Mr chair was that it was a
finance yet so she called a few
minutes yet I need to make a
payment.
Religiously.
I'm not sure if it was a payday
lender I'm not sure if it was a
title and lender I'm not sure if
it was some sort of installment
lender I don't know what it was
but my grandmother was able to
leverage that in a very
particular way you know very low
income but also very savvy and
she could leverage that loan and
do what she needed to do and
then pay it back in and I never
remember her being in trouble
you know and I don't know if
it's because the terms were not
as terrible as they are today or
or or she was is really good at
it but but certainly I have the
memory of my grandmother who by
the way has its has exemplary
credit like she's eighty five
eighty six years old now and
like her credit is off the off
the hook but regardless you know
I think that I think that these
lenders there there there is a
space for the lenders and
there's a space for the landing
I think the problem that I have
as the legislature for
as a cause as as a as a
representative of my district is
that these loans we've seen
horror story after horror story
after horror story of people who
who are are in desperate
situations.
And because of that desperation
they fall into these you know
fifteen page.
Contracts for like a five
hundred dollar loan that me as
an attorney can hardly even
read.
And that's the situation a lot
of people are put in
and again you know that's not to
pass judgment on the of the
people we heard from today you
know the the working people who
work at these places the people
who show up to work every day
right those people are our
neighbors we worship next to
them we eat next to them at the
restaurant they're making forty
fifty thousand dollars a year as
a you know clerk at one of these
places
but you know what what what
families go through.
In these desperate times and
then to be tacked on two hundred
and five percent interest on a
loan because their water heater
blew out and they got two little
kids at home.
That's a tough spot to be on Mr
chair.
B. and that should set.
Lastly Mr chair when
Representative Fajardo explained
her amendment and and we both of
us sort of had a meeting of the
minds in terms of the.
in terms of the one twenty five
and and I asked why the one
twenty five and and she as well
why the one seventy five and why
the thirty six and and I think
that's the other piece of this
of this puzzle Mr chair we just
don't know where these numbers
come from you know whether it's
the one seventy five in the
books right now whether it's the
one twenty five on this bill or
whether it's the thirty six of
the previous bill I still
question why the feds one with
thirty six percent for military
members.
Why not twenty five percent.
I don't know you know I'm not a
lender I'm not a banking expert
perhaps it's rooted in some sort
of you know banking philosophy
here lending philosophy I don't
know or perhaps is completely
arbitrary and we just follow the
lead because that's what's been
done in the past but the last
thing I'll say Mr chair is if we
base everything on a thirty six
percent interest rate and we
base that on federal interest
rate cap for military members
I've got one question for all of
us and I guess it's rhetorical
at this point because I can't
really ask the Sanchez.
If it's good for military
members.
Why isn't it good for the rest
of us.
I've never really understood
that Mr chair.
I don't I I've never understood
why we create these institutions
For something as critical as as
credit.
Because in a capitalist country
in a capitalist society.
In a capitalist economy.
Credit is everything access to
credit because everything.
Right different classes of
people.
In the one sense based on
military service.
But in the broader sense classes
of people based on a three digit
number.
Whether you agree fifty or eight
fifty determines the rest of
your life and probably your
children's children's children's
life.
And that is a real real damn
shame Mr chair thank you for the
time I appreciated
thank you Sanchez and and thank
you members.
Thank you very much
Representative Representative
Powdrell Culbert you have your
hand up thank you Mr chairman
As I said early I've looked at
this and looked at this and look
at this and.
This is something that will we
will probably continue to look
at for a few years down the
road.
But Representative Martinez just
talk about the military if you
know anything about me you know
but a military wife now for
almost forty years.
And I just happen to know the
contractor.
That was brought in by the
military.
To address the problem they were
having with payday loans.
And Representative Fajardo
mentioned the garnishment.
Before the military.
These garnish.
Any.
Of the item listed in this
mostly they'll listed
military that was having these
problems.
They.
I had to take financial literacy
classes.
And I think that that's for our
major problem is yes credit
scores are everything.
When you look at our younger
generation.
You know we've created an
environment where they just go
out and buy then when something
happens it's fear.
And so when we started out with
this you were trying the same
thing that we're doing now when
we got it down to one seventy
five we address how can we help.
These individuals.
In this class that.
These atrocious credit scores.
How can we work with the banking
community to try to bring a and
to help these individuals we
have not been able to accomplish
that yes.
But I think it's something with
this piece of legislation with
the amendment amendment whether
you like it or not that we start
looking at the data.
And all of the banking industry
come in and work with us.
To provide an environment where
everyone every New Mexicans.
Can.
Survived in when they have these
atrocious events like COVID to
occur.
They don't fall completely
apart.
Having having lost everything
and have been too late one night
and say well the only direction
I can go from here is up.
And.
Credit was hard.
All.
But I decided that I'd lost
everything I'm up botch bring
result of floor looking at
ceiling as a result of the
divorce.
And we have to start somewhere.
We can help New Mexicans and I
really do believe this.
And this legislation whether
it's pastor not where the the
Sanchez decide to pull it
because of the amendment you
know we have to start somewhere
again and working with the
families of New Mexico to create
a better credit environment.
We also have to work with this
banking industry to start
helping these individuals so
that we don't have to continue
to have these conversations in
reference.
To
They high interest one seventy
five one twenty five thirty six
is too much to pay.
For short term loans and so I'm
just you know I'm I'm kind of
like
Representative Serrato I've been
a long time.
But I am completely overwhelmed
with what we're trying to do.
And we need to do it.
Thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Martinez.
Your hand is up.
We'll go back to work okay great
so couple couple comments I
think we're.
Google comments one is want to
thank everybody for a dignified
hearing this is tough stuff you
know the virtual aspect of it
makes it much more difficult.
And the the ultimate the
ultimate
the gender of the advocates is
is is admirable I agree with
that I don't know thirty six is
arbitrary completely harbors an
arbitrary
but I think it has some to do
with twelve months times three
and so I'm committed to to
capping at thirty six percent
but that that's a question of
capping capping the interest of
the loan at thirty six percent
the interest of the loan.
And so even though I think these
insurance policies are.
R. that are offered by the
stores are.
Unnecessary and frankly if
you're offering these insurance
policies and why isn't the APR
ten percent if you're guaranteed
to get paid on a default that
that's just the nature of this
industry
and all of some comments with
regard to that toward toward the
end but I I just can't wrap my
arms around.
Products that you're purchasing
that the the borrower purchases
these these insurance policies
the store then purchases the
insurance policies and then that
be included.
In any thirty six percent markup
so at this time I move up.
The two two zero seven oh seven.
Two two zero seven oh seven of I
get us the Sanchez to look at
that it's a one pager.
And I'll give you a couple
seconds on that and let me
explain the amendment
essentially on page it's it's up
page six and page thirty six so
page six and base thirty six of
the the language tracks one
another but essentially
Instead of including all these
ancillary costs.
It essentially says up the right
shall include finance charges.
Finance charges as defined in
the federal law known as
regulations Z. E. and then what
it does is it deletes on page
six.
R. on page six it deletes lines
seven through twenty four.
On page thirty six it deletes
lines fifteen through twenty
five and then over on page
thirty seven of the eight lines
one through six.
And I'll go to the Sanchez at
that's a friendly.
Mr chair and is still trying to
the standard and and see exactly
what that does I had a little
bit of a heads up that this one
was coming so I'm not quite is
blindsided by it and and what
the details are
My understanding and and please
as the sponsor of the the
amendment you may have lots more
information as to so what it
does when taking out that
section does that only allow an
ancillary product such as
insurance or does it allow
Originations in other kinds of
things I mean as we took out a
whole section there that talks
about those if it is only allows
for insurance as an ancillary
products I think we would see
that as.
I would are mildly friendly
it also allows other kinds of
these and other ancillary
products and things of that sort
then we really want to see what
it what those do if it's
something that is a requirement
of the loan like an origination
fee to take out the loan
affectively does change the
thirty six percent it is just an
extra product that somebody can
buy to protect their loans such
as insurance.
That's that's in a whole
different park and so can you
clarify that for me and assured
me that it doesn't include
anything that is required as
part of getting a loan fund that
you myself where thank you thank
you Sir soul so let's look on
page six.
Let's look on page six and would
essentially be deleting line
seven through twenty four.
So let's read let's read what
we're deleting it talks about
the annual percentage rate shall
in this is the current bill
shall include.
The finance charges.
as defined by federal law.
And that's our our you know
defined in twelve CFR part one
zero two six comma known as
regulation Z. so that's the same
that's the same so this will
include finance charges as
defined in federal law loan as
regulations Z. and that stops.
So what we're what we're taking
now is Chargers for any
ancillary product or service
sold.
Product or service sold or any
fee charged in connection or
concurrent with the extension of
credit comma any credit
insurance premium or fee and any
charge for single premium credit
insurance or any other related
to insurance.
So to answer your question I
believe we're only taking out
insurance we don't have any
but we can review it I mean we
got a lifetime without a life
time between now and next
between now and Saturday at noon
and if it does not do what you
want I.
What what I wanted to do I I
because I think the fees on the
costs should be included in the
thirty six but not these it did
these actual products that the
store has to pay for and we
could up.
But I'm confident that it does
that if it doesn't do that then
I can let.
Let my colleagues know to to
correct the language of.
Of the amendment
and then
we can review it and Mr chair
you know as I look at it because
I think it strikes all language
from seven clear down to twenty
four and so the insurance ends
at around thirteen I think but
yet again Senator Duhigg is a
much more familiar with these
kinds of things but I it's the
possibility of what's in two
three and and paragraph four of
some of which to me looks like
financial gobbledygook
attention a psychologist I can
probably tell you what this bill
is feeling emotionally because
of my psychology training that
some of the financial dealings
are are we will be on the so
that's a joke.
Psychologist knowing the
feelings of the bill.
But Senator Duhigg are you able
to decode what two three four
does is it only the insurance
that would be allowed as an
ancillary costs.
Mr chair Senator I think it
would be any ancillary products.
Would be allowed to your is is
ancillary product development
the actor no.
Mr chair.
I can try looking up really
quickly or if one of our experts
has the act believe came out my
you think it's consistent with
federal law but do you have an
opinion miss Myers.
Yeah ancillary products are
typically credit insurance and
the credit disability those
kinds of products there is to
reflect an industry term
accepted term in the industry
the problem is that what is I
understand what just happened in
the committee and please correct
me Mr chair if I'm wrong that
you just change the interest
rate cap to one twenty five so
what your amendment would do
would be also have an additional
cost on top of the one twenty
five for ancillary ancillary
products which sometimes can
triple the rate of the loan so
you really in essence for any
lender and not all lenders chart
of sell these products
admittedly but for any lender
who does you're talking about
getting right back up there till
one seventy five two hundred or
whatever depending on the cost
of the product so the
combination of the two
amendments needs to be
considered the other thing is
that ancillary products are paid
by the borrower.
The benefit is to the lender and
the borrower the there are many
many exclusions that the
borrower is often not aware of
so for example a pre existing
condition so if someone dies and
it's a pre existing condition
that's a basis to deny it of
these other things that are
allow for those those exclusions
so the benefit is rated by the
national insurance association
very low no thank you so much of
our your expertise on this data
and that'll be up a policy
decision by the committee but
might my position still stands
and I believe it's consistent
with this committee is we can't.
You can't roll product into this
thirty six percent the thirty
six percent is eight interest on
the loan.
And so we got whether thirty six
or one twenty five that that my
position still stands.
And and I I proffer to the to
the advocates are there any
other things we could do with
this act to make it better but
the fixation is on this thirty
six percent.
On I appreciate that we could
all of these insurance deals
because they never come to
fruition we you know we could
cap fees we do a lot of stuff
but the fixation was on the
three six percent I respect that
but but I move up.
Of most I move then at seven oh
seven is there a second.
When.
Mr Chairman is a second by
Representative Baldonado is
there discussion on the
amendment.
Discussion by the committee on
the amendment.
Discussion by the committee what
we go and call the roll on the
amendment.
Yes.
Dow.
Representative will
Representative Dow is a yes
thank you.
The yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
No.
Representative Culbert yes.
Well.
No.
Madam chair you know.
And chairman Maestas.
Well yes on that amendment so
that amendment has been adopted.
and then did you text me and
I'll list include bus.
The statistics so she she does
things to make a motion folks
commute of the staff page.
Which is incredibly
comprehensive
In the two thousand nineteen act
the statistics page only goes up
to that thirty six it doesn't
contemplate a one twenty five so
that's just that's just a
technical error in the bill as
as good as it exists right now
and there's a whole a whole
maybe a whole host of things but
members of the committee on the
amended bill.
The passes amended.
All righty there's a motion for
a do pass as amended is there a
second.
I'm sorry go ahead okay great
let's hold that motion let's
hold a motion of because the the
other sponsors are are you know
they're not sitting next to each
other so let them communicate in
the meantime Representative set
out the.
Mr chair I'm Lou motion to
temporarily to table I guess of
a question.
What's your question.
What I wanted to to really table
it because I could go to the
majority on the first amendment
and I wanted to make a motion to
reconsider amendment to to both
for ninety nine point one.
And I don't know that supersedes
the amendment on the table.
Okay forgive me I missed that
say that again I wanted to see
it because I go to the majority
on the motion on the motion for
the amendment for two two O.
four nine nine point one I
wanted to make a motion to
reconsider.
But it works with the motion
that's on the table already.
I got you okay great table.
Okay great they're still the let
me answer that out those
question and then all all
recognize a Representative heart
of but right now all there was a
motion for a do pass as amended
by Representative Martinez we
were withholding a second but
I'm sure there is a second and
then you ask the question if you
can essentially make a motion to
undo that wanted most that one
motion that was passed you can.
And then a reservoir did a
tabling motion but didn't have
the floor as a representative
set up to have the floor and
then there's a there's option is
option B. which is regardless of
what we do today we come back
tomorrow and and and do a final
vote however there is a motion
on the table of by
Representative Fajardo there's
been a second as a non debatable
motion is there any error
Representative said authority of
anymore debate on the bill.
Okay great that up that's a up.
That's a good procedure motion
there is no debate please call
the roll on the tabling motions.
to table yes to table.
Representative Dow to table.
Half.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
No to table.
Representative Johnson.
In this bill.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes.
Representative Roybal no to
table.
Representative Dow.
No to table.
Mr figured all.
No to table.
Yes no to table so that the
motion is been
Was not successful we will not
go back on the bill before we do
that for go back to committee
of.
Tomorrow
is another crazy day
We can out etcetera so that we
got a chance to communicate with
your with your Sanchez we can
take action today I think it's
important we do but if we want
to just kind of sleep on and
take action we can do a five
minute hearing tomorrow and
probably take that very same
action but it's it's up to you I
know this is a a lot to digest.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for asking
I I think the.
I think what we like to do is
just to move forward today if
that works with your schedule at
this point.
It sure does and that's the so
give us a minute give us a
minute of.
We have by like twenty Texan or
phone give us a second I will go
back to the committee.
We're just deciding whether ask
more questions are not because
there's tons of questions we
could ask on this bill so I I I
members of the committee when we
take a twenty second breather
and and then we'll go back to
the committee.
All righty thank you for this
for doing our best in this
virtual world and the patience
of the Sanchez we now go back to
committee.
Representative Serrato.
Mr chair just yes.
I'm sorry Representative Fajardo
for a point of oil personal.
If you could just explain where
we're at right now the a lot of
motions and so that I can
understand.
Thank you so much so so we're up
and just for the folks at home
thank you Representative Fajardo
great suggestions so obviously
what we have before us is Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill sixty six.
We had a motion by
Representative Fajardo seconded
of or for I'm sorry a motion by
Representative Baldonado
seconded by Representative
Powdrell Culbert to adopt the
motion that you put forward two
two zero four nine nine and the
motion was adopted then we had a
second motion which was motion
by me I believe seconded by
Representative Baldonado two two
zero seven oh seven and that was
also adopted so what we have
before us is Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill sixty six as twice amended
in this committee as you recall
the first amendment was what
about those people that can't
get a loan to that would agree
to order they go do what they
gotta do
red light district or whatever
and then they get a hundred
twenty five percent and the
those concerns with regards to
what that would entail and then
taking out these ancillary drugs
from the thirty six percent
that's where we stand now.
We'll go back to committee.
Go back to committee
representative of Brevard of
anything else.
Mr chairman I just need to be
get caught.
No it's still it's a we're
missing a great line so there's
somewhere somewhere in the world
somebody's having a great lunch
Representative set out the.
Thank you Mr chairman I think at
this time because the majority
of I make a motion to reconsider
amendment two two zero four nine
nine one.
I believe that's yes that's one.
Thank you Representative so what
we're gonna do is we're not
gonna reconsider it because it
it wasn't table that was passed
so it's currently in the bill.
but you but I what I'm hearing
from you is a motion to
essentially undo.
Four nine nine point one is that
correct yes okay so we'll get
with of the bill drafters and
let's council as to how that
would look if it were to pass
but I believe that that is an
acceptable motion because
everyone can understand that is
there anyone who doesn't
understand it.
I don't Mr chairman so could you
repeat what she's doing.
Thank you reserve but residents
at the could you repeat what
your motion is because it's it's
it's before us but it's not
before us and I mean right to
the motion is to on to
essentially.
Two two O. four nine nine point
one I thought because I voted in
favor of it and originally that
I was able to do that as well
but I I do for you chair what
anyone could anyone.
Anyone could make a motion to
amend adopter substitute the
bill before us so here's the way
it's gonna happen procedurally
there is a motion by
Representative that out though
to strike House commerce and
economic development committee
amendment two two zero four nine
nine.
From Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill sixty
six.
Do I have a second to.
I'm sorry Mr Chairman point of
order he's.
Already had all the discussion
and moved.
By the bill can she go back and
and change your vote I mean
that's not allowed is it.
Representative apply
misunderstanding it I understand
no absolutely absolutely yes
let's all take a step back.
She cannot change your vote
because the the a motion that
was adopted is now in the bill
however this bill before
assessed by amended can also be
amended by this committee so her
amendment is essentially a third
amendment which would strike
amendment number one so it is a
A proper motion this is our
understand all the rules but I
think that's very improper.
I understand I understand.
There is a motion on the table
to strike a member number one is
there a second second that
motion seconded by
Representative Martinez Mr
speaker I move to Mr chairman I
move to table all right so
there's a table in motion on the
motion to adopt amendment number
three it is a non.
Please call the roll on the
motion to table Representative
set out those amendment number
three.
Well yes to table.
Representative Dow.
Yes to table.
Well.
Yes the table.
Most.
No to table.
Representative Johnson.
No to table.
This.
I was muted I said no.
You have.
Culbert yes.
Representative bill to table
madam chair to get all.
No to table and Estes.
noted table we're back on the
original motion of state no
debate please call the roll on
the motion to adopt amendment
number three which would strike
amendment number one.
Chairman please.
Absolutely taken to thank you
okay.
So now I've got.
This motion thank you thank you
sorry I'm
that coffee kicked in for me
says I for talking so fast so we
have I will will I'll explain
the committee report if this
motion is adopted and how it
would work but we have a motion
from Representative set up
though.
We have a second by
Representative Martinez it does
not have a two oh two number I
don't know why it's called till
two I just snapped its.
It's two twenty on all the
things and and now we're on that
motion to adopt.
A member number three which is
not written but we all know what
it does.
Thank.
Any anything else miss all of it
is on the.
The.
You chairman I now.
No.
Representative Dow.
Representative will.
No.
Yes.
Representative Thomson yes
Representative Martinez yes
Culbert no.
Representative well yes.
All.
No.
You get all yes and this.
Yes I support the motion so that
motion has been adopted
members of the committee.
Mr Chairman who passed.
Mr chairman I second there's a
motion for a do pass as amended
by Representative Martinez.
There is a motion to table yeah
there is a second by
Representative Wonda Johnson
there is a substitute motion to
table which takes precedent.
Seeing no debate the gentle lady
to call the roll on the
substitute motion to table.
The bill.
Yes.
For the motion to table yes to
table.
Representative Dow yes.
Representative will yes.
Representative.
No.
Representative Johnson.
Now.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Martinez all
passed for now I'm sorry
Representative Culbert yes to
table Representative.
The.
No to table.
Representative Martinez.
No to table.
Get off.
No to table and Estes.
No so the tabling motion fails.
We are back on the bill.
Seeing no further debate there
is a motion for a do pass as
amended by Representative
Martinez it has been really
seconded by Representative
Johnson.
Please call the roll.
Well.
No.
Representative Dow.
No.
Representative will now.
Representative.
Yes.
Johnson.
Yes.
Martinez.
Yes.
Work no.
Representative capital yes.
Madam chair I get off.
Yes.
In my instance.
Yes so Senator souls
Representative Lara
Representative Armstrong Senator
do it you have a due pass as
amended for those keeping score
at home.
The committee report is gonna
reflect six for both.
And it's going to reflect what
what would what was referred to
informally as amendment number
two.
And that is the committee report
that will move forward.
Everyone everyone of everyone of
their grandma's welcome to read
it.
Question and question the
committee report but it will be
sound and it will be legal and
it will be easy to understand we
want to thank the advocates with
I thank all the folks who
testified today and thank you
for a great afternoon.
with that we are adjourned thank
you Mr chair I appreciate it
that was not quite a discussion
thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee.
