Representative Dow.
Representative Fajardo will.
Representative US air.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Martinez.
Here.
Representative Colbert.
Representative bill your.
The level.
Representative dial.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Madam vice chair Figueroa.
I am here.
In chairman my Estes here thank
you so we have a quorum
hopefully of our budget in the
in the minority will be here
soon before we take any action.
joining us here on the rostrum
as Representative Ferrary
welcome she's here on the next
bill.
yes thank you Mr chair
absolutely just sit back behind
us and I sitting in the.
The virtual desk in front of us
is a Matthew McQueen this is the
Senate bill two is was
introduced by senator Liz to
phonics Senator Jacob R.
Candelaria Senator of Brenda
McKenna and house member Matthew
McQueen so.
Representative welcome welcome
to commerce and go out and take
it away.
Thank you Mr happy to be here I
think it's my first time in
commerce I do have an expert was
with me Andrew but I have
purchased the name by a host
fantastic if you could let.
Raise your hand Mr by our so we
can provide you easy.
And we'll let you into the
virtual committee room welcome.
In he's here to help you with
the complexity as you all of our
existing liquor license
reaching.
Mr Mr chair reading let's I
think Xander with yes okay great
Mr messes with us in the room
You have the floor thank you
Representative McQueen thank you
Mr Senthil to.
simply just waves the fees for a
liquor license for all of our
different liquor licenses for
one year.
and what this is what we're
trying to do is we know a lot of
the companies of all these
licenses are having a hard time
if they're not open
and so as sorry but the gesture
of good will that yeah we know
you're out there we know you're
struggling we care about you
your important to our economy
would like to waive those fees
for one year.
The bill has been on the journey
it was amended in Senate finance
to make it clear it is not
simply the twenty twenty one
calendar year as soon as this
bill takes effect it will be the
next time each license holder
pays the bills give me a second.
And then the bill as amended
again on the Senate floor.
And any they start the Senate
finance committee amendment that
included that same principle but
then added the language that
in order to be eligible you have
to show a fifty per cent.
Action in the business gross
receipts.
Mr chair members of the
committee.
This bill us left the Senate's I
am a co sponsor this bill.
We I invite you to reconsider
that serve for.
My concern and maybe Mr plate
House can shed light on this is
it.
It's a paperwork burden that we
don't really want to click on
some of our liquor license
holders.
the the bill also I I would know
the bill applies to all liquor
license holders I I personally
think the the holders who are
really struggling or that the
bars and restaurants includes
the package sales
I'd be curious to know what
their gross receipts are it
might be up as people buy
alcohol and go home and socially
distance into alcohol at home
don't know about that but the
bill does apply to all the
liquor license holders in keep
in mind this is the annual fee
not the you know value of the
liquor license or not we're not
talking about thousands or
hundreds of thousands of dollars
is I think the highest be on the
list is three thousand dollars a
year.
With that Mr Chairman happy
answer any questions I don't
know if Mr bios just add
anything.
Your muted Mr welcome director.
Thank you Mr chair I'm here to
answer any questions you might
have about the bill in order to
stand for any questions you know
you are the committee my app
thank you fantastic they are.
We are thinking of your
questions Representative
thirteen attendees.
Hopefully folks are realizing
we're meeting now but we want to
see a.
For those folks who wish to
speak.
In favor of the bill would raise
your hand in the zoom.
We have three thus far four so
those who wish to speak in favor
of the bill what always start
with miss Allison Smith followed
by Carla son Ted so you guys.
Know the routine will up let you
into the virtual zoom and then
you on mute yourself miss Smith
welcome.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Allison Smith on the
registered lobbyist for The New
Mexico restaurant association
during this pandemic as our
restaurants were directed to
close their dining rooms many
have not been able to utilize
their liquor licenses weeding
these fees for twenty twenty one
will help our restaurants were
struggling to stay open and to
keep employing their team
members we feel this is part of
the solution for our local
restaurants to keep serving up
the favor of New Mexico we want
we appreciate Senator Stefanics
and have an idea and
Representative not cleaned for
bringing this bill forward the
field is common sense of tool
that we can put in our tool box
and local to local restaurants
across the state stand in
support of this bill thank you
for your time.
Thank you miss Carla Suntech
followed by JD Bullington.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm car less
contact president of the New
Mexico business coalition we
support this bill and think that
it will provide some relief to
business owners who hold a
liquor license this is one group
of entrepreneurs hardest hit by
the lockdown well it won't make
up for the significant losses
they've endured over the past
year it is a nice gesture on the
part of the New Mexico
legislature to support them in
this way.
We would also encourage the
legislature to look at other
businesses that have been hard
hit as well.
And to give them some relief
specifically I would ask that
you consider signing the
unemployment insurance fund so
that our people that are still
out of work have a source of
revenue and that businesses are
forced to cut back on those
positions with incredibly
increased rates if we don't do
that thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you Mr Jaitley Mister JD
Bullington followed by Jason
Espinoza.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee JD Bullington
speaking on behalf of the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce waiting liquor license
fees for businesses in our state
who continue to struggle during
this pandemic is a smart move.
Important short short term costs
that will help liquor serving
businesses recover a little
easier as the economy is open
back up we appreciate this
legislation and other pandemic
relief bills designed to help
New Mexico businesses remain
afloat and on the road to
recovery over the next few
months thank you.
Thank you Sir Jason Espinoza
welcome.
I am chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director with the national
federation of independent
business and we stand in terms
of legislation I'm just for the
reason reasons previously stated
thank you.
Thank you anyone else was to
address the committee in favor
anyone else wish to address the
committee in opposition we have
fourteen attendees.
anyone else.
Anyone in opposition so no one
in opposition
Let's go to members of the
committee.
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative McQueen I have my
question is clarification about
the Senate amendments and your
response to it you Mr chair
representative indicated that
you would just as soon the
Senate floor amendment wasn't
there but in the next breath you
sent you wonder and it is
certainly licenses we're
actually doing fine so Mr chair
representative please clear by.
Mr chair Senator a that preceded
that
I got in on this bill a little
bit late I think it's a great
thing to do I just especially
appreciate it for our businesses
that have been closed
so you do have to questions let
me separate this out so first
the amendment.
The Senate floor is limited the
the application this to
businesses that lost fifty
percent of their gross receipts
and I think this is based on a
concern about
you know big box retailers your
words are giving them a benefit
that they don't really need yeah
and I get that
to me that concern and I'll to
segue into your other question
you know maybe the directors
more information about this but
you know I would think a.
I would think a package liquor
stores are doing okay because
they have been allowed to
operate.
in people are drinking home
because they're eating at home
they're staying at home which
which we encourage so I'm very
concerned about restaurants in
bars around the state the the
package stores I don't you know
so I just R. surest some of the
concern about.
That was shown in introducing
affirmative but the paperwork
involved.
The serial numbers you know some
of these some of these fees or
you know hundred dollars or two
hundred fifty dollars they're
not that much and by the time
you get someone to prepare this
paperwork and submitting go
through the process you know I
I'm not sure necessarily helping
those people
I'm not sure if they're gonna
follow paper so I'm hello yes.
Mr chair I'd love that's the
director if you knows about how
much paper how hard that would
be that all the paperwork and
how our package liquor stores
are doing.
Mr chair I may.
Mr chair us Representative
McQueen no you actually have to
mail right on the head I mean
not not the pandemic didn't hit
everybody the same way you know
as the public health orders to
come out
there there were different
openings and closings for
different things of course
indoor dining took the biggest
hit in the hospitality world
where as package stores did do
pretty good and by all accounts
did better business you know
during the pandemic as everyone
will stand at home and so so yes
there were there were
differences I mean the ones that
probably got hit the hardest
yeah if you bear with me just
for a little bit so we have
three kind of main district just
dispenser type licenses one is a
retailer that just sells package
second is a full dispenser that
can either sell package or on
premise in the vast majority of
those ones are for package as
well now the inner local
dispensers are.
On premise only and they lost
their package and so those ones
were the ones that got hit the
hardest most bars and
restaurants that that need full
service alcohol have what we
call an inter local so the inner
local licenses definitely got
hit but again if you're trying
to capture everybody who got
affected
you may want to have some
language in there that sort of
makes an exception for those
perhaps full dispenser licenses
that did use it as a restaurant
yeah a in conjunction with the
restaurant.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair it seems like
then if we want to target this
more specifically to where it's
most needed.
Our options are to stick with
the Senate amendment and base it
on the.
Paperwork
shows the lost or we limit by
license type and then we might
get most of the people who've
been hit hard we don't want to
do the burden of paperwork I
understand that Mr chair and
representative but we do want to
be targeted.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative
Martinez.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative McQueen thank you
for this bill I'm looking at the
FIR there so Representative we.
Looks like a two million dollar
maybe hit to the agency itself
how Mr Chairman representative
how does this affect the actual
agency not to have not to be
able to count with that money
that otherwise it would.
Mr chair representative Martinez
I'm gonna the the for the
question to director.
Thank you Mr chair and thank
you.
If I have your Martinez
good question we will
and R. O. D. especially boards
and commissions they have non
reverting funds for a lot of the
boards for alcohol there's a
separate division all of our
money is general fund in so the
money that we raise two
collection of fees and
imposition of administrative
discipline all goes to the
general fund in all told we
average on on a typical year
between between three and a half
million and five million dollars
we give to the general fund and
our agency budget just broke one
point one million dollars for
the first time ever so you know
we're we're pretty efficient
over there but we use general
fund appropriations.
Got it Mr and and mistrials so.
We're going
the we don't two million dollars
in fees.
that's something that the
general fund will feel next
fiscal year.
Don't have to million less if
you will in their pop.
Mr Chairman representative
Martinez we'll go with the bill
has an emergency clause on it so
I meet with Representative
expected immediately and I think
all the fiscal impact is spread
over two years even though
but we're just waiting the next
sequential the four however they
can't come up.
Got it got it thank you Mr chair
representative and thank you
director bicycles you know I I
think this is a very common
sense bill I'm glad you all are
doing it I'm glad that this has
already gone to the Senate and
that you can get up to the
governor sent as possible
you know well the last couple
days there's there's been some
committee in fact I have to go
on television and respond to
some of the committee from one
of the chambers of commerce
accusing the legislature of
business on friendly practices
and whatnot including working
people again small business and
and you know this is the another
clear example that that couldn't
be further from reality
legislature's been working
overtime to ensure that not only
working people get the tools
that they need to get through
this pandemic but also our small
business so I I really
appreciate your effort I
appreciate this bill it's
practical are these businesses
will feel it right away and I'll
be happy to support this when
the time and so when the time is
right Mr.
Thank you Representative and I'm
not going to take your hands
down when you're done of.
There's no other members of the
committee but just a couple
questions.
So the crux of the bill
Representative McQueen is on on
a page three you know line seven
through nine and then the Senate
finance committee actually came
up with some great language.
Shall waive the next annual
renewal fee that that language
is better is be easier to manage
Chairman the queen directed by
our.
Mr chair I I believe so so I did
and I don't know if.
Like I I don't know if all the
fees are due at the same time or
if it's rolling throughout the
year but this this language with
the lease prevent the need for
RLD to send checks back to.
liquor license holders.
Yes Mr Mr chair this is a into
my house in the Representative
McQueen was actually right so
how was drafted up at the early
stages was that was with the
calendar year of twenty twenty
one but we are in the alcohol
world of all of our licenses are
staggered throughout the years
and for different quarters and
so different licenses up hit and
renew it different times and so
with the emergency clause and
talking to Matt Marton Jordy
later we're just in senators to
phonics we thought it was a more
elegant approach this to
basically say that with the you
know whatever the effective date
is if emergency clause you know
happens but let's say that
somebody had already renewed
they would just get a credit for
the next renewal period so that
everyone was insured at least
one renewal credit and so if you
haven't renewed you could use it
this year but if you already had
renewed you can use it for the
next year.
And so and it and it kind of
tied into the emergency clause
issue.
No fantastic thank you
Representative McQueen director
by the no that's great language
proud of our friends and Senate
finance coming up with that
because if if we get this on the
governor's desk and she's she
signs that say February twenty
eight that all the March
licenses are are waived correct.
Assuming we have emergency
clause.
Yes that is correct and and and
I just would reiterate you know
it was to decrease the burden
the administrative burden of
trying to refund licenses that
are just been renewed and again
it goes back to the idea that
some some dispensing licenses
didn't have a problem coming up
with a check right you know they
renewed on I'm and so in in so
it would just give a credit for
next time but but yeah I was to
decrease the ability to do a
refund to get a refund from the
state takes about four different
levels of approval it's not just
automatically has to go through
you know we have to do the
paperwork we have to sign I have
to sign off on it our financial
is the director has to sign off
on it and then DFA has to sign
off on it and so just to cut
down on all that that red tape
we just thought it would be
better more efficient use of
state government time to give a
credit going forward you know
thank you and also the the bill
up says the director shall so
that language will avoid that.
Level of bureaucracy.
Yes vote yes thank you and then
so anyway here's my cares my
crocs I.
This the the the floor amendment
that the Senate did kind of puts
more work on your office
A direct routes it also puts
work on taxed reps desk.
And I see the point I see the
point but.
You know I think just to send a
good message to all of.
You know like the the the the
the walmarts in Alberta they
weren't close that also you're
right the price increase their
revenues
some of the moment public stores
were closed for a while but they
may have rebounded so instead of
getting and all that I'm
inclined to.
To go back to that Senate
finance amendment and then
hopefully the Senate concurs
however I did not prepare a an
amendment written so I'm not
sure if the bills after will
strike the floor amendment and
do a brand new one or how we
would Amanda twice amended
paragraph but of.
But I move that we just see if
I'm just trying to get the
temperature of the room.
At because if if we have support
my just just pass it out now but
would that be a friendly
Representative McQueen what was
that we are asking us to do.
Because we could do it first
thing on Wednesday and.
Chairman my just I think you're
headed down a friendly path I I
don't know exactly which path
you're choosing.
you know I I think if we you
know if we we think like the big
retailers who sell a lot of
stuff are doing okay because
they're still selling liquor
it's probably easier just a card
them out by category of license
rather than this fifty percent
yes which was applied to
everyone.
That being said you know we've
got.
The twenty different types of
licenses so for example the
dispenser license my
understanding is that the
sponsor license allows you to
Sir you make strings impacted
sales.
That doesn't mean that everyone
with the dispenser license is
selling package sales.
So I mean we just we could come
up with a list of the licenses
that we want to include a list
of licenses that we don't want
to include and then you know no
one has to file that people work
with
R. L. D. O. R. TRD it and that
that is I think it reduces the
paper close of the state as he
noted I think you also return
reduces the burden on the
businesses it does of course
part out some of the businesses
businesses but we think this
businesses are.
I haven't been has directly
impacted as as those as our
restaurants and in bars and
things like that.
Thank you and rest of the queen
the.
Because I'm inclined to just
wave a mall you know we just
wave a mall but but I'm.
I'm not really stuck on that if
folks want to exclude particular
licenses I think waving a mall
just sends a good message but my
concern is just the extra work
the whole point is just to waive
it.
So
how burdensome would it be
Representative are directive as
if folks had to prove to you
that they.
Had a bad year you know.
It would be beneficial if you
didn't have to go through that.
Mr Chairman these two answers
really I I don't think the
administrative burden would be
that that tough I mean I I think
what we would do is you know get
the word out through email to
all the affected licensees to
apply and we just making a
simple you know to apply in to
give us that information the
other another approach might be
you know in this discussion is
limited to in our local licenses
giving up but also making
exception for up for other
licenses that have been affected
with the downturn of at least
fifty percent from their
previous year that would exclude
all the distributors fees.
Wholesaler fees you know those
guys were really affected by the
pandemic as much some no but but
not really overall those kind of
more than made up for the on
premise losses so if you wanted
yes just just food for thought
that you know limited to you
know locals find of the rest of
them of the ability to just to
prove to the agency that they
had a fifty percent loss in
revenue and I think that that
kind of cuts down on the
administrative paperwork so that
you know locals get it
automatically.
Other people have the
opportunity if they can show
less than fifty percent.
All right well I guess we'll
just try it will just try it so
I I that's just fun of the will
of the committee I am.
I move that we that this
committee strike the Senate
floor amendment and adopt the
language.
Of the Senate finance committee
amendment which just which gets
that good language that we all
agree on does away with this
This up fifty percent or more.
Requirement so all I'll just put
that on the table.
Mr chairman I would accept that
is friendly amendment all right
it's a from the amendment but I
think it's so friendly there's
not a second.
I'll second.
Okay great to have a motion and
a second any discussion.
Of.
delivery please call the roll.
An amendment to a to a number
no thank you we're gonna.
We'll probably take this vote
again on Wednesday if it passes
I just we're not in the same
room and so I just want to get
an idea of which way we want to
go.
So just call the roll and now.
And then we can make reference
to it later we can have the book
we can revote on Wednesday if it
passes.
Yes
despite that I'm taking is to
accept to amend SB two with
that you are calling on.
Four we're here will do the
paperwork you and I will do the
paperwork a few and we'll figure
that out but if you just call
the roll okay thank you.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Dow yes.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative was yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Representative well Culbert.
Bill yes.
Hello.
Yes.
The agency.
Yes.
Voting yes but over again yes.
Thank you Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Good and yourself Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
She may have stepped away okay.
Madam chair
yes.
Maestas.
yes so whether know knows well
that stuff so
so I think that's the the the
will of the committee.
What I can do is what you and I
Representative look we we can
get it rafted and then we can do
a quick five minute hearing on
on Wednesday but is that
preferable to you.
Chairman my S. is fine with me
all right is there any other
discussion on Senate bill two
members of the committee.
All right you'll be first up on
Wednesday.
Thank you chairman viruses thank
you very much the committee.
We are now joined by
Representative Roybal Caballero
and Representative Ferrary thank
you for your patience this
afternoon
in the.
The committees.
What the experts are.
Thank you.
So thank you Mr chair and so if
you could I have
Dr Michael o'donnell.
Raise your hand Mr o'donnell
thank you.
Anyone else I have Pamela
Herndon.
Just heard and welcome.
And then of course the co
sponsor Representative Ferrary
she's on with me already.
Representative whenever you're
whenever you're ready to tell me
all right we'll.
Hello.
Name is an attendee so we will
that we're looking at.
I'm.
One second.
The doctoral.
I'm letting her know
We may have come on a little
sooner than her should
anticipate that okay you were
taxed.
What it's going to go.
You know what I'm Mr chair
you're sounding really muffled
and I'm having trouble
understanding you.
Okay is that Representative all
right well we'll look for
retained in we should be here in
a minute.
when we go out and start the
hearing and then go to public
comment there's fifteen persons
in the attendee room.
Representative you know we have
the fourth welcome thank you
thank you see you Mr chair and
members of the committee again
this is I I should probably come
back to your committee now.
I would love to anyway thank you
Mr chair I am here to introduce
house bill one ten which is an
act relating to labour
increasing the minimum wage for
all employees in phases.
And I
I want to make a few opening
remarks and then how will
proceed Mr chair and members of
the committee is
The co sponsor and the expert
witness says whoever happens to
be I'm I've Hamel is on we'll
all recognize the expert
witnesses to say a few words and
then Representative on Friday
will close the opening part two
and then we'll go on so thank
you Mr chair what this bill does
is it picks up where.
Relation leaves on we have we
passed the minimum wage bill in
twenty nineteen in the current
legislation.
No raises the minimum wage to
twelve dollars an hour and what
this bill does is it picks up at
twelve dollars in kicks in to
fifteen dollars in twenty twenty
five and it raises the minimum
wage to fifteen dollars an hour
at that point and it is the
second thing it does is it
indexed to increase based on
cost of living after that and I
think that.
Here are the most important
Element is that we don't need to
continue to be living in poverty
and working two and three jobs
so raising the minimum wage to
fifteen dollars an hour in
twenty twenty five will help
break down the cycles of poverty
and create a huge stimulus for
our local economy we all know Mr
chair members of the committee
when low wage working families
have more money in their pockets
they can actually participate in
our local economy they spend
their wages on essential goods
and services and then the money
circulates throughout our state
your commerce so.
Mr chair members of the
committee to be perfectly clear
again this bill does not going
to affect tomorrow it begins and
twenty twenty five and that's
because we've taken into
consideration the fact that we
have we were faced this last
year with of COVID pandemic and
we recognize that it will take
time for our businesses and
employers across the state to be
able to regroup and and
and so we don't want to we want
to make sure that everyone has
that opportunity so we that's
one of the main reasons why we
set it up for twenty twenty five
but we don't want to be Mr
Chairman position in five years
or beyond where our economy is
growing that are most vulnerable
workers are getting left behind
so we wanna also Mr chair
members of the committee of four
eight leaving our hard working
families behind again if we're
faced with unexpected crisis
like we were this last time so
this will set up the structure
to help alleviate the kinds of.
Formal situations that we were
faced COVID and so Mister chair.
At this point I'd like to
Ask.
Have you seen more current
income on yet has anybody seen
her come on.
Yes yes if you could raise your
hand in the zone.
So we can provide you easy and
they let you in the room.
And then I'll.
What we let in a okay your turn
the camera as a courtesy let him
into the so you can see behind
us on the Dyess.
Yes and and I got to.
Sorry.
Introduce you Mr chair thank you
Alan Herndon will be first to
speak and she is here as the
first vice chair of the New
Mexico and double ACP and she's
also the state policy chair of
the American Association of
university women I'd like to go
ahead and have per se if you
weren't.
We don't hear you
Mr.
You might want to.
So I am I'm not the house.
Good.
You may go ahead and and make
make a brief opening statement.
Thank you.
The
way this is coming through this
coming through it may be late
response so I just want you to
know that as the as the first
vice chair of the N. double ACP
and as of the state policy chair
of the American Association of.
We stand strong support this
are and I'm.
Primarily what is most important
is the effective going to have a
family and over the past France
has two years as we have been
watching.
One such as as the COVID
nineteen pandemic at.
We have watched how people have
not been able to purchase the
food that they need for example
to pay their rent because of the
the rising costs that have
occurred during the COVID
nineteen you're at a fifteen
dollar working minimum wage
would absolutely help families
with food security and other
types of the a need so it's in
your hands right now to make
sure that we are protecting
families that we are helping
them grow and that we are
protecting the children who are
also part of and so Mister chair
members of the committee I ask
you to please support this bill
the gradual increase to fifteen
dollars an hour over a period of
time and we will be helping to
raise every single family in
every single community in the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you Mr and then and
I have
Just ask Dr Donald few wishes to
say a few words or if he prefers
to just be part of the Q. NA and
I'm not getting a response so if
he's hearing me maybe he can
various.
Yeah good evening everyone I'll
be happy to answer respond any
questions anybody has.
Thank you so now on May coast
but the co sponsor
Representative are joined
Ferrari.
Thank you Mr chair and a
committee members I am here to
support not only raising the
minimum wage like we have
started a motion but to continue
that and to also index it to CPI
but also to support the
repealing of the exceptions on
such as paying lower or sub
minimum wages for you
tip wage earners
who are.
Always it.
Found this is a kind of a racist
and sexist on minimum wage
because mostly women of color
are working in these types of
jobs in the also are subjected
to harassment and also wage
theft so that being said also
the sub minimum wage for those
with disabilities I don't know
if you know how there are
certain certifications from the
federal fourteen see where
people with disabilities are.
But judge for their work in pay
by say how many widgets they can
produce
within an hour and can be paid
like if it takes them twice as
long they would be paid half as
much an hourly rate of right I
should say so we're trying to
change that in New Mexico
especially during the pandemic
when a lot of these shelter
workshops have been closed and
and most of them are not even
seeking more certifications so
this is a timely
Position to be in right now so
with that I'd be glad to help
with any questions to.
Thank you Mr chairman that we
can go ahead and stand for
questions or whenever you're
ready after public comment thank
you and just a thank you
Representative Mr o'donnell was
heard and so when we got up what
we go to a folks in favor first.
Let's hear from folks in favor
of the bill Gordon Rascher had
within the.
On your device raise your hand
on your device other seventeen
attendees in the in the audience
so to speak.
And we have to folks in favor
when we going to let them in and
then when you're in good in on
mute yourself fairly big belly
big about I followed by the
given the
Mr.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is from
the back of our and I'm an
attorney excuse me at the New
Mexico Center on Law and Poverty
on New Mexico workers regardless
of age and occupation December
just ways to provide for
themselves and their families
one New Mexico's minimum wages
increments increased over the
past few years it is set to stop
increasing after it reaches
twelve dollars per hour on
January first twenty twenty
three according to a study by
MIT the living wage in
Albuquerque for example is
sixteen eighteen per hour for a
family of four that has two
working parents this means that
working parents in Albuquerque
with two children with speech
make at least sixteen dollars
eighteen cents per hour cover
basic expenses such as food and
medical care this page is
significantly higher than the
current minimum wage and the
minimum wage that will be
offered by twenty twenty three
in New Mexico thank creasing
this minimum wage to fifteen
dollars per hour New Mexico
significant group so which
workers chances of providing
basic needs for themselves and
if it's H. B. one one zero also
eliminated several minimum wage
exclusions and just the and
without reasoning some Senator
which workers from the minimum
wage for example many are coach
workers at directly work with
livestock dairy products or
package agricultural products
are excluded from minimum wage
these exclusions preclude
without reason hundreds of
workers a state New Mexico's
robocop by limiting these
exclusions New Mexico sure that
all workers regardless of
occupation receive because each
H. B. one one zero seven which
for secondary students and the
two minimum wage for all workers
and thirty dollars more in tips
as you all know you Mexico has
some of the highest rates of
poverty in the nation obligating
Menino which workers New Mexico
to start working while in high
school and at multiple jobs such
as to jobs that are more
flexible than other employment
opportunities by eliminating the
sub minimum wages New Mexico
ensures all workers regardless
of age occupation receive.
We stand strong supporting each
B. one one zero thank thank you.
Thank you Sir so we're not gonna
have a timer but we don't
everyone you know take a minute
have two minutes.
V. given although followed by L.
and pines ****.
Mr.
Afternoon chair members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to.
I thank you for the opportunity
to give public comment my name
is Victoria Canada I'm
representing both estimates with
center and the New Mexico
coalition of agricultural
workers and advocates aware in
strong support of each B. one
ten because all agricultural
workers including dairy
livestock Peachtree and youth
deserve New Mexico's current
minimum wage but as was stated
previously under New Mexico's
laws currently six exemptions
exclude many of them.
We often hear that the industry
needs these exclusions Boston
went to simultaneously admitting
their industries are extremely
labor intensive it should not be
the responsibility of
agricultural workers or any low
wage workers to bear the burden
of ensuring and ensuring the
business owners profits I hope
so workers are the backbone of
our food system they have one of
the most dangerous jobs in the
US and are least likely to have
reliable housing health care or
ability to afford food despite
being more likely than any other
worker to work full time food
production workers are more
likely to have a household
income below twenty percent of
the federal poverty level and
too often gets for ending
poverty and hunger fail to
include thousands of farmers and
agricultural workers of.
Sorry about that I'm using the
reason that food prices would
increase if agricultural workers
are paid fairly fails to
recognize agricultural workers
are people too who also need to
eat and who also have families
finally the pandemic is a reason
that this has to happen now not
a reason for further delay it is
me the current equities of the
food system worse at every
cultural workers are some of our
most essential workers so it's
time to pay them at least a
minimum wage to support working
families in New Mexico and to
decrease hunger and poverty in
the state we urge you to please
passed H. B. one ten.
Thank you miss Ellen pines
follow followed by Jim Jackson.
Thank you Mr chairman Ellen
pines and I'm speaking today on
behalf of two organizations the
disability coalition and the New
Mexico caregivers coalition and
both stand in support of this
bill we believe that these
exclusions are wrong and should
be eliminated we support
providing all workers a living
wage and we particularly want to
call attention to the repeal of
the five minimum wage for
persons with disabilities with
the disability coalition stands
in strong support of so we are
to the Canadian border well
thank you.
Thank you Mr Jim Jackson
followed by John Lipschutz.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm Jim Jackson
and I'm speaking to you today is
the registered lobbyists for
disability rights New Mexico and
we are us we support this bill
and in particular
the elimination of the a couple
of the exemptions that do relate
to services to people with
disabilities and to the minimum
wage protections for persons
with disabilities for workers
with disabilities and
Representative Ferrary
specifically cited that piece of
a house bill one ten it's a
particularly important issue for
us and so we encourage the
committee to support this bill
thank you.
Thank you Sir Mr John Lipschutz
followed by J. Alex Douglas.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I
gently disputes with The New
Mexico federation of labor
AFL-CIO we do Representative I
unionized workers throughout the
state by who happen to are in
large part earned more than
minimum wage although there are
plenty that do not but
regardless this is a very
important measure to treat all
workers fairly whether they're
in a union or not and we
certainly appreciate the sponsor
for bring this up and would urge
all of your support on this
measure thank you.
Thank you Sir anyone else wish
to speak in favor there's
fifteen folks with us in the
audience all right those who
wish to speak in opposition go
out and raise your hand.
Those that wish to speak in
opposition are you going to take
up up to two minutes.
Mister JD Bullington followed by
Allison Smith.
Thank you Mr chairman this is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce of the sponsor
certainly knows how much respect
we have for her however this
legislation we believe
undervalues the impact of
raising the minimum wage on
small businesses and those
employed and small businesses.
In the midst of a once in a
generation pandemic Mexico the
ninth most dependent state in
the country on small businesses
for private sector employment in
the chamber feels this is not
the best way to put out the
welcome back Matt from state
government.
The chamber believes the full
phase in of the minimum wage
increase passed by the
legislature a couple of years
ago should be allowed to take a
fact and be evaluated before
there is a consideration of
raising it again.
The chamber's core message on
this bill is this let the
current minimum wage increase
process fully play out let's put
the pandemic business
restrictions behind us and let
small businesses fully recover
the checker respectfully request
that this bill be placed on the
table for future discussion
thank you.
Thank you Sir Mr miss Collison
tag followed by Dorham Mr
chairman this is Allison Smith
you had you asked me to a new
please do thank you very much Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Allison
Smith I'm the registered
lobbyist for The New Mexico
restaurant association today we
respectfully oppose this
legislation according to the
debt the department of workforce
solutions the leisure and
hospitality industry continue to
report the heaviest employment
losses with a drop of twenty
nine thousand one hundred jobs
or about thirty for thirty
percent compared to the previous
year our favorite sit down
restaurants are going to have a
difficult time re opening after
the pandemic this means tens of
thousands of people will remain
jobless two hundred restaurants
have closed permanently and that
means five thousand New Mexicans
will not have a job to return to
win the and pandemic is over
fifty two percent of restaurants
it's unlikely their restaurant
will still be in business six
months from now and forty three
percent of New Mexico operators
expect their staffing levels to
decline during the next three
months that is what New Mexico
restaurants are facing now add
to that an increase in the
minimum wage that also removes
the tip credit for servers and
this will place additional
pressure on an industry already
struggling to keep their doors
open and keep the employees they
have passing this legislation at
this time could be the final
straw for independent
restaurants already considering
a move out of state or
conditions are more conducive to
success if we lose more
independent restaurants we
impact our tourism economy our
small business recovery and our
ability to employ New Mexicans
respectfully we urge opposition
to this measure thank you for
your time.
Thank you this call is some tags
followed by Djarum robs.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee on car lots on
tech president of the New Mexico
business coalition.
We strongly oppose this
legislation I appreciate what
the sponsors are trying to do
I'm concerned about New Mexicans
as well but my concern is a
little bit different when you
look at what's happening in the
state right now we've had two
thousand businesses shut down.
That's a loss according to the
state of thousands of jobs that
we don't have anymore and you
put this pressure on business
owners they don't have any
choice but to less than job
opportunities.
We have a member that has not
she owns a business she has not
received a paycheck in a year
but she has paid her employees.
So I ask you to consider the
other side of this equation the
New Mexico business coalition
our policy is that blanket
mandates are unnecessary and a
growing burden on small business
owners who are trying to just
maintain right now they can't
take this much anymore and I
know some people find that hard
to believe and think that
business has bottomless pockets
of cash it's just not the case
and if we want to take care of
all New Mexicans and we need to
take care of all New Mexicans we
need to make sure that there's
jobs available for them if and
when that opportunity arises
that businesses can fully
operate again so please take
that into consideration and
oppose this legislation thank
you.
Mr a showroom rob's followed by
bill Lee.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members I'm dorm robs
the executive director for the
New Mexico Chile Association and
we respectfully oppose this
legislation.
New Mexico's agriculture and
food industries including
archery producers are not
financially stable enough for
another phase minimum wage
increase.
Our farmers are price takers
meaning that they cannot
increase the price of the goods
they sell.
Most farmers in the state are
already operating at a loss
increasing their labor will
force many in to stop growing
our food and our Jerry or worst
bankruptcy.
This will damage our food
security in our state and
increase the cost of the food
that New Mexicans by.
An increase in minimum wage will
also heard our food
manufacturers processors
distributors and value added
sector R. J. processes in the
state are already struggling to
the state's minimum wage that
we're currently in some of our
major big manufacturing
companies are already looking at
relocating to another state or
Mexico to be able to stay in
business.
this will damage the state's
economy as a whole and because
many New Mexicans their job.
With food prices remaining
artificially low and increase
the minimum wage will force our
food production to the point
where it is cheaper to buy from
another state or country
damage in our economy and
threatening our beloved Jareth
industry thank you for your time
respectfully ask you to oppose
this legislation.
Thank you Sir bill Lee followed
by Tiffany Rivera.
Thank you chairman my Estes
members of the committee Mr
chairman members of this is bill
Lee president CEO of the Gallup
we can the county chamber of
commerce in the three hundred
and fifty members we represent
we stand opposed to this
legislation last year or two
years ago we supported the
phased in minimum wage increase
and feel that it is a viable
solution and needs time to work.
In addition to that Mr Chairman
would like to point out that the
should this be passed costs for
all goods and services will
probably rise to gaining any net
gains it may produce we also
asked the committee to strongly
condemning consider the scaling
affect this has on a business's
payroll loss of jobs we've
already seen with the present
minimum wage law in effect has
been significant and now during
this pandemic a further increase
on small businesses and the
burdens this will place upon
them will be almost unbearable
in looking at the fiscal income
the fiscal impact report the FIR
points to P. I. T. and G. R. T.
possible gains but really that
just points to the beneficiaries
being the state taxes and even
then that increase may not cover
the expenses of that the state
will encourage well for these
reasons we stand opposed to the
bill thank you for your time
members of the committee Mr
chairman.
Thank you Sir to be Rivera
followed by Jason Espinoza.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Tiffany
Rivera and I'm the registered
lobbyists for New Mexico farm
and livestock bureau thank you
for the opportunity to comment
this afternoon we stand in
respectful opposition to house
bill one tent.
Like all New Mexicans New Mexico
agricultural producers are
facing challenges as a result of
the pandemic New Mexico's
agriculture and food industry is
still adjusting to the twenty
nineteen increases in minimum
wage.
H. B. one ten removes the
exemption that the current
minimum wage law has that
provides agriculture employers
that our culture producers I
represent are price takers and
have relatively no control over
agricultural markets where
prices are dictated at the
national and global level this
is important to note because of
the cost of labor increases our
New Mexico farmers and ranchers
will have to pay more to perfect
deuce the food products which
they are not guaranteed will
receive additional money for for
most of our New Mexico
agriculture producers are
already operating at a loss or
extremely low margins and
increased costs have the
potential to force many of them
to close up shop.
New Mexico's agriculture
industry directly supports more
than twenty three thousand jobs
statewide and contributes more
than three point eight billion
dollars to the state's economy
increasing the minimum wage
beyond that beyond the increases
already in place will result in
a loss of not only farm and
ranch businesses Balasa food
manufacturers processors
distributors and those involved
in the value added sector a loss
of these businesses will reserve
in the permanent loss of jobs
for many New Mexicans I urge on
the behalf of our state's
farmers and ranchers to oppose
house bill one ten.
Mr Jason Espinoza followed by
grace Phillips.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza state
director with the national
federation of independent
business since our founding in
nineteen forty three we have
exclusively dedicated to
representing small and
independent businesses and we
remain so today and if I'd be
strongly opposes new legislation
to mandate a statewide fifteen
dollar permit fifteen dollar per
hour minimum wage based on the
overwhelmingly the feedback of
our small businesses according
to an NFA member ballot ninety
two percent of small businesses
say a fifteen dollar minimum
wage would be harmful to main
street and our job opportunities
it would hurt the small
businesses that have been
hardest hit by the pandemic and
comment related shutdowns
according to the F. I. R. in two
thousand nineteen the
Congressional Budget Office
released a report highlighting
the impact of raising the
national minimum wage to fifteen
dollars an hour in noted that
one point three million or point
eight percent fewer workers on a
given week maybe in the work
force the CBO also estimated a
two thirds chance that there
would be between zero to two
point two seven percent
reduction in the number of
employed workers due to
increasing the minimum wage
these harmful consequences would
be the result of hard choices
endorsed by minimum wage
increases to fifteen dollars an
hour well big businesses have
the profits and revenues to
cushion the blow small
businesses are less able to
absorb additional cost increases
forcing them to cut back on
expenses including labor or even
close their doors one size fits
all mandates are always bad news
for small business and a
statewide fifteen dollars
minimum wage is no exception
especially given the global
pandemic in the current economic
crisis we need to continue to
lift up our small businesses by
providing financial relief not
weigh them down with additional
burdens that was lower recovery
additionally a chairman members
the committee many of our
members are included system
living centers home care
agencies and child care centers
which rely heavily on Medicaid
reimbursements for the revenue
without addition.
increases in the Medicaid
reimbursement to cover the wage
increases as a result of this
legislation New Mexicans may
lose access to health care
choices as well child care
centers across the state we
stand in opposition thank you
chairman.
Thank you Sir miss grace
Phillips welcomed.
Thank thank you Mr chair this is
grace Phillips our general
counsel for New Mexico counties
I rose my hand to comment
specifically on about one piece
of this bill on page two lines
twelve through fourteen
at that place the bill proposes
to eliminate the executive
administrative and professional
exemptions from New may New
Mexico wage and hour law on
these are exemptions that also
existed federal law and they are
what essentially allows some
kinds of employees to be paid on
a salary basis you know you hear
about are you are you an hourly
employee are you over time it
sent well the exempt is what's
based on you know this this
language that provides for
executive administrative and
professional exemptions and
typically you know those folks
are paid at a higher rate these
are the people that are CEOs of
companies you know managers of
departments in order to qualify
for the exemption you have to
need a particular minimum salary
basis test it's a test it's a
it's a rate that goes up over
time currently it is the
compensation rate of at least
six hundred eighty four dollars
a week or a base salary of
twenty seven dollars and sixty
three cents per hour that's the
minimum that you can have to
qualify for one of these
exemptions you also have to have
job duties that match the
exemptions but many if not most
exempt employees are compensated
at much higher rates as I said
these would be any of the folks
that are paid on a salary basis
including lawyers as well as
executives and so on so removing
these exemptions would put New
Mexico in conflict with federal
law.
And it would make a really big
change and how exempt employees
are compensated and it could
could have a tremendous
financial effect on employers
who are already compensating
these exempt employees at a rate
that sort of bills and that they
may work more than forty hours a
week and thank you miss out
would entitle all of us we we
included two time and a half for
any time work over forty hours a
week I don't think this is the
population of worker that the
that the Sanchez trying to
address and I'm I'm just
speaking to recommend that the
sponsor we consider striking
that language from from I from
New Mexico law.
Thank you for bringing that out
any of the other with anybody
else was to speak in opposition
we currently have fifteen
attendees will now go to members
of the committee representative
about the agency.
It thank you Mr chair and thank
you Representative for bringing
bill forward I'm I've got a I've
got a few questions and and a
few comments first of all
Representative The New Mexico
chair what is the minimum wage
currently for an agricultural
worker.
Mr chair and Representative
Representative Ferrary do you
have that
Information that the minimum
wage here I do not have that on
you.
But I can check.
Okay thank you Mr chair and
representatives.
I I believe it's well I mean I
don't know exactly but I believe
you're gonna tell me that it's
much much more than the minimum
wage that was passed
last year for a couple of
sessions ago and where I'm going
with this madam chair Mr chair
and representative is that for
some odd reason I believe we
have.
excluded certain professions
from some of these laws
And that is concerning to me.
because.
I think that ultimately what we
end up doing is we end up
creating different classes of
workers and then when it comes
to and and I I really hope you
guys can get me that number
because I I I don't want to
speak out of turn here I don't
know if Pamela has it internet
you know what the minimum wage
for an agricultural worker might
be.
The Mr chair members of the
committee our agricultural
employees are required to pay
federal minimum wage of seven
dollars and twenty five cents an
hour.
And Mister chair and then turned
and I agree I agree cultural
workers just looking at the bill
you're striking the six at the
exception of the bill does that
mean that your culture workers
don't qualify for New Mexico's
minimum wage.
I'm currently at the moment they
do not.
So madam chair I'm sorry Mr
chair and Mr dent looking at the
bill
I believe that by twenty twenty.
To January of twenty twenty two
I believe New Mexico mandates a
ten dollar an hour more or less
minimum wage is that correct my
reading that right.
Mr chair and Representative on
page six.
what was the year that you
referenced I'm sorry what year
was the twenty twenty two.
Just trying to.
There right the at least it says
on page six point ten we took
this directly from the current
bill the current the law
beginning January first twenty
twenty one and prior to twenty
January first twenty twenty two
at least ten dollars and fifty
cents an hour.
And Mr chair and representative
Martinez the
And workers do have the right to
current state minimum wage some
of them do and others like those
excluded have no right to the
minimum wage.
Of New Mexico they would go by
as this turned instead the
federal.
And Mr chair and representative
how how switch agricultural
workers get to use of the state
minimum wage in which have to
use the federal.
I'm checking on that now thank
you.
Mr chair representative okay
thank you Mr chairman and do any
of the experts have a response.
Yeah we're.
Okay I I think that from a
policy perspective I I have a
real problem.
depreciating.
Types of workers
I think there's an argument to
be made once upon a time Mr
chair representative that.
You know young high school
student might be under training
wage of some sort I think at
some point in time that was true
I think nowadays we've got way
too many heads of households
trying to support their families
on on very very minimal wages
and and that's a real problem
and so I commend I commend your
efforts
I I I'm gonna keep listening to
the conversation because I I
want to get more into the nuts
and bolts of for example the
agricultural workers because
that's a piece that really
caught my attention and your
bill is that you're removing
that exception.
Eight exemption and I think
that's the right thing to do and
in you know.
As critical as it is for our
cultural industry to be able to
turn a profit to be able to stay
in business it is equally
important for the people who are
picking that food that we eat
that we consume for them to be
able to put that same food on
their table
I mean it's it's it's not a good
thing that we got these card car
belts I remember the fight many
years ago Mr chair incentives
and and maybe maybe it hasn't
been resolved I'm not sure but
Hey your cultural workers were
kept out of workers compensation
that's just that's just nuts my
opinion let me move on well
you'll find answers to those
questions Mr chair
representative.
I I like the way it's faced then
I'd like that you give
plenty of time I believe for
businesses to adapt to to a new
age I'm glad that we did what we
did a couple years ago because
in a way it's already face then
everybody's expecting to pay at
least twelve Bucks an hour at
some point the next couple years
and so now you're bumping that
up by a little bit more by
twenty twenty five you know
which is four years from now I
think any.
you know I I think any business
unit should be able to plan that
out far enough in advance
Let me ask you this though in
the FIR they're pretty clear
about.
you know what we call the cliff
in fact and I'm sure we'll hear
more that two listening question
but you know for the folks are
tuning in at home you know as
your wages increase you know
perhaps that puts you out of
eligibility for something like
Medicaid or or or snap or
whatever else childcare
subsidies have you all.
Have you all had those
conversations internally and and
how would we address that
particular issue.
Mr chairman and Representative I
will ask Pamela said she's.
History of of working with our
Women in and out communities of
our poor working families and
communities of color to answer
first and then I'll get.
If you would miss hundred.
So Senator members of the
committee one of the things that
we would be looking at when we
are increasing the wage to
fifteen dollars an hour we would
not be excluding people from
things like health care our our
other areas where they would be
needing assistance because as we
look at what is allowed under
the Health Care Act you are
allowed up to a hundred and
thirty eight percent of the
federal poverty level in order
to still be eligible for what we
have adopted is Medicaid
expansion and the other aspect
that we're looking at is that we
want individuals to be able to
grow and to participate and and
the in their own self well being
and growing and do we want to
say well we want to make sure
that you continuing to stay on
snap benefits at all these other
benefits because we don't want
to pay you more so that's not
where we want to go Mr chair
members of the committee what we
do want to do is to support
committee and support families
and communities to grow and to
participate in their own self of
self and well being so I'm
suggesting to you what we hear
all the time is all well people
won't be able to use these
governmental benefits but then
that saves you more money you
don't have to put the money into
the governmental benefits you
can put the money into people
increasing their own self well
being.
Mr chair and.
Good.
Okay I was gonna sentiment to
miss her and I I think that's a
fantastic point Mr Nye I agree
with you.
but I think I think the question
is still relevant right I mean
if you have if you have a a two
income household in your bumping
both to to this you know to the
fifteen or whatever
There is some trade up I mean
eventually potential and and I
agree with you I mean I think in
my opinion and this is for a
different committee meeting but
we need to reimagine the way we
do public benefits you know I'm
I'm starting to do some work
around the concept of a
universal basic income for
example as opposed to just
putting as much as we do into
these public benefits programs
that
you know.
For the last fifty years I think
have been a safety net for many
families a very much needed
safety net but one could argue
that they have in in most cases
in some cases succeeded in up
lifting people with some
exceptions right there's always
a story of me I'd right but
generally speaking we haven't
seen that transition of using
the safety net into a better
place
so no doubt about that but I
think until we re imagine that
system we still have the problem
of if you're making twelve Bucks
an hour under this under the
current law by twenty twenty two
by twenty twenty five you get
bumped three dollars.
Does that affect.
Your public benefits at that
point maybe it does maybe it
doesn't but it's something to
think about and I it seems like
you want to respond to that Mr
chair and representative thank
you so much that they've been
several on major studies in the
past few years particularly
around housing and housing
subsidies in the section eight
subsidy program and one of the
major findings and I can't
recall which year it was blue in
the last two years the national
housing coalition and through
on its networks indicated that
for family of four in New Mexico
in Albuquerque actually it would
take a seventeen dollars and
forty one cents
and now we're a little wage just
to be able to pay for a two
bedroom rental property in
Albuquerque New.
That was that coalition report
was very important at that time
and it was offered to me when I
previously introduced the
fifteen dollar now as many of
you know Mr Chairman
representative I've been
introducing the fifteen dollar
now for many years now and that
was particularly that
information was given to me
because even at seventeen
dollars and forty one cents.
Then the basic cost of a rental
for a family of four it it would
it would
It would take that amount of
money to pay for that and if
we're having family still at the
seven dollars and then it was
still at seven dollars and fifty
cents an hour minimum wage
that's when we found that we had
families working two and three
jobs both parents just to be
able to pay their expenses so
what what that told us and part
of that information my and that
data and I'm not quite sure of
involved Dr o'donnell has that
information but what that told
us was that.
We were way behind the spectrum
and that was part of the
argument for the twenty nineteen
on legislation that we still
would have families living.
Yeah I'm able to be able to meet
their basic expenses and it
would take on a big jump and
that's the reason why this
particular year might then
jumped that because it was a big
step ahead as we all know we we
took a big leap of faith and
invested in raising the minimum
wage on in incrementally that
point however twelve dollars.
Is that what
are.
Somebody.
You are a one in the the.
They're giving you full yes you
all but it's.
You are.
What also.
The room so.
Use their devices thank you.
Representative please thank you.
Okay thank you for that Mr chair
so as I was saying in twenty
nineteen it was a big leap
however it still didn't even get
this close even in we were
incrementally but we were doing
it incrementally in order to
give everyone the opportunity
businesses employers across the
board to be able to begin to put
into their business plans are
pro for most of projections what
to expect in terms of and that's
what all businesses still every
business has to calculate what
their cost projections are going
to be in order to be able to
meet their business plans and
the performance and so even then
we knew that these families at
the wages they're earning ten
dollars and fifty cents state
that's where we're at still
would have to would still be
able to qualify for section
eight for example because it's
still under the
poverty guidelines that qualify
you to be able to receive
certain subsidies so going back
to the previous question you had
that Mr answering it's still not
gonna knock you out where we're
at right now because of the
degree of poverty that the state
is them and because of the
federal guidelines and so
That's a long way to answer
your your question but it it
And I lost my train of thought
but it it addresses why it is
that we have to do what we do
and why it is important for us
to do it in such a manner that
one it delays the implementation
to twenty twenty five so it gets
businesses in line to be able to
prepare for it and at the same
time yes ma'am please and really
the the the feeling of being
able to get off the subsidies
and be independent is what we
hear across the board in our
districts all over the state
this is what people individuals
want they don't want to be
working two and three jobs a
poverty level two and three jobs
even the military right now is
struggling with that issue
because they have new and list
these that are receiving food
stamps and subsidized housing so
at the national federal level
it's a huge discussion going on
right now why would we want to
have our work force working two
and three jobs and still be a
qualifying for subsidies that's
not what these families want
their goal is to be able to earn
enough to pay their basic
this these and have be off of
food stamps be office subsidies
be self sufficient self
independent and be able to move
on and have the disposable money
to either save which is would be
their choice or to have to spend
which is their choice but they
want to have that choice thank
you Mr chairman.
Mr chairman I I agree I agree
wholeheartedly with that thing
that's one of the strengths of
your bill is your phase in I
think that's a very very smart
and very conscientious thing of
beauty of of you to a sponsors
to do get allow are a small
business committee to adjust to
this
I do think that
You know this isn't this should
never be a discussion of small
business verses working people I
I don't think that's the right
frame I think it's being correct
frame you know I for one as a
consumer and and I know plenty
of people who will consume all
the time whether its restaurants
or stores or whatever retail
small business local business
I I'm I'm always happy to pay
more knowing that the people
making my food the people
serving me the people delivering
groceries to my to my car
whatever it might be I'm always
willing to pay a little bit more
to know that folks on the other
end are are happy in their in
their you know taking care of.
And I think that there's a lot
to be said for what with the
system that we created over the
last forty years where you've
got to work two or three jobs to
make ends meet and then you've
got a host of problems attached
to that you know parents not
being able to be with home with
their children rate payers are
being able to be active in their
children's lives.
You know families that maybe are
broken up for for a number of
reasons including the impacts of
poverty in the stressors of
poverty on on on families this
is very much I think a matter of
public policy right what kind of
society do we want and I believe
that no one absolutely no one
who works you know there there
forty hours a week.
Should live in poverty and
everybody should have the same
ability like many of us have
like I do to get home at a
respectable well time to be with
my children and spend time with
my children and have whether
it's we cancer week days
whatever days people might be
off of work to spend with their
children to ensure that their
children are nurtured and loved
you know the way my kids are in
the way the golf Cancer brackets
are so I I I really want to
stress that this is not about
punishing small business to give
workers a free pass this is
simply about ensuring that
people have the money that they
need to survive and guess what
if we have the disposable income
we're gonna go spend it at that
restaurant review go spend it at
that retail shop regal spending
not that local businesses that's
that's you know I I I I I don't
think working people take their
extra two Bucks an hour and ship
it overseas to some bank
account.
And then happen.
The last thing I want to address
is what the when miss Phillips
up from associated counties
brought up Mr chairman and
representatives have you all did
you all.
No that is news to you is this
something that you need to work
on what's and and if you can
keep your response brief because
I know that there are the people
on the list and the hours in
the.
Mr Chairman representative
you're talking about the
conflict with the federal law
that miss Phillips brought up
is.
And so Mister and in I don't
know if you will be able to
address that.
So are we I want to make sure
that I'm understanding the
question correctly Mr chair
members of the committee of.
Representative a Martinez.
Are we talking about the amount
with respect to we still talk
about agricultural workers
please don't know Mr chair is
turn didn't miss Phillips
brought up an issue introduce
yourself as an example like and
and I forget the exact wording
but on the way this bill as
written but she would have to be
paid time and a half I think is
what she said and that seems to
be an issue in terms of examples
of non exempt employees for the
counties.
So the chair members of the
committee representative
Martinez one of the things that
we have to look at is how
definitions are set for and so I
I don't necessarily agree with
miss Phillips that people would
have to be would have to be paid
time and a half it would depend
upon how the definition is
interpreted and applied and if
we want to continue to interpret
it and implied the way that
we're doing right now in terms
of of who should be paid
overtime and he showed not be
paid overtime I don't think that
we're going to see that that
would be a drastic difference
that miss up Phillips is
absolutely expressing so I do
believe that there is a way of
to reinterpret the application
of the provision that she has
described in order to not create
a barrier that was never
intended by trying to make sure
that the large majority of the
community is allowed to receive
a fifteen dollar working minimum
wage.
Mr chair and and is turned in I
I appreciate that answer
you know I I think that to the
extent possible you know the the
the tighter you can get this
bill and and
you know I I I I don't I don't
think you have a with so the
association of counties I mean I
think there's a difference of
opinion definition I would love
for for the parties to get
together and and figure out some
some common language that we can
all agree with you know I don't
think they
I don't think they have sort of
a.
It didn't seem to me that it was
opposition based on like the
ideology of you know what
workers make it was more about
Hey if this passes here so it
affects local governments and I
kind of feel like that's
something that we could probably
come together and and and figure
out some common language you
know should this bill progress.
I do think that that would be
helpful I for one plan on
supporting the bill I again I I
think that it's extremely
important that we make sure that
workers who work you know forty
hours a week can can be made.
Comfortably.
It on the table can be with
their children can love their
children can enjoy life and not
have to scrape.
By simply because some of of of
these archaic.
Ways in which we look at our
neighbor so thank you Mr
chairman the opportunity I'm
sorry it took a little longer
than that plan that you know the
hours late I appreciate your
responses and I appreciate the
time chair chairman myself
losing Representative Dow we we
do have the answer about the
farm workers can you respond Mr
fully pay above era of RO I'm
sorry he's in the audience and
if we could just elevate him to
answer that thank you can you
text you or.
Or a Mr chair I can answer that
question if you want if you
could just Mr Secretary thank
you Mr if you look at the law as
currently right now I'm only
here to answer technical
questions but this is a
technical question Mr chair if
you are looking New Mexico
statutes chapter fifty article
four section fifty forty twenty
one you'll be able to go down
and starting on on section
twelve basically it breaks down
into four different spots so if
you're employed by a employer
did not have more than five
hundred says in the bill
mandates of agriculture labor so
these are these are kind of
small farmers that only do kind
of part time work if the
employee E. is the parent spouse
or child so this allows for your
sons and daughters of farm
workers to go out and work
this is where it gets to I think
the point that the
representative was trying to
make if you have an employee who
basically works on a piece rate
basis so the folks that you know
pick by that by the pound for
for cotton or by the chili
pepper that sort of thing or if
an employer employees primarily
engage in a range of production
of livestock or milk production
so those folks have an exemption
and then lastly if there and
handling driving packaging
packing processing freezing or
canning and any agricultural
horticulture community so those
of folks that you does the first
level processing that's the
answer Mr chair I hope that's
okay thank you and Mr Secretary
it's fifty eight dash four dash
work to.
You're you're muted.
Fifty fifty dash four dash
twenty one thank you.
Representative thank you Mr
secretary great to see you.
Representative Dow.
I'm thank you Mr chairman and
thank you for the bill and I
think I was along the same
process as Representative
Maestas
in thinking about oh I'm sorry
Martinez in thinking about what
is called the click the fact and
my work with low income at risk
mostly women mostly minority has
been around moving them toward
selfsufficiency and what we see
is that they are very heavily
dependent on housing.
Childcare and if they're going
to school or or
getting a degree then they need
at federal assistance with
school with them their their
college costs as well sh and so
they may be using WIA they need
using any variety of federal
programs we do not set the
eligibility guidelines for
federal programs sh and even
though it's been alluded that
they would still qualify for
housing what hasn't been talked
about is how vastly the copay
goes straight up.
So you may be the the every
dollar you earn your co pay on
your housing goes up your
utility allowance goes down your
EBT cards go down I mean there
are some people who gets thirty
dollars a month in in food
assistance and no cash
assistance but they get housing
that housing is very valuable as
Representative Roybal Caballero
spoke to I can speak
specifically to child care child
care assistance is essential for
the single women and we those
are federal guidelines we're one
of the states that does not
allow business to charge the
difference so but I can tell you
right now the even with us not
allowing businesses that charge
a difference between cost and
what the state pays that
families as they move up to
fifteen sixteen dollars an hour
they can have a three hundred
four hundred dollar month co pay
per child their dollar now raise
is a lost and they have less
disposable income.
The other part that is
interesting to me as worst us
considering is the fact that
most of small businesses in my
area they're also qualifying for
government assistance federal
assistance so they have their
gross income and they have their
taxable income and the small
businesses the mechanic down the
street the small you know
accounting office with just I'm
a mother and daughter working
the restaurant that is run and
operated by the husband and wife
those businesses after they
deduct their expenses they're
also qualifying for these
federal programs they don't have
money to kick this and so I see
this as shifting the burden from
the federal government which is
subsidizing the quality of life
to our small businesses who have
no margin or scale of operation
I can't there are no more
customers most of our
communities are seeing a decline
in population and the only thing
they can do is raise their cost
now a restaurant may be able to
raise the cost of their food.
But a small home based childcare
center can't raise their tuition
we are studying their cost in
statute and we are studying what
they're allowed to charge in
statute so what is.
Critical for this body to
consider this committee in
particular that commerce is the
fact that we have raised minimum
wage but since we raise minimum
wage.
We have not touch reimbursement
rates to child care centers and
we have not adjusted eligibility
so we're only you cannot do this
with only raising minimum wage
if you are not going to raise
eligibility to access these
programs and that means state
dollars kicking in the
difference of what the federal
government will pay.
And if we are not going to
increase the reimbursement to
people who are providing
services on our behalf are home
care health providers are child
care workers those that are
doing hospice care that are
delivering meals to indigent
seniors that are providing
services for our people who are
disabled those not only are we
not paying enough for those
vendors to cover the minimum
wage to we're gonna start seeing
lots of services in rural New
Mexico.
But we are also not considering
it those people are on fixed
incomes and the federal
government determines their
eligibility not us so and lest
we kick in the difference of
what we think should be paid
which we have not done yet.
And I will continue to introduce
the bill for parity rate for
contractors that we increase our
contracts with these folks as we
raise the minimum wage or other
employee benefits then we are
simply shifting the burden from
the federal government to
subsidize the cost of care and
quality of life to just as we're
not doing at the state they were
shifting it to the small
business and the small
businesses are struggling right
now so I think these rate
increases these minimum wage
increases in these employee
benefits have to be done and
hearing them with us subsidizing
eligibility to stop the cliff
effect which is real it is real.
You're going to see people work
part time.
So maybe I'll have more time at
home.
But then we're gonna have a
shortage of workforce even more
than we do now or you're gonna
see small businesses stop
providing services and I I mean
I I don't really have a question
I can just tell you that I think
Representative or if I follow
prove the point just how
valuable housing voucher is but
what wasn't.
Really focused on was how
quickly the copay goes up sh and
so I heard a report
in the interim I have real
economic developments two
sessions ago that someone who's
unemployed was participating in
every benefit they're eligible
for she could be seen at the
equivalent of thirty six dollars
an hour would take thirty six
dollars an hour to get the
housing that we find to get the
food assistance utility
assistance the internet the
child care and the medical
assistance that we apply that we
find is the equivalent of thirty
six dollars an hour so even if
we're reducing those benefits
and half they're still their
quality of life is different
than the size of the check that
they take home and so I just
think this body needs to be very
cut to keep that in mind as we
make these decisions.
Mr chair committee just like to
respond to that I feel
compelled.
Don't feel compelled.
One it wasn't a question posed.
So can we answer or not I know
there's not a question but if we
feel compelled to clarify
compelled to respond a lot but
normally we wouldn't do that
that was not a question posed
but yes Representative Ferrary
what's on your mind thank you I
I just like to agree that yes
there is the click a fact that
we need to be cognisant of but
this is it going into affect
until another four years after
we get to the what from now and
when we get to the
twelve dollars an hour it's
still going to be you know what
we have to compensate for but
also allowing people to get
closer to a living wage which is
over twenty one dollars right
now we should be also raising
those compensation allowances
and capabilities which I think
we will be doing especially at
the federal level that they will
be improving that
Those capabilities so this is
something that in the future
after the pandemic and when we
have the recovery and it will
give the needed
time to address those other
problems but I agree there are
certain things that we don't
want to keep people down just
because they're going to you
know maybe have a little bit
more of state so in their lives
and how they
Our our state spending their
money if they have a little bit
more of having to cop could in
honor of balance then it should
be that they have that right to
make those decisions.
Thank.
It is only like who's talking
now I am I am I am I wanted to
add to Representative Ferrary
and also agree with
Representative Dow I think
agreed with her in the past as
we sat on this committee
together that everything does
need to be aligned as we're
making these decisions we do
need to online all of our
requirements and R. eight minute
ministry of offices and that
with the change of the state
administration they're very
cognisant of a lining.
There it administrative of
criteria along with the
decisions that we're making and
I the other point I wanted to
make is that the federal
government right now as we speak
are entertaining the very same
discussions at the federal level
because we have they're
considering a COVID relief COVID
recovery and how we can increase
the minimum wage at the federal
level and at the same time have
an administrative regulatory
response that will change the
eligibility requirements in
order to just stop exactly what
Representative Dow just
described and I've supported her
Representative down the past in
terms of the bills that have
been raised concerning bringing
up the our aligning the
decisions we're making policy
wise and making them address the
eligibility of criteria across
the board for all contractors
because she's absolutely correct
in which she has described is
and so was Representative
Martinez however I agree with
what Representative Ferrary is
saying and that is that we
cannot use these as ways in
which to obstruct what we know
we have to do because by far
it's the essential in frontline
jobs that we're talking about
that needs that include
substitute teachers nursing
assistants home health aides and
most retail sector workers
grocery store workers janitors
housekeeping of the cleaning
workers across the board that
are are essential front line
delivery of services Mr chair
that are in the position of
working two and three jobs and
still living in poverty so we
cannot ignore the vast majority
of our population in the state
representative the the vast
majority of the need as
described by both Representative
Martina Sandown so thank you Mr
chair no thank you thank you for
that so couple.
Thought for maybe a couple of
questions up first want to thank
you for bringing this forward
this
this conversation has to happen.
Every year every interim and if
this doesn't move forward I I
commit to.
Having interim hearing on on the
following things that I'm gonna
talk about because two years ago
it was all about the wage you
know this committee supported a
ten dollar minimum wage in a
very historic meeting that you
are part up and then and then of
course the Senate was more
comfortable with a nine dollar
minimum wage.
And and it's been and just
because you don't want to do
these large leaps.
But these large leaps don't
occur because of the proponents
of a minimum wage they occur
because of the rigidity and the
ideology of the opponents of
minimum wage.
So just to recap of.
You know in nineteen sixty eight
the minimum wage was a dollar
sixty.
If you if that trucks for
inflation it would be twelve oh
three today twelve all three
today and here in New Mexico
where up to ten fifty that's
just that's because what we did
two years ago we're still not on
track from from what it
historically was
during the economic boom days of
the of the nineteen sixties and
if you go with worker
production.
If you go with the work worker
production and it grew based on
production it would be nineteen
thirty three nineteen dollars
thirty three cents would be the
minimum wage today if it tracked
her economic growth as it
relates to labor production and
so here we are in twenty twenty
one with the the largest of
disparity of income in the
history of our lifetimes you
know at you know as kids we we
we we read about the robber
barons and.
You know JP Morgan and
Rockefeller and Carnegie all
those guys.
Those guys.
Don't have anything on the also
Zuckerberg or that you know I
forget his name Zuckerberg
the dude from Amazon the Walmart
family those families today are
disproportionally richer than
the population than the
Carnegie's and the Rockefellers
were a hundred years ago.
That's our reality you know
that's our reality and and so
the way I do minimum wage.
Yes is not that it should be a
livable wage or anything like
that but it's it's it's it's
simply
A way to manage the labor market
and a growing economy.
And so my point is is in
nineteen eighty one the minimum
wage is three dollars thirty
five cents and it wasn't raised
until nineteen ninety nine years
it went without being raised
even a dime so you know ask
yourself who is in power from
nineteen eighty one to nineteen
ninety then in nineteen ninety
seven it was five dollars
fifteen cents and it didn't get
it didn't raise until two
thousand seven.
So you history buffs can ask
yourself all you old timers that
remember the nineties you know
who was in power from ninety
seven to two thousand seven.
So it it it took nine years to
raise it in the eighties it took
ten years to raise it and the
turn of the century and here we
are in twenty twenty one and the
federal minimum wage is still at
seven dollars twenty five cents
which was instituted in two two
thousand nine.
So it is the longest time in
history of our current or
history of minimum wage which
started in nineteen thirty eight
that that it hasn't right.
So when you raise it to what it
should be it's a shock to the
small businesses it's a shock to
these rural areas we need a
federal minimum wage that that
is right where it needs to be to
regulate the labor market and
maintain cost of living
increases as we go along.
so the folks so then we got to
ask ourselves are we gonna go
through another eight year.
Stubbornness where we don't
adjust the minimum wage over
quarter year twenty cents
fifteen cents thirty cents
whatever and that's.
And that's kind of the
apprehension
On on on on a certain side but
anyway I just had to just go
that route so that you guys know
where I'm coming from because
minimum wage bills are gonna
come to this committee.
You know whenever there
introduced but what I love about
this bill of Representative
Roybal Caballero is the is the
language if you don't with the
language two years ago we just
dealt with the wage.
We don't deal with the language
and so I love the fact that you
deal with the language so on
page two.
The the the definition of
employee and then and then the
magic word shall not include
shall not include.
And it has you know eleven
paragraphs in about sharks six
or eight subparagraphs of of
what of who's exempted from the
minimum wage and we need to go
through these and ask ourselves
what's the policy behind it and
is this still a good idea as
mentioned by miss Phillips from
the New Mexico counties.
Of subsection one is is is a
good idea it's a good idea to
have those in those folks that
are working sixty seventy hours
a.
Doing these big will jobs that
that that they be included
because if they are included
that it goes to time and a half
it's just not you know they know
what they're signing up for they
get a decent salary to do a very
high profile the government job
But some other stuff may not
need to be in there
You know seasonal employees why
is that exempt sales persons
okay they get a commission you
know
a registered apprentices and and
on page three lines eight and
nine registered apprentices and
learners otherwise for but a lot
that's that's it's called
a fancy word for slave labor
these days is the intern of your
intern in my company and then
and then on page four.
You have up.
On on subparagraph line B. line
sixteen through nineteen if the
employee is a parent spouse
child.
So there's a restaurant in my
district where there's like
twelve year old kids running
around there that children of
the restaurant owner.
So if we were to the race that
then he will have to pay his
kids the minimum wage in which
she pry wouldn't hire his kids
prices hire somebody else so I
would ask ourselves you know
Is is that section of good idea
or not and they we can put the
secretary on the hot seat this
summer to get explained the
policy the policies behind these
great many things on on page
five line thirteen to fifteen if
the employee is principally
engaged in the range production
of livestock and NO production
why our dairy workers example
the minimum wage they're busting
their tail.
At dawn trend you know getting
us milk and ice cream and cheese
and all that good stuff that
that leads to value added
products here in here in our in
our state subparagraph ten
Representative or will come in
Representative Ferrary an
employee engaged in the handling
drawing packing packaging
processing freezing or canning
of any agricultural or
horticultural commodity and its
manufacture state of the words a
group cultural workers you know
if we get more meat processing
plants you know meat processors
these folks worked their tail
off.
Why are the exam they've they've
been historically exempt the
courts have looked at that and
the courts have been knocking
out stuff down because it makes
no sense it's if it raises the
price of food somewhat that's
just that's just that's just our
reality the
So anyway anyway there's some
good stuff in this bill how you
strike all that language we may
not want to strike all of it but
we certainly want to consider
striking some of it.
on the bottom of page six we
have an eight dollars and fifty
cents student wage so you get
rid of that
you get rid of on on page seven
subparagraphs C..
An employer furnishing food
utilities supplies are housing
you know in other words live you
know.
Live on my land and work my
landing like a rancher whatever
like is that a good idea our
people be taken advantage of and
then the worst part of the
current statutes in my opinion
is the tipped wage the tipped
wage in my opinion should track
the minimum wage in a perfect
world there should be a tip wage
like Representative Ferrary
indicated that the history of
the tip wages very troubling
what's a bummer is set Santa Fe
as some of the most high end
restaurants in the south was
United States with these awesome
waiters and waitresses that that
love the tipped wage because
they can make some good money
getting tips but of you know
what to dollar fifty five
percent minimum wages in twenty
twenty one is unacceptable it
should be in my opinion fifty
percent of the minimum wage and
then we don't have to mess with
it ever again it just it just
rises along with the minimum
wage and then here's what I like
And you mean to go on this long
Representative of members but on
page eight this is what I like
of honoring everyone twenty
twenty five.
I need successive year the
minimum wage shall be increased
by the increase in the cost of
living.
You know politicians should be
deciding the minimum wage the
economy.
Should be deciding the minimum
wage once it's set preferably by
economists and so here's here's
my apprehension Representative
Roybal Caballero Representative
Ferrary here's my apprehension
why I'm reluctant to move
forward with this bill this year
is that
It you know to use a metaphor.
From from my from the expert
witness on on my cousin Vinny
the a minimum wage in my opinion
is as a timing device on old
Chevy you know you get it just
right and that should be just
harms down the highway well
we're adjusting the timing
device.
But the Chevy is on blocks the
Chevy is on blocks are there's
the engine is needs to be
rebuilt or in the midst of the
worst economic crisis of our
lifetimes and and we don't know
where the economy's going to go.
And so
so we've it you know we what we
have the minimum wage set up
until twenty twenty three we
have a session of twenty twenty
two and we have a session in
twenty twenty three.
I don't know it what you do is
you do you throw a dot three
years in the future at fifteen
dollars and then you raise it in
perpetuity so when we saw that
dot and we lock in the the
increase the the the standard of
living increase we have to make
sure that we're we hit the
target you know I mean I think
fifteen dollars in three years
is probably right around that
target but we don't know it
could be low we don't want to
lock it in too low you know
And then I fits a little higher
we get adjusted or whatever but
but anyway in in closing.
What you want to do is instead
of bumping it to eleven fifty
want to bump it to twelve
dollars in twenty twenty three
this bill and current law is
actually the same the minimum
wage will remain at twelve
dollars thank you have a two
dollar and fifty cent jump on
January one twenty twenty four I
think our economy will be stable
at that time but I would rather
make that decision as to what
that leap is in the session of
twenty twenty three hopefully
the federal government will.
Get its act together and we can
have one country with one
economy and one minimum wage
instead of you know obviously
New York San Francisco Seattle
they're they're different animal
but but the rest of the country
needs to grow together.
and that's why we need a federal
minimum wage
so it might be fifteen dollars a
year from now and then and then
we don't have to worry about
this but that's kind of where
I'm coming from.
And and and and I commit to you
to to to have these
conversations again in the end
from and
And once our economy role once
our Chevys on good white walls
and rolling down the highway we
can we can adjust the minimum
wage according at that time that
that's that's kind of the way I
look at it but in closing
Representative Powdrell Culbert
thank you Mr chair and and and
Representative.
The chairman said some of the
comments that I was going to
make but what really concerns me
is that along his journey and
his historical overview of what
has happened with the minimum
wage we never had COVID.
We've never had as many small
businesses to go under as a
result of one particular
incident and that's called
COVID.
And I think our committee came
together very well in nineteen
to support.
The minimum wage increase
everybody work together and they
work closely to to address this
issue and at least get it pushed
forward nobody could have
predicted what has happened in
twenty twenty and I think it
would be very unfair at this
time.
To put another burden on the
back of our small business
community I like many other
legislators have received a
tremendous number of emails and
not one said don't do it.
What they all said was not now
give us the opportunity to get
back on our feet.
Because if they don't.
The jobs are not going to be
there so then what does not
gonna really matter.
And I think that that's really
what we need to take into
consideration that we've got in
it.
An entire community of small
business here in New Mexico that
every single one of us depend
on.
And so we're caught between a
rock and a hard place do we push
them to increase the minimum
wage at this time.
Or do we push them to go out of
business thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chair.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
what I have a.
Final words Representative and
and now the oil back to
committee.
Thank you Mr chair so I wanted
to reiterate again.
Excuse me that no one
in any position of employment.
Should we should never lose the
big give lose giving them the
dignity of their work and giving
them the dignity of the work is
paying them a living wage and
right now they're not receiving
a living wage which is why we
have the vast majority of our
population working two and three
jobs especially are single
mothers that's that's a given
that's a proven we're forty
ninth in the state in the in the
nation as in child poverty and
you know all the statistics Mr
chairman committee that we don't
have to go through that in
reference to the small
businesses I think it's a win
win situation for everyone
because of the time frame that
we gave to this to this bill we
have and it's a lined with most
of the other time frames that
we're giving to all of the COVID
related recovering relief
packages that we're entertaining
especially what the law the
policies that we're proposing in
terms of paid sick leave paid
family leave and all of those
other bills that we're policies
that we're looking towards up
listing our families we've all
taken.
The the time that it will not
need for everyone to recover
from the unexpected pandemic we
recognize that and that's why
most of our policy proposals
going forward for most of my
colleagues have taken that into
consideration and we work in
that time frame we need to
acknowledge Mr Chairman
representative and members of
the committee that small
businesses we came together in
two separate special sessions in
order to be able to enact
legislation to lift our small
businesses across the board we
change criteria we look at
different.
levels of of of grants and loan
packages for the precise reason
and it knowledge meant that we
recognize that small businesses
are the drivers of our local
economy and we have to keep
those small businesses online we
also need to recognize that the
City of various cities and
counties that have the capacity
were able to leverage to add
additional resources to small
businesses in order to keep them
open as well as the various
packages that were available on
at the federal level so everyone
is trying to do the balancing
but the bottom line is that
employees will remain.
Employees and they will remain
fervent and
Productive employees and they
will be loyal to their places of
employment and that's just the
letter the bottom line is what
we're getting across the the
sentiment across the state is
that we want our jobs we want
him back we want to be able to
work we want to be productive
citizens we want to make a
contribution we want to be able
to have money circulating in the
economy because it behooves all
of us so.
Mr chair thank you for your
comments on on the on the
various exemptions I think that
the reason why one of the
primary reasons one I am so
motivated to
Remove the exemptions is
precisely for the reasons that
everyone spoke to today and that
is going back to why we even
left him in there in the first
place
you know I eight keep persons
with disabilities our
agricultural workers it doesn't
matter what position they're in
I think just the state piece all
right
is is dignified and it's to
reduce
it's like going back in slave
labor time period we're you know
that's that's how labor was
treated on a piecemeal basis and
that's horrible to have that
type of language even on the on
the records on the on the books
right now and so my our goal was
to remove those to attempt to
bring in line what
Representative Martina spoke
about and what you spoke about
and that is to give bring back
the policy discussions about why
is it that they were in on the
rules in the first place and why
are we still entertaining them
and so that to me was an X.
pourtant to I've been asked that
question over and over again why
did you remove those there's a
wait I don't know about you all
but I was raised where there's a
will there's a way Mr chairman
and members of the committee and
I think that we have to have the
oil we have to be bold and we
have to be courageous and all of
our actions because COVID
through branch at us all all of
us and until we it and unless we
make take these bold courageous
leaps forward and dignify
everyone that was adversely
affected and those are hard
working families our communities
of color those in the most
essential line of work and so we
we demonstrate and we articulate
to them.
That we're taking these actions
because we recognize that they
were adversely affected.
Because of our antiquated
approaches to the decisions that
we're making that have benefited
a few and have ignored the many
because it's the many that are
suffering from living in poverty
and working two and three jobs
so Mr chair and and and members
of the committee I asked that we
take these bold.
And make these bold decision to
as this committee has
demonstrated in the past and
that we recognize that we're not
kidding one group against the
other it that would be
ridiculous for us to be in the
position to do that when it's
the very jobs in the very
employment that we're attempting
to protect and in a day we want
to protect employment so that
these individuals are hard
working families have jobs on to
retain and then we also want to
be able to set up the structure
so that businesses can recruit.
Can retain we don't want our
small businesses or business
community to be having the
turnover we've heard over and
over again in this committee
that it costs every time an
employer has to replenish
employees it costs it costs the
money and time and training and
the whole multitude of problems
starting over and over and over
again every time it costs
businesses money so this is what
this bill does that recognizes
the balance us it did not by the
work and it recognizes the
importance of employment as well
so I'd like to Mr chair on offer
my co sponsor a chance to also
close thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee I do strongly wish
that you do on past this bill
out thank you for that our
workers thank you final thoughts
Representative Ferrary real
quick the more money we put into
the hands of low wage workers.
They spend every dime of their
disposable income and we grow
our economy and we've seen that
in Los crucis when we raise the
minimum wage years ago and have
kept that incrementally going at
we've seen Los crucis businesses
benefit from it they have more
disposable income and they spent
at thank you Mr chairman
committee.
Thank you very much
Representative Ferrary
Representative Roybal Caballero
for championing this cause and
you're right the more disposable
income the better our economy as
we are a consumer driven economy
sometimes we forget that so
there is no
Hands up there is no motion on
the table so with that will
conclude the hearing and want to
thank you for bringing four.
We'll go to our house bill up to
seventy four a we are we able to
do that Representative set up
for you fading out.
Mr Chairman.
All right fantastic then and
your witnesses rob black.
Yes that's right all right we'll
just take a breath those take a
breath and then when you're
ready.
Go ahead and proceed.
Okay great well
thank you Mr chairman I H. B.
two seventy four is the building
and I will try to keep it pretty
tight presentation on the
returning relocation Act create
a new pilot program all within
the economic development
Department to attract
individuals to settle in New
Mexico and help build our brain
trust in the state it allows us
to to offer educational loan
repayment awards offered through
the organization to be used for
employees to relocate into New
Mexico within the year this all
will be paid on a quarterly
basis for two year term which
can then be paid all which which
will be paid once the individual
needs the quarterly agreement so
they work for that for three
month period and then they can
get on you know receiving a
repayment for part of their on
student debt on it also has the
department increasing awards for
those who are returning back to
Mexico and those moving to a
county where the unemployment
rate or the average wages lower
than the state average are start
with the average wages with the
average but the unemployment
rate is higher than on we want
to address our brain drain and
bring that bring back those were
born right to come back home so
the board those kind of wanted
to separate considerations
as we talked about today this
committee and we usually do on
COVID nineteen has real and the
pandemic overall has really
changed the work environment and
the work
culture that we have in our
country and really Mexican to be
at the forefront of this
changing work environments there
is a remote movie for employees
were so many individuals working
and major companies and they can
relocate to our state bring
their experience and their
families and today Wirth workers
are adjusting to working
remotely to enjoy it they're
looking for a place to live
college kids are you know as a
reading about how the are
actually.
Instead of going to school there
did a cabin and like working out
of there instead so this is
really an opportunity to invite
people to live permanently here
but it's also on my own
experience when I was working in
Washington DC I so many of the
folks I I if we're friends and
helped us get through the day to
day work I New Mexicans and so
many of them we're trying to
find ways to come back home and
it was it was so difficult many
of them had took longer than
half a decade to return home the
should be the case this program
would allow New Mexicans have
gone off again experience to not
only bring that back but bring
their businesses for state
encourage others to do so as
well so we kept the bill fairly
brought to me with the fact that
this is a pilot program to
attract workers and allow the
department to build goals based
on the applicant's he received
and require the department to
report annually on the program
we have bases on successful
programs in other states like in
Vermont and will we want to
allow the department to really
address it enhance it to stay in
New Mexico the applicants were
saying I do want to introduce my
my my witness Mr a black who's
with the New Mexico chamber of
commerce and will briefly go
through a presentation then also
I'd love to chat about my the
committee substitute as well
that addresses some of the early
issues that we thought so we go
to you thank you for the
reminder so everyone we were a
give it a committee San and I
believe the allies had trying to
look at it it's.
Two two zero zero six four zero
two so pleasure the committee
regarding the committee so.
Yes so on the chairman of the
sub for.
Discussion so the sub is been
low for discussion good and
address address the sub or
however you want to address it
and and and thank you for a let
me thanks for your patience Mr
back I.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative for the movie
to discussion so the committee
sub meets the concerns the
economic development department
had we met this weekend don't
sorry last week with the
Economic department economic
development department and the
department of workforce
solutions and and really address
the concerns in the in the
analysis the intent of the bill
remains the same but we had a
really productive meeting and it
really a last look at that
specifically
with the adjustments we're
putting in here it enables us to
enable the EDD to run this
program with one full time
employee which we included now
in the probation aspect of it so
we crease that and then it also
allows them to it also fills in
the holes that they were that
they were concerned with running
the program.
So so at this point I did have a
good conversation with sorry I
station with the EDD
As staff who'd written the
individual houses and he felt
that this the case update
addresses concerns on that one
has had been happening for so my
body is happy to turn it over to
my witness if you're there you
go there you go I just need
thank you Representative Mr
black what thanks for your
patience today good to see you.
Thank you Sir thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee I don't first want to
thank you Representative
Representative Serrato for her
leadership on this issue as you
know because we presented before
the interim committee and that
with you chairman we've been
working on an economic strategy
document and that was published
in December one of the key
findings of that document was
the the workforce issues in New
Mexico in particular the
workforce flight that we are
seeing and and the working age
population over the last ten
years New Mexico has grown at
about two or three percent
population while the state
surrounding us have all grown in
double digits in population and
as we look forward to the next
decade
we expect New Mexico actually
lose around four percent of our
population and again those
states around us are projected
to continue to grow up when that
happens it makes it much more
difficult for us to fill the
jobs and what we hope is our
growing industry whether it's
intelligent manufacturing
whether that's in bio tech
aerospace etcetera you know we
need to be diversifying but
we're gonna need to recruit more
people into the state as well as
better educate our existing
population to fill those jobs so
we're part of what we're we were
looking at in this bill is how
do we incentivize people to re
locate or return to New Mexico
and as we think about where that
would be were also know as you
think about we we had population
loss over the last five years in
New Mexico and it's really our
rural communities we're seeing
lots and lots of people leave
either leave those rural
communities to go out of state
or to move into the urban of
urban counties and so part of
what this bill does I think that
the representative did very well
just think about how can we
incentivize folks to relocate in
those.
Counties communities that are
seeing that population loss and
bring good paying jobs in those
communities again we're we're
anticipating that in New Mexico
when you think about the working
age population we're projected
to lose three a little over
three percent or and thirty
three thousand people in the
next decade.
In comparison Texas is expected
to grow three point four percent
which is about five hundred
seventeen thousand in Texas.
Arizona is going to grow three
point six percent so if we don't
do some things to really bring
people to New Mexico we won't
have the workforce to diversify
our economy the way we need to.
So in thinking about that we
work with our the representative
to look at what are two
different options that we can
look at to attract and retain
talent here in the states or the
state we look at about nine
different states models about
how to do that as as she
mentioned the Vermont model is
one that is currently operating
and has.
Been successful in that they've
been able to recruit R. or
create in one year about three
hundred new Vermonters through
their program the grant did a
hundred and forty requests
totaling about five hundred
thousand dollars in their
programs to be more than what we
we have an hour's but it also
added forty five children to
Vermont so it's creating
families is moving I families
into the state and creating I
needed workforce so that's
really the the basis of the
model that we're looking at
the the intent was also to
create a very flexible program
for the economic development
department so that they can
model it to target the key
industries that align with the
state's existing strategies so
with that I will stop their and
be here for any questions or
support that I can't.
Thank you very much will not go
to members of the audience and
their seven attendees with us
seven attendees anyone wish to
speak in favor of house bill two
seventy four.
Please raise your hand Mr
believe welcome back.
Thank you chairman my S. as
members of the committee and
thank you Representative for
bringing this important piece of
legislation forward building
president CEO of the Gallup
McKinley county chamber of
commerce in the three hundred
fifty small businesses we
represent we see this is an
excellent economic development
tool and a way to recruit rural
workforce that is meaningful to
stop brain drain in our state
and see real work force created
that helps is create that
diversified economy that we've
all been talking about for the
past several years so Mister
chairman members of the
committee yeah we can we have a
chamber of commerce stands in
full support and we appreciate
your time and interest thank
you.
Thank you Sir anyone else wishes
to speak in favor of two seventy
four.
Anyone wish to speak in
opposition.
Members of the committee.
Representative Fajardo.
Thank you madam chair thank you
thank you Mr chairman says.
Judiciary.
Mr Chairman representative of
the sorry I'm I'm kind of
looking at your career and the
committee set up I'm and I'm
just making sure that the
probation right are we still
looking at a four hundred
thousand so we went from two
hundred fifty to four hundred
thousand I'm.
Is is is gone has it in is this
in the budget yet has.
I'm.
Are you gonna go to
appropriations and take a chance
on it Mr Chairman representative
we're gonna go to appropriations
and chance.
Yeah I've done that before I've
always felt.
You know it's it's interesting
because I I kind of like I like
this idea I mean I I could not
have seen this before maybe I
have maybe I haven't but I like
this idea I'm not a hundred
percent sure it's going to get
through the session
especially since we don't have
the funding for it yet but.
It's one of those things what we
need to do to to keep first of
all education to right we want
to get people educated and I see
this great especially for the
trades right where you need that
skill set Mr Chairman
representative
and you're kind of staff in in
this place where it's like you
know you can go online and on
the screen and so I I like the
concept and like the pilots I'm
and I.
We even if this pacifist dies
and you need to go to the to the
in terms of access I wouldn't
even see if we could even.
Change maybe J. text light rain
to accommodate this you know I
am because we we that we have
data I think this is just
another opportunity to get
people to work I'm like I said
I'm not sure I'm not sure that
it that I do like the overall
concept
and so if something doesn't
happen I would love to see this
in the interim and maybe it hi
do data for something like that
if that's feasible I mean we
have to have those conversations
and and see if it's something we
can DO but I just wanna make
those comments but
Appenzell thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative thank
you.
Thank you Representative
Figueroa of automatic of
federal.
Thank you Mr.
Well Representative is very
interesting bill I have a couple
of questions it's a small pilot
that amount of money ninety
recruit twenty people Max I
think it's fifteen thousand
dollar is the F. I. R. as
Simenon alone although the
national averages thirty five so
that's like ten people so it's a
tiny pilot you're talking about
here and my question I guess
beyond that would be
how are you gonna get around the
anti donation clause on the
spot.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
representative so Google dot so
so one we worked really we
really worked in a few different
ways we look at a tape we look
at lead that we wanted to make
sure that this was a really
flexible program and really we
took our cues from on the other
programs that essentially help
repay on from medical doctors on
educational funds and so
utilizing that the organization
has at as a conduit to pay that
those funds one other out and I
did want to add to that is that
you know it's really gonna come
down to how big the awards are
on the program that rob black
refer to their their repayments
were something like one zero
five thousand dollars each
member correct and so you know a
lot of that that's going to
factor in and the experience I
mentioned to you know I've I've
worked for two organizations
that have helped pay my so my my
own student loans back and I
will say you know in that short
period of time that impact of
five thousand dollars is really
felt by people paying their
student loans back because it's
just that two year period so
it's almost it is it is a bump
in your in your salary and it
does factor in as well.
Thank you Mr chairman absolutely
is a bump in your salary and can
be a really attractive
recruitment tool but it's one
thing when a company pays that
Cologne and offers that bump as
a recruitment tool different
thing when the state does have
and that's why I think it might
get hung up on the anti
defamation issue but I think
it's an interesting idea and I
really like that you built it
practically with the clear and
date and clear pilot limit we
don't have an S. I. R. that I
can find on the committee set up
I don't know if it exists gent
on the other FIR had a lot of
concerns about the cost it would
take to implement the program so
when uses have you address
those.
Chairman and Representative
that's a great question yes I
think there initially and this
is what we sat down with D. W.
S. and and he because those
concerns came out in the dust
analysis initial one where they
thought they were gonna need
three full time employees but
the concern they had was that
they were going to be running
and if you look at it because at
it on a loan program and so when
we remove when would we
clarified that it really is an
award to repay student debt on
you know that has been accrued
then that took away a lot of
that you know because PED is not
a bank they don't they can't
read alone program and I fully
respect that so Mr Chairman
representative when we change it
to the this way to EDT was a
label so you know we can run
this with one employee on this
can be very and and again we
adjusted it so that
there wasn't any for call backs
so initially was they had to
work a minimum of two years in
the state and then you have to
deal with what we people broke
that contractor there for this
it really is you know at that
but those are the grant amount
is partition over twenty you
know over those those
eight quarters and so then
you're then if they feel that
those period that is paid in
other ways to the if someone
leaves after twenty two months
that final payment just doesn't
happen and it just goes away.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative.
Representative.
Johnson.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative just really
quickly I just I really like
this bill thank you for bringing
it forward I think this is a
great way to support I'll be
grow our own initiative in our
rural communities and bring our
students home after they go
abroad to get an education or
training you know they can come
home and bring their education
and qualifications back to our
communities a lot of our
entities in our communities
offer high quality good jobs
sometimes it's hard for our
students to go away to school to
make that trip transition turn
around and come home and and
invest in their communities so I
just wanted to make that comment
thank you Mr chair and
representative.
Thank you very much.
And now before we go back to the
committee representative set up
the whole song give a song.
It was asking too much well
Representative Johnson a second
time.
What are your hand is still up
members of the committee
pleasure committee.
I will entertain a motion.
Everyone go to your espresso
machine what.
This gentleman.
I'm not.
All I think this is a great
idea.
I think you should go through
the
Enter I'm so I move to table.
Have a motion to table there's
still discussion I guess there's
no discussion will address the
tabling motion it's not
available.
please call the roll.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative to table.
Yes.
Representative Dow.
Full.
Ask.
Representative.
Ask.
Representative Johnson.
No to table.
Representative.
No to table.
Representative Colbert no to
table.
No to table.
Representative Dow.
Happen no to table.
Well.
No to table.
Oh my god.
I'm.
But again.
I didn't get that I'm sorry.
That is able.
Madam in our.
No to table and this.
So I'm I know the table the
motion was unanimously.
Yes Mexico state legislature and
but don't we have our special.
Mr chair I move a do not pass on
house bill two seventy four body
do pass on house commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill two
seventy four.
That is a proper motion I can't
second by Representative you're
all
but it's not all on the.
Representative though.
No.
Past.
Yes but I think by my doctor.
Yes.
Johnson yes.
Representative is.
Yeah.
Representative Culbert.
No.
Bill yes.
Representative well.
No.
Madam chair.
Yes.
This.
But I will yes so you have a do
pass on the committee substitute
and you may want to have Matt
this.
Everything on the table thanks.
I was.
Representative Fajardo would
like to explain your vote yes.
I thank you Mr chairman and
thank you Representative it's I
think as you can tell.
I mean it's I think it's like
everybody loves the idea we just
don't think it's fully baked.
And so I I you know I I did not
sure it's going to get anywhere
this session but you know please
continue to work on it that's
why I went ahead and and did you
pass and and that I think it
needs some work but I'm I think
this could be a really really
good thing this could be
something like day yes like you
know the the and things like
that we got a lot of really good
ideas in the job council when we
had it back in the day I don't
think I remember anything like
this we could have had something
similar but anyway best of luck
and if you make it through that
I'm wrong.
Thank you thanks a lot.
These are long days of very long
days so we'll give it another
shot on Wednesday and then we'll
up we'll see if we want to meet
Friday afternoon or Saturday
morning.
we will see you Wednesday same
time same channel thank you all
your adjourned.
