I would.
We are.
All right welcome everyone to
the house commerce committee
we got a late start today we're
on the floor of bills are still
being used on the floor and have
all echo in the room so.
Of my door.
But
We're gonna.
We're gonna have a couple people
introduce themselves and then
we'll dive right into.
I but our committee secretary
myself all the rule.
I'm here.
Thank you.
What.
Your.
Hello.
Sorry I can hear that.
Here your apple Representative
Johnson.
About one.
Representative Martínez.
That's.
This
call.
You're also.
Sen after all your stuff.
Chance to get on.
I am here thank you.
And then Maestas.
And I am here thank you and we
have a quorum we have a couple
folks who work with us Friday
for entertainer directory.
ET we have a committee analyst
and then we have two major
analysts and a minority and.
Those of the staff people for
this community and it is job so
what we have are the adults.
Is also a bit about your.
Good afternoon my name is merry
souls I'm very sorry I wasn't
with you last Friday and this
will be my privilege to serve
this committee for the fifth
year and I'm looking forward to
an as major thank you.
Thank you so much.
Committee through the years we
have a major new to the
committee who wasn't with us on
Friday.
They want to say hi.
Everyone divine take walks in
from Albuquerque New Mexico I
have the privilege of serving as
and policy analyst for and this
committee the commerce and
economic development committee
really glad to be here today
with my representative chair act
Mr chair and my S. this and also
my status teacher from high
school Representative Figueroa
from volcano Vista high school
really glad to be here today.
Thank you goal.
Then what did you study in
college.
I studied economics at the
university of New Mexico all
right that's a great degree
degree thanks everyone we are
we're gonna go to House Bill
five.
And we're gonna turn it over to.
Representative.
chase we need to allow him into
the into the room as a panelist
and so give us a quick secretary
of cheese.
And then we'll go to a hospital
I saw everybody.
Covered in front or or get it on
a.
On the second.
On this computer screen.
And then what the analysts also
had a.
On a on amendment provided to
them earlier today that I think
is relatively.
Easy all right great well case
welcome.
Right thank you Mr chairman and
good afternoon committee along
with me as my co sponsor
representative Harry Garcia even
though the camera doesn't show
this we are six feet apart.
I and I'd like to thank all of
you for hearing our bill early
today Mr chairman I have an
amendment and I would like to
present the amendment but I'm
not sure if it got in on the
twenty four hour window I'm not
sure if that happened because it
was worked on over the weekend
but it is point two one nine
three zero six.
One.
And we have it in front of us do
I hear a motion.
Mr chair to a movie made for
discussion purposes and all
second that motion what do you
present the bill and the
amendment together chair all
right I appreciate it Mr
chairman and committee I'm a
basically this of this bill ties
to the original legislation that
was passed last year as a result
of the closure of the Escalante
power plant last year this
committee was very helpful in
helping Representative Garcia
and I and the entire delegation
out of McKinley County ansible a
county with the establishment of
the and they knew Authority the
closure of course had a direct
economic impact on the family
and symbolic County we set up
the legislation has an
opportunity to establish a
redevelopment authority for the
purpose of industrial
redevelopment in this
legislation of course would
qualify we asked for qualified
membership.
And after review of how things
are proceeding it's important to
include additional key
participation outside of local
expertise this is a very very
important economic driver for
the two counties and I want to
ensure that we have the best and
most
Qualified expertise that we can
have in the establishment and
the work of the authority so
what this bill does House Bill
five actually is an amendment to
the electric generating facility
of district that was set up last
year we're asking for in this
then the to declare an
emergency.
Of that as we zoom down on line
twelve page one.
Then on page one
why twenty five we felt that we
need to strike the language of
online twenty five this is that
consists of I.
And then it's got eight
underlined members we think that
that's too confusing when you
have a number like that we'll
just have a base number at the
end.
the fourth amendment is on line
to page to where it says
authority voting members it
doesn't distinguish well enough
in the original bill voting and
non voting members a line three
the authority shall include a
three voting members appointed
by the governor who shall serve
at the pleasure of the governor
for two year period we think
it's important at the governor
not just have ex officio that
she actually have of true voting
members and thank you about that
is that
The governor and any other
basically has national and
international reach we feel like
that would be what would be
looking for is that kind of
support and expertise for this
kind of this kind of a facility.
Also on page two line twenty
five we scratch forces or a coal
fueled electric generating
facility the next two lines on
page three lines one through
word retired online three and
then also online ten we had
additional voting member.
so basically what we're trying
to do with this amendment it's
to the bill we passed last year
is give it a more urgency
Authority and restructure some
of the membership of the
authority board and with that
Mr chairman and committee.
That's that's the amendment
that's the bill and we'd be
happy to answer any questions.
Thank you madam chair before we
go to members of the committee
let me just get the and see if I
understand the amendment number
one we're putting an emergency
clause.
Because we can't wait till July
first we want this to become law
When I get signed and then it be
before the words members were
putting the word voting voting
members and then some cleanup
language on the bottom page to
top of page three do I do I got
the amendment right that's
correct and if I could Mr
chairman chase is there anything
else that I may have forgotten
in this amendment.
You're on mute chase.
Thank you.
Madam and then Mr chair I want
to work for the Legislative
Council Service line here for
the sole purpose of providing
technical assistance on the
matter before the committee and
I do not appear in support of or
opposition to the motion before
you
Mr chairman of the committee I
think go up the rostrum has
summed up the the amendments
correctly and I stand for
questions.
Thank you Mr Ben Gordon of any
questions on the amendment.
Our folks comfortable with the
amendment.
Mr chair move that we adopt the
minutes.
Second.
There's a motion to adopt the
amendment by Representative
Martínez a motion and a second
by Representative Figueroa.
Any objection to the motion.
Any objection to that motion
sing no objection show all those
present voting in the
affirmative and you have an
amended bill.
What do members of the committee
members of the audience and just
for the folks online we have
nine attendees the attendees are
kind in the lobby so to speak.
And some of armor on the next
bill house bill eighty two but
for those who want to speak on
this bill.
I know Mister McGee are here on
this bill garden up and raise
your hand in in the on your
computer on your phone.
Raise your hand and we'll let
you into the room.
Anyone else wish to speak on
House Bill I raise your hand
within the.
Your computer device.
Welcome Mr McGee.
Thank you.
just to clarify my participation
in this I am was recently
elected the chair of the
McKinley County the the
authority of and we had our
first meeting just last month's
twenty eight and started the the
S. or.
One of the things that I would
like to bring up is that we have
been working diligently studying
this going through lots of
documents and trying to
Lead and figure out the the
requirements of the authority
the duties of the elected
officials and the goal and
purpose of the the authority one
of the things that.
The authority has concerns over
is that we we there was an
initial of board members
and no one was consulted about
this proposed bill.
there was no input provided to
the story for McKinley County
and so.
It would have been.
Of very favorable to us if we
would have heard from the the
legislators of proposing to
build as to yes this is what
we're intending to do and so
forth so at this point we we
have great reservations about
the bill.
As presented because of the lack
of communication to
the existing board members.
So that's one of the things that
I wanted to bring out today.
At this committee meeting is.
The lack of of of coordination
and and and or I should say
coordination but the lack of
communication.
With the sword.
More thank you.
Thank you.
Would you say your name for the
record.
My name is Marvin McGee it's
bill in the last name is spelled
M. AG E. thank you Sir and
besides the the notice on the.
Are not being at the table so to
speak to have any objections to
the substance of the bill.
we have concerns yes I think
that
you know we just are we have our
first the initial meeting of
want to twenty eight of
December.
we we met the criteria of
getting this done before the end
of the year and we have a lot of
the the.
Concerns about the bill the
number of representatives of the
number of
members.
And and I guess the lack of
communication.
To figure out what was going on
so right now we have
reservations on the bill.
Thank you Sir very much thank.
Seven.
Just for the experience of your
seven ten dis credited a.
Lobby.
Anyone wish to address the
committee on this bill please
raise your hand.
Mr Lee just joined us we're
doing public comment Mr Lee if
anyone wants to address the
committee that now is the time
just raise your hand within the
zoom.
If it's compelling we can go
back to the audience but now
we'll go to members of the
committee
Representative Baldonado.
Thank you Mr chairman
thank you all.
German Representative Garcia for
bringing the point I just want
to understand a little bit more
on that on that it looks like
we're just simply adding.
The ability for the governor to
make those appointments I'd I'm
reluctant in that in in the
regard that I feel like the last
few years for legislature we
keep.
Handing over different that the
power to the to the executive
can you give me a little more
comfort as to what what exactly
the purposes you currently have
five members gonna go to eight
is that every.
If I could thank you Mr chairman
you know I I think it's
important and I and I I don't
know the gentleman that just
spoke I don't know I met all I
just as soon as name in the
newspaper and what the press
release that in the newspaper is
that all the people appointed by
McKinley County or temporary
that they that these
appointments were made
temporarily I don't know exactly
what that meant I know that the
membership from symbolic County
has not been made yet so this
authority board has not.
Formed and the deadline of
course was December thirty first
twenty twenty and the first
meeting for establishment
happened right under the wire
the reason is
that I'd like to expand their
membership is because I believe
that we need to have the best
expertise that we can provide
both nationally and
internationally in the
governor's regardless of who the
governor is and particularly
this governor her interest in
alternative energy as we do as
we know that this is a coal
fired plant.
Holtby is now basically being
phased out as a fossil fuel and
alternative energy is now being
something that we're looking at
as a state in the country
there's a solar company now
that's moved into that into that
site but there there needs to be
expertise not only with
alternative energy but
decommissioning of a power plant
I had
requested through email from the
county manager the
qualifications of the folks that
were appointed by McKinley
County I have not received a
response from that yet so I have
no idea I know some of the
people personally but some of
them I don't know including the
chairman.
And because I'm very very
concerned Mr chair
representative Baldonado about
the estimated tax revenue loss
to the two counties we don't
have time for people to just try
to figure things out this bill
has been in place for a long
time there's been a number of
months that this authority could
have been set up and there's
lots of delay I've had a couple
of emails relating to that.
It's important to know that we
would lose at least from twenty
nineteen reports.
Three point six.
Million dollars annually and
attacked in our tax base we
don't have a way to make that up
so we need this industrial
redevelopment quick and we need
people that can get on board
quick and I think that the
governor's horsepower and her
reach into getting the right
people immediately moving is
critically important and there's
no reason not to do it I mean
it's three members of the total
most of the membership comes
from the to local counties but.
I feel like we need that extra
horsepower.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Senator Lundstrom
and I just have one more
clarifying questions my
understood that this this bill
that going to play and it came
in a lot of last year was at the
time was there an appropriation
with this to get this authority
going and is there some sort of
sustaining appropriation that
goes along with it yeah what's
great about this is that this
authority was done in
conjunction with tristate
tristate was a right
corporate partner in moving us
along and what was done is that
there is nine million dollars
that was put into the general
appropriation act for lead of
funds that would go into the
Pruitt development area which is
basically where this authority
would have would have the.
oversight and five million of
that had been spent this last
year for shoring up in retaining
a hundred and twenty five
employees at the McKinley paper
plant.
we were able to test more than
half of that to retain those
high paying jobs I mean that is
now the anchor for this new
authority
without them I think we'd be
dead Water.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative Lundstrom
Representative Garcia with all
the questions thank you Sir.
Thank you representative of
members of the committee.
Members of the committee have a
couple quick questions and just
want to thank you Representative
estimates of.
Tough times when a.
Industry goes away you know but
but we just have to capture
those new markets and I
appreciate your leadership on
this the
So we remember we passed this
last year we heard in our
committee so just because a
COVID another reasons you just
never materialized.
I'm you know I'm not sure Mr
chairman I don't know what the
particular delay was I know one
time the county manager had
expressed that that was the
reason is that there is delays
due to they're focusing on all
the COVID issues.
But we had a work group that
started even before the session
session last year which included
the county commission chair the
county manager of their lobbyist
and a number of other people try
state working on this you know
keeping our fingers crossed
hoping that the bill would pass
already knew that was timed the
launch once its business I want
to spill passed.
Thank you thank you
Representative illustrious when
I think of I hear what
Representative Baldonado saying
I was glancing over it I think
the the governor chooses three
of the five members but I think.
I'd.
County kinda on the bottom of
page three before appointing a
person has the authority member
the governing body the county so
first determine that the person
has the qualifications to serve
on this authority board so.
So that's some good language in
there Representative Powdrell
Culbert thank you Mr chairman
and.
When chair lady I guess my
question is you have I are you
going to eight.
Four five you know Mr chair
because it's confusing based on
what we scratched out I'm gonna
have chase explain how the
numbers work is a year expert
analyst had a good catch on that
and talk to me about it barely
did good job on this but chase
can you talk about the how the
numbers are going to work for
Representative Powdrell Culbert
your.
Mr chairman of the committee the
the county that the county that
forms the commission appoints
five members.
Under the proposed amendment the
governor has an opportunity to
a point three additional voting
members so that would be eight
members.
Okay.
Now we're thing a county that is
within twenty miles of the
facility has the option of
joining the the authority as a
second County in this case the
only county that might be
qualified to join with receba
County if you were County
decides they want to join the
the authority.
They would have an opportunity
to a point five members as a
participating County in that
case the authority would have
thirteen voting members.
Finally this amendment talks
about having to non voting
members that would be appointed
by the two of the that is the
subject of the authority to be
using it at to be advisory.
So.
If yes County joined it would be
thirteen voting members and two
non voting members and I'm not
sure at this point don't have
to.
Let Representative Lundstrom
indicate whether not Cibola
County has in fact decided to
join I know that they had a they
had an opportunity through the
end of the year to join.
The they can join if if they
want to.
Okay thank you for that
explanation but I guess where
I'm going with this a
Representative is a right now
you have eight.
with the governor okay and I
mean you always gonna have
issues that you're going to vote
on so what happens if you have a
tight right now with the.
Eight members so you got a four
and four.
How was that tie going to be
fairly dressed okay Mr chairman
let me just raise restate this.
If this well we've already
adopted the amendment but it
also adds one member for Cibola
County read the original bill
they only got four so negative I
for McKinley.
I first of all and
representative Garcia just to
mention a symbolic County has
notified McKinley County that
they are going to join they've
been accepting applications in
reviewing applications for
membership and then three from
the governor.
That's thirteen okay thank you
she to thirteen I didn't know I
Cibola had joined if that gives
you the thirteen then there's
always room for four tie breaker
yes and so that was that was my
concern thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you and there's a members
of the audience that has his
hand up Mr DeMoss if you would
if you're gonna talk on this
bill you're a little late but we
can certainly have you speak are
just flasher hand on and off if
you wish to speak on this bill.
I don't know if your hands up
in adversely okay wonderful if
it is eligible Mr DeMoss in and
we'll give you one minute Sir.
County manager with me what can
County I was on earlier it have
scheduled you guys for one
thirty but it never popped up
some wasn't sure that jump on
another meeting so I apologize.
Thank you what I want to convey
is from the from the commission
of.
They are not they oppose house
bill five.
The county strongly opposes
house bill five we birdie got
the thirty up and running about
a month ago would like
To give us some time should get
up and running we just got a on
December twenty eighth our first
meeting we have another meeting
next week
so with that being said we need
time and opportunity to get that
already up and running but
McKinley County does not
support.
House Bill five.
none of the.
Members have come to the county
told us why there we can change
it why with updates we're gonna
move from a nine member board to
a thirty member board.
All we do the local should have
input.
And also
that thirty itself I've talked
to for members of the forty and
they are also opposing this as
well as they feel they should
have time to get up and running
and opportunity to see if it
works it will if if we can make
it work and get it going.
Thank you Sir yeah and we up we
had a floor session that went
over time we appreciate you Mr
a.
Mr chair.
Will not go back to members of
the committee.
Representative Dow.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
you know with a little with very
little contact information
except what was shared today I
guess I'll just ask R. Sanchez
how the.
How they got community input or
how they found you know was
there public comment did you put
out a draft I mean are there
commission I'm hearing that's
the city the county manager and
county commissioners that's at
least in my district it would be
hard for me to bring for
something they were opposed to
is there a reason why they're
input wasn't gather it wasn't
discussed account meeting.
You get this mask Mr chair
representative down this bill
was pre filed.
It was pre filed it said in the
hopper for a for a while I had
informed.
Both the manager and the folks
that have been participating on
a work group that I would be
submitting a an amendment
they're well aware of that
I wasn't sure that they're even
gonna take action to set up the
authority.
And I didn't want
this opportunity to be lost the
number of jobs that we've lost
is a major major impact our
area.
This so legislation was based on
a bill that we had done down in
Roswell with an industrial site
we use that as the model.
Differences as the folks down
there got there
Authority up and running
immediately.
Which is exactly what we should
have done here.
Now I can tell you that there is
others that feel exactly
opposite.
Then what this managers just
told you about how the authority
has been set up but I am not
going to get mired down in local
politics I feel that is my
provocative to put forth
legislation that I think is
important and I think that
trying to get re development in
one of the poorest counties will
the two point counties in the
state in New Mexico is critical.
We've had major power plant lost
in that whole northwest New
Mexico and we've got a great
corporate partner with tri state
I mean they've been excellent
with us and they've done a real
good job in working with us.
And that Mr chairman my
cosponsored wants to say
something here from may to help
answer that question
Representative Garcia welcome.
Thank you members of the
committee thanks for hands on
during the day.
This bill is of the utmost
importance for number two
reasons Representative Boyle
county elder can down the tax
base give me County right here
the more County probably
supplied ninety five percent of
the employees that work in the
great she power plant so we took
a major hit on that too in the
biopic bed which is a paper mill
right next to the city on the
property if we don't act or
something and they go away we're
gonna be devastating that's
another hundred twenty thirty
jobs directly close whatever
else to fix the come along with
it no there's always a hundred
twenty people need Bobby.
Two three under so much come out
of there every week with paper
and that we did the state for a
communities not only the
community before the state Mr
chairman.
And on the.
You know I've heard how people
are upset because the
region's employment all budget
bill well notified of what was
going on do not wish to their
other than I don't know what the
settlement but back to what I
see Mr chairman is of the utmost
importance we get this the forty
going.
Now can we come next year and
one more thing Mr chair and
representative I spoke with or
county manager Katie Fletcher in
the our board may also spoke
county commissioners in my
district in the our board the
only amendment.
With the amendment is changing
is the number of well voting
member for four to five that's
only because she knew there but
welcome you on board thanks for
the opportunity to speak in
terms Representative thank you.
Representative Garcia
Representative Dow has the floor
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you chair Lundstrom and
Representative Garcia for your
explanation I guess I understand
the urgency and also the
authority it's very few and far
between that larger boards
become more efficient versus
local local smaller boards but I
guess I I'm I'm a little.
Flexed as to why particularly
adding voting members for the
governor would make this more
efficient and more effective but
I I guess you have good reasons
for that I would I would hope
that the governor's understand
the urgency in helping you guys
with or without expanding the
board to actually thank you Mr
chairman Mr chair thank you.
Thank you thank you
Representative dollar the
No I'm just looking at the bill
I appreciate what what manager
do must was saying but if we
don't pass this bill Cibola
County gets a style.
The deadline already passed
You know on page three line six
December thirty first twenty
twenty already passed so we have
to extend that deadline if if we
if we do nothing else.
I think bringing the the the
governor's office into this
problem solving I think that's a
that's a good thing we we need
a.
We need the governor as well as
the legislature as well as the
local leaders to all involved in
this endeavor so with that
Representative Johnson.
Thank you Mr chair I would like
to move would you pass if the
time is appropriate and then I
would like to make a comment so.
Do we have I don't see any other
hands eight so we we have a due
pass as amended.
Thank you.
We have a second.
A second to that motion by
Representative guy goes they're
still discussion will go back to
Representative Johnson.
Thank you Mr chair I would just
like to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward they
are reached out to me in the
late summer and informed me
about this bill and I have
received
Emails and communication from my
constituents in both counties
and you know they are worried
about losing good people in our
community and our communities
you know we have good people who
work in these jobs and are they
worried about losing them as a
result of continuing to have an
economic impact loss and losing
jobs and so I think we need to
quickly Louganis Authority and
do the work that we need to do
with that Mr mat Mr chair thank
you and thank you Sanchez.
Seeing no debate there's a
motion for due to pass as
amended by Representative
Johnson a second by
Representative that goes with
the miss just let us call the
roll.
Yes.
Representative Dow.
Hello.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes Representative Martínez.
Yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes.
Representative
yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Before I vote Representative
Dow.
What was your vote that was a
sign language for yes all right.
One in this room without the
proper your phone so it's
creating echo to Noam narrating
will thank you I vote yes.
So you have a I do pass.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you committee thank you very
much thank you guys.
Mr chair here maybe.
So we're gonna go to a house
bill eighty two we're gonna let
in some experts but in the
meantime.
We've seen this bill up gosh
three times
actually run this bill with the
former Representative of young
lad back in the day in a.
And I I think it's it's ready
for action we have a new prime
sponsor however which we're not
gonna rise to bad.
Well let's let in a Jason Weaks
secretary Ortiz and marcado in.
We'll turn it over to
Representative set out though.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Representative Serrato taken
away okay
great so as the chair mentioned
you will have seen this bill a
few times before and New Mexico
it's taken into consideration
some of the things that you have
been discussed in the past
insofar as I've understood and
seen in past past video and
there were R. two amendments
that we had introduced a term
would you like me to go over
those briefly.
Talk about the bill and then
we'll discuss the members and.
so as you know house bill eighty
two which is the historically
underutilized businesses act or
help would stimulate economic
development and create jobs
within New Mexico particularly
by creating this help
designation within the tax
revenue department and improve
these businesses ability to do
business with the state on this
particular version enables us to
support businesses and learning
how to work with with state you
know contracting process then
also allows us to track on by
agency and annually how on how
we're doing you know contracting
with this businesses and others
they get that designation so
really there's for the
components one is it creates the
status of historically
underutilized businesses within
TRD tax revenue.
At the department it also allows
IGST to work with nonprofits to
create training and other
opportunities to help hubs get
the designation help them appeal
a rejection of the designation
and things like that three
through GST it also creates a
searchable database and for for
those that are approved.
And then finally it said school
by July twenty twenty two for
each of the state agencies to
one report how well how how many
help doesn't mean businesses of
their inner working with but
then to setting goals for how
they could prove.
so that's pretty much the big
bass to internet standalone on
additional points awarded it
really does provide us the data
on to help us make informed
decisions in the future
and I think that's the the big
pieces to it.
Thank you and we have one
amendment which is relatively
simple the other amendment seems
long but it I think it's simple
as well what members of the
committee.
I hear motion to discuss.
The amendments for discussion.
And I'll second that motion of
so what we're talking about of
all use the last three numbers.
Two seven three.
And then the second motion is a
three zero three.
So what are you up presented to
amendments and I will go to the
board of public comment sure so
that lets oh two seven three as
you mentioned that's a very
simple one just on page three it
changes on the language to the
regarding to the minorities just
communities of color it's more
indicative of the communities
exist in the state now since
there is a majority minority of
people of color in the state as
for three oh three that's I
think that the chairman
mentioned
the longer but essentially just
kind of moved things around to
make it easier and clear for
what the designations are so to
begin point one on three oh
three is on page two and what it
does is it strikes line three
lines nine through sixteen in
its entirety but it essentially
moves it
moves it over on later on in the
bill on I'll get to that when I
get.
actually sorry I'm sorry I'm so
sorry that so the first one
strikes that the entirety then
it re letters in the point to
and then if it what it does is
it takes on page three what we
struck input in that language
with a slight adjustment
to include what's on page four
from line three to eight so
essentially page four line three
to eight.
And he needs to lines nine to
sixteen instead get placed into.
Our page three hundred and at
line eleven so that that would
read qualified facilitating
nonprofit entities means are
nonprofit entities that is
organized promote and enhance
economic development
opportunities it also right
business and workforce education
with expertise assisting start
internalize this is to prove
that the GST to assist and then
I take that second part which is
in the identification of
qualified applicants for
certification assist applicants
applying for ending teaching
certification as historically
underutilized businesses
including pre certification
screening of eligibility appeal
the denial regal cation
certification so it's
essentially just moving that
language over again with for
ages three letters and then
point I
It strikes out the first line
and then it puts in again that
qualified nonprofit entities as
qualified facilities.
and so that to suggest that
point six is in line to it
certainly this really fast it
just deletes that to assist in
the that last little chunk
because we moved those points
earlier in the bill.
And then on in point seven
online I it puts in there it it
changes what gets reported so
that we have the total number of
awards and corresponding dollar
amounts statewide of of
purchasing and then also for
these businesses as well
definitely which does and I
don't want to read it to you
okay so before we go to your
experts
With new complicated but I
believe it's not here just
tweaking the definition because
you change the the.
The wording to qualified the
queue maybe it jump of paragraph
because H. goes before Q. and
and dictionary and then and then
of course the language on the
Google page I just better
language to capture that data
that's right I just changed it
to makes it make it clear for
GST and and the reason we up.
Videotape these hearings us so
that we don't have a
stenographer would not have been
able to keep up with you on
that.
Policies are just a lot of what
are you introduce your guests
and and and let them take it
away as well absolutely so I do
have would be three wonderful
witnesses general service
department secretary Kenneth
Ortiz is here General service
department see purchasing
director marking it as well and
Jason Weaks on behalf of
Hispanic chamber of commerce.
And they're all in here okay.
Jason Mr secretary do is to set
the words.
So one of the rules that one
would you go ahead and go first
to.
Question.
The vote is.
Right from your during.
Representative guy goes but in
mute
This is I think the second time
this committee answered this
bill on aspects of the committee
before as Representative strada
mention and Mr chair you
mentioned basically what the
bill does is it is it promotes
the creation of a classification
called historically
underutilized businesses and
then really the me to the bone
but the meat of the bill is then
us GST we're asking TRD to
certify and those businesses
based on some assistance from
qualified nonprofit entities
that help facilitate on that
application process and then
asked GSD to create some
material and they can utilize
the qualified facilitating
non profits basically whatever
degrees they want I think that
some of the questions in FY are
just that it gives GSD and your
December thirty some Lee way to
implement rules to administer
the relative program anyway so
then GST would also be
responsible for collecting
information about the total
number of contracts going out in
New Mexico and then total number
of contracts with the hub so we
can understand what the
utilization of Hobbs with is
within the state of New Mexico
this is very much founded on the
program from Texas that has been
significantly successful the
Texas program goes a lot further
in promoting the usage of herbs
because it actually creates
setasides this bill does not do
that this just creates the
infrastructure to get
classification as Hobbes and
then
says you know GSD should collect
information on utilization
there's a couple other
components it asks any prime
contractor to make some effort
to utilize hubs of
subcontractors make good faith
effort to do it and then it asks
every state agency to report
back one utilization of hopes to
GST and then also implements a
very basic practices to
perpetrator promote usage of
Hobbs so that's.
That's basically what the bill
does with that I'll turn it over
to secretary secretary Ortiz
thank you Jason good afternoon
Mister chairman members of the
committee it's great to see you
all altogether I wish we were
all in person but virtually I
guess is where we have to be at
this time so so first of all I
want to thank the sponsor
Representative instructed to
reach out for reaching out to
GSD and get having us work with
chase in on the proposed
amendment that would make it
work for GSD we're we're
prepared to implement it we
think it's a good bill
addressing opportunities that
New Mexico businesses would
qualify for work on our fiscal
impact report we're requesting
funding for one additional FTE
to provide develop training
materials work with tax and
Representative have developed
the web portal the server
searchable database and
ultimately the report of
businesses going back to the
legislature so once again
Representative throughout a
thank you for the opportunity
and reaching out to us pro
actively we're here to help
implement the bill at the
legislature's chooses to so our
pass it also on my team want to
introduce our state purchasing
director marketing he's a
director State purchasing market
was a couple words.
Thank you chairman and thank you
Mr teas yeah we're very
interested in assisting on this
bill we think that the data we
can get from this is going to be
very important to to just look
back one session SB eighty eight
the past last year about a year
ago generated some data and in
state and out of state contracts
and we found about sixty five
percent were in in New Mexico
we've never had that data before
this bill similarly captures the
hub usage and I think that's
going to be very valuable going
forward.
Thank you Mr chairman we stand
for questions there are any.
Thank you very much.
And let's there's a couple folks
as attendees and I'm not sure if
they worked on this panel
Armstrong Mr T. or Mrs T. just
regular raise your hand it will
get you in for public comment if
not we really appreciate you
guys visiting with us.
And we'll go to back to the
committee
Representative part of the.
Thank you Mr chairman
A quick questions.
The audio the auto went low on
you could you repeat yourself.
We can if we do this but.
We can hear you now okay.
Minorities.
Work.
Trying to go out.
Problems for that confirmation.
No we don't anticipate so I
decided you want to add more to
that.
Should more ago.
Representative Mr Ricardo I kind
of heard the question I think
what you said was are we gonna
have any issues moving forward
with the definition of hobby and
you know what it requires to
achieve that classification
early.
Yes.
I don't believe we will and I
think you know we we moderate
our notes on this relative to
the qualifying entities and also
the federal government defines
this class businesses in pretty
much the same way so I don't
foresee that we should have any
problems with that relevant
definition within the context of
the broader procurement world.
Any existing language anywhere
that if we have any issues in
the future is that defined in
statute
minorities and defined in
statute.
Go on Mr chairman and
Representative Fajardo and I
apologize and address the chair
earlier I think because we to
lay out in the legislation
itself specific designations of
African American Latino or
Hispanic Asian Pacific Islander
native American or Alaska an
Alaska native which are defined
at the federal level it you know
I believe that that should be
fine but I can I am happy to
refer to me this is well.
Okay thank you and I do
apologize I didn't go through
the chair either and I do
apologize this whole thing is
going to be a very interesting
experiment and I'm already
struggling on day one so thank
you for your patience let me Mr
chairman.
Okay thank you very much I think
that was that was my only
concern is moving forward if we
had any problems with the
language or anything like that
it was to find or anything like
that and I think representatives
that you did say earlier that
you know where minority made
major state so it makes sense to
kind of change language a little
bit but thank you very much
appreciate it thank you Mr
chairman thank you
representative good catch
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you Mr chairman I guess I
have a a number of concerns in
regards to this.
In this summary.
Is the state agencies would then
have had to set a goal for
percentage of work contract to
those certified businesses so
what is the difference between
that and set aside.
Yeah I'm Mr chairman and and
thank you representative so the
difference between that is that
there is not on.
I apologize I'm actually in the
sewer line my witnesses that
that's alright because I think
Secretary teasing maybe better
equipped to speak to that or
maybe add director.
And I.
More.
Mr
Representative Powdrell Culbert
I I can take the initial swing
at this and then secretary or
tease arms straight and can
claim up anything that I missed
it but it's not a set aside
because you're essentially
saying could create a plan to
try to figure out how to utilize
you're not requiring that the
utilize many basic percentage
you're not even creating I mean
is not creating a set aside set
aside would be you have to use
ten ten percent of all your
business has to go on to hubs
this is just saying create a
plan that tries to promote the
usage among and within the
context of the bill we do a
couple things we say that
prime contractors have to
completed portion that says that
that they they try to seek out
historically underutilized
businesses and include them as a
on some on the relevant
procurement and then it if they
don't it just says make a good
faith effort to do it it doesn't
say that they have to use hubs
as a subcontractor so there just
is no actual actual set aside
for or preference created with
the context of this bill.
And Mr which I totally disagree
with you on that because anytime
you put put a goal for the
percentage the percentage of
work contracted.
Then you've got a setasides
situation that may not be what
you want to call it but that is
what it what it is.
And so I just yeah no I I have
some concerns.
You know in regards to that
moving on the other the other
thing and I think Mr our
Secretary trees would remember
this that some years ago there
was some legislation that was
passed in the same committee are
to worry unions would have.
the lack of a better word first
choice at some of the contract
and so I'm wondering if we.
Do this then are these
businesses going to have to join
to become union members.
Yeah Mr chairman and
Representative thank you for the
question no I I leave this on
anticipation this is a good
faith effort and there's no
retribution for any argument or
any state injury that doesn't
hit those goals but ask for
forcing how business to be
included it's just a designation
you know within TRD that we're
of course our certification I've
also received after you know we
seeking training and learning
how to the the the state
contracting process but there is
no set aside with the bill or
there is no set up within the
bill to force any any of the
hubs to change their their
current hiring process
unionizing process or anything
like that but that still didn't
answer my question I'm just
because we did and then
secretary to you I remember some
years ago we had some
legislation that was passed
under
Maker low hot.
Where
The unions became a very big
part of some of the contracts
that we're going out there was
some some major concern in
regards to that and I just don't
want the US small businesses to
fill like in order to get state
business that they have to
become a union a union shop.
Representative Joe Coburn this
is secretary of cheese I applaud
you for your good memory because
I remember some of the
discussion on that as well I
don't see how this bill would
impact require businesses to
become unionized
there are some qualifying
criteria such as revenue over
the preceding three years and is
to be certified by tax and
Representative but if the
business is interested you know
they could either work with GST
or some of these facilitated
nonprofits on gaining that
certification and then to the
point that Mr weeks maybe it
does encourage agencies to to
consider historically utilized
under utilized businesses but
different from previous years I
don't see it as a set aside
either so we're happy to work
with you will discuss that
matter all online and offline
but I I don't see it we're it it
it has been changed from
previous years for any type of
set aside at work or state
purchasing at that time you know
had some concerns about that.
It will have to talk off line
The other question that I have
and
That is I think I read somewhere
where if it's a help loan
business.
The it has to be fifty one
percent owned.
I women.
And if in fact that is.
A requirement.
How does that impact the
business that is totally own.
By.
And we talk about women in this
particular example this totally
owned by a woman.
So does she get preference
under being female minority.
Hub zone owned business.
Thank you if I may I'm a co
sponsor and I kind of miss these
debates I may represent a set up
though to secretary Jeez one is
there is no preference there is
no preference however you're
correct if if it's determined by
tax and Representative that they
qualify as a hub business then
they get that certification as a
hub Business and are essentially
put on put on a list so that the
big contractors can subcontract
with the smaller businesses so
it's are we actually change the
language to of more than fifty
percent because we the question
was what if what if the company
is fifty point five percent
women so yeah if it's a if it's
more than fifty percent or up to
a hundred and it's still a woman
or minority owned business or
persons of of color business so
to qualify as a hub and then it
would be hopefully build
relationships with those big out
of state contractors okay and
and.
Mr chair secretary does this run
along the same lines as the
federal requirements or would
they have a different
requirement to be hubs all of
certified.
Minority owned whatever
With those requirements be the
same as federal.
But the federal requirements are
under all these different
designations.
As I think there are five or six
designation hubs all women owned
minority owned of.
Veteran owned a native American
owned so is it the guidelines
gonna run this you know along
the same line is the federal
requirements are.
Good question Representative Mr
chair representative puddle
covered you good question I'm
asked Jason.
Mr weeks to respond to that
chasing the money.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
I see that the chair actually
has handout I'm gonna defer to
the chair thank you.
Thank Representative Serrato
revision of COVID Mr Secretary
Mr weeks I if you look on page
three paragraphs three tracks
the federal language Rep
Patricio Ruiloba paragraph two
is it has to be in New Mexico
resident business which is
doesn't track the feds or that
it has to be listed by then
dollars
and Revenue so so the five
million dollars on the New
Mexico resident does not track
the federal language but the
more than fifty percent women or
minority owned business forgive
me Representative Serrato woman
or person of color own business
which to does track the federal
language with regard to their
small business association
statutes okay and Mr chairman.
Are there possibilities.
Of sole sourcing.
Mr chair Representative Powdrell
Culbert I mean there's always
going to be the potential to
sole source but this bill
doesn't touch on sole sourcing
nor does it promote its usage.
For Hobbs.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative
Martinez.
Thank you Mr chairman I'd like
to move adoption of the
amendments and I think we
probably should do it one one at
a time Mr chair.
Good we have a motion to adopt a
two seven three two seven three
and that's a committees of
color.
And I.
To adopt two seven three point
one.
So there's a motion to amend.
A second by Representative
Figueroa.
We will call the roll.
Yes.
Representative Dow.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes yes.
Johnson.
Representative Martínez.
Yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
no.
Representative Serrato yes.
Madam chair Figueroa.
Yes.
Yes this.
Yes and that
is I think it encompasses a lot
more to come up with Dr
the amendment three zero three.
To.
There's two.
Second motion to adopt.
I would.
Get that I will second that and
this is to adopt a moment three
oh three which.
Which is the.
Essentially the heading the
solidity nonprofit agency to
qualified facilitating nonprofit
and.
With that will call the roll.
I feel yes.
Representative Dow.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Colbert.
Representative Culbert.
I guess yes.
Yes.
Madam.
Yes.
With.
Yes you have an amended bill
pleasure the committee.
Mr chair I want to do
crescimento.
We have a motion for due to the
by Representative Martinez a
second by Representative cerrado
of.
All the rules.
I'm.
Yes.
All.
Yes.
Hello.
Well.
Yes.
Representative Johnson yes.
Representative Martínez.
Yes.
Representative Culver oh heck
yes.
Yes.
Yes.
And.
This.
I will yes so you have a do pass
Representative throughout just
want to thank the secretary
every time people bad mouth
government I. have spectrum
cheese on my shoulder reminding
me just what how are how
