Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente.
Representative little here
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Your.
Representative this year.
Representative Matthews here
last year yeah madam chair yes
already have like thank you for
that.
The patients and moving things
around and Representative up and
it over to immediately thank you
madam chair thank you members of
the committee this is the first
time I've presented to this code
to to this committee satellites
it's a new one for me.
A lot of fans.
Chair members of the committee
of house bill thirteen seeks to
amend the border Development Act
of this this up this bill is
proposing legislative changes to
update the act to better align
board membership when you
priorities and to provide a new
approach to border development
opportunities
this is something that that is
it is sorely needed yeah there's
this is a new way of looking at
things that and this is
something that I think should up
really of the concert by the
committee out there with that
then try to want to take too
much time I would like to
introduce myself to my I would
like Y. expert witness to
introduce or some hi thank you
very much madam chair members of
the committee my name is Alicia
keys and the cabinet secretary
of economic development I've
been in front of you all a lot
this that this session so thank
you one of the divisions that is
administratively attached to EDD
is the border Authority and we
work hand in hand on economic
development today I have with me
Joseph Tularosa who has just
been appointed as a senior
adviser of global trade and
infrastructure investments and
this is Joe works for DOT and
also for EDD but we have mark
Roper here who is our and
director of economic development
and we also have more program
Hey the here who is the director
of the border Authority a lot
has changed since the border
Development Act became law in
nineteen ninety one just in the
past decade New Mexico has seen
some major growth in exports in
twenty twelve we were at three
billion now we're yet we are at
five point four billion we see
major growth also in imports in
twenty twelve it was two point
three billion now we are at six
point zero billion New Mexico
however is well behind other
states particularly.
Early with regards to the recent
major manufacturing
announcements and a lot of that
has to do with horizontal
infrastructure that we are not
getting some of these major
deals because we do not have the
horizontal infrastructure
particularly we don't have it at
the border and right now there
is a lot of work between Mexico
and New Mexico to promote
exports and growth we have a
federal request in to DC for a
hundred and seventy million
dollar expansion for the port of
Santa Tereza we really believe
that this area which has very
you know which hasn't Bill park
on it now and some really
fantastic companies but we think
it really has the opportunity
and the potential to be a major
economic growth sector for New
Mexico specifically in the V. P.
the secretary and we'd really
love to see what a border looks
like with fantastic facilities
great horizontal infrastructure
green space for people a place
that people can drop off their
family members who work in
Mexico or maybe work in the
United States and really have a
border of dignity so this is
just the first part is changing
some of these are the statute so
that the border Authority can be
L. up much more proactive group
down with regards to
infrastructure and our two
experts so I'm going to remove
myself are two experts today are
just of delarosa and mark
overhead us so I'm gonna let Joe
come up here and sent.
Thank.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee so particularly
what this bill does is it amends
the
border Development Act to change
and the formatting of the
membership of the board it goes
up to eight members and it's
essential we modernizes kind of
the requirements for the
executive director position our
currently there are no
provisions in the statute for
any sort of technical or
professional knowledge or skill
sets and so as we move forward
to try and capitalize on some of
the activities and opportunities
the secretary Keyes outlined
we've identified the need to
kind of strength and the
diversity of the board to
include a legislator from the
border district two in trying
the other elected officials are
such as a county commissioner
city council representative from
a more from a border community
and additionally I we're looking
at
some provision are some language
in the border project fund for
residential but private
partnership capabilities so that
projects there can be entered
into agreements with pop private
entities as long as the the
projects are for public purposes
and so the border Authority
would undertake rulemaking if
this bill goes through and so
that that's it are kind of in
the broad strokes and I'm happy
to answer any questions thank
you thank you madam chair with
that was the proportions right
do we have anybody here in the
audience that is in favor of
this bill.
Anybody opposed.
Okay let's start with in favor.
The same last it is okay and it
would just be.
Hi mark Roper on the division
director of economic development
for this state of New Mexico.
As this bill is is been outlined
by by Joe here it's really going
to give us an opportunity to
improve economic development by
the investment in infrastructure
and by putting this in place
that will give us more
opportunities to improve what
what's already Gainey moment of
doubt on that border we stand
strongly in support of this
legislation thank you anybody
else.
Hey anybody in opposition.
Anybody on sale.
Sure okay let's go to the to the
committee and you.
Representative Duncan.
Representative chair
I just have one question.
this bill removes.
And with the that that the
governor is now able to choose.
Correct.
Madam chair representative
I would like to defer to my
experts for the.
Madam chair representative
Duncan the governor currently
appoints the members to the
border Authority board of
directors and what these changes
will do is
Quantify who the members should
be in terms of where they the
three that are pointed that are
up from the business sector they
have professional credentials
that are outlined there and then
one would be a county
commissioner reporter County one
would be a more city councilor
from
border community what would be a
legislators district borders
you the U. S. Mexico border and
they would still be subject to
the advice and consent of the
Senate.
Check.
I guess my question is if the
governor wanted to whether it's
a Republican or Democrat
governor governor could load up
their party.
And that is probably the crux of
what and why I don't like this
bill because it doesn't give
opportunities for diverse as a
more I wanted to most little
person I could find in my
hometown.
The reason I did that was
because he brought a different
set of skills that and a
different set of ideas that I.
Yeah after six years on the city
I always get rated movie of the
thank you for that and there's a
reason for that.
I don't know if I need some
money council and I don't
believe you need you are whoever
that is yes diversity on that
for and that it's on I'm I'm not
for this and I certainly will
support this with that language.
It needs to be.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Representative Mason.
Yes Representative up.
You never know what the under
one that.
That you know what first of all.
I do want to thank you for
bringing this bill forward
there's no doubt that we need to
upgrade.
Our border.
Presents at all in order to
bring in that stress she ended
in Mexico but that's the.
The new did answer my question
of why the changes which are
kind of the but along with.
Representative Dawkins I have a
real problem with.
Thank you the language in the
original bill at the thank.
One part of the members of the
committee.
M.
I. K. that it doesn't really
matter the right now.
Us as Republicans would want all
Democrats we don't have but.
But if we could in a few years
it might be a Republican we
don't want.
Wait for the board back in that
all Republicans the.
It's not good for Cappelletti of
the board of that anything
that's to construct.
One thing I noticed at this
point time you know with the.
United States senators United
States representatives
lieutenant governor.
We look at this point time with
the structure of the.
They're all Democrats.
Every one of us Representative
Senators.
Eight of the US or Democrats of
course part of that
but the so I do have a real
problem with that language and
the.
The rest of the bills you know
it.
I like it hello a lot seven
The.
With this while ago you know it
says.
All the consent advice of the
Senate but you know and.
Does that mean that they.
Board members I do come to the
legislature and go through I
believe that Senate rules for
confirmation and so that would
remain in place I believe that
the the only reason the party
affiliations were removed is it
would be difficult to specify
that you would have a Republican
member from a county commission
or democratic mayor a council
member and so when you have
those qualifications adding an
additional party affiliation I
would kind of make it you know I
think incredibly complex to do
that but I think there may be
the opportunity to address it
through the three
Or you may be able to add some
language that says we're no more
than you know five of the
members should be Democrats or
of one party affiliations I I
think you know there's probably
a way to fix that and we could
probably do that between now and
the next committee
or or I mean I guess the
committee could you know fix
that here but you know we're
we're not specifically tied to
anything in that the intent of
it is to modernize and update
the language into diversified
the membership of the board and
now those qualifications I
should note that this bill was
run a similar bill was run Opeth
and twenty eighteen it was H. B.
two ninety five it was also run
as H. B. six fifty two and
twenty nineteen I'm so we just
kind of Representative Lara is
co sponsor Representative Roger
Representative small I'm reading
it this year and so you know a
lot of that language came from
the regional bill.
Thank you.
Here.
Representative you know I
appreciate that lack of stated
online a lot of the bill that
the without some changes.
The get it we're we're not
either part of it I'm not.
Necessarily.
Campaigning for Republicans on
the committee.
But I have can I use that not
all of the.
And if.
With that size which.
Welcome to support the bill.
Without some assurances try that
I'll have to.
Use respectfully.
Not support legislation.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Representative
Martinez.
madam chair representative thank
you for the opportunity.
Representative fusion.
that I have.
can you tell me Representative.
Changing the board.
Making the changes of you're
wanting to accomplish with this
bill how is that.
Relations right.
Representative manager I'd like
to divergence of opposition.
thank you madam chair of
Representative and
Representative Lara
so currently the secretary of
economic development chairs the
board and the members aside from
the party affiliation there
there's no.
Qualification for board members
so you can have board members
are all from one sector for
example three lawyers you can
have.
Someone that doesn't have you
know specific business
experience some that's not from
the agriculture industry the
secretary of transportation as
an ex officio member and doesn't
actually vote even though many
of the infrastructure projects
that are funded down at the
border come through DOT for
funding so what this does is it
in addition the secretary of
economic development and that's
the secretary of transportation
as a voting member so they have
more of that direct interest in
participation and the success of
the border Authority itself then
you have the three members
appointed by the governor.
Representative the private
sector and have professional
experience in accounting
agriculture.
Business logistics or freight
shipping business management
economic or land development
economics engineering finance
international commerce or the
practice of law so with the the
goal there is to get three
professionals from the community
that have some specific
contribution to the border
authorities activity so when
they have counterparts in Mexico
that they're dealing with or
they're pursuing policies in
advising of the governor the
Legislature and other
departments in the state they've
got more of a specific
background that strengthens you
know the border authorities
expertise and and resources and
then you're including
statutorily right now the
Some local officials who right
now there are currently there's
a member from the dot like Luna
County serves on the board in
the past there have been
some others but what they can do
is speak on the international
relationships with their
counterparts so if you have a
more of a border community that
works closely with the more on
another community I'm similarly
commissioners a legislator who's
from a border district there's a
thing called the border
legislators conference so that
brings in you know some slide in
there and some some skill sets
and knowledge on that's
currently not there and then it
also as we go through the
interim committees income on an
annual basis you know we're
we're better discussed and kind
of the policies are better
vetted that we're trying to
pursue with the statutorily
through the executive or the
legislative branch and so right
now and it's not to say we we
are fortunate to have very good
board members but this is just
ensuring that in the future and
as you said some other governor
comes and and it's not people
that just have no experience and
and potentially be you know
involved in in border policy
without actually having any
knowledge or response effect
professional experience.
Madam chair with.
Please see.
Or some type of.
Two forty some type of
Our.
All members why.
What is it right.
Mr chair representative that's a
good point again we added the
border legislature it was at
seven and so when you had at
that position which was not in
the previous versions of the
bill that brought it up to
eight.
Madam chair representative.
It gives me but I just.
You're right.
That long for.
moving on chair representative.
I like.
Question why the Saudis which.
Qualifications for the executive
director.
Why why we.
Why are you not jobs focusing
on.
More business.
Because of your appointment from
the governor.
As a whole lot of government.
There's a whole lot of politics.
Why not get people from the
border area.
I don't really want to focus on
the issues and not focus on.
It on making government
whichever party whichever
governor it is.
You've got appointed to work
like that I don't want to
reflect on the wall.
Why not focus on.
Instead of having the government
level these appointments.
Why not look for people with
qualifications you're you're
raising the qualifications for
executive director like I said I
chair representative I think
that's a great idea.
What can you get all these
political force.
And.
I mean in your opinion
representatives at the.
Will be the long is it gonna.
Create better trading the
borders again we should need
more.
Madam chair of Representative so
I.
I would say that I believe that
those persons or on there are
local people and are invested in
the local economy in the local
community so those you know
those people have a vested
interest because are there
either from the area where they
live and and and and that
particular that's going to be
affected so eight you know bye
money by allowing the the number
of the committee members your
the the important aspect I think
that we're leaving out is that
there are local people are not
people from from other parts of
the state so those are the
people are going to be directly
impacted weather up there is
Republic and the for the for for
Democrat those people still have
that **** vested interest of
being locals and having that
local impact this Representative
manager.
Madam chair representative I
like like that.
On.
On page seven.
Those born.
All along.
The.
Additional members as necessary.
For the show.
We see if
it.
madam chair Representative
Martinez so the advisory that
this is an advisory
For that is to advise the actual
board which is the decision
making of statutorily
responsible entity for of the
border Authority about what this
section does is it invites
people to be more engaged in the
border authorities meetings and
their activities and so you know
the situation we're we're kind
of you know are discussing were
may be there's of voice that's
missing in the room the board
itself would be able to
designated at this additional
advisory members to make sure
that there it really is full
stakeholder engagement and you
know at this point I think what
that allows is for if you know
there is someone who it's a new
entity in New state agency a new
federal border commission
international you know the.
Entity of some sort that may
want to come and and advised the
the border Authority in be
designated as an official
adviser to the border Authority
on that's what that language
would allow.
Thank you madam chair
representative.
I want to always look at the
unintended consequences of
which.
What.
In that statute.
This language.
We were bringing people from
another country.
Tweet by.
One or forty shouldn't be
happening and we shouldn't of
the.
I don't practice.
I mean we are dealing with
border issues.
Are those meetings not happening
is that what we're putting
stature.
Madam chair representative I
think part of this
you know when we reviewed it I
really remains because during
COVID when it was really hard to
to have the face to face
meetings up like the New Mexico
to all commission which is also
the border Development Act The
New Mexico Sonora Commission and
some of those in person
meetings relationships did you
know kind of you know
deteriorate a little bit right
there which is where the
opportunities for communication
on that direct engagement and so
what this does is by having
official
designated advisers when the
border Authority was meeting the
zoom and and virtually there
would have been notices that
would have gone out to these
people and and some of them you
know went to someone that was no
longer in that position and
because there's not an official
designated advisory capacity
folks that were on the
distribution list as a regular
stakeholder list may not a
representative you know that the
entities that in need
representation and and some of
the issues that we were going
through because it's you know
particularly during you know the
the pandemic of cross border
logistics and you know the the
shipping and and those sorts of
things continue to be a really
major issue and supply changes
globally but definitely along
the border.
Chair of the.
The.
Senator.
Mr chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee also Representative
Martinez one of the things that
we're doing right now is working
on the expansion of sanitary
support and it does not matter
if we get the funding and if we
have the plans if the Mexican
side does not have the funding
in the plans at the same time so
that's super super important and
something we've realized this
year is that we just can't do
this once a year and a
commission this is an ongoing
relationship with regards to
global trade.
Madam chair Senators secretary
so.
Why not just mandate will
meeting.
Make them.
J..
You madam chair members of the
committee it's very hard to
coordinate schedules of
secretaries in and also
governors New Mexico and the
secretaries in the governor's in
New Mexico I don't think
logistically it would happen to
be honest with you if it was
more than once a year.
Madam chair representative
secretary.
All I get that what goals does
or figure.
They've been sent out.
Order eight is this that things
in motion to get everything and
then.
Of the.
Top level.
People can get together once a
year just about a mile or these
I guess one point out for these
meetings not happening regularly
madam chair members of the
committee they're happening
regularly they were not
happening because of COVID in
the travel restrictions but we
are in the process right now of
scheduling them again
statutorily though they only
need to happen once a year with
regards to that it's very hard
to get people to pay and there
we have to pay using our
department funds to actually
travel down so all of the I
think it's like twelve
secretaries so that that is a
little bit cost prohibitive I'll
be honest with you but we do
feel like with with them
involved on the border Authority
and sometimes you know these
happen happening the assume it's
just a more consistent
conversation at least quarterly
and quite honestly it that that
the you know that's not even
enough right now with regards to
this we were just Joe and I were
just on the border you know yes
last week and will probably
going to get next week.
chair representative thank you
Sir our.
Understand the demands of the
cabinet secretaries of.
Well.
I just it to me it seems like
this this would be model
prisoners.
For.
All of the services or daily
business was dealing with a
major issue.
during cold weather up there was
a lot of work done across the
board on the we.
People.
A lot of the office I can
imagine what it's like trying to
set up a meeting of the board
with another country so I I
appreciate that but under normal
business.
There should be representatives
of the four forty meeting with.
All of the.
Off of the Mexican side of the
work for the photo should be on
the board.
Madam chair members of the
committee yes markup or had a
does take those regular meetings
that are with the community down
there but what we are talking
about though is more high level
conversations regarding funding
and federal funding in
government funding and to be
honest with you when we came in
four years ago the governor said
that global trade was one of her
priorities and I think that that
area is doing to be doing a
great job to be IDA is doing a
great job but we are seeing this
moment in time where people are
on shoring reshoring their
companies whether that the car
companies from the US or Asian
manufacturers who no longer want
to be in China so it is just.
An influx of opportunity
information meetings that has
happened really within the last
three years.
So.
Thank you madam chair Sir just
one question.
Russian.
Trying to wrap my head around.
Is that the team up for going
through this.
Yes LFC not getting a report
card from the one forty on
regulations.
Madam chair representative
The LFC is getting a report but
it's not statutorily required
the only thing in statute is New
Mexico the finance authority has
over side of the border
Authority and so the sponsor and
in reviewing this also you know
thought it would be really good
to what we're cleaning up some
other things up but in statute
that the border Authority would
be reporting to LFC and such as
formalizing what's already
happening.
Madam shares Representative one
one last question.
Really.
Kind of scared me when I read it
on on page eighteen.
We've been there talks about.
You've reached out to one of
more several times.
Can you explain that to madam
chair representative.
What's what is the need for.
She.
All the sub accounts.
Okay Madam chair representative
I'm so the existing languages
you can see up provides for sub
accounts and so this is actually
just re wording
to to kind of I think be clearer
so when it says may consist of
sub accounts is determined to be
necessary it's just saying that
there may be sub accounts
establishing the border project
fund and so I what I believe
that does is it allows if the
Legislature were to I'm
a specific funding sources to
the order project fund that
money could be separated out
from the border project fund to
a specific statutorily
specified purpose so you know
you can have unidentified
project within the border
project funded so that sub
account would be limited only to
that specific project in other
words it would just be in the
general in a pot of the order
project fund.
Sure I.
This is.
madam chair at the bottom of.
Age eighteen.
starting online forty three
with.
All.
Well
One of the eight two.
eight costs incurred wishing to
remains with I a person's.
The amounts of money by four
percent for public.
This Madam chair representative
is this.
Those are my conception to the
no nation San Andreas.
Madam chair representative so we
had to lawyers take a look at
this language and what this does
is when you have the words for a
public purpose I what that does
is it ensures that any money
public monies that would be
basically reimbursed to a
private entity for public
infrastructure would remain in
the public domain so the example
of this would be if the the
company wanted to locate at the
border and they were going to
you know to go public water well
that was going to be available
to other you know businesses and
whether it's a county the city
creating a you know it was the
result you to would be there
they could actually pay up front
for the well at their own
expense and then you know the
order of forty could potentially
reimburse them for that public
cost so that it would be
dedicated to creating a or to
the border Authority the same
would like if they did you know
I wrote we would want to make
sure that it wasn't a public
road I mean a private road at
the end of you know some sort of
development agreement so that's
essentially what this does is it
allows of the border Authority
to enter into development
agreements and potentially have
like a reimbursement provision
up but it would only be for a
public infrastructure.
check.
Thank you.
I have to say there's a lot of
the this bill would.
The least not being this this
last part is covered.
I hope we'll have what she's
like the.
The the.
The.
Representative Representative
Lundstrom.
Madam chair of thank you Sanchez
Bill.
This is.
Our.
I need to let me know that J. Y.
and you look on page two.
What is your estimate.
Why would we.
Projects are forced to.
And that's exactly what's wrong.
Because of what these right
right and mark.
And generally with the three
are.
News or I think.
There's always a chance.
But yeah.
Government service.
And that means more promulgate
rules for you.
And.
Projects at what point is
Rovers.
And that's how we read on this.
I also manage.
That water change job
description.
Well process.
You don't necessarily have to
statute of those requirements in
there were some expired.
But what is a.
Major search.
To the third round.
I have probably again rules.
I I'm person that the results
for these.
Call.
Not simply going in setting up a
little.
Because of what it is is is that
animals are financial
relationship.
So that maybe or maybe not the
that membership in.
But it's really a setting of the
rules for traction.
What is going to be Hey what is
going to be Hey what those terms
I.
I would ask you're listening for
how does he see that being done
under this phone call and.
There's an oversized.
Madam chair
Representative members of the
committee so I think
rulemaking as we know
shouldn't be an exhaustive a
process where you have input
from all the stakeholders and
and the parties and that's the
way I think we got you know good
rules and so I can understand
the concern about oversight and
how exactly that you know
process with you know yield
something that is
you know definitely
You know keeping the ability of
the board to select projects
based on the criteria that
accounts for all of the
different you know stakeholders
but particularly you know the
the legislators and the lawyers
that are involved from the
attorney general's office which
staffs the border Authority up
to the DOT lawyers and EDT
lawyers I want also to be
involved in that process but I
would say that that's the reason
that we're also solidifying the
LFC reporting requirements is
that increase that oversight of
which projects would or wouldn't
be funded and so it could be on
that a rule making you know
projects you know are not
selected until you know they've
been presented through on the
legislature or through that
process that that's the part
that you know I think we need to
kind of work out but the.
To.
Explain to me what public
purposes in this context this
bill now tells me you don't.
As you setting up the public for
this P..
We need to understand what that
value of.
And you just say it's for roads
or
our water and wastewater lines
those kind of things you should
say that in the.
But when you're thinking about
how the pay back process.
And how that value is determined
at that point we want to make
sure that the public isn't for
you.
So you need explained in the
madam chair what is the public
purpose definition.
It's public infrastructure you
should say that.
Madam chair
Representative members of the
committee so I think that you
know when this was drafted the
definitions that are outlined
beginning on page two and they
go through a page three and then
to page four specify what
exactly the types of project the
border Authority has the
authority to undertake and so
you know you can see like under
seven which is line sixteen on
page three infrastructure
development involving requiring
repairing improving or
maintaining storm sewers and
other drainage improvements
sanitary sewers sewage treatment
water utilities are solid waste
disposal facilities including
rights of way and then where it
goes on from there all the
streets it is specified and the
border Authority does have
limited authority on the types
of projects that they're able to
be involved in and so.
The manager.
Or may have information County.
So if a project is being paid
for by private developers have
the set possible today.
It is done well months for now.
There's a escalated for
inflation how would how would
you do that.
Well I believe you can write
those clauses into the contracts
which is you know kind of what
duty does and what you know
other development agreements at
a future but we also believe we
can cap the cost and so if you
cap million dollars sorry madam
chair for a project if the have
cost over runs the commitment in
the agreement only specifies a
million dollars so I think in
that instance the developer I
would only be able to recoup the
amount per the contract.
Act and usually there's more of
a.
but I mean it is not going to
feels better at removing their
costs.
What it cost is an opportunity
cost that's a loss for them.
Because it would be spending the
money on something else.
So I think this bill managers
not quite.
These.
So right.
All right I think we need to
have.
those are the ones.
We do have.
Having worked for so many years
on the emails.
This is not a number of
education regarding suicide.
Is not enough information public
process.
Madam.
Any other comments or questions
in the committee.
Representative Chasey is just
one question and I apologize for
making a second I've this
activity and the other point
that has members from another
taxi sitting on.
the state.
I'm madam chair Representative
just it to be clear there will
be no four members from other
countries that that's an
advisory membership which is not
the same as a member of the
board and will not be voting
we're actually having a formal
The kind of statutorily provided
role in terms of
responsibilities as a board
member so.
Expect the manager.
It was one of the committee.
so I was stated I also has on
page eighteen regarding.
Hey that is with thank you.
The nation's classifications yes
ma'am I was.
The questions asked.
With the response.
Madam chair
so when this was drafted and we
ran it on both through LCS and
then we also had to other
lawyers look at it this was one
of our primary concerns but what
they did is they took language
from other statutes including
seven tubes and pits and other
public infrastructure
financing statutes and then
crafted this particular language
for that for that reason.
You know I I am very much in
favor of the state that's my
areas make sure the early is is
that right you take care of I am
sure that this is.
The will to do it I am seeing
some red flags.
So.
Could you give me an example of
what it I mean remember the kind
of person learning the advance
of funding for public purposes
entities that if they did a
road.
Would you know that point here.
Madam chair so what one of the
the issues we have is so when
the manufacturers looking to
locate at the border they've
approached us in some instances
and they have cash ready to go
and hand and so they're willing
to to build what will end up
being a state or county
maintained road on it will be a
public road but in order for
them to wait for us to either
get it through the duty that the
state transportation improvement
program or through capital
outlay the following legislative
session to then be available the
following fiscal year doesn't
the delays don't often fit with
their schedules and so if for
example they were to say you
know we'll build this road but
you're going to need to pay for
the signal you know you're going
to need to pay for you know the
storm drain connection to some
other adjacent facility because
that's a Public you know utility
that's a public something we're
not going to own will spend the
money but you know we would cost
X. we could enter into an
agreement to basically pay for
that out of this fund I without
having to go and see an
appropriation and so again there
is no general appropriation in
this and so at this point this
is doing is creating the
framework because there is no
money in the border project
funding to go to these purposes
but next year subsequently at
some place down the road again
after rulemaking you know and
and there's kind of those
safeguards in those guidelines
for what that that would look
like would allow funding to come
in there and so like right now
at the legislature decided they
wanted to put money into the
border project fund.
there really are no rules
oversight or mechanism by which
you could you know pay for you
know some of that infrastructure
that is a developer
manufacturer some industrial
you know our investment at this
point so what this does is it
just creates the framework to
then go through the rule making
and then potentially receive
appropriation somewhere down the
road.
the thing is for the committee.
The desire the committee.
I think.
It's
better to take a second.
The wrong.
Representative and in order.
Representative Duncan yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente yes
Representative little check
Representative Lundstrom yes.
Senator Martinez yes
Representative Mason yes
Representative Matthews yes.
Representative and in order.
Yes.
Sure yes madam chair yes.
tallies live folks yes Sir.
The table thank.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Representative Matthews Ortiz
that to us.
The Los pool.
Are you getting more.
For the.
This is an easy.
Representative this is that the
doctor.
Four four three three eight
months.
We put it.
Representative.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee
We are back on the committee
substitute for house bill eighty
three.
And this is I think as I
mentioned last time it was a
bill that originally began with
some very the.
The simple changes in dietary
Act and evolved into a much
bigger project with the
assistance of the
The department regulation
licensing to take the productor
board and make it subject to the
medical board and now that.
We have a lot of additional
time.
to read this very long committee
substitute I'm sure you won't
have any questions we will have
committed to memory.
To move the.
This up for discussion I think
that would be outstanding
already.
Right.
Madam chair I'm sorry do we need
to about.
Well we're just using it as a
patient first okay thank you
just to go straight to the.
Three.
There madam chair there no
governor appointees.
Okay madam chair to remind the
committee because it was a
special moment.
The reason that there was some
delay in this was because we
came across the phrase moral
turpitude.
And.
And so I did that that was an
antiquated.
Integrated raised for all kinds
of things that we're going to
talk about public.
So we made some changes.
And actually.
It turned out.
Chair.
Maybe I I I'll go to this first
because this is a a an
amendment.
the more interpretive was on
page thirty one.
Thirty one.
The language we needed to
replace.
Was beginning online twenty.
And about the the conviction of
a crime involving moral
turpitude turpitude show by
certified copy record including
convictions.
Yeah by removing that we had to
replace it with some new
language and a new language
madam chair.
Is the interesting phrases I
understand comes from the U. LA
and what CYFD says which
constitutes conviction which
constitutes disqualifying
criminal conduct.
As the chair of that board as
used in this subsection
disqualifying criminal
conviction means a conviction
for crimes that is job related.
For the position in question
consistent with business
necessity.
And madam chair.
Trying to apply that to.
Body entry positions was kind of
an interesting exercise in.
What that meant I thought maybe
a minute No shoes no service or
something like that but
So given the.
This strange.
Way that that applied to this
particular bill we don't like to
offer an amendment.
That would be a little bit more
specific.
And
If I might read our proposed
language at page thirty one line
twenty.
Disqualifying criminal
conviction as determined by the
board as used in this subsection
disqualifying criminal
conviction means a conviction
for a crime that is related to
the profession of the diet.
So so I move the amendment to
the committee substitute for
section.
So so let's get that passed do
we have the amendment.
Okay okay.
We're
gonna have the.
I feel.
On.
But it's chair it page thirty
one and one twenty.
Of the.
The committee substitute.
R. B..
So go ahead and read what you
are suggesting the amendment
should be.
Getting after all right nine
twenty eight thirty one thirty
one point twenty alright the
conviction.
And then replacing it with the
bracketed language with.
The ex.
Okay.
Okay actuate madam chair.
state thirty one H. twenty we
take out the word conviction.
And we actually take out all of
that section.
One nine one page thirty two.
And we place that with the
freight with.
RBC.
Disqualifying criminal
convictions.
As determined by the board.
And this would be the Medical
Board.
And as used in this subsection
is quote disqualifying criminal
conviction in a quote means a
conviction for a crime it is
related to the profession of
production.
I
am sure I can read that again
please DO.
So we're replacing all of part
B..
Getting aligned twenty page
thirty one and ending on page
thirty two it line one.
With disqualifying criminal
convictions as determined by the
board as used in this
subsection.
Disqualifying criminal
convictions means a conviction
for a crime that is related to
the profession hi three.
Representative is this the only
place that will be placed into
our develop.
Madam chair yes that is the only
place it will be put into the
bill and and the reason we're
doing this is to make it so that
it's clear.
That relates to profession
podiatry because the U. LA
language really is inappropriate
in apt for this.
Okay.
I think there's that clarifying
question for Representative
Mason before we go any further.
We get a.
You have a copy of this language
so I understanding from the
representative is that she's she
was doing this on the fly and
usually I know we do a clean
bill but since she is taking
that and given this she's done
it a couple times and I think
this is the last correction in
my correct.
It's here hi.
Right.
Have.
Do you have the amendment typed
up and Madam chair I do so let's
get some copies I think so the
the committee is clear.
We can continue to to talk and
we can talk about and then we
can.
Hopefully bring it all together
chair that would be terrific
okay.
at the last meeting.
I don't care if I can continue
up there Representative the
superintendents had Trujillo who
is my experiencing any.
At did a very detailed analysis
of how this bill was changing
and I am not going to repeat all
that.
And listen buddy has a specific
question is it really basically
the border podiatry.
The profession of but died three
physique possession.
That body at three positions.
Is.
Going to now be supervised by
the medical board and will have
its own advisory committee and.
And hopefully everyone will be
extremely pleased with this as
both boards are.
Very happy to have this
happening and superintendent
Trujillo is overjoyed.
Thank you and and thank you just
superintendent for being here
would you like to add a few
words what we're trying to get
the copy so absolutely madam
chair members of the committee
thank you for giving us this
other opportunity to make a few
corrections that needed to be
done I will just add that we did
remove the definition of
association because there was a
conflict so that got taken out
of the definition section we
added back podiatry on page
thirty three what we're saying
you can't use any of these terms
we must that I think what
happened is we the the director
Miss search and replace and the
panelists pointed out that we
also don't want them to use the
term but I address if they're on
licensed and so that got added
back in where it had been struck
and then for the the FBI
fingerprint background we
clarified that it was a
condition for licensure so those
are the three changes that were
substantive but minimal in
addition to this moral turpitude
and I will just say that I I
have to agree that that moral
turpitude not the moral
turpitude the the job related
consistent with business
necessity is a very confusing
language but you also some of
the long timers may recall that
during the first special session
of twenty twenty one when I was
working very hard to get the
count of this bill through in
the Senate side they were
working because we have divided
those two from the regular
session aware there was the
expungement and there was the
cannabis I was working on the
cannabis and the the Senate was
working on the expungement that
language got put it into the U.
LA hundred that piece of
legislation and that it became
effective you know in April of
twenty twenty one.
And all of our boards had to go
through this this very very
difficult process in
collaboration with the attorney
general's office to figure out
all right what is job related
what is business necessity and
how does that apply to licensure
and we came up with it okay it's
got to be because of the job
that you're going to get and
it's got to be because of the
task that you're going to do but
it was a very difficult
transition so I actually
appreciate the language that
makes it much more clear about
podiatry that's being proposed
here today thank you
superintendent
I am trying to steal a little
bit on track here.
Did we so now we have we've got
a substitute it with the
amendment to the substitute as I
want to make sure that we.
Okay and so I want to make sure
that we are do that process wise
we're doing correctly and so
We've got on the sixty first for
the amendment the members to
discuss users.
Representative discuss the.
Yeah.
Okay we have to discuss.
Okay.
Just making sure we did that
correctly so let's let's do
that.
So we want to
Yes.
Thank you.
Do we have any
anybody opposed to doing that.
And you make is to the.
Very complicated
okay so then.
We're back on to the substitute
as amended.
Just as we have heard this bill
before we have taken public
comment
I'm just opening it up to the
committee if they have any
comments if not let's move
to the well is there any
comments from the committee.
Yes Sir Mr representative Duncan
thank you madam chair I was as
Percent of Matthews if we any of
us ever come on bill has terms
like that Chico Sanchez.
Thanks all right up
Representative mais.
Just another I was talking to
her expert witness before this
the and through the time I
walked for the back to.
All right all right so is there
what is the desire of the
committee.
Pass through us for the issue.
Do not.
We
have
measures to avoid excess as a
man okay.
All righty so that you can you
please do.
Yes.
Would you.
We please take their own.
Representative and in order.
Yes.
Representative yes
Representative attendance.
Representative Lente yes.
Little.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez yes.
Mason yes Representative
Matthews yes with the next.
Sure yes the next.
yes
yes you're able to.
We've got amended bill.
Thank you and you can get the
amendment is chair members of
the committee if anyone else
needs help with.
The two.
I would I'm willing to help
carry the.
Thank you all right.
Thanks for the
okay.
Apparently we had to.
Migration was six with your
public I I do want to thank you
for all the work I know you guys
a back and forth a lot for this
really trying to fight it off it
was quite a little difficult to
pass it just because of illness
I wanna make sure we cut
everything but it is that point
in the session where we have to
have trust that we've done all
we can in that sense but I will
tell you for it was a comes the
floor I will be looking closely
at picture on it but and your
Google search and.
This.
Thank you thank you all right we
can get house bill four ninety
four.
You madam chair members the
committee.
Good evening.
Thank you.
I know enough to begin the.
Your booster club.
Good explain your bills thank
you madam chair members the
committee on house bill four
ninety four amending section of
the liquor control act to allow
persons at least eighteen years
of age to deliver and stock
package all call predators madam
chair members if we with that
means right now in the law it
states that you have to have a
CDL in order to package liquor.
and any displays so we're trying
to amend that to allow a tear
rolls at don't have a CDL the
ability to practice liquor and
maybe help out the workforce
manager.
My witnesses are marked for when
this is Jimmy Bates madam chair
and will stand for questions.
Okay Mister based anything to
adder.
Or do you that are you ready to
proceed.
I don't remember the proceed
with questions okay do we have
anybody here in favor this belt.
Anybody opposed to the bill.
Okay let's start by this.
Madam chair members of the
committee good afternoon my
name's John Thompson I'm a
registered lobbyist for admiral
beverage corporation and L. and
F. distributors.
Definitely support the bill
to put it simply it eighteen all
right now can serve you a drink
in a restaurant open drink we're
asking for an eighteen year old
an up to be able to for lack of
better term put a box on a shelf
that when they're delivering
product manager thank you thank
you.
Thank you madam chair L. park on
that the New Mexico brewers
guild for all the reasons that
we support the legislation thank
you.
Okay.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is cut
four and the co owner of tractor
bring a troubled minds is
selling and I'm on the executive
committee of the New Mexico
distillers guild and our
products are delivered
graciously buyer distributors
and this is something that they
really need to continue to serve
us so we appreciate your support
tech.
Just a support yes Sir.
Madam chair members committee
rich gay with premier
distributing
I support this bill
wholeheartedly and spirit lies
my.
My daughter's are serving age
and they can serve open
containers to people and I think
this is a common sense piece of
legislation and I supported on
percent thank you anybody in
opposition of the bills.
Anybody on zoom.
The committee.
Could I just have two questions
because I want.
Representative Hernandez thank
you Mr
I just want to make sure
everybody understands it so
hello you have to be now under
the new requests to service.
To serve alcohol to something.
Eighteen.
It's not so I don't understand
why we would not allow them to
also staff on a ship that's all
I got your thank you.
Anybody else on the committee
have a question or comment.
Madam.
Representative basin.
With.
As.
The location for the.
The.
This will.
That what.
One of the for the.
Of Representative I'm not sure
that I'm not sure that right now
but.
Representative and I will get
back to you this afternoon.
That are.
For the the more I I.
The.
That.
To the.
Allowing the.
What.
This is our Representative all.
Thank you Representative.
Representative Matthews did you
have before you on the list.
Madam chair I was just have.
Just.
Surprised that.
Has always been about that
eighteen year olds could
certainly for like of our thank
you madam chair representative
can does done in the last bill
we all hope that we did in two
thousand twenty one.
Madam chair that explains why I
thought they were looking so
Thank you.
All right any other questions or
concerns and the writing was the
desire the committee.
To thank everyone to do passers.
Take the rope.
Representative ending our new.
Yes Representative Duncan yes
Representative Hernandez.
But I think it's Representative
little Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez yes
Representative Mason.
Yes.
Representative Matthews yes
madam vice chair.
Yeah.
Chair yes after I was eleven
beta test scores.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee.
A space Senator are for seventy
five.
Thanks.
He doesn't would shorten the
chair.
You have to.
I can assume.
I'm actually taller than my
husband we sit by each other
really long torso.
All right.
Please go thank you madam chair
members of the committee today
we are presenting house bill
four seventy five this is my
expert witness Kerry Romero the
executive director of New Mexico
council of outfitters and
guides.
and this is not meant to.
Harm or disrespect anyone.
Straight up from the very
beginning this is about what we
what we think is best for New
Mexico and US specifically rural
New Mexico.
Madam chair representative and
Representative so our house bill
forty seven would simply
transfer the outdoor recreation
division from the economic
development department to the
New Mexico department of tourism
the division is currently under
economic development however.
We believe that the mission and
functions of the division more
closely aligned with the exact
existing initiatives undertaken
by the New Mexico department of
tourism.
the tourism department has an
existing relationship.
With outdoor recreation business
such as skiing outfitting
hunting and fishing operations
and agritourism as well as many
others these relationships are
well established and predated to
the creation of the outdoor
recreation division for many
years the mission of the outdoor
recreation division is to grow
existing.
Outdoor recreation businesses
and attract new ones.
The tourism department has is
already doing this and moving
the division two from EDD to
tourism will create efficiency
and reduce duplication of
agency efforts.
And I'd like to let my expert
witness at anything if she'd
like to thank you madam chair
and committee members again
Kerry Romero executive director
of the New Mexico council of
outfitters and guides we are
I would see six trade
association that advocates the
business segment of the hunting
and fishing industries we
represent three hundred small
businesses and there are over
three thousand employees I think
I'm Representative did a great
job explaining what this bill
does and really the bottom line
of this is that the tourism
department is already heavily
engaged in marketing and
promoting outdoor recreation and
for the three predominant
segments of the outdoor
recreation activities in terms
of gross income and also gross
receipts taxes that would be
skiing hunting and fishing in
that order
the tourism department is is
already driving our clientele.
The Economic Development
Department.
Since the creation of the
outdoor recreation division has
really focused on funding the
user segment about recreation so
that hikers the bikers of the
residents who are participating
in these free activities and
that's great that's fantastic
but there hasn't really been
that much emphasis on the
business aspect or building the
existing economy more attracting
new businesses so we would like
to see it move to tourism and
and you know reduce the
duplication and effort.
And and without madam chair also
the recreation aviation is a
thriving business we're looking
for someplace to go and we think
that the tourism is doing a
great job in trying to attract
those and I think that would
fall under this as well so when
with that madam chair we stand
for questions thank you
Representative is anyone here in
favor of this bill.
Anybody opposed.
Okay let's start we'll start
with the poses are just one.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's a lesser and
like on the deputy director of
the New Mexico and recreating
Division current acting
directors and currently vacant I
do want to see.
Voice our opposition to the
transfer of Activision and also
the
let you know that administration
and economic development.
Early and close to this transfer
after recreation with unified by
the governor and the nineteen.
Versified the state needs also
one of EDD's key top priorities
as.
Find laid out in its latest or
do you plan so we bill that the
house of the needy makes most
sense and allows for us to focus
on.
The entirety of the other.
Thank you thank you
anybody in favor let's start at
the back here.
Thank you madam chair Jeez weeks
rush of this project's cost
Delhi Association remember when
this bill was recently passed to
create apps or rex Division
there's a lot of discussion
where to place it in we do think
that the tourism department is
probably the purposes since it
does have a tourism based
component they have the
marketing ability to get the
word out relative to what a
direct is all about and and
hopefully proliferate that
message statewide and beyond the
state so for those reasons we
states thank you.
Madam chair committee out Lara
Riley I'm a registered lobbyist
for Gatland's solutions but
today as we that on my own
behalf I grew up on a ranch in
in western recovery the county
where over half of our income
table Representative agritourism
and hunting operations.
Course that was a long time
before any of have these these
agencies were were in place to
help us but since then I also
have managed to run several
large state agencies and I think
the important thing here to
remember is when you have an
initiative like outdoor
recreation it should be very
closely tied with the
philosophical outlook of HSD.
And in understanding the
agencies.
Outreach and how they deal with
people I think tourism is is the
more appropriate place both you
role areas and in our urban
areas because they understand
the need and it were brought
people to New Mexico that you
know that's what we feel we look
at it in our industry so thank
you.
Thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee to your Rivera with
Mexico for livestock bureau we
stand in strong support possible
for seventy five we're extremely
excited to see the provisions of
the bill that decline in average
for them as a priority sector
in outdoor recreation division
our organization has long sought
to expand and promote New
Mexico's agritourism industry
and we're so appreciative of the
inclusion and the support this
proposal agritourism activities
are perfect combination of
outdoor recreation and tourism
and they support producers in
diversifying their operations
can help revitalize rural
economies and communities work
to preserve our state strong
agricultural heritage
additionally agritourism
provided hands on experience
learning opportunities for
children and adults alike and
there are many iconic
agritourism operations located
throughout the state including
our very own feeling these Los
crucis for these reasons we
stand in strong support of the
bill and encourage you all to do
the same thank you anybody else.
Already today begins in just.
The the the serotonin.
That is all manager thank you
okay any questions or comments
from the committee.
Representative little.
Yes thank you madam chair.
Madam chair.
Thank you thank you so much.
can you tell me.
we're this bill is coming from
was it that.
To develop the EDD.
For.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee hi there.
All in all it to my experts
expand on that.
Thank you madam chair
representative little really it
was the business community
segment of yeah REC industry
that is bringing this forward
and you know I don't think that
I I got a chance to pass our
little flyer to you earlier but
we did have
a number of.
Association is that a
representative of the business
the other recreation business
industry sign on and really.
Where.
Where it's coming from is that
where we are already.
Partnered with the New Mexico
tourism department they already
do a substantial amount of
marketing and promotional work
we have really strong
relationships and we feel like
those relationships have not
necessarily been formed within
the outdoor recreation division
under EDD and so we we just
think that there's a lot of
duplicative efforts going on
between the two agencies and we
think it would be more
streamlined under the tourism
department.
The madam chair and
representative of the other part
of that is the outdoor
recreation advisory board
there's not a as far as we can
tell there's not a business
person on there.
So it's more about non profits
and and secretaries and things
like that it's not promoting
business in New Mexico EDD is
promoting bringing business here
and creating business but not
really advocating for business
that's already here to grow that
business.
And tourism is okay and so that
follow up question I would have
to that is what the business
community be willing to give
cover part of that partnership.
And have you asked that before
madam chair excuse me and has
that question is.
That request been made before
Madam chair representative
little yes definitely when the
operation division was created
in two thousand nineteen and
potentially even prior to that
yeah outdoor recreation division
concept has been in the works
for many many years under the
previous secretary of tourism
and originally it was going to
go into tourism now when the
legislation came in two thousand
nineteen to create the HSD I'm
not sure why at economic
development was selected but I
think all of us in the business
community were just so excited
to have it out directed vision
being created that it didn't
really occur to us that that it
might not be the best fit in in
hindsight I think that if we
could go back we we might have
originally tried to put it under
tourism in the beginning and and
we have definitely I mean we
were all there at the signing
when the governor signed this
bill in two thousand nineteen
and so I think we very much want
to have a relationship with the
economic development but really
their focus has been on on the
end user group the hiker the the
biker the individual person.
Engaging in outdoor recreation
but not necessarily paying for
those services the outdoor
recreation not supporting the
outdoor recreation businesses or
generating the economic
contribution for the industry.
I think I follow that
okay my second question madam
chair and.
Senator.
can you describe for me what on
page six lines nine ten and
eleven.
Creating specifically creating
change partnerships with up to a
recreation businesses what's
that idea behind chapters within
that.
Thank you madam chair
representative I'm going to
defer to my experts here Madam
chair representative little so
the outdoor recreation division
currently through the other
equity fund is tasked with
promoting the New Mexico outdoor
recreation over the past years
all of these requests with I
think the exception of maybe one
has gone to a nonprofit
organization for recreation
projects adding this paper
should language will allow the
outdoor equity fund to provide
sponsorships to the business
community and the sponsorships
are already under an advertising
exemption within existing
statutes so they're exempt under
the current procurement all.
Okay I'm not familiar with the
term I mean it would be used in
this sense Madam chair of the
term sponsorship can you go into
a little more detail for me
please.
So advertising sponsorships.
Is the exemption language and it
would be like for an example
the at the New Mexico ski
industry they they put the hosts
an event every year I don't
exactly know what's called some
pro skiing thank and and they
collaborate with the tourism
department under that
sponsorship extension to host
out of it also outdoor
recreation division has actually
also utilized this exemption to
to put on the the tour of the
left which I think is a bike
race I'm not.
I'm not certain but I'm and so
they facilitated that
partnership under the same
exemption however they don't
really have the capacity to
undertake all of the the efforts
of those various different
events and so then the tourism
department actually provided all
the services for that tour of
the line so the tourism
department is filling in the
holes where the outdoor
recreation division.
We have the capacity currently.
Thank you very much
Representative and madam chair
so it's my understanding that
the outdoor equity fund
that have been it's very.
Very intensive effort to
establish to have and has
successfully it's my
understanding
given our that's given an
opportunity to between three and
five hundred young people to
have benefited from being able
to become part of this
experience
in the outdoors Madam chair
representative how would that
continue.
Madam chair representative
little I I think we.
The projects that have been
funded through the outdoor
equity fund so far are fantastic
would like to see that continue
the you know the outfitting
industry does various different
promotional things for youth
and.
This with the added language to
the businesses would also allow
for the flexibility for some
partnerships between between the
agency and at outfitters
themselves the business owners
who are also facilitating these
youth experiences madam chair
and and Representative for
instance they I personally just
I'm on my private ranch allowed
the game and fish department to
put out some children that
didn't drop in the in job hunt
and we had a huge camping
experience outdoor cooking they
had to write the little essay
about why they wanted to this
experience and they chose seven
kids from all across the state
that came to the ranch and
experience that I've got to
haunt hello.
So that's one of the experiences
not that I would be applying for
these grants but it is the same
thing as you know some of the
outdoor equity these children or
from.
All ethnicities that came to the
ranch and and were chosen so it
was a really great experience
and I think this is just
allowing for more of that and
not
Just for the trails and things
like that but for other
experiences to happen out in the
wilderness.
Thank you Representative for
your
responses and and that that
would thank you madam chair that
all my question thank you
representative Duncan.
Thank you Madam I I just.
Like like you to teach you could
so what's the.
The have at it but.
Go ahead.
Madam chair representative
Duncan so EDD that economic
development are under the
outdoor recreation division so I
believe the I believe the amount
is one point one million yes.
We have an expertise.
By that yeah I'm here.
Are occurring on the morning.
Year after year.
Larger impact.
Thank you madam chair so with
that one point four million
dollars where do you see that
your business how to how do you
do you see personals do you see
the overseas what do you see
that would be driving me as a
guy for.
A significant hearing loss and.
Madam chair representative
Duncan.
From the outfitting hunting and
fishing industry specifically.
The.
Economic development departments
and you should too so far have
have not.
had an impact on our individual
business owners in that
particular industry segment
Primarily because.
Our clientele is predominantly
non resident so all of the money
captured through our industry is
considered tourism dollars
currently and the tourism
department is who does that
marketing so they are generating
our clientele they are marketing
to our clientele through that
the billboards that they have
and in the the airport you might
have seen on the you know that
don't have a you're going LFC
and they'll have a year like
needy powder and you know.
Some other outdoorsy things
they're they're driving our
clientele.
And and madam chair and
representative we think that it
would just enhance that as well
we already they are they are
driving a lot of it but we think
this would enhance it.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Martinez.
madam chair thank you very much
Some of these questions.
Madam chair representative.
On the FTEs what is this.
Madam chair representative
Martinez I believe they have
three FTEs and the at the deputy
director from the record now is
here and I'm sure she could.
Tell you for sure.
General fund and we FTEs one and
we have one.
A grandma.
Come on.
Thank you madam chair on.
Talk about there's a lot of.
I'm sure we'll.
Thanks for.
What what station for.
Madam chair representative
Martinez.
What I'm referring to is
probably more potential
duplication of effort a lot of
of the marketing that the
directed vision has done thus
far has been and your other
marketing which does not
necessarily placed at benefits
or drive business or attract new
businesses because really
they're they're marketing to the
end user and that's that's
really who were marketing to as
well and in order to to contract
business but I would think.
In its
Mission the outdoor recreation
division is basically tasked
with promoting business and and
driving new business so it would
seem that in theory there would
be potential duplication but
really the department of tourism
is is who does marketing for act
our collective business
community at this point time.
Madam chair were being.
Thanks for so.
This statute there's seven
different.
Several different agencies of
our soul.
Real quickly the free Google
recreation based on the number.
Support the efforts of the
economic development department
out of state.
I'll for recreation.
Okay Mexico.
Sure sure preservation of New
Mexico the environment total
assets from all.
So on and so forth.
Course of one of their past
is to promote tourism.
All.
That's great going that.
But there are a lot of other
listing your dad or the
responsibility of this
Although recreation.
I just don't see how important
tourism us the expertise to.
Be able to announce.
I think there may be a breakdown
communication industry.
The division.
All.
One city
problem.
But I think.
of discourse.
College.
sh I was with the.
State department
Have a very large.
Division move over.
it is very difficult in this.
The flight not to undertake it
and for us it made sense because
it was our specialty.
I don't understand how.
Promoting stewardship and
preservation of New Mexico's
unique environment.
and sing Public Health outdoor
recreation assets.
I don't understand how this is
in the purview of the department
stores.
could you explain that to me
Madam chair representative
expect.
Madam chair representative
Martinez
so actually stewardship is
already under the purview of the
department of tourism they are
by statute required to which it
gets to the language of the anti
litter campaign in in the bill.
They are they already have
several different programs the
keep New Mexico true program and
the clean and beautiful program
that focuses specifically on
stewardship and beautifying the
state maintaining our natural
spaces and and extended Stewart
storage additionally they are
already doing a lot of the
educational outreach for the
business community through their
various New Mexico true
campaigns.
Where there educating
nonresident clientele which is
the clientele of the outdoor
recreation industry.
In what New Mexico has to offer
what sort of experiences they
have what sort of outdoor
recreation I can find here you
know what type of topography
what what type of activities
that they can participate in so
a lot of those things.
A lot of those seven items in
their office the department of
tourism is already doing and
all state from the agritourism
standpoint the Economic
Development Department outdoor
rec division so far has not
recognized agritourism as an
outdoor recreation industry
however the department of
tourism does and they already
have a program through their
rural pathways program where
they recognize agritourism and
find partnerships and liaison
between the department of
tourism and the various
different agritourism
operations such as like McCall's
pumpkin patch I don't know if
you guys are familiar with that
that's in my area and then I
think that to formalize our
bureau mentioned a corn maze
that's increases area those
would be examples of agritourism
businesses.
Madam chair representative of
short
resumes already doing this.
Why don't we just do away with.
This division completely.
I'm all for smaller government.
I'm here Representative Martinez
that basically what we're doing
we're just moving it from from.
From PED tourism so there would
still be the FTEs you would
still have the capacity and you
can build on that with you know
the various different
infrastructure that's already
available under the tourism
department.
Chair representative what you
you said that they're already
doing this so you don't need the
extra FTE.
you don't need the extra
capacity because your to being
done.
I understand why.
Why not just do away with it if
it's already happening.
Other than being able to absorb
the F. P. in the budget.
But it.
Keep going.
Let's do away with.
You have to eat.
Madam chair representative one
of the things that we would like
to to grow it under if we could
move it to tourism and tourism
is already doing a lot of it but
bringing those FTEs over with
tourism is going to allow them
to grow even more and do more
and and if they inherit the
outdoor equity they would need
those FTEs.
Thank you madam chair
All of the I don't know that I
could support which.
Madam chair representative.
Thank you Representative
Representative Lente.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you Representative thank you to
your expert I appreciate the
comments of Representative
Martinez I think they're very
thorough and get a couple points
of it that I want it on as well
but I have a few follow ups then
up.
So so he came in here and I
think the question was asked who
asked for this and you said
nobody to.
But maybe you to date us up you
can expand on that regards to no
one aspect that you get to eat
your brains out we understand
that thank you madam chair and
representative.
Either of the secretaries asked
for it but other people are
asking for it and if you'd like
to expand.
Madam chair representative Lente
yeah I I I think the point is
just that the secretaries were
not asked to work with the
business community definitely
would like to see this and
And I I think going back to
Representative Martinez is point
that outdoor recreation division
is doing good things and we do
recognize that and and we don't
want to lose that but we would
like to see it maybe simplified
and you know cut out some of the
duplication and then enhanced
over on the tourism sites thank
you thank you madam chair thank
you Representative so if if
needed then the EDD or tourism
was it is asking for this or
what this change that
correct me if I'm wrong so
Department tourism is more of a
broad scale outside of the state
that's bring people into the
Mexico to enjoy our our state
right and then EDD as I
understand it is more localized.
I have a fifteen.
Changes in appreciation for the
outdoors part of localized I
guess workers citizen level is
that correct Madam chair
representative I don't think so
I think EDD is more about
bringing.
As a whole EDD is economic
development they are always that
they're trying to charge in the
bank recommend maybe that PED do
but the the department here that
we're talking about the outdoor
recreation division excuse me
hello Department yeah.
Madam chair and representative
Lente the other recreation
division and is underneath the
economic development department
at I believe the reason that it
was placed there is because
there was to be a focus on
building the economic side of
the outdoor recreation industry
and I mean in when the governor
was very heavily involved in
creating outdoor recreation
division that was kind of what
she said was her goal she wants
to build your current creation
industry she wants to you know
be comparable to Colorado well
the fact of the matter is the
outdoor recreation industry
depends on the tourism segment
the the whole of the revenue
that is generated through the
industry is not resident revenue
and that's not to minimize the
resident revenue that resident
revenue is extremely important
residents outdoor recreation is
extremely important we don't
want to lose that but the non
resident revenue is is really
what helps to build the economy
and that's where the tourism
department comes in thank you
thank you madam chair thank you
Representative another question
then as a follow so does does
the outdoor recreation division
currently promote agro tourism
and for outfitters and hunting
in New Mexico.
Madam chair representative Lente
and it is not.
So then thank you madam chair
representative so they're going
back to that Representative
Martinez is point.
Wouldn't it be easier that just
sit us make that request that
they add that to their platform
of of drugs that they were going
currently and then in the state
of you know forcing this
discussion.
I'm sure Representative Lente.
As an advocate for the outdoor
recreation industry as a whole I
would hate to see the outdoor
recreation division's.
Gains through the Economic
Development Department lost all
we're trying to do is move that
department into the department
of tourism so that they can
capitalize on the benefits
already being provided by the
department of tourism to enhance
the industry as a whole.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair
thank you for opening up this
discussion
Care you came by my office as
many yes.
Maybe it was on for the house
and no idea at this point
it would be to work for.
Madam chair Representative
Matthews I am employed by the
New Mexico council about figures
in guys which is the trade
association for the the
outfitting industry both the
hunting and fishing segment so
the organization that I am
employed by and and the
registered lobbyist for
that represents the business
community of the hunting and
fishing industry.
Thank you I think we are done
soon the couple others.
Sort of associations are
supporting this correct.
Madam chair
It would.
Quite clear with the demarcation
would come for example I know
that we've got a number of
trials being developed in the
state of with.
Would that be something that
tourism would be doing it if
this bill passes or would that
be something EDD's.
What else Representative
Matthews that's a great question
so the trails maintenance
portion of the operations
division would stay with the
outdoor recreation division
regardless of where it's at and
it is a very important component
trail maintenance is vital and I
I love the fact that the outdoor
equity
Fund helps to provide an Avenue
for trails maintenance because
the outfitting industry on the
hunting side they do a lot of
this trail maintenance and a lot
of it is done just for free
because they are the ones that
have to use these trails and if
this poor service is not
maintaining the trails the
outfitters maintain the trails
because they are the ones who
have to use them so I really
like the trails maintenance
portion of the outdoor equity
fund and you know would
definitely want to see it
continue and I think it would
just move.
With the agency are with the
division to tourism department.
And madam chair.
I just my phone economic
development ideas for outdoor
recreation and seventy should be
organizing bird watching tours
of the state it is providers are
fervent people and they a lot of
them actually have some money.
and this is a great bird
watching state and I don't know
that anybody's doing that is
anybody doing that Madam chair
representative Matthews I don't
think so but I can get to work
comics I represent the office of
those I want to do it I'm glad
to help.
And.
Image here is so tourism is not.
Thank you tourism is the
secretary tourism is.
Neutral on this or.
Quietly supporters I didn't
totally understand what that
connection here once Madam chair
representative on we don't want
to pit secretaries against each
other so I I mean the Economic
development agritourism I'm
sorry outdoor equity
person is in the room and I
don't think it's appropriate for
secretaries to stand up and we
don't want them to argue over
what where this goes we just
really want to promote New
Mexico and tourism and economic
development all in one and we
just really honestly feel like
this fits better under to resume
and economic development
Madam chair representative I
appreciate that but also with
paid to do something to a
different agency and the
secretary that agencies what was
supposed to do this.
Madam chair representative
Matthews if this out of this
committee you have my word that
I will discuss this bill with
the secretary of tourism.
What.
there has been no discussion
with the secretary tourism.
Madam chair representative
Matthews this bill came to
committee rather quickly and I
think that we maybe weren't
quite prepared for it to come to
committee so quickly so we have
not chatted with the secretary
of tourism I will say that in
previous discussions with
Over time through the
development of the outdoor
recreation division the tourism
industry did have an interest in
overseeing the division and so I
would hope that that sort of
opened or might still be there
I think chairman and that.
Expert and and Representative I.
I am reluctant to vote for
something in which the chair out
of state the secretary the
agency has not been.
Out and at least some
communications about this and
however I will say that I am I
agree with you that EDD is a
funny place for the kinds of
activities and the probably be
done better elsewhere but
without some.
Involvement with the secretary
tourism I would be very
reluctant to vote for this madam
chair and representative I.
I think most of you know me
pretty well if.
If this bill passes that we have
the conversation and if he does
not want to.
We it's really difficult because
we really don't want to pit them
against each other so it's very
hard for someone to say yes I
want to and then the other
secretaries say no don't take it
from me.
It's an offer to session and so.
If this bill moves forward and
if she says she does not want it
I will personally kill the bill.
I'm just being honest with you
because I I it it's a really
tough situation madam chair
because we care about both
secretaries and we want both of
them happy but we also want
what's best for New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair.
And that's how much thank you
Representative Representative
throughout the thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
bring for this bill I think you
know regardless what happens
here you should just go for it
will have a conversation it
happened and they should not I I
do think it opens up the
conversation of what the
directives you know the industry
hoping it goes and I will say
I'm a little surprised to see
and and again I'm not at a
working backpacking I'm not you
know I I enjoy it but I'm not a
professional
the reason why is that we look
at the numbers and outdoor
recreation New Mexico is growing
and it's it's is the to
significant industry and it
seems really done fairly well
since twenty nineteen whether
you're compared other states
okay in terms of growth that
outpaces the state I just as a
regular because I remember these
numbers look at again and these
are New Mexico state to the
national association saying that
New Mexico is is an example of
how to did you appropriation so
I'm guessing that I'm a little
surprised to see this change
your record as well because you
feel like that would increase
the more significantly.
Madam chair representative yes
we think we could and that the
growth would tremendously
increase thank you madam chair
thank you representatives at the
two things I'll just say in all
the cases that.
Two pieces of money to do and
what is it one tourism has a tax
already in its hands and our
other recreation is one of the
greatest you know.
Self advocates why everyone's
always going Mexico forever the
tourism is competing and other
southwestern states that have
significantly larger tourism
department budgets and dedicate
a lot of funds during the the
pandemic direct federal funds
directly towards our trip that
present moment was talking that
that secretary while ago and she
was saying look at the ten
hundreds I mean their their
budgets were significantly
larger there was an increase in
the operations here right up to
million you know but I.
So you know that's good but they
they have a monumental task and
from my perspective and I'll
stop here the it reminds me of
the relation between.
Eight LCS aging long term
services department and public
health I would hope that runs a
lot of those things that they do
a lot of stuff in consultation
with the LCS to because our
population so hoping that we'll
part do you do not see that as
being a potential and I don't
Representative use you know that
calm relations well I do work a
lot of issues for aging as well
do you not see that as being a
potential partnership that that
works like an example of this
case.
madam chair representative it
hasn't been so far and so we're
just hoping to really increase
that
We're not sure exactly why we're
not getting the.
Growth in the rural New Mexico
and across the state in this
area and we think that the
growth would come.
If we moved.
But I'm always willing to
collaborate agencies of course.
Thank you
So.
Yes I see that there's a problem
when the secretary is not here
that that that it would be
transferred to.
And so
I know the EDD waited very
heavily they submitted the
report and tourism did as well
and but they were very lukewarm
on their report.
And so I know that the that the
secretary was here earlier she
knew that this bill is here and
I think I for not being here is
is a signal to us in my opinion.
but I also hopes that EDD is a
hearing dissatisfaction that
that
this being waster today and so I
think that they can do better at
making sure that that
everybody's needs are and
expectations are being met and I
I also wanted to make sure that
you know EDD and tourism have
very different missions and
goals SO maybe that's what needs
to be really to get the total
debt of we need to really look
at defining some of that we're
clearly because they if you have
a different expectation as to
what they're going to do and
they have a different
expectation as to their
definition of what they should
be doing that I think that
there's a place it to me it just
seems like I'm not seeing clear
communication as I would hope
that you all would start there
and so I'm I'm well I'm very
reluctant on this bill and the
representative knows I always
want to support her bills but I
don't know that that's going to
happen today so I appreciate you
bringing this March and what's
the desire the committee.
Centrelink a motion for.
We have a second.
That's just table and the
second.
We do call the roll Senator.
And and in order.
Yes.
Representative don't know.
Representative Fernandes now.
Representative Lente yes.
Representative little yes.
Representative Lundstrom no.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Mason
Representative Matthews.
This is really hard
I've been this I'm gonna vote.
Madam vice chair yes the table.
Madam chair yes after the final
tally is as well as free as I
was for.
Six seven.
Okay so it's a table not thank
you for.
Thank you she listening.
But thirty.
I want to know.
Right.
Mole I've social issues of the
estimate.
