Don't get.
Here Representative Fernandes
here Representative that they.
Representative little.
Representative Lundstrom.
Martinez your.
Representative mesa your.
Representative Matthews here
alone.
By share your.
Check here.
We have a quorum all righty
Right Representative if you want
to explain yourself thank you
very much madam chair members of
the committee house bill seventy
nine
changes.
So there's a hearing that's
required for title insurance
every now two years for the
promulgation of those title
insurance rates throughout the
state it's a very evidence based
not heavy process expenses for
all involved sides and so it
house bill seventy nine does is
it just changes Committee.
Fireman to have that hearing
from every two years to every
three years and that is the bill
madam chair.
It's my expert this is Brett
more from our communities Casey
wants to talk about just how
hard these hearings are and what
we need to do is every three
years thank you madam chair
members the committee just very
quickly so you understand the
landscape of what this bill is
about the in the United States
there are three states that
promulgate title insurance
premium rates those states are
New Mexico Florida and Texas the
other two states they do not do
we mandatory hearing they do a
review I in Texas every five
years in Florida it's every
three years in New Mexico we do
on mandatory hearing every two
years so we are by far on the
the far end of the spectrum in
terms of conducting these
hearings and engaging in the
process of setting these rates
their use for title insurance
premiums we're asking in this
bill that that cycle loop from
two years to three years this
the concept has been vetted with
the office of superintendent of
insurance they are not standing
in opposition to this proposal
you look in the FIR you see
there is an expense that is
incurred by not only industries
but also by the agency and so it
would alleviate that burden
and the other thing that I would
know for you if there is any
issue with where the title
insurance rates are you can look
down in in the the end of the
language of the statute as it is
now in subsection B. it has the
authority of the superintendent
called hearing whenever it is
necessary so you still have this
discretionary hearing that could
occur that is the bill.
Thank you
do we have anybody here that is
in favor of the bill today in a
previous years you.
The opposed to the bill.
Have feedback across the
committee.
Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair in thank
you for the presentation for the
bill my memory of title
insurance is again there the
premium that the customer pays
is based on the.
selling price the phone we might
remember that correctly.
Madam chair defer to Mister
Moore Madam chair representative
you are correct if there's a
table that is used in depending
upon the value associated with
the transaction will come up
with a different premium.
And madam chair
so.
Did your bill the the question
is sort of popped into my head
was effective date the.
Selling price of homes.
in New Mexico and I guess across
the country but I only care
about New Mexico has been.
I just all over the place it is
prices shot up during the
pandemic and then the twenty two
tracer to rise to prices or
default and I'm just sort of
curious how.
That kind of a market with with
big increases and and and it
would ensure time drops
if you're only looking at the
rates every three years will
well that distort me how you
deal with those kinds of it how
does that factor into the price
of people would pay for for the
type of insurance Madam chair
representative it's an
interesting question because
when we have the hearings used
to be actually every every year
you you did have kind of that
fluctuations over time when we
do the hearing you have experts
come in and they give you
projections on the real estate
market and give you their best
guesses to the volume of
transactions so that you can
have some understanding of where
the the premium rates need to be
yes of actuaries calculating
insurance rates which is a very
detailed process so we try to
take a best guess based on with
the volume is and what those
prices are to come up with
something that is reasonable it
what is required within that the
hearing is that there is a
reasonable rate of return it's a
fairly standard provisions for
title insurance rates and we are
trying to set those rates at
eight.
An appropriate level over the
three years if you did it every
year you might see more of that
that fluctuation if there is it
say for example if the
superintendent.
Got it if the if the estimates
were just off if there was some
major event that happened within
the market and they needed to
adjust the superintendent would
come back and on under
subsection be and say okay the
rates are not accurate we need
to have a hearing and they would
start the process I sooner so
you have you have a bit of a
fallback in terms of if if there
if the rates too high if the
rates too low either could be
situations where the rate is so
low that you know the title
insurers are saying this is this
is running towards a really
prices point for us if say for
instance transaction a motion
really if there is to a
detrimental level that could be
re examined by the
superintendent if the
superintendent chose to.
I'm sure that's all my questions
thank you very much for that and
she.
Thank you madam chair the best.
We still have a.
Listenable that motion
Representative Martinez.
Madam chair representative I
appreciate this opportunity to
ask you a question.
if if the offices of the
superintendent is not asking for
this.
I was asking for was it who is
this going to benefit.
Madam chair representative
Martinez up all start on
different expert but that
previous superintendent Russell
tall hi would be communication
with us and had asked for this
change is no longer in the
apple.
He is no longer in in that role
but I do believe that I will
defer to me Mr more that the the
office is still in support of
the change.
Madam chair representative in
this instance I am representing
fidelity national title
insurance this is an industry
request given the the amount of
time and effort that goes into
the hearing in the expense so
industry is coming forward I
want to talk to the existing
superintendent Russell told he
understood the.
The reason for the request at
the official position Russell
till at the time was neutral but
go ahead chase it and let the
legislature decide the policy so
so they are not standing in
opposition to the proposal now
Russell did retire and we have a
new interim superintendent I
have heard nothing out of the
interim superintendent to change
that position.
Thank you madam chair.
Do we have any other questions
from the committee.
The representative Lente your
question please absolutely Roger
we will do that.
The second that.
Yeah.
Question and the second.
Representative and in order.
Yes Representative W. yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Senator let yes Representative
little yes Representative
Lundstrom yes Representative
Martinez yes Representative
Mason yes Representative
Matthews yes.
Pleasure Serrato.
You madam chair.
I'm sorry madam chair yes.
You madam chair the as part
knows ours or thank you
Representative the other two
passed thank you madam members
of the committee.
Of the four we going for the I
wanted to introduce at we've got
to students observing today
and I don't have a last name for
Fernando.
What's your last name for
another.
And we've got no worries about
that.
So that very good thank you for
joining us today they are from a
definition.
Is that correct.
Thank you for being here all
right we can go to House Bill
what the team.
Thank you madam chair.
Committee members are I am
Representative Kathleen Cates
and I'm here to present house
bill one fifteen as many of you
know I am a licensed realtor and
with in this industry
at the legislators.
Salfit to pass in twenty
nineteen
Requiring home inspectors to be
certified home inspectors are
who inspect your home before you
purchases after you are in an
accepted offer contract gives
you back the feedback you need
to know on how are you gonna
counter offer and whether you
can go through with the
transaction it's the largest
purchase in most people's lives
as their home this is given a
great consumer confidence
because the legislature was I
had the foresight to be able to
pass this law and twenty
nineteen today we're asking that
the yes to certify because our
meet national standards and are
peer reviewed I'd like to
introduce to my expert witness I
of a rainy rainy trainer
heritage hill.
Hell tell you about himself.
Thank you thank you madam chair
R&D trainer representing the
examination board of
professional home inspectors.
Opponents Becker's.
We just walked through the bill
these are the of some pretty
straightforward amendments
in what we're Mr chair before
you go on
we have as a representative I
think you have a seven sure we
do that first.
So for the pointed to the for
the.
Discussion Madam chair of the
committee substitute for house
bill one fifteen for discussion.
And so.
Do we have so.
I'm gonna go ahead and
distribute that now please.
So we can just pause for just a
second.
Thank you.
Okay.
Representative.
Madam chair we have a substitute
the most significant change to
the substitute as we remove that
phrase or the term psychometric
please send
I think we decided that we
didn't want to have to explain
that a hundred and twelve times
so well we've found another way
to
described a certified exam and
so what we've done is the the
the law says that the that the
inspectors board should approve
an exam and they've adopted an
exam currently current law
current rule is
an exam that is adopted in there
are thirty six states that have
a licensing examinations for
home inspectors thirty five of
those states use certified
examinations and so what we're
trying to make sure is that the
examination that we use here in
New Mexico is an approved quote
certified examination
In that we've made some changes
we've added some language for
compliance to the American with
disabilities act and then we
made a provision it's towards
the back of the bill will be by
the exact page.
On page eight line seventeen and
eighteen we've added language in
there that us references a New
Mexico specific examination and
all we're doing there is.
Right the.
The same page eight.
What's that.
I did.
Hello I have checked out of.
Number five.
So missing pages because not
every.
And madam chair I noticed that
the number you're page numbers
one three seven nine.
I.
Okay.
So let's hold on here.
So could somebody catch Patrick
because I think you're just
going to get the one page if
we're missing Senator we need
to.
Make sure that that's.
Well I apologize that we like to
know what you're looking at
changes so would like to be able
to get that so if you'll just
house with this for just a
moment we appreciate thank you.
Madam chair we could just adopt
ages one three seven.
I have a.
All go together Representative.
I think.
Two years.
You have to play the permanent
there and I was gonna I was
gonna ask you Mr traitor to.
Tell us a joke or six on or
something you don't want me to
sing that's for sure.
That leaves you with the job.
Thank you
That so there are these three
little boys and they were
bragging about their fathers in
this first little cases when my
dad so fast that you shot an
arrow to a target it could be
that to the target.
In the second kids that will my
dad so fast if you fired a gun
my dad could be the public to
the target.
In the third cases will that
that's not uses my dad works at
city hall he gets he gets off
work at five years old for.
I respectfully ask the committee
not to.
Reviewing this.
Official record.
Solves.
Madam chair I I think we which
is here with the words that go.
What what what does that mean.
By I just as the means here we
used in mass.
It's it isn't it is accepted
educational.
Your review process.
I might add to that it would
gets an exam that would
withstand a legal challenge and
is designed to avoid a
discriminatory biases in
insemination.
So madam chair it would up you
could rename it politically
correct.
Yes.
That's why we amended
yeah.
I because I.
Sort of.
We are.
That.
Additionally of the.
That's what I do.
Double check that.
Did you have the.
It has been.
What what I've got one.
Representative now you know why
it's hard to do substitutions.
All right.
I believe everybody has the.
Updated substitute that correct
already please proceed thank you
just so we're clear here the to
a to a six blasted a six four
two point one.
We'll get there okay the pages.
Yeah.
J. we have a provision in there
that if the board would like to
adopt a New Mexico specific exam
they could do that and the
analogy I would use of the New
Mexico building code they have a
national code and then we we lay
areas if you will a New Mexico
Mexico so we've all up that
option if they so if they see so
fit and there might be some
specific need for New Mexico to
adopt some specific rules for
home inspectors specific to New
Mexico they would have the
ability to do that and so
that'll stand.
At the end of your presentation
yes thank you okay.
Do we have anybody here in favor
of this bill.
Do we have anybody opposed to
this bill.
We have anybody on them.
The committee Representative
Lundstrom.
Okay.
The first motion and a second
anybody else you are okay can I
ask one question.
So correct so we need to
modified since it's a substitute
for pass on house good commerce
and economic development
committee substitute for house
bill one fifty.
Thank you Representative already
we can take the role.
She wants to ask one simple
question is you madam chair I
just there's a board and be
supported favors.
madam chair I've been news
stations without the
superintendent of our LD she
said she would try to make it
here she didn't make it here
today I believe in state agency
as Mister Moore stated earlier
of the department has no
problems with this bill.
Of.
As for the.
Thank you madam chair
representative committee at
thank you Representative Mason
it there is not because there is
there is no additional that I'm
aware of financial obligation
they're already providing a
certification test we're just
asking that the certification
tests be peer reviewed and
accepted nationally is so there
would be no additional
Need their yeah appropriations.
Right anybody else in the
committee have a question
already this call will.
Representative.
Yes it.
Yes.
Representative.
Representative Lente yes.
Representative will yes
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez yes
Representative Mason yes
Representative happens yes.
Madam chair.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair is our ten thousand
dollars thank you given amended
bill Representative thank you
very much you.
This is.
All right.
B. ninety three.
That's okay we'll go on to HB
two thirty seven she is here.
This is particularly exciting
meeting today.
Pages all kinds of things every
day around here.
The.
Representative ready.
For
the two that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee
House bill ninety three
Is the intent of the bill is to
update the pharmacy act and I
can go through the different
sections.
Fairly quickly.
just to section one is the
custodial care facility is
redefined to exclude community
homes and foster homes you are.
Okay
to exclude community homes and
foster homes which are overseen
by CYFD and the children in the
settings are there to have a
place to grow up rather than a
medical use and
Section two allows the of like
tonic or regular mail
notification to board members
rather than by certified mail.
Section three cleans up the
process for approving
pharmacists prescribing
authority pharmacists can
prescribe for public health
conditions through protocols
approved by the New Mexico
Medical Board and the New Mexico
nursing board in the New Mexico
board of pharmacy and this is a
cumbersome process it can cost
protocol approvals to take years
in some cases and it has taken
over two years to get approval
for providing testing and
treatment for flu strep and
COVID nineteen and it's not done
yet this protocol was approved
by the medical board in December
but will not be able to be
considered by the board of
nursing until their March
meeting so this bill will stream
like that streamline that
process by allowing the board of
pharmacy to consult with the
medical board and nursing board
for protocol approvals as well
as other pharmacy act cleanup
changes that will allows the
board to enforce the impaired
health care provider act.
And chapter sixty one article
seven NMSA nineteen seventy
eight for pharmacists in terms
technicians in applications.
Orting levy impaired pharmacist
Act which is outdated and less
developed in the icy H. PA would
be repealed.
excuse me and it also specifies
that the board required
reporting a non controlled
dangerous drug to the
prescription monitoring program
when lack of we may create a
hazard to patients.
section for increases quality
I'm sorry quantity allowance for
emergency dispensing from
seventy two hours to thirty day
supply if anyone has ever
traveled and gotten their
prescription or has a breaking
your prescription this is
something that will make it so
that you don't have to worry
about you know even just three
days being enough until you can
reach your doctor and pharmacist
and all that and also the cost
Well it.
Can be broken down there
critical drugs which may not be
broken down to a seventy two
hour supply based on
manufacturer's packaging or
dosage forms like in healers or
insulin.
So that's another good reason
for this it will help patients
avoid interruption in prescribed
therapy well refill
authorization or new
prescription is obtained.
Section five clarifies that the
board made from shall set by
rule the amount conditions of
the security bond for better
consistency of subsection a of
this section which specifies
that the board may require
surety bonds.
Section six removes unnecessary
reporting requirements for non
resident pharmacies and section
seven adds provisions for
protective actions and
communications.
section eighty absolved board
members and others working with
the board of liability for acts
or omissions of the boards
subsection be exempt information
transmitted to the board from
inspection of public records act
disclosures with limited
exceptions were necessary
section see insurers that
information within the
prescription monitoring program
is confidential unless
disclosure is compelled by the
court and the non disclosure of
this information other than for
specified allowances is
important to protect patient
health information as to
dispense controlled substance
prescriptions which may include
treatment for mental health
conditions and substance use
disorder.
Okay we're almost there
subsection need absolves a
provider of information to the
board of civil liability for
that information if provided in
good faith and finally section
eight repeals a section the
pharmacy act section sixty one
dash eleven eight regarding
impaired pharmacists the
secretary would be replaced by
application of the impaired
health care provider act to
pharmacists and other workers
pharmacies.
And this bill will go into
effect.
Team this year and I'd like to
introduce my experts.
Mr Tinker also sharing.
And they can introduce
themselves and also comments
please.
Madam chair Dale can Kerr I'm
with New Mexico pharmacists
Association and I don't have a
lot of comments I think they
were Representative covered this
sections I just want to mention
this is just a part of pharmacy
clean up and and it has not been
done in about twenty years so
it's in pieces over the years
have been cleaned up that but
we're trying to do a more.
Organized clean up for the board
of pharmacy I don't work for the
board of pharmacy but I'm a
lobbyist appear for pharmacists
and so I try to support their
efforts were I can't at this
point I'll turn it over to chair
and grab.
Good afternoon on madam chair
members of the committee I think
that Representative Ferrary did
a great job of summarizing the
bill and Hey.
Stand for questions along with.
Sorry I'm sure and the crack and
I'm the executive director and
chief inspector of the New
Mexico board of pharmacy.
Thank you and I don't have
anything to add right now but I
do stand for questions indicate
that your presentation
Representative yes thank you all
righty if we can get to the I do
we have anybody here in favor of
this bill.
How do we have anybody in
opposition.
Okay let's start with in favor
in this okay here Mister.
I thank you madam chair.
The pharmacy it is working this
bill to really
A modernized forms you have to
clean those things up to really
allow us pharmacists to be able
to practice or knowledge and
provide for the health care of
the people.
Next.
Good afternoon thank you I
Melanie Dodd and this is.
Representative is the reason
that we are also mentioned in
terms of being able to modernize
the language of practicing and
but also to be able to provide
extensive care for our patients
that the example I mentioned in
changing the.
Number of state Representative
seventy two hours a day is that
not only.
Raval.
That are also in the situation
like a family the short term use
treatment and asked where it
doesn't come in a seven to our.
Thirty days so those are
situations where from a
practicality perspective I think
the the claim of an alleged.
Terms and.
Here.
Committee members my name is in
the ceiling I'm a pharmacist and
I spent majority of my career
practicing in rural parts of the
state and I Spanien support
specially the part of getting
the process of all things like
her phone patients regarding
this before is access on medical
care.
I just need to gauge.
Our training and all the other
wonderful successful healthcare
members to reach out to and so
no one in my spinning just
because of patients whose lives
and overall area five thousand
be there on the lack of access
is acceptable so please what
the.
Yes on the same.
But if they were on my right
now.
Anybody in opposite.
Available at two one seven.
Karen Parsons.
Hello yes this is doctor Karen
Carson and I am the chair of the
New Mexico Medical Board we are
in opposition to the changes of
approval without morning from
call we we want to continue to
have approval of these
pharmacists protocols I think
that pharmacists do a great job
we are team members and I
appreciate their expertise and I
do you really applaud these good
intentions to try to increase
access to care however this is a
increase a change to their scope
of practice and these protocols
are medical practices protocols
and the Medical Board feels very
strongly that these protocols
need to be approved by a
clinician who is a medical
practitioner not by a pharmacist
we would like to work with the
pharmacy board we've offered to
streamline the timing to review
these protocols and approve
these protocols but
consultation of these protocols
may need a letter coming from
the board of pharmacy that says
that we've come up with this
protocol and we want to let you
know about it and that is
something that is very
concerning to me as a physician
and as a medical board member as
we are charged to protect the
health of the people of New
Mexico we don't want to harm the
people of New Mexico just like
the pharmacy board is charged to
protect the public of the people
of New Mexico of of New Mexico
we want to partner with them we
are trying to help guide.
M. in this new area of practice
this is brand new they are just
starting out with this.
We really want to continue with
this type of approval and I
would hope that you would keep
the language with the word
approval and not change to
consultation that's on page
thirteen and sixteen.
Of the bill that I have thank
you very much.
Thank you.
Hi my name is Amy backer it's
and I am a pharmacist with
Walgreens and the college of
pharmacy at madam chair and
members of the board thanks for
allowing me to speak I'm in
favor of the bill and I respect
what Dr Karsten said and she has
been great with collaborating
the only thing is some of our
past collaborations have taken
at least three to five years and
unfortunately Mr tanker is great
as he is in advocating sorry
Dale he he won't be around for
ever to help us advocate so we
are trying to
find a way to help our patients
and not fall behind
in doing so maybe in in more of
a streamlined effort that
doesn't take five years to get
something to go through
collaboration with the medical
board so the consultation won't
try to go around the medical
board definitely not what we're
trying to do here but just put
this in the hands of the board
of pharmacy who we do trust to
regulate our medications here in
New Mexico and so that that's
the the purpose of cleaning up
the pharmacy act so that we can
appropriately do this in a
timely fashion thank you.
Actually.
Thank you very much for hearing
name chair my name is Ashley
State Farm I am a pharmacist in
rural New Mexico serving aspect
in Bloomfield ten years ago when
I first purchased into my
pharmacies I had ten physicians
in my parking lot I now have to
nurse practitioners servicing
patients in one of my parking
lot and we have had no providers
left in Bloomfield at all we've
become frontline and this the
last few years have proven that.
We're not the first state to ask
for this change there are and Mr
teacher can correct me I believe
thirteen states that now operate
with protocols like this.
So I appreciate the medical
board and you know what they
want to do in a sense of helping
to guide us and direct us we
will continue to do that.
But the reality is we don't have
providers in our areas any
longer and we desperately need
these types of protocols to go
through at a quicker pace so
that we can service our patients
we have the education backing
all of it and we would never do
anything that we did not feel
that we could practice at the
top of our authority.
Thank you very much please
support this legislation so that
we can continue to support our
patients.
Okay.
Let's go to the committee chair
could we
would you like to.
At.
Can I talk about to.
Just before we go to questions
Mr correct it would like to
explain that.
Medical Board.
Thank you Representative Ferrary
madam chair members of the
committee.
So as as far as.
And I appreciate.
Address a few of the points that
were raised in particular there
was one referencing a change in
scope of this does not change
the scope.
It changes the process from
after approval by two in
consultation with there are
still rules and they're still
protocols and those protocols go
through not only the board of
pharmacy but the board of
pharmacy committee which at
different points in time has
been inter disciplinary followed
by the medical board and the
board of nursing and sometimes
that happens two or three times
so there there is no change and
scope it's all very very very
regimented we currently have.
Six protocols and I think that
pharmacists have.
They're they're over regulated
as.
Really over regulated
that protocol for naloxone for
instance is four pages long.
So you have people at harm
reduction centers centers just.
And you know I'm just saying
like pharmacists are being how
to the absolute highest standard
of everything and we will
continue to collaborate with the
medical board and with the board
of nursing there are important
partners but the process has not
and effective.
Over years.
So I think that I think that
touches on all of the main
points and stand for questions
thank you madam chair.
Representative Lundstrom.
Thank you.
I do want to follow up a little
bit more on the.
After talked about.
Protocols and so.
You have two very different
opinions madam chair.
Two very different groups and I
guess I I am interested in
numbers.
Looking at page thirteen now
finds sixty.
Last.
Your.
If we have anybody from the
medical association are can we
get somebody to.
By the.
Characters are you still on.
Let me see if we can get her to
call back in.
So can we go to somebody else
and then will you okay thank
you.
So let's go to Representative a
little while we try to get.
The drive back on.
Thank you thank you madam chair.
And thank you for your
presentation my question is
should be specific to the
patient what we see.
Different from that my question
is does this change the process
have I'm sorry I'm here Dr
course.
One moment doctor.
That allows the
This is change the process of
the legislative prescribing the
description because what I
understood was what this does
was allowed for refills of
medication that had been
prescribed.
But it cases where I'm out of
medication
what whatever reason being up at
the session not able to talk to
my doctor and a pharmacist I can
ask the pharmacist.
To.
Find a refill for a period of
time.
I'm sure I'll refer to I think
thank you Representative little
madam chair members of the
committee so those are.
Start my.
The thank you for bringing that
up because it is an important
point of clarification those are
two separate provisions within
that part of the the statute so
the allowance for pharmacists to
dispense to the patient up to a
seventy two hour supply exists
and it's basically an emergency
refill and this extends that
emergency refill authorization
quantity to up to a thirty day
supply so patients don't have to
go without when it's unit does
student or act in a particular
way for if it's insulin for an
inhaler or something that just
can't be broken down so that's
that's separate from the
provision with respect to
pharmacists prescriptive
authority where the proposed
change is from approval.
And and if you don't mind I just
read it to you just as
promulgate after approval by the
New Mexico medical board and
board of nursing rules and
protocols for the prescribing of
dangerous drug therapy including
vaccines and immunizations and
the appropriate notification of
the primary or appropriate
physician of the person
receiving the dangerous drug
therapy so the change it is I
have two words approval by to
consultation with.
That a politician and.
so thank you so what does this
mean to the patient.
Is that.
The after.
Check madam chair members of the
committee representative little
thank you.
The.
So the changing of the approval
by to consultation with.
I think that it would mean that
patients.
I'll be able to have.
Increased access to certain
prescriptions pursuant to
protocol.
And an example.
Is HIV pre exposure prophylaxis
we did as was mentioned in the
by Representative Ferrary and.
We did recently get approval for
COVID and for flu and for strep
but if we need to make a change
to that let's say there's some
kind of new treatment that's not
contemplated there's some kind
of significant change there's no
maneuverability.
There were other times during
the pandemic that that allowance
would have been extremely
critical because what we could
have timely implemented under
very.
At the protocols that and I I
brought them.
Your anybody is interested and
and looking at them and I also
brought the rule it's it's very
detailed and it's very
regimented and and every point
is laid out in the required to
have training
there are required to do
additional continuing education
they're required to go through
very very specific steps in
these processes.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Representative Lundstrom we
let's go back to you because we
got the doctor on the line
thank.
Years
the doctor nine PM officer
guarding providers ostentation
yeah and then I would like to
ask that and here are all the
way and.
The us.
On that.
Go ahead drive Larson.
Hello this is Dr Carson madam
chair members of the committee
I'm sorry but I couldn't hear
your question very clearly can
you repeat it for me please all
right
I would like you to discuss.
The difference between.
But I.
We're funds versus consultation
with in this the language in
this bill is starting talked
about it briefly.
I'd like to have a better
understanding I think that is
kind of the cake up here that I
am hearing and then my second
question is did the RLD weigh in
on Leiber's.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee yes so approval by
means that the medical board
would have full approval of the
protocols as a little history
the protocols were first brought
before us in.
Right around November of twenty
twenty right before COVID kind
of hit there had been a
committee that have worked on
those protocols and when they
were brought before the medical
board for approval there were
still some work to be done the
protocols were voted down.
The protocols were not brought
before us again until.
This past board meeting in
December I'm sorry yes in
December of twenty twenty two
they were not placed on our
agenda again at that point we
reviewed them and they were
approved for COVID lu and
stress.
And so the process was not
timely because it was not
brought before the medical
board.
In a timely manner.
We are willing to work with the
pharmacists and the pharmacy
board to try and streamline
streamline that and we have
assured them that we will look
at these in a timely manner
and put them on our agenda if we
need to every single month these
protocols are very specific
there are very long they deal
with testing and treatment of
patients so this is medical care
given to a patient by retail
pharmacy this is not by a
clinical pharmacist to have a
lot of additional training this
is a retail pharmacist who will
have some additional hours of
training in these disease
processes and able to perform a
CLIA waived tests so like a
rapid flu test and if the test
is positive they will then have
the ability to treat a patient.
They do not have to always
perform a physical exam on the
patient as they are not.
trained in physical examination
however we have really tried to
tighten these protocols as much
as possible so that we make sure
that these patients obtain vital
signs that are really important
things like blood pressure and
temperature that a respiratory
rate and oxygen level is
obtained these are all things
that we added to these protocols
when they were first brought
before us because they were
things that were not necessarily
place there the first time and
so our goal again is really
trying to access to improve
access to care what we one would
care I don't want a child to go
in be tested for flu to be
positive and get Tamiflu and go
out that night and die of
respiratory distress because the
pharmacist did not recognize
that that child was in
respiratory distress and we want
those protocols to be tight to
where we can really look with
our our.
Medical actually meant with our
expertise Medical Board and say
this is the best that we can do
to give you this information.
And that's why that approval is
so important to us it's really
important for our patient safety
for the people of New Mexico
thank you.
madam chair again.
And when the concert areas and
just curious yeah the regulation
and licensing department also
named waiting on read some of
their comments pretty generic
user anybody there Madam chair
of the more of the.
What what.
Thank you.
Representative Duncan.
Thank you madam chair.
Your friends are working both
bills so I've heard from and and
all right now party lines.
But I have a question for you.
Let's just say that that I go
into a pharmacy or call pharmacy
and so you know I'm out of this
I'm in the Timbuktu and wonder
if you could give me a thirty
day supply because I'm gonna be
here for another week.
What if the doctor didn't want
that prescriptions filled for a
thirty day supply and he had
told the patient and the patient
tells you that one's is there
liability and does that fall.
So terribly for two years.
Thank you madam chair.
Sorry.
Representative Duncan madam
chair members of the committee
thank you so.
It's it's generally a chronic
medication that has been
prescribed I think if the
physician or the prescriber of
that credit medication didn't
want a thirty day supply they
would probably have written a
prescription for less than a
thirty day supply but it's when
there is an interruption in the
therapy would because or would
be expected to cause harm or
suffering for the patient and
the pharmacist is not able to
get in touch with the physician
that can provide up to a thirty
day supply.
Thank you madam chair so
following up on that and so
years your you can look me in
the eye and tell me absolutely
there's never going to be any
change that then that you could
get all of the doctors first
maps.
I can't look you in the eye and
tell yeah absolutely there's
never going to be anything.
so it it you know at I don't
speak generally and and
absolutes and and those types of
things
the.
The idea is that a patient has
been on this medication they've
been getting maybe a ninety day
supply maybe more than a thirty
day supply but the pharmacist
can provide up to a thirty day
supply we would very much expect
the pharmacist to exercise good
professional judgment and look
at that and making that
determination.
Senator I don't know that I've
got an answer but.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you Representative.
Mason yes madam chair.
Representative my questions back
on the sideline as.
Representative Lundstrom on the
wording of I think the six thing
where the.
It's approval or consultation.
The big difference twenty.
Well as consultation.
And I think with others before
this committee.
I was under the impression that
dollars them ask them this.
For.
And the.
No debate you're going to get
medical services.
I.
All this protocol.
Like to.
Thank you madam chair
representative thank you
Representative make sense yes
the the pharmacist will be
providing patient care to
include potentially providing
the patient with the medication.
Your
and with most of this bill are
right we all realize that
certain.
Areas madam chair that there is
not.
But for that fact.
And I don't want to be the one
that hurts.
That.
Madam I think for myself.
If if they're gonna perform
doctors services.
I would like for you all will
have.
Approval by the doctor by the
medical board.
Find them so.
Goal is.
It.
The the
I'm like yeah I got lots of
friends involved there is and.
But the.
I do not want to hurt.
Chair New Mexico.
But.
Anyway we could signs.
Two words.
This call will I would be a
hundred percent behind without
the J. I don't know that I can
go for.
And here fans.
Madam chair members of the
committee dealtaker New Mexico
pharmacists Association I I want
to give you a little history I
know Dr Carson mentioned that
this was a new process it is not
this bill was first passed in
two thousand one since that time
we've developed seven protocols
we're down to six now because
one of them merged with and with
a different protocol pharmacists
can prescribe hormonal
contraception they are receiving
additional training it's not
like they just go out and start
writing prescriptions there is
additional training in that in
the twenty years plus that we've
been doing protocols there has
only been one complaint to the
medical board to my knowledge
and that was from a.
I I would say
Travel medicine doctor who
didn't like the competition
basically and they so they
complained about pharmacists
being able to give those.
Traveled axes I think your
patience the their patients
wouldn't complain about it and
they provide the access to be
extremely rewarding for patient
care and that's the point of
this bill is to smooth the
process up for patient care
we're not going to ask for
anything that
The Medical Board probably
wouldn't approve alternately we
just wanted to be a little
smoother process right now it's
time consuming difficult to get
through and
So I just wanted to give you the
history this is been in place
for twenty years more than
twenty years and we've had not
one single complaint against a
pharmacist prescribing under any
of the it Ortiz that the
pharmacist they probably gave
you your call that shot or your
flu shot is part of the protocol
that it authorizes prescribing.
So
anyway I just wanted to make
that point thank you.
Also madam chair.
Also madam chair and
Representative Mason of some of
the comments that the doctor
made were referring to another
bill about you know
examinations and things like
that that's not in this bill.
I understand that that this bill
is the one that's been.
Yeah I have all the the problem
lies is.
The scratch if we went back to
the original bill out of them
problem the scratched out the
approval letter secretary
consultation with.
You know it the.
We understand the regional
protocols would.
This this has to do with the
protocols I don't you decide
where they reviewed three that's
for.
About doctors level ones what
the next protocol that you get
through the.
And
But with Procol is where I think
the approval.
This they are the with the
doctor if you just.
Go back to the original bill
this is but but also it the.
You know the NMAA that changes.
Lately the protocol system.
Yeah just that one I get a
little difference of opinion
here to point out parsonage you
all she.
Was saying that the like the
last the deal was because it was
not presented back to.
Thousands of you know it what
was that we don't know but the
weather's use for Dr Carson or.
Then we also the that should be
a problem for that point.
The pharmacy board in the
Medical Board no are we could
add some language in there that
says one of pharmacy board is.
Presented the of the proposal
called.
As they made every month.
But the provision in there that
within sixty that.
Thank you at.
The.
Then why I think that's all my
questions others.
I'd like to the other one madam
chair and Representative Mason
if I could
Quite a few years ago now
doctors didn't want nurse
practitioners to be able to
admit or discharge patients on
the road they had to go and get
the approval of a doctor we were
able to change that law because
it was better for the patients
this is somewhat of the same
thing we don't want pharmacists
to be restricted if they have to
you know have these different
approvals ahead of time this is
something that will make it
better for patients because the
pharmacist can say okay we know
that you can't get a seventy two
day supply it because of what
the of medication is and they
are highly trained professional
basically doctors and they
should be able to you know have
that
ability to do that for patients
especially as one person was
mentioning in the rural areas
where there isn't the access
this will help us increase the
access and the care of our
patients
beyond what are you know
shortage of doctors and help
have the pharmacist help feel
that.
Representative I will get that
we're still up on the
That I made a mistake it is
leading this thing but the.
I have no problems with the walk
with the prescription part off.
Strictly all the protocol for
the move.
Protocols to treat.
Different sections that are not
our lives and I have no problem
with with the part of the bill
that has the thirty day
Representative.
It's only on what I understand
it is.
It always just had to cope with
the oldest on it for many of
which they will have another
stuff come up.
That will need to also have a
variety of
local elections that simple to
go down get your shot we'll have
to go see a doctor more which is
not just
you know something else will
come up that will maybe that
that side.
Bill but the it's the it's the
protocols.
But I have a problem thank you.
For.
Thank you madam chair
representative Mason so and and
I do appreciate that it it it
applies to any change whether
the protocol has been around for
twenty years or not if we need
to change something for the
vaccine prescriptive authority
has to go through that same
process.
So it's it's it's any kind of
change has to go through the
process and if I may the
consultation with the similar to
provisions and other actors
including the physician
assistants Act a promulgate
rules regarding things such as
the dispensing of medications
and could and consultation with
the board of pharmacy.
And we would fully intend to
actually consult with them and
and to utilize all available
resources to make the process as
efficient and as safe as
possible for our patients.
Representative based.
I I lived.
Representative elected.
Thank you madam chair I want to
first thank the medical
community for years that it's on
the front lines during the COVID
and all the sacrifices that you
all made.
Thank you so much secondly I'm
all for they should see and and
creating mechanisms to make sure
that the special rural
communities with the lack of
doctors and care in those areas
that if we can help those
individuals out in anyway
possible it's always a good
thing however I do I could
certainly by two want to be so
efficient that we cut a corner
regards to overall provision
whether you call it to a medical
border or however you want to
call it but at this point in
time it makes me very
uncomfortable I try to push this
through if in fact Dr Carson me
mentioned that they're willing
to work with you all to
mechanisms to create more of a
streamlined process that's all
inclusive versus us here this
board saying oh yeah go to do it
and then somebody passes and
then.
The bottom line just for for for
moving this too fast forward so
that means that manager
I really feel comfortable about
this bill and so that's what.
Thank you.
Any other questions from the
committee Representative
Matthews.
Thank you madam chair
I find this hard question I was
in the hello Committee for.
I think three years and I know
that in small communities in our
state the pharmacist is almost
like a doctor
and does a lot more than the
pharmacist might do at and
working with patients in
Albuquerque or somewhere
but having said that I'm looking
down at the language here I'm
not concerned about the vacation
filling prescriptions.
But I am concerned about the
word dangers in line eighteen
what page are you on I'm sorry
page.
I wrote over to page three.
Representative protocol language
appears.
And.
In my correct madam chair and.
Presenters that gives the
pharmacy the pharmacy people
have a story already to write
rules and protocols for non
dangers drafts.
Thank you madam chair
Representative this so dangerous
drugs is
It's defined in the drug device
and cosmetic Act and and federal
law and it's synonymous with
prescription only so the terms
are interchangeable that simply
means a medication that is it's
not over the counter so
dangerous drug is prescription
only.
Madam chair at thank you
So
How long is it taking to get
approval of the protocols.
So if I may ask dealtaker to
speak to that and then after he
does I may have some additional
information thank you madam
chair.
Madam chair Representative
Matthews.
just within the nature of the
having to go through three
different boards it if
everything goes smoothly it's
close to a year to get a
protocol approved
if it hits a rocky road like the
last one.
That we did with the medical
board as Dr parson said they
turned our protocol down our our
it was a group of protocols they
turned it down and
And then it was over here before
we came back and that's true it
it took us a year to regroup
and basically brought back the
same protocol which the board
Medical Board made a couple
suggestions and we we agree to
those
And then they approved it but it
took two years our hormonal
contraception.
When we first introduced it was
two thousand eleven no other
states were doing that and we
get that was in New was a new
thing for pharmacists but it did
not get it we did not get it.
Both entail twenty seventeen so
it took six years
it didn't go back to the border
I you know we didn't take it to
the board on a quarterly basis
or anything like that we work
through those protocols trying
to make them better at it took
six years for that one
TV testing was probably one of
the quickest ones that we did I
think that one took under here
to get that one approved
I'm don't remember naloxone
took probably about eight or
nine months to get that one done
and then then we streamline that
one by getting at Department of
Health.
Standing order from the doctor
department of health so
pharmacists can fill it and that
doctors prescribing authority
maybe a little quicker the
pharmacist didn't have to go
take the additional training
that we require and that sort of
thing so it it I I would say
nearly a year to get those drugs
cost time
if if everything goes smoothly.
Madam chair of thank you Mr
speaker I I'm wondering if.
It is a possible solution to the
situation I can appreciate that
that.
We need to keep the protocols
being developed and they need to
be properly done and so forth
I'm wondering if.
At.
And this would require some
change in the language here but
something along the lines of you
all should test as repairs wells
and rules for the prescribing
dangerous drugs prescription
drugs and that the medical I
have a period of state here yes
kind of the normal time period
it takes to accept or reject or
modify and and if they don't act
within that period of time you
protocols adopted that something
like that.
Hello the process along and
still protect the.
Madam chair representative
Matthews
I guess I would say that sounds
cumbersome
I I agree that it might just
moved up a couple of things but
generally it our our intent was
to streamline so that we could
instead of scheduling one board
meeting and then getting
approval from the medical board
and having to schedule nursing
board getting approval they're
going back to the board of
pharmacy which is how the
structure works now we would
like to be able to consult with
the medical board and the
nursing board and and just make
a lot more streamlined process I
I would leave that up to sure
ran as the representative for
the board of pharmacy
and.
I leave it up to her answer
that.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Mathis
I think that that would be an
improvement over no change
because it has it has been a
long term issue and I don't know
that the details are really what
we're here about you hear about
right now today it's about being
able to make those changes and
and efficient manner so I I
would be amenable to to that
amendment.
Madam chair thank you very much
for the input.
I'm just following up on that
because the change.
The changes approval by you want
to change it to consultation
with and I assume the
consultation is.
Time so that.
The and coming up with something
that finds that.
again with the state if there's
not some kind of response with
an appropriate time that you all
can move ahead anyway I I have a
I have concern is Representative
Lente does we just should just
switching it over totally this
and find a find consultation
time
our process and.
So as it is written on I have
concern about the process but I
I would think that maybe there's
a way to.
Make everybody recently happy or
not to and recently I'm happy
madam chair.
We would be able to I'm making
at that
it to go ahead in
just.
After approval by the fact that
you get out consultation with.
Some of.
So
Let's get to all the questions
that I think you that way you
can if there's any other
tweets or amenities that we did
we need to make then you can
decide whether to roll it and
get it cleaned up and bring it
back to us
let's go at it is to put the
line of questioning so you have
all the information that that
that that the M..
Percentages may have does
anybody else have any questions
that they would like to ask the
sponsor.
I actually have a couple I am
what's the and I I I I you know
I've worked on many
updates on different
Licensure acts and so I I
understand that it can be very
cumbersome and
I think what I heard did this
not been updated in about twenty
years is that correct so the for
very first time that that's
pretty good I think that you
have done well and we appreciate
all the work that you all have
done I think though that you've
heard from the committee that
there are definitely some
concerns
I too was was hung up on the
word consultation and I don't
think that it's defined in in
the pharmacy act and I think
that that maybe some of where
the problem also stems from and
when we talk about consultation
verses approval
we don't I know that I have no
intention of slowing down the
process and especially making
sure that people in rural areas
get the medications that they
need that's always very very
important but I I do believe
that there needs to be.
Houses with the medical society
and so sidestepping that I don't
believe is is good practice I
don't believe they're taking a
year to get back and forth
consultation is appropriate and
so I would ask that maybe some
time lines be put into it into
the bill that you're asking
because
I think that what I'm hearing
from the committee is they want
to have that consultation and
approval by the medical society
but it can't be just out there
in a black hole and there's no
response time back it and and
that's what I I would really
push for I also heard at and I
don't know who said it something
about clinical pharmacy our
clinical pharmacist versus did
that was the word storefront
retail retail and so I was I'm
clear about that and if there's
a difference in training because
in my brain I and I'm seeing no
but I heard that and I and that
may be a little uncomfortable as
well because if we go to a
Walgreens verses a private you
know as a cellphone I I I'd like
to follow up on that please.
Madam chair members of the
committee
The pharmacist in New Mexico
have what is the entry level
degree is called a Pharm.D the
pharmacy drive it takes seven
years in New Mexico to get a
Pharm.D degree so it's not a
lightweight Education it's
pretty extensive the dean of the
college I'm sure can explain it
far better than I can but
It is a big deal and every
pharmacist that has graduated
sense.
Late nineties has been graduated
with a Pharm.D degree we have
probably very few R. P. H.
pharmacists anymore a bachelor's
degree pharmacists date still in
practice most our important dis
most would it and while I
consider all pharmacists to be
clinical because they offer
patient care there's not a
single pharmacist that you would
come to that probably doesn't
diagnose something if you ask
them you know I have.
Runny nose and Sniffles and
fever they can tell you what
that is but they're legally not
allowed to diagnose and so they
will say you have the flu but
you have to go to your doctor
and get a prescription so yes it
is these protocols are an
attempt to make that a little
bit smoother process so it and
and the pharmacist at that are
in front of you at the counter
our clinical pharmacists they
are not under trained people
they are very well trained well
qualified people the distinction
between a retail pharmacist on
the clinical pharmacist we do
have some pharmacists that are
dance practice call pharmacists
clinicians they go on to get
Additional training for physical
assessment they do a clinical
rotation with that in in a
clinic with the physician
usually our nurse practitioner
somebody of hundred fifty hours
three hundred patient contact so
it's a residency in effect for
pharmacists that that qualifies
them to be pharmacists
clinicians they take additional
training for that the board of
pharmacy reviews their
credentials make sure that they
meet the needs to become
pharmacists clinicians that will
actually a subcommittee the
board of pharmacy that reviews
all of those candidates and then
the board of pharmacy will
decide if they can have
prescriptive authority every
pharmacist clinician must have a
supervising physician.
So it's not like they practice
out on you know on their own
somewhere they have a
supervising doctor that they
have a
contract with affectively a
protocol as a pharmacist
Commission but what we're
talking about here are
pharmacists that work in
community pharmacies get
additional training to be able
to prescribe and have these
authorities through the protocol
structure.
Thank you
So.
I just want to say thank you to
the pharmacist the ones that are
here today testifying and the
ones that have helped us
you know what we're trying to
fill prescriptions and have
questions I know that that that
it's viruses that usual take the
time to talk about how drugs
interact with each other since
has far more than we get food to
with physicians and tested they
just have more time so I do
appreciate that I think in order
to make this a stronger cleaner
bills Representative.
were you wanting to it what how
do you want to proceed.
That's what we were just trying
to decide okay Madam we'd like
to go ahead and
Fortunately to change back to
approval by instead of
consultation.
Okay and you can do that on the
floor and ending proceed with
the.
About because we we hear that
from.
Yeah we we we like to try to do
that in this committee yes goes
to the floor and Representative
Matthews you talked about the
the tire and yes.
You had another amendment that
you talked about do you want to
put that in at this point.
What and madam chair it was it
wasn't it wasn't so much of a
formal which is that this
section I think would be.
More likely get deeper with the
committee and perhaps even on
the floor if you and and I don't
even have a problem with
necessarily leave uniformed by.
I'm sorry consultation with that
set a time limit for there to
for them to come back.
Both of the New Mexico medical
board the board of nursing
in response to provide a
response to what you all are
proposing and if the year I
think the years seems kind of
our long but you know could be
something like ninety days or
six months or a hundred twenty
days or something like that.
In that and that the if this
provision be changed a little
bit with some definition of a
call consultation with the time
period and have required
responses if the response isn't
forthcoming.
If the response isn't
forthcoming Muintir that was
got some
problems.
anyway if the manager is to if
the response is not forthcoming
then the protocol be damned
proved if a response is
forthcoming requires an
additional conversations and
the parties who.
What what what is up any
differences at the beginning but
in a like a thirty day period
for for resolving responses or
something maybe sixty days.
That that would be measured the
specific timelines I think
should be up to the.
So I think that
I know that let's keep it in so
we what we want to talk first
about approval by
ship can we talk about making
and that an amendment which is
the.
What is the wish of the
committee.
Madam chair I think we need to
take the Sanchez recommendation
and change it back and because
I'm a voting member on this
committee and willing to put
that for.
Okay so it looks like we've got
to have a motion for an
amendment.
And the second.
Representative please check I.
Thirteen.
The.
It is there's not.
Sixteen sixteen
thirteen madam chair and page
sixteen.
We have the language lines I
think it's one sixteen on page
thirteen.
Representative says.
Okay after instead of scratching
out the approval would be
completely not to scratch that
out which Grachev consultation
with.
Use the same on page sixteen.
I want to check with nearly.
Did you catch that.
I didn't see it.
Okay so we've got it in in two
places.
And the changes.
Representative Lundstrom you'll
just repeat one more time so we
make sure we got it exactly
correct.
Thank you madam chair I would
like to take the recommendation
of the sponsor page thirteen and
on page sixteen.
All aware the language status
promulgate after.
It says where the forces
approval I were scratched out
would no longer scratch that
out.
We would reinstate that.
And then
basically what it says
promulgate after approval by the
New Mexico Medical Board it
would even have consultation
within the.
And Representative you.
Yes madam chair yes madam chair
that's great be on page six.
Yes Representative identify.
Okay.
So we have a motion to amend the
bill.
Educate you would take the role.
Representative and in order.
Yes the amendment.
Representative Duncan yes.
Representative Hernandez yes on
the amendment Representative
Lente yes Representative little
yes Representative Lundstrom
yes.
Martinez yes Representative
Mason yeah Representative
Matthews yes.
That I'm not sure.
After yes.
This.
Save the bill are we so let's go
back to I think there were still
more questions.
As.
I think.
All right well let's go to the
chair.
All right so Representative that
Mason.
That and move it to have some.
Okay.
And we have a second.
But.
Representative.
Yes is amended.
Representative Duncan.
All.
I have a question some of the
competitors second mass.
Representative yes.
Representative yes.
Representative.
Yes indeed.
Representative.
Yes is amended.
Representative.
It
is yes excuse me yes is amended.
Vice chair.
Representative government.
Sure yes.
That is yes.
We have an amended bill.
Chair thank you committee thank
you.
For.
Let's go to.
Go to thirty seven.
Yeah.
Representative
Where we start I mean it does
that we have a hundred and
thirty seven people on zoom and
so.
I wanted to start out by saying
that and so we're going to have
you present to build close we're
gonna take at public comment but
we are going to put that at
twenty minutes
I need to act and so we're
asking that everybody keeps
their remarks to about one
minute because we do not want to
be here at midnight and we like
to keep the process moving so
after twenty minutes if we'll
try to take some zoom calls will
take people in the audience but
that's how we're going to run
this committee today so if
everybody could please that
follow those rules I would sure
appreciate it so with that
Representative we would love to
hear your bills.
The.
You madam chair.
Members of the committee of
going before you
two three seven.
Which is a repeal.
Tax Court.
This is a consequence of.
Revenue stabilization and tax
policy meeting that was
presented to the committee in
the room in November.
And.
Presentation.
Not only a significant
liability.
As a consequence of these
credits but also the significant
upward trajectory.
Thank with the liability.
I'm under no illusions.
Much of a chance getting out
this committee but madam chair.
And members it is time to start
a conversation.
Well these significantly
increasing liabilities or
restrictive and efficient use of
taxpayer dollars and madam chair
can go through an explanation if
needs based on the mechanics of
the film tax credit but if.
Members or sufficiently
knowledgeable this point I will
stand for questions thank you
Representative hi I believe that
they are I think if they have
questions for you
it's time for their question
answers so we could hold off of
and I would appreciate it if
you're comfortable with that so
Based on that let's go to a who
in the room is in favor of this
bill.
Those opposed to this bill.
All right and we can't tell the
Syrians can we.
Okay.
Yes I am here so so let's take
note of the time because I want
to make sure that everybody
feels that.
Not everybody will be heard I'm
just going to say that so we're
going that we're gonna and we
are going to time at one minute
so since there was nobody in the
room in favor of let's start
with opposed.
Also if you are that's cool
raise his hand here when there's
about ten seconds left that way
we can move on to the next
person so first person opposed
start right here in front.
West.
Interacts with this I.
All of the films distributed.
He says.
The.
The.
Thirty eight years of business.
Mrs with.
Of.
Right now with Netflix what
you're doing.
Billion dollars.
Albuquerque.
I think that is this is what
we're going to take the bait all
of.
Please.
This.
Thank you.
X..
Secretary hi we have
Development.
Right here by Amazon
of mission and I think what I
can suggest to you is that data
right now because there's a lot
of this information.
It is the.
Just.
and Revenue these local
businesses and outside of the
state two one five billion
dollars to.
New Mexico and.
Two dollars and.
Eighteen.
This.
Those duties jobs do not require
a college degree but rather
skills to be in perfect rows.
Direction of the maybe that next
trip this is the distribution
eighteen right truck driving.
Our ally in
economic return and the industry
was measured recently this is
the legislature.
The levels of this the.
The early exit we want lower
invested in.
Program
Is that.
Right now.
Yes Representative.
Investors thought alone the.
They did two point three million
dollars in Chavis we wanted to.
That is not an interesting
in the area.
That is the eight forty eight
are now here they are in your
partners they will they will
bring over two point five
billion dollars of money into
New Mexico the next ten years.
For the first time that we had
to fifteen million dollars
investment.
Yes thanks to the five thousand
lives that.
The vice chairs.
Senators.
Last year we had eight hundred
fifty five million dollars
that's right.
And this is really not present
for us this doesn't include that
this doesn't include incorrect
or.
And it also does not G. R. T. in
terms of G. R. T. E.
approximately eighty six point
eight dollars were paid by the
industry in FY twenty and FY
twenty two.
It is currently estimated
economic development department
fifteen billion dollars to
direction disable.
Right next year.
The following Texas Oklahoma New
York they are all into these in
fact you do there from one
hundred million that you're.
we are already in the state.
We have a structure we have for
you we have stated.
I have to.
We are about to start this
having which is next generation
if you have a Mexico R. G. R.
this.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
We did give the secretary a
little bit more time we are
asking that everybody sick back
to the the one minute.
Thank you.
Thank you very much you have one
of the one thousand members it.
All of these.
After all
the tracking right thank you.
It's S. as
hi folks here in taxes
Representative two little
reading want
to mention.
Hello this is that you.
We have a two hundred.
These are not just raise.
Or what is your job the cheese
intergenerational thank you very
much and you really are the
state in which we haven't seen
generations also secretary
actually that this is the right.
Have.
For.
Losses.
The eight years.
And
We.
The reason reductions.
The president also.
This is the start back.
Thank.
That quarter.
Yeah issue L. what years of the
state.
Office.
This tax service change I like I
like to point out
that
two well this two thousand from
Los Angeles your this this deal
this is jobs from have because
of that time what about these
whether you saw it's always.
This is just.
One hundred.
And we need to do.
Actually.
two hundred.
So it's a lot of money and we
success I.
That was out of station for
twenty years I remember the days
of representative genes Act
usage issues she'll eat every
legislative session that started
actually restart the refuse it
is all about that.
The districts that for sure
hoping.
The so I.
Thank you yes ma'am.
Levinson.
President of the table travel I
am one of the success stories of
reductions in doing their travel
since two thousand two I will
tell you that competition and
facing lines on.
Of
my business.
Funds that.
Yeah because they must be able
to create more.
Opening between Iraq
all in the state of New Mexico.
It's very
do that judge.
All travel all of the family.
So I am success.
Thank you.
This is what we get some more.
Good of the jacket.
We also growing I have a
secretary treasurer levels right
and they've already talked to
the members I'm gonna talk to
you about my personal success
story in the film industry.
When I began I began as an act
years ago a lot.
Where they started.
I want to know how.
I work group I got to find that.
To.
my whole college.
Well there is jobs.
They're not going to get into
this position we're going to go
up.
Mexico it just one person or one
part that is benefiting from
this this is gonna Jack that
that generation.
Not just one you know.
It was I mean very much at all
because if it weren't for this I
don't know where I would be.
If it wasn't for this
opportunity.
It's it's a lot harder
economically in our country to
to have health insurance and to.
Get out of a need to be without
having to be either a remarried
for behind.
Thank you.
This is right now.
This is.
Easter's.
Service.
I've seen the interest.
Engine to members.
in your.
Our record the state actors we
do.
Out to present this.
Higher education.
To the.
Else's.
How.
I just
don't workers.
Businesses.
Well
it right out just.
Thank you.
Thank you.
The committee chairman.
Members of the committee our.
Here's a chance to send me all
of I. twenty five studio which
is so some staff transaction
Question to another studio
a motion for the last hour
is an option seven thousand
miles and the industry to
extremity alfresco customers
around the special dishes.
And I can save money by.
Producing in Los Angeles mothers
are coming here
not to be trusted.
Creased.
Right now we're turning down.
Projects coming into the state
because with our unofficial is.
So.
Transaction thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair
committee I'm here and and I
work in the film industry also
I'm an actor so these issues and
you've already with the numbers
you've heard the numbers about
middle class earners good jobs
we also know that if you take
away the incentives you kill the
film industry.
Over the years
we know that telling the other
industry incentives to come here
the next thing that that's great
we all need to work together but
the bill is three dollars
provide exceptional value let's
look at the tourism into things
also travel around the world and
around the world last.
Ross tells about one lakh tell
us about it.
Even number okay so they come to
locations because of your movie
we also think that we all pay
taxes reserves which the money
last argue over seven thousand
dollars to areas of charities my
church meals on wheels.
So much so that it's the whole
state thank you thank you Sir.
Hello my name is Paul what thank
you madam chair of the
committee.
Yeah I live in all right.
Every two years.
Because I couldn't afford to pay
for place since I've been here I
paid off thirty year mortgage
right now a problem taxpayers in
Rio Rancho at.
It's because of the honesty I
call my friends and allies.
And they say you got a spare
room.
Thank you.
The staff.
Madam chairman of the committee
my name is Brian now let's
present this year's general shot
options.
States also are up in the state.
It is we came up with the space.
Stages what offices for
companies at and it is it should
it should us off what we do
which is for further and I know
I've asked for the hand article
from today's journal but as some
of the numbers that that
secretary Jesus mentioned stuff
but I don't know if they're act
and I think they might be too
low because we expect and in the
last calendar year half a
million dollars to upgrade our
facilities so that movies wanted
to call there and we've got
another half million bills and
I'm alone.
Thank you Mr call center
building studios down south and
your bill more Albuquerque so I
think this spans is higher than
these numbers indicate thank.
Yeah.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for
listening to this of opposition
to this bill in opposition to
this bill my name is in the
process and I am the Phillies on
for the City of Albuquerque on
your desk on the faces of film
this is a national campaign that
we reduce our office and it you
can see the diversity in those
faces of us pretty members and
we
Well in the old folks young
folks of.
Background to work in this
industry successfully in my
building jobs and everyone
ninety for two on the side of
the room you mentioned of
incentives is a number one as a.
Talking to use yours and
production they're here because
of incentives the locations once
they get here they love are
creating.
Don't pass this bill.
Thank you.
daughter also.
It.
Thank you.
And.
Madam chairman members of the
committee.
Who is the bill because
in a huge amount of money to put
into the building or structure
and a whole lot of people
committed their lives to these
rather interesting different
lifestyle and set of skills so
this is not the first time that.
Those two.
Senator.
Each time it puts us all.
Rollercoaster scares us to that
to that to the ground but when
we hear this coming that there's
a possibility
that a Martinez you she.
With.
It is locks on it and three year
some of us didn't work so it's
new men's roller coaster.
Feels almost fifty two seven in
there may be a time when you
need to scale back or something
but talk about that.
All right how.
Very thank you.
Good afternoon my name is Dr.
Executive director Steve.
The findings.
Because of that these fired it
was the weirdest.
One production.
Ireland was altered
economically.
Like a with.
Taking the production it was
incentivized.
Jobs come from do that and that
are the backbone of what the
answer to the support one you
job teaching one family from
moving from struggling to
thriving.
One.
One person with you.
That's probably one of the so
and.
Health care tension.
Have right that are supported by
you that's what.
Really Mexico District.
Feels not license supporting
Mexicans having to to be strong
members reported that members
can store your.
Thank you Sir.
Sure committee
on this inquiry.
I've been able to find.
Three years.
Will be used to.
But.
Thank you for your service.
There in the back.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Scott
skin one register lobbyist for
enterprise rent a car and we to
respectfully opposes legislation
the film industry has been
incredible for car rental we we
began up truck rental in New
Mexico just really because of
the.
I also stand in opposition on
behalf of another client each
hotels home grown up until
change here in New Mexico the
state are hotels.
Go to our restaurants tremendous
partners
specially post comment so we
expect the least.
F..
Yes.
hi I thank you madam chair and
thank you committee I stand in
opposition hello my name is
Tory J. and then ran up the
stairs to get here's where.
I need to Mexico.
To help us I came from a single
parent home we were on welfare
and when I graduated in nineteen
he is a long time ago there was
no education or training
opportunities for me to want to
do the money locally went.
Trains in two thousand five.
Being
ready to do this to
show called into the west at
that time there about.
My.
I have to hand over the make up
department had there about
twenty or thirty more.
Two hundred.
And what we are doing which I
really want to.
We're gonna train up education
opportunities what this gives
our young people which are not
here right now.
Express thank you we're going to
assume.
Yes.
HM that's funny and she ended
commission money fast enough hi.
She mentioned on I am.
I am in need of New Mexicans my
family come the last year is
thank.
I'm here in opposition as well
for this bill.
If you have seen dark wins I am
not only an actor.
This upcoming season I'm also a
writer.
The success story is the film
industry I come from.
I am a natural storyteller that
is my culture and.
Regardless of what happens
nothing will take that away.
From the New Mexico.
Being as a mother.
Me as a human being.
I will continue to tell my
story.
And the cultural story of the
state
and the land from which I was
born.
The fact is the money.
Has come in to New Mexico has my
kids.
And that's taking that away
takes
It takes that shelter that I
provided to make it.
Thank.
I urge you.
Everyone.
To.
Part of our community.
Monetarily thank you.
What is them.
I'm gonna start with Jonathan
David.
John David you are still muted
through their.
Thank you for.
Yes.
Watson Michael Miller.
Thank you very much madam chair
committee members.
Many Mexico filmmaker I have
been.
For the last twenty years.
This particular fight has been
going on for at least twenty
years and perhaps beyond that
I'm not sure why it's brought up
again I don't know what.
motivated on the other hand
every time it does come up we
run into the same talking points
about somebody is that another
study that says that the program
is not good for New Mexico and
gives us too much liability for
future payments.
That is not been the case and
the records show the numbers
show in your own fiscal impact
report that in fact.
The incentive is what makes the
movie business good for New
Mexico.
Right now I'm trying to fund an
independent movie.
There is not any funding really
that I'm able to get a hold up
but if the incentives not there
then there won't be any film
business and I won't have any
opportunity to make this movie
nor will a number of other
filmmakers this particular film
will be made on the east side of
the state outside of the
Albuquerque Santa Fe corridor
also I stand in opposition.
John Representative.
Madam chairman committee
mentoring members thank you for
taking my call total opposition
of this bill to approve
Representative Scott but I was.
We're a worldwide provider of a
motion picture cameras and
lenses and are under our
umbrella also as light aren't a
post disability and I was
schedule I have appointed for
myself and the CEO of Panavision
and another member to come in
and do an advanced wrecked
because we have a program to
build a brand new facility there
and I've been there since the
start of this program are in
nothing but New Mexico residents
until they get punched by the
various productions so I was
kind of horrified when I saw the
news story about this because of
the last thing I want to do is
come in and almost make it ten
times larger facility
there in New Mexico with a ten
year commitment and spending a
lot of money and hiring more New
Mexico Tennyson's you know if
this program but what it's
really all I have decided thank
you very much I'll still be
there next week by the way.
Thank you.
Right to the point.
Yes thank you up.
Madam chair in the committee my
name is Rachel morning.
And
I am I am
I'm a teamster local for ninety
two slash three ninety nine not
by my will.
And
I don't believe that the
incentives should be written
should be repealed however they
do need to be overall to protect
Mexico workers we're losing jobs
to California workers especially
in the stores because more and
more coming here and pushing us
out many of us are having to
seek work outside of the state
as I am today calling you from
the state of Pennsylvania.
As I had to I work outside of
the state.
And the the the the.
Because we have no protection
we're kept out of the highest
rate jobs because those are
given to the people from
California even though we are
qualified and a lot of their.
Rules state that we are not.
So I think this needs to be
revisited.
The language needs to be changed
everything from the residency
thank everything that's going
October companies us companies.
A list of the top.
Yes.
Yes thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Melissa for tech and with the
motion picture association the
trade association for the
leading producers and
distributors of move.
The the programs and streaming
series we want to also urge that
this bill not be adopted that if
you rejected I could share
information I want to be mindful
of the time and some of the
important information Secretary
keys is already conveyed about
the success the enormous success
of this program for the economy
for jobs are The New Mexico Film
partners is unique innovation
that has already resulted in
several companies making long
term infrastructure commitments
and investments in New Mexico
and we support the program we
urge that this bill be rejected
thank you so much for the
opportunity to speak to that.
Thank you and we are a little we
are over the twenty minutes
Time limit that we again I don't
think that we have any
Anyone in favor of your bills
Representative so would you like
to speak or do you want us to go
straight to that committee.
Madam chair I'm ready to answer
questions okay let's go to the
committee thank you
Representative Lundstrom.
The table should be fine but I I
do understand why it's being
brought on board.
Of course of study we need to go
back to the tax.
Next I would like to offer.
I have a table in motion
second.
Okay.
Okay so it's a non debatable
motion so let's go ahead and and
go ahead and have take the role.
Representative yes the table.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente yes.
Representative little yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Mason of the.
Representative Matthews.
At.
Questions or
Madam chair.
yes the table and I think at
Representative led to would like
to explain as well
thank you madam chair and thank
you the sponsor and the debate
showed up this afternoon and and
I take that of recommendations
by Representative Lundstrom
seriously that if in fact we
need to have a robust discussion
about this as chairman of the
Texas tax revenue committee I
would invite that as well as the
chairman of the revenue
stabilization committee I would
invite that but to the point of
where we are we need everybody
to table so that folks like
these in the audience of like
they're building up left out the
dark that we can meet everybody
and understand the true impact
what it means to be part of this
society and and and not look at
the big number but also look at
the the interest of the families
the people the impact local
communities and and everything
else of the right to our state
so that the state I welcome that
discussion but same time not at
the risk of taking food or money
out of your pockets thank you so
we get that the telling.
Madam chair tallies to table
set with those friends.
Those tables madam chair opens
for bush to scratch.
With respect to the numbers but
I do understand.
So level of opposition.
Hundred and fifty million
dollars of subsidies.
And read the news so the school
would.
I do understand this issue.
Thank you Mr thank you for being
here today.
And what that we're completing
our hearing today.
