And good afternoon, Madam Chair,
um.
Uh, thank you for the
opportunity to be here today
presenting HB 59. I'll do a
short introduction, pass it to
my co-sponsor representative
Wuhan.
And then we'll move through this
presentation.
I'm Representative Mikaela Lara
Cadena and admittedly, um, I
heard this bill read out on the
house floor.
I'd had an idea over the interim
about what this bill considers,
but I hadn't looked closely at
it until again I read it.
heard it read out on the house
floor. Um, I'm grateful to
Representative Lu Han for
introducing this bill because
for me, this feels like a
conversation that New Mexico
legislature should be having.
This is personal for me.
I've been under the weight of
overdraft fees and maxed out
credit cards.
Madam Chair, not because I'm
stupid.
Madam chair, not because I'm
being taken advantage of.
And Madam chair, not because I
need financial literacy.
Instead, Madam Chair, I, like
many, many, many New Mexicans.
Live check to check.
And sometimes
I need to find a way to get.
My expenses cared for and my
children cared for.
Um, I'm going to turn to
Representative Lu Han to talk
about how she got to this
effort.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, um, committee members, I
appreciate the opportunity to
work with Representative Kadena
on this bill, in fact, she was
11 of um.
The names are probably the first
name I thought of when I uh
learned about this uh this uh
proposed type of policy at CSG
over the
Uh, interim, and I was in
Portland, Oregon with CSG West
met many of us have attended C
CSGs, those who don't know about
what they do, um, uh, they
convene state legislators to
talk about policies, and they
they regionalize and then they
have a.
Um, a full state convention
every year.
We lean on them, we talk to them
consistency, consistently,
excuse me, on policies that can
affect us and those that have
worked in other states, and
that's where I learned about
this spill contrary to um some
false information that you may
have received that this is.
Uh, type of um partisan effort.
That may be in fact true,
however, that's not how I came
to understand this bill.
And the concerns I have around
it, and I too echo the values of
representative Kadena in the
respect I have for her as a
working mother, as many of you
are as well and navigating um.
The financials and economy of
the state. I too um.
I've had, um,
Time in my life when I had to
turn to those then.
predatory type of loans where I
didn't understand, but then
later did because I read the
fine line. I was just in college
when I had to apply for one of
those loans, so I did
understand, and I
Made my full effort to pay it
back because it was just a gap
of which I needed uh recovery.
At the time
In my life, much like many New
Mexicans look for some kind of
recovery or some kind of
solution.
For their financials and the
predicaments that they find
themselves in.
I often talk about those things
as much as representative Kadena
does because these are the
families, the working families.
Um
Families that uh pride
themselves in in trying to make
ends meet, but sometimes can't
but are working and have means
and need access to their own
means and have to find ways to
do that, and that's simply what
this this policy introduces, and
it deserves a conversation.
From all of us an open
conversation of how we get
there.
And
That's what the process is that
we engage in engage in every
year at this time.
And
I have spoken to many
organizations and to those that
have their concerns.
And
I'd like to then have this
discourse with everyone today
and thank Representative Kadena
for taking the lead on this
bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for
today, um, our ask is actually
not for your votes, but to come
to a shared understanding of
what's in this bill.
Um, I think public often assumes
that we all have room and time
in our lives to intimately
become experts on everything and
we're not that.
So we rely on information
provided to us from advocates,
lobbyists, others that show up
in this building or reach out to
us in other means to tell us
what they think about this
around this effort and similar
ones that I've been part of in
my 3 terms here in the
legislature. I've realized that
sometimes, um.
The most important thing we can
do is make sure we're
understanding what's in front of
us, so then we can have an
accurate and honest debate about
this policy. So today, that's my
hope is that we can come to a
shared understanding of what's
in this bill, uh, that we can
come to an understanding of what
the provider models are that are
operating today in New Mexico
without any kind of oversight
sight or parameters or caps on
their models, um, and then I'd
hope that we can ask ourselves
if this is an issue area that we
as the legislature, our body
should be.
considering if yes, then we get
to work, um, y'all, I don't
think any I've, I've met any of
you on the House Judiciary
Committee, but um, these chairs
can get a little impatient with
me cause I say, can I bring you
a draft and then get all your
expertise and come back with a
committee sub. But if you all
deem that this is something of
importance that it's relevant
for us to be paying attention
to, then we would um hopefully
capture.
Uh, some of your insight and
expertise, what parts of the
bill do you like? What parts of
the bill need to be tightened
up, um, what are we missing? Uh,
so with that, Madam Chair, I
want to talk quickly about the
two, earned wage access models
that we're considering here in
this bill.
And then I wanna talk to you at
a high level through the
sections of the bill, knowing
that we can get into some of the
complexities and detail over our
question period and then I'll
share that you all have been
provided with amendments, I name
um what those intend to do, but
part of a broader conversation,
you think this is important.
Uh, finally, I will share we
have two people joining us
today. They are here to answer
technical questions about how
their business models work, um,
that would be Nancy Coleman
Chavez, who's the manager of
government relations at daily
pay and Zach Drucker, who's a
public affairs specialist at
Ernin, so they won't be speaking
yet, but we'll be here to answer
questions about their models,
um, and, and catching me if I
don't explain these accurately,
um, but first, Madam Chair, um.
Daily pay is an organization
that of, of a handful of
organizations that do something
called an employer partner
model. You may have read about
that at an FIR, but daily pay or
companies like them go directly
to these massive employers in
America, Target, Albertson's,
Home Depot, um, those
organizations sign up.
As a benefit to their employee
with these services. So how it
works is they um moved to
integrated payroll. So a company
like this has access to ADP or
whatever payroll company that
massive corporation uses, they
can, and it sounds like check
daily multiple times to see what
wages uh employee or worker has
already earned, and then this is
hugely important then for a
one-time fee that we are
attempting to cap.
The employee can access the
wages they've already earned
early. So this is not
speculation like I hope I pick
up a couple of shifts next week
or I, I might be working, I
might get a call on a job, but
they, uh, these companies,
because of the payroll
integration are looking to
verify what wages someone has
already earned, and then that
worker or a fee that they
understand and are well aware of
and decide to pay a fee to get
their wages early.
Again, paying a fee to access
the wages they've already earned
early. We'll talk later about
the caps we've proposed in this
bill, but that is one model.
Uh, the second model is direct
to consumer. So for those New
Mexicans that may not work at a
place that offers this as part
of their benefits package, um,
they can find themselves up,
typically on an app or mobile
platform, they can um have their
employment verified through a
couple of means including an
email address or geolocation,
like showing that they go to
that place and in fact work
there. They upload information
like pay stubs and work history
and, and the hours that they've
worked and
again for.
Again, for sorry the whispering
in the back was distracting.
After uploading this
information, uh, they can see
what uh wages they're eligible
to access early and pay a fee.
A transaction fee for accessing
that pay early. What's really
important to clarify, Madam
Chair and committee, that there
is no interest rate, there is no
APR, there this is, this is not
a model that relies on or is
based on someone paying interest
back over time on money they
borrowed. Instead, these are
wages that someone has already
worked and they're paying a fee
to get access to those wages
earlier.
Um
Moving through some key sections
before we wrap up this
introduction.
I am imagining you all have your
bill in front of you, pretty
standard language, um, I
appreciate and have a copy of
the small loans Act next to
this. In many ways you could say
we plagiarize the Small Loans
Act because there's so much
overlap between the two, but,
uh, section one, we start out
with a short title that's pretty
standard. And again, I can slow
down or go through this in
detail now or or.
Addres details and questions.
Section 2 will be pretty
important. That's where the
definitions come out, including
what earnsway access is, what
the fees are, what it means to
be a provider of these services.
Section 3 is, uh, that a license
is required. Section 4,
application for original
license, Section 5, license
information, 6, license, renewal
or denial, um.
7 is something else to do with
the license. I didn't write the
full thing down, 8 is a service
of notice, 9 is fees, not for
the consumer, but involved in
the application to be uh have a
license. 10 is the investigation
exam of records, like we were
just hearing you all debate on
the last bill. 11 is records
retention, 12 is where we're
going to pay most of our
attention and energy, that's
provider duties, trips, tips,
gratuities, um, and other
services, so that's over pages
where we're going to actually
Talk about where the substance
of this bill is, what the
proposals we have to cap these
fees and to keep accountability
and consumer protections in
place for these models.
Section 13 is annual reports, 14
is a list of providers, 15
establishes that this is the
exclusive jurisdiction of the
state.
Um, 16 is rules, 17 is false
advertising also in another
important section, um, we don't
want shady operators showing up
in New Mexico, so of course,
provisions on what would happen
um if somebody was operating in
those ways, 18 is that they
would operate a business under
an approved name, um, and then
the final pieces, those last
final pieces are the pretty
standard parts about uh, let's
see about uh.
final actions appealable to
district court, contracts not
offend uh affected, uh, division
records and finally the
violations of the act and
applicability when this would go
into effect. So Madam Chair, if
you'd like, we can talk about
section 12 now. I feel
comfortable and imagine that um.
The essence of the bill will
come up in in questions, but
your call.
Um, thank you, uh,
Representative. So I think what
we need to do, I I so it sounds
like you're wanting to first
have a concept discussion. And
then at that point you want to
go into uh the amendments that
you're proposing, or would you
like to talk about, should we
move the amendments for
discussion purposes so it can be
part of the whole concept
discussion.
We can do that, Madam Chair, so
at that point, uh, at this
point, uh, do we have emotion uh
for a discussion on the
amendments.
Um, that's a, that's a different
kind of procedure. I don't, I, I
kind of like it, quite frankly.
I think I can think of several
bills where that would have been
very useful.
Um, and, uh, would have stopped
a lot of anger and disagreement.
Um, but I also am kind of
curious if we do that.
What is the role of
Uh, the people who
Object or support the bill as it
is, is there room in there.
Or comment from the audience, so
I just not quite sure how this
works. Well, so this is the
first time that I've been asked
to have a conceptual discussion
during the, the committee, so I
guess we're, we're, we're gonna,
um,
I think you're correct. I think
we probably need to, to hear how
the how the public feels. And
then, um.
So let's, let's do that first.
Um, let's talk, I think we, we
need to.
Yeah, he threw me for a loop
there. Madam Che mostly pulled
this move in house judiciary,
um, Cherry Chandler has been
frustrated with me on occasion,
but across the aisle, I've been
able to get bills out like 110
because we don't have the
audacity to say this is perfect.
We're coming here to say that we
should be paying attention to
this. We hope you agree and we
don't, you all have expertise
that we don't, so including a
conversation, I wouldn't quite
call it a concept, but to say
I'd like to present the bill.
I'd like to talk about the.
amendments so far and then open
a discussion like what are we
missing in the case that you
think this is an idea we should
move forward that we can capture
those and potentially bring back
a committee sub next week.
More than a concept discussion,
I would like to present the bill
and the amendment, of course, we
always want to hear from public,
but.
Most important for me was that
we established what's actually
in this bill, uh as far as I've
seen in media coverage and
otherwise and and from advocates
and materials I've handed today.
The the there are folks that
have seemed to have some
misinformation themselves, and I
wanna clear that up with you all
as voting members of this
committee.
OK, but I think, I think what
we, how I would like to proceed.
um.
But
Chairs.
Thank you. I, I'm in a little
bit of a loss.
Because I feel like we're
putting
Cart ahead of the horse. I, I'm
really not even clear I I've
read what's here.
But I'm not really clear on what
we're trying to do, and yet
we're jumping to amendments. So
it seems like we
We have an audience.
Both present and
Television and I think we need
to talk about.
What this Bill is attempting to
do.
Thank you.
Representative Serato.
Madam Chair, I, I guess for me,
I, I apologize, Madam Chair and
Representative. Thank you for
bringing forward the bill.
Wonderful. Um, I
I would like to include
including the conversation of
the amendment, if that is its
current form, because if that's
the current form that we're
discussing it from, you know,
the, the, the amendments were
submitted with more than 24
hours in advance. Um, you know,
typically whenever we have a
bill, whether, whenever we vote
on it, we discuss it as amended
and not prior to amend it. So
from my perspective, that's what
I would hope we would do, um,
cause that's typically what we
do with any bill.
Represented uh chair Lente
anymore.
No, I, I, I, I, I like that
approach with the amendments and
treating it like a like an
actual bill. I think, I think
we're going to set up some
really bad precedent in this
committee if we begin to be that
committee that let's just go
there to float ideas us really
not take any real action because
then we're just we're here, you
know what I mean? We're we're
we're listing the bills without
taking any action, so I guess if
you want to, this is your
committee, but um.
It's treated like a real bill
and and then if it's going to
tank, then maybe you give them a
chance to roll it.
And, and I agree with that. I
think that's how we should
proceed and so I, I will go back
to my first statement is, uh,
I'd like to to see if there's a
motion to discuss the
amendments, um, because we need
to have.
The concepts out there that
we're gonna need to vote on at
the end. So if we could have
emotion.
Do we have a second?
For discussion.
All right.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I imagine you all have these
amendments, the 200 number is
230242.1.
OK, so again, like I said,
I came to this bill after
hearing it read out on the house
floor.
I printed out a copy and I read
this bill page by page, section
by section.
By that time, someone had handed
me some potential amendments,
um, I read those in the context
of this, there are a couple I
agreed with that were clean up
and there's a couple I didn't.
So what these amendments reflect
is after my first close read
with a hard copy in in hand what
I thought was important to
already establish as part of a
bill I was moving with doctors
upstairs. So what you'll first
see on some of these amendments
is that we're striking the word
tip or other donation, um, my
first read.
I'll be honest with you, like I
said, why would providers like
this need, need a tip.
I tip someone that prepares my
food as part of a food service
economy, I tip my Uber drivers
and Lyft drivers. I tip when
there's a worker involved.
That I can, um, support by
putting additional funds in
their direction.
My first idea was that we strike
that entirely and don't allow
providers operating in New
Mexico to solicit or collect
tips.
I am still open to that
possibility if you all agree
with me that tips aren't
necessary in a model like this.
It was flagged for me that there
could be some First Amendment
concerns about banning tips. So
what I did in this amendment
that you'll see is that
If we proceed with a bill like
this and tips are included in
that model that the tip would
have to be set at 0, not maybe
said at zero, but shall be set
at 0 so that if there is a
consumer that's so compelled to
give to this provider company, a
tip to help them maintain their
platform and do this work of
getting people earned a wages
early, then they would have to
manually go in there and move
that tip from zero to whatever
tip they thought was appropriate
for the services they.
received. So that, Madam Chair,
is a key part of this amendment,
but otherwise we'll talk through
some cleanup language, um, so on
page 4, and this was my work um
with the drafters, so on page 4
line 5.
We stroke, uh, we stroke, um tip
and we're trying to make the the
language here clean up, but tip
and gratuity basically mean the
same thing, so we're using it
from here on forward as
gratuity.
On page 4, line 6, or other
donation, we're striking that in
entirety like you're paying for
your service, you have the fee
clearly lined. We don't want
other donations mysteriously
hanging out there, so we struck
other donation. This is on the
definitions page, but you'll see
those, um, same uh strike
throughs happen throughout the
bill. I stri striking tip or the
language of their donation. Um,
we then, Madam Chair, go to
page.
10, line 15.
Um, here is cleanup language.
This is the section that is
coming out of um license
information like what
information needs to be provided
to regulation and licensing, the
FID division to obtain a
license. This was, um,
stipulating that you would put
the address of your provider's
principal place of business
within or without New Mexico and
each physical location in New
Mexico, we're putting comma, if
any, cause they may not have a
physical location in New Mexico,
so.
That was clean up.
We then go to page 11, Madam
Chair, line 18. Um, this is
under the section license
renewal, denial and hearing. So
here we are saying that um.
Let's see, page 18, that the
division.
has room to renew your license
if you find that there were no
valid complaints of violations
of abuses of the earned wage
Access Services Act or of rules
promulgated in accordance with
the Act have been filed by
consumers or other persons, what
we're adding is the language and
remain unresolved. So it's not
like a single consumer can go
out there and file a complaint
and it stops the renewal, but
the complaints have to be
unresolved.
So that's just clean up
language.
Um, Madam Chair, we go to page
22.
This is, uh, the concept I
already introduced to you all,
why we're striking tips or other
donations we're just leaving it
as gratuities for now.
On page 23.
Madam Chair, line 16.
We are striking, so this is
more, this is another paragraph
about the gratuities. So we're
saying if a provider solicits
charges or receive a tip, a tip
should be voluntary, so you
should not be charging a tip,
and that's why we're striking
the word charges, you shouldn't
charge a tip, I think we could
agree on that.
On page 23, line 17. Here again,
we're striking the tip or the
donation. We don't want some
unstated other donations out in
the realm of this regulation.
Um
Same thing happening online 21.
And then on page 23, this is
more substantive on line 22
after voluntary were inserting
and the providers programs
default shall be set at 0. So if
that's still part of the model
and we deem it appropriate that
tape has to be set at 0. A
consumer would have to go in and
input a dollar amount or
percentage if they wanted to tip
the provider.
Then, Madam Chair, the next of
significance, so the rest of
what we're doing, this is
Janelle at work, 50 years in
council service, this is she
wants to clean up language as
she should when she gets a
chance and as we get the chance
to do that, the rest of that is
striking the other and donation
line.
Um, the next substantive.
Change
Madam Chair
Is, um, Amendment 28.
So here when we get to page 26,
and we can talk through, I think
it'd be helpful to talk through
the the substance of section 12.
But Section 26, this is
important because we're
establishing um a distinction in
a cap between the two different
models. So on this page, what
we're looking at is going back
to the definition of fee.
And when we're talking about the
model that someone is charging a
trans transaction fee for
accessing your wages early. I
first wanted Janelle to make
that plural like I don't want
there's some to be some sneak
around like you charge an
application fee that was $3 and
then your transaction fee was 10
and then a processing fee was
another two and you added up to
the 750. So one, we're adding
language to say a fee or fees
per transaction and not come in
above $7.50.
But that's for the model that
comes from employer-based or
direct to consumer. There is
another piece that we see in
definitions that for some
people, um, they are paying for
a group of services with a
monthly subscription or
membership, and as it's been
explained to me, people may be
paying 999 for identity theft
protection and earned wage
access, but some of these
consumer services that people
are more compelled and drawn to
these days. So what I've added
here.
Um, in this amendment, uh.
When we're talking about on 28
page 26, paragraph 1, that is
saying that basically
establishes that the 750 cap
applies to the employer and
consumer model.
And then, um, here it says,
provided that no other fee shall
be charged for a transaction
that's page 29, like, we're
establishing transaction fee,
you can't slide other fees in
here, that section B would say
if you are on the model.
That you're already paying a
subscription or membership fee,
your cap per transaction would
only be $3.50 because that
provider is already collecting
some income for you signing up.
To be part of this group of
services.
Um, and then finally this uh
last piece on 30 and 31 is clean
up, it's covering that gap
should a law like this pass, um,
we are saying that providers can
continue operating until RLD FID
stands up a licensure process
and at that point they either
have 6 months to get licensed or
cease operations under the new
rules and regulations.
Um, so with that, Madam Chair,
to sum up one more time because
I think it's important like
we've heard that the public have
room to provide public comment
on the substance of what's in
front of us.
Again, most of that exists in
section 12, so that starts on
page 22. This is where it covers
the duties, tips, gratuities, or
other donations, um, so their
first obligation would be to
develop and implement policies
and procedures to respond to
consumer concerns or questions.
The second piece of these models
and these proposed regulations
are really important. What we're
establishing on page 22, line 22
is that when offering the
consumer these products, every
operator, every provider in.
Mexico must provide at least one
no cost option.
To consumers. Again, none of
these models charge any
interest. There's no APR.
There's no compounding anything.
They are fee-based, but on top
of that, we are requiring here
that they must offer a no cost
option. What that means in
practice today with
organizations like these, is
that if you can wait 24 to 48
hours to access those wages if
you're planning ahead, you know
when your car insurance payments
coming out or when you have to
register your kid for soccer,
whatever that may be, if you can
go through that waiting period
of.
24 to 48 hours. There is no cost
to access your wages that you've
already earned early. If you
need it more immediately, like
in 5 minutes, then that's when
these models with the $7.50 cap
or 350 cap would come into play
if you need access to your wages
immediately. So, one, it's
important that all of these
providers would be required to
come in with a no cost option.
Section 3, we're moving to page
23, uh, before entering into an
agreement with consumer for uh
with the consumer for the
provision of these services, you
must do all the following,
inform the consumer of their
rights under the agreement,
really important for us, right?
Uh, be fully and clearly
disclose all fees associated
with these services.
Nothing hidden, nothing shady on
the side. Those fees have to be
clear, and that consumer has a
right to consent to pay those
fees in order to access these
wages early. Um, for here,
inform the consumer of any
material changes to any terms
and conditions before
implementing changes for that
consumer, so if they're changing
how their model works, they
can't change it on you until
you've been informed.
Um, section 5 allow cancellation
at any time without a
cancellation fee. So if you were
part of a membership or
subscription, you're not into
this anymore, you don't need it,
you got a better paying job,
you've you've met your bills.
You can cancel it any time at no
cost. 6 is, of course, comply
with all the applicable federal,
state, and local privacy laws,
7, this comes back to the tip.
The amendment has some language,
but basically if a provider asks
for a tip, the provider shall do
all of the following.
Clearly disclose immediately and
prior to the transaction that
such tip it again it would be
set at 0 and it's voluntary. You
also have to disclose that
you're um.
whether or not you tip will not
impact whether or not you're
eligible to access your wage
early, so it will make that
clear as well.
Um, and then next, uh, 0.8 that
the proceeds to a consumer are
are directed in a way that's
mutually agreed upon. Basically
how this works is it's like an
ACH like you provide your bank
information, um, if it's direct
to consumer, they put that money
in after you've signed your
contract and said you agreed to
the fee on that agreed upon date
based on when your next paycheck
is supposed to hit. They already
have your bank information, it
just gets pulled out the amount
that went early and that fee
gets pulled back out.
Uh, but generally, again, it has
to be, they have to understand
that and agree to that for the
employer-based model because
they're integrated into payroll,
all that happens is the part
they got early is not included
in the next check because
they've already been paid for
those wage and services. 0.9
here. Um, if for some reason
there is outstanding proceeds,
so in particular, maybe that
bank accounts closed down, maybe
everybody shut it down, maybe
there's nothing left. This lays
out what would happen, um, if
there were these outstanding.
proceeds. So what's really
important here with lots of
consumer protection is that they
would have to still comply with
federal law on doing that. Um,
if there was any accidents and
how that happens like if they
cause an overdraft fee or an NSF
fee because they went to get the
money early or they went to get
the money and accurate in the
wrong amount that the the
worker, the client would be
reimbursed for all those costs,
but if something else happened,
the provider, we're now on page
25, shall not do any
any of the following. They
cannot share with the employer
the a portion of the fees or the
gratuity, they shall not require
a consumer's credit report or
credit score, they shall not
accept payment of outstanding
proceeds by using other credit,
so specifically a credit or
charge card, they cannot, very
important, charge a consumer a
late fee, deferral fee,
interest, or any other penalty
or charge for failure to pay
outstanding proceeds.
Um, we're almost done with that
section 5 is they shall not
report to creditor to the
consumer reporting agencies or
debt collector, any information
about the consumer regarding the
inability of the provider to be
um to have these outstanding
proceeds paid.
Uh, then, uh, we're almost
wrapping up here in this
section, the section next lays
out like how they could seek to
have payment if again, that
account was shut down, they go
to pull it and there's nothing
left. Um, it outlines how that
would happen.
Uh, and then here on 26th,
really the essence of it is
where we lay out.
Every provider per transaction
cannot charge more than $7.50 to
a consumer that wants to access
their wages early. So that's it.
Whether or not 750 is the
starting point or the right
point would be a discussion with
you all, but it's as
straightforward as that, there's
no interest, there's no other
fees. What should we cap um
these providers at per
transaction.
And then, um, that gets us
through the end of section 12,
Madam Chair, where the bulk of
this bill is.
All righty.
It was
That was a lot.
Um,
So, um,
Let's hear from, let's hear from
the audience, let's see what
people are thinking about this
bill, but anybody in favor of
this film if you like to.
Come up if we can get our
attendant to.
Madam Chair, um, members of the
committee, my name is Molly
Jones. I'm the head of public
policy at Pay Active, where an
employer integrated earn wage
access provider. We've been
proudly serving hundreds of
employers as an employee benefit
to over 10,000 employees in New
Mexico for over a decade. Uh,
we're here in support of this
bill. We think it creates very
strong consumer protections for
the industry and uh provides
guard rails around which we can
grow and innovate.
Our company is really created to
solve a problem. What happens
when you are the 40% of
Americans who don't have even
$400 in your savings account for
an emergency. You can take out a
payday loan or an online payday
loan, you could incur a late
fee. You can
Borrow money from friends and
family.
You can ask your employer for an
advance on your wages.
That's why our product was
invented to help preserve that
dignity and help you access
money that you've already
earned, but is trapped in a
batch payroll cycle. The
non-recourse, no interest
product. We have 5 free options.
Um, and again, we're, we partner
with the employer.
Thank you.
Thank you. We also have people
on Zoom, uh, just a reminder, we
are at a one minute cutoff
limit.
Tara rider
Thank you.
Good afternoon, madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Tara Ryder and I'm the
vice president of policy and
government relations for
Bridget, a financial wellness
company that offers earned wage
access as one of the many
features in our services to
consumers in New Mexico and
across the country. We thank the
sponsors for introducing this
important legislation to create
a responsible framework for wage
access providers in the state,
in New Mexico, we serve over
37,000 consumers with an average
earned wage access transfer
amount of $72.
In addition to earn wage access,
Bridges its customers a
subscription-based services that
include products such as
identity theft protection,
monitoring, building, and
budgeting tools to help our
customers reach financial
independence. As a direct
consumer provider, the
amendments that have been
proposed today Bridge to a
different fee structure than our
competitors for the delivery of
the same product. A subscription
is not required to access our
EWA product and comes at a cost
to Bridget to provide to our
customers. The only fee that is
solely attributable to
is the optional $1.99 expedited
transfer fee. We respectfully
request that Bridge's expedited
fees are placed in the same
provision for expedited transfer
fees
as our competitors for a clear
regulatory structure and a fair
market.
Thank you.
Tara
Gerari
Hi, good afternoon, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Tarari, and I serve as
director of economic analysis at
Chamber of Progress Coalition
committed to ensuring all
Americans benefit from
technology. Our corporate
partners include companies like
Ear.
And daily pay, but our partners
do not have a vote
on excuse me.
We are strong supporters of
providing consumers with better
alternatives, predatory lending,
and earn wage access services
workers bridge the gap today to
payday
and for the people of New Mexico
dependency on the payroll cycle
and the financial system and the
frequently disadvantage them.
I'm here for you today for HB
59, which is a separate
distinctive licensing regime for
earned wage access providers
within New Mexico that
acknowledges how these financial
services are fundamentally
different from traditional
lending
through EWA workers can maintain
their jobs, continuing access to
their earned wages regardless of
their employer. The service is
available to organizations of
all sizes from small businesses
to large corporations and public
sector entities, enabling them
to compete more effectively for
talent.
a responsible alternative to
high cost financial products,
helping workers avoid credit
card debt, late fees, bank
overdraft fees and paydays.
Thus HB59 takes the appropriate
steps access for the people of
New Mexico. Well also in acting
protection.
Thank you.
Ashley Erisman.
Thank you. My name is Ashley
Yurman, and I'm the director of
state government affairs for the
American FinTech Council or AFC.
AFC is the premier trade
association representing leading
financial technology companies,
including the largest providers
earn wage access services, um,
EWA is an innovative financial
tool that empowers workers to
access their wages in a way that
best fits their lifestyle rather
than keeping them tethered to
arbitrary payroll cycles. You
can opt to access through their
employers standalone products or
part of a a description. Uh, to
date, more than 100.
Mexicans have used EA in more
than 800 employers in the land
of enchantment offer EWAs a
benefit. We support HG59 because
it ensures that your
constituents can continue to
reap the benefits of EA while
also protected by policies in
line with AFC's strict
standards. These protections
include the availability of a
no-cost option for all users
that the clear disclosure of
fees associated with each
transaction, the ability for
users to cancel their service at
any time and the first in the
nation fee on EWA transactions.
regulated by the bill are not
recourse, meaning users do not
have to repay if they are unable
to and users' credit is not
impacted if they fail to. Thank
you for taking up this issue and
I'm happy to answer any
questions you may have. Thank
you.
That is all.
Do we have anybody in
opposition?
Right, if we can get the
attendant to get the mic and.
If you'd lined up, you've got to
admit uh a minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, Christina
Fisher, Associate director of
Think New Mexico. We're strongly
opposed to this bill. 3 years
ago, this legislature capped the
cost of credit for New Mexicans
at 36%. This bill proposes to
carve out earned wage excess
products and allowed them to
charge unlimited percentage
rates. I really want to urge the
committee to take a close look
at the New Mexico Department of
Justice analysis of this bill.
The agency analysis says clearly
these products are loans under
the Small Loans Act. They are
subject to the 36%.
% cap. They absolutely are
already regulated. This bill is
not necessary. If you pass this,
they will be taken out of that
and be unlimited in how much
they can charge, um, as an APR.
Finally, I just want to note,
this is reverse economic
development. These companies are
not based in New Mexico. Every
dollar that goes to pay their
fees leaves the state and is not
circulating in our local economy
with local businesses. Thank
you.
I I'm sure members of the
committee, my name is Oamba Umi,
advocacy director for AARP New
Mexico. We represent 240,000
members statewide. Uh, we have
an interest in the bill because
ARP has strong, uh, long history
of protecting consumers from
from things of this measure such
as predatory loans. We have a
large older population still in
the market, um, a lot of them
work check to paycheck and so we
take a lot of these small fees
out over time for each of these
transactions. It tends to add up
and can actually end up.
reducing a lot of their, their,
their low wages that they're
already uh accumulating and so
for that reason, we oppose this
bill.
Madam Chair and committee
members, my name is Krisel
Martinez and I'm the VP of
legislative affairs with the
credit union Association of New
Mexico.
I wanted to state that as such
in the way the bill is currently
written, which includes the
amendment. It appears that
there's a lot of room for
predatory abusers, uh, abuses to
take place. For example, there
is no limits for dollar amounts
of access services received or
how often they can be accessed,
or if more than one can be um
maintained at a time. But
lastly, it's important to note
that it is an essential way uh
for families and community to
build credit when um they're
looking at um
Reporting to credit bureaus, um,
that is the essential way of
building credit. So without
reporting that could potentially
posses uh pose an issue. Um,
there are just a few, um, these
are just a few of the, uh,
significant missing terms and
conditions. So with that, we do
ask that you oppose House Bill
59, um, and continue to look at
how regulations are impacting
for all lenders in the state to
minimize um New Mexico to help
advance New Mexicans' financial
health and well-being. Thank
you.
Hello and thank you, uh, Madam
Chair.
I'm Paul Diak. I'm a citizen
here in Santa Fe and District
46.
And I'm very grateful to the uh
sponsor, uh, Representative
Cardenna for having explained
that the fee is a one-time fee.
And it would be helpful, I would
think, if all of you would
satisfy yourselves whether
there's any difference over the
course of a year between a
person using the service once a
year or using it 4 out of 100
pay periods or 20 out of 100 pay
periods and however many that
is.
If the employee.
would total up all the fees they
paid, these one-time fees over
how many times, and how much
they received in early payment.
Grand total over the course of
the year, then derive a
percentage is that percentage
higher than 36%, isn't it?
This committee, I'm hoping will
help protect all of us as New
Mexicans. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Austin Wiake. I'm with New
Mexico Working Families Party,
and I stand in opposition to
House Bill 49 because the bill
presents a pretty big loophole,
uh, in our recent consumer
protection laws that set us at a
national standard. Uh, this
isn't ambiguous. These are
products that for people money,
uh, in exchange to your uh uh
tied to your income for a cost.
The only difference is that once
again, just like from 2017 to
2021, they're calling them fees
instead of interest. We're
hearing once again how cheap
those fees might possibly be.
able to be in the best case
scenario, and once again, we're
trying to plug a hole in New
Mexico's economy with products
that exist on fees charged to
consumers living paycheck to
paycheck. This is an ambiguous.
This is money borrowed from a
company for a fee. And to me,
that's a loan, and loans are
still very much covered under
the Small Loans Act of 2023.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of committee. My name is
Andrea Serrano. I'm with Olay in
Albuquerque, New Mexico. We
represent our members who are
workers, um, many of them who
are living paycheck paycheck to
paycheck and ask that this
committee continue to work
toward legislation that protects
workers, um, and protects people
who are low, low wage earners
and the loans like this can be
predatory, um, you know, present
a really quick fix to something
that actually ends up harming
them in the lung.
Thank you.
Alrighty, we'll now go to zoom.
Whitney B
Hello, my name is Whitney
Barkley Denny and I am senior
counsel and deputy director of
State of the Center for
Responsible Lending. We're a
nonprofit focused on closing the
racial wealth gap and leveling
the playing field for all
people.
Um, I don't want to be. I only
have 1 minute, so I just want to
say a couple of things.
When you, when you give somebody
money and they have to pay you
back to get a loan.
The um the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau agrees to
loan. New Mexico's law agrees
alone. These are loans. Number
2, I would just like to
Say that much like payday loans
were in that we see that people
are borrowing over and over and
over again. About 30% of
borrowers, the people who drive
this market, they are super
users. They're using at least 24
times a month and they're, I'm
sorry, 24 times a year and
they're often using multiple
times a month and often using
for multiple service providers
at one time. This is how this
industry makes their money like
formerly. Um, what we can see in
the data, and I'm happy to
share.
Right.
Anne Lynn
and community members. My name
is Alyn Hall, and I am the CEO
of Prosperity Works. I'm here
today to ask you to oppose HB
59. This bill does not help
households that live paycheck to
paycheck in Mexicoes needed
funds in emergencies. It's just
funds in a cycle of high fees
and hidden gratuities and his
predatory nature. Both models
being discussed are loans and
should follow the small loans
acts, including these interests.
There are some great
employer-based loan products
available in the Mexico.
comply with the Mexico's small
Loans Act and don't charge
interest greater than 36%. True
connect is one such small dollar
loan provider that allows the
employees to get access to the
funds within 24 hours of up to
$5000 with no credit check and a
19.99% APR repaid within one
year.
Large employers and
municipalities in Mexico are
already use TrueConnect. City of
Albuquerque, of Las Cruces,
County of Bernalillo, Eddy
County and Donna County are
examples.
I also want to highlight the
financial institutions.
Thank you.
Melissa Candelaria?
Madam Chair, this is Melisa
Candelaria for the New Mexico
Center poverty. We appreciate
what the sponsors are trying to
do but cannot support the bill
because it does not cap the
interest rate on this type of
loan. The type of payday events
authorized in this legislation
is a PD.
Yet this bill does not cap
interest rates and opens up a
major loophole in the current
law that regulates small loans.
In 2022, the legislature capped
interest rates on small loans at
36%. This bill would create.
to the 36% rate cap legalizing
high cost lending in New Mexico.
Research on these phone products
shows that they lead to repeat
borrowing to stay afloat and
create a cycle of debt for
families. Yes, the bill would
exclude these loans from the
small loan Act passed by the
legislature. We know the
legislature is looking for
better solutions for families to
support economic opportunity,
but we don't believe it should
be through loans that have
exorbitant and unlimited
interest rates above 30%.
6%. For those reasons, we oppose
this bill. Thank you.
Bernadette Hardy.
Hello, Madam Chair and members.
My name is Bernadette Hardy. I
am a single mom and live in
District 19 Senate District 17.
I'm here with Nim Vo as Baldwin
stated, it's way more expensive
to be poor and to this day it's
still true. This is a predatory
loan loophole and huge step
backwards and advance loans
leave a borrower worse off than
for paying high fees, and ending
up to be uh paying way more than
we borrowed, increasing the risk
of overdraft.
Falling more and more into debt,
having to reborrow again and
again.
This predatory lo lo loophole,
um, bill targets our most
vulnerable, and it's not
ethical. If you read the FIR,
uh, it's stated, um, to be
considered to have a regressive
Disproportionately negative
impact on lower income New
Mexican residents who are more
likely to rely on EWA services.
Thank you for listening.
Laura Montoya.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. This
is your state treasurer calling
to say that I appreciate
Representative Lujan and Cardena
for bringing this forward. I
know that their heart is in the
right place and trying to help
people that are vulnerable and
need that help. I think we're
not quite there yet. Um, I
definitely would recommend that
it comply with if we're going to
keep it under the Small Loans
Act that it stays at the same
36%. I don't like the fact that
none of these people live or
work in New Mexico, and I
definitely don't agree with the
tip at all. Uh, we
go to your banker, we don't get
tipped. Um, and these are the
most vulnerable people in our
communities, and they also
should not be tipping for
something like this. But also
keep in mind if we are really
talking about our vulnerable, if
you're tire gets flat, you're
gonna pay 100 bucks. That's 7.5%
interest. If you need $50 that's
15% interest. That is still high
and everyone knows that if it
was your child, you wouldn't
allow them to do these types of
things. We shouldn't allow our
New Mexico children or families
to be able to be preyed upon by
others. Thank you so much.
Jane Doyle.
Good afternoon, members of the
committee. My name is Jane Doyle
and I'm here speaking on behalf
of Woodstock Institute. Our
position is neutral on the cell.
I'm here today to relay
Woodstock's position on EWA
products in general. Woodstock
is an advocacy and research
nonprofit organization based in
Chicago that works to advance
consumer financial protection
policies. Woodstock Institute
believes that responsible EWA
products can be a safe and
affordable financial product and
with the proper regulation, have
a role to play in the landscape
of the financial products and
strategies to help
consumers address short-term
cash needs. It can even serve as
a pre-advanc option for
consumers. We believe that
proper regulatory oversight
should pay close attention to
whether those seeds are truly
voluntary as voluntary charges
are not finance charges. By
contrast, payday loans and auto
title loans carry mandatory
finance charges, often in APRs
and triple digits, and our
predatory by design. So long as
those additional charges remain
voluntary and consumers
understand the cost-benefit
analysis for each choice they
make during an EWA transaction.
Then a truly free advance option
can remain on the market and
available to consumers. Thank
you for allowing me to speak.
That is all matter.
Ready, let's go to to the
committee. Does anybody have any
questions?
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, my
very first question is their
money and house bill too for ILD
to create this and in the, in
their budget.
Madam Chair Representative,
there is not.
Thank you for that answer. Um,
so that's, that's my first
problem with it. And then, um,
how, uh, if, if I read it
correctly, there's a membership
fee that you would go, um, is
the membership fee fee paid by
the employee or the employer?
Madam Chair, there are some
business models across the
country that include a
membership fee we heard from one
of them, um, over the public
comment today, but the experts
I'm sitting here with today,
their models are not based on a
membership fee, so there's an
employer partnered model in
which the employer goes to seek
these services in order to offer
that as a benefit to their
employees, um, so the employees
would only be paying the one
time fee for that transaction if
they wanted to access their
wages early so
membership is a different model,
um, what I've proposed today is
that if someone is accessing
these services through this
membership model, they're
already paying for their
membership and that product
should have a lower cap, so what
I've said today is that that
could be something like 350
because they're already paying
for that group of services.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representatives. So
there's two different, uh, it
would be in the rulemaking to
decide it with RLD to decide
which.
What we're gonna do with this or
which one are you proposing? Um,
Madam Chair, uh in this bill and
with the amendment, it's both,
so if someone is not already
paying a membership fee, but
they're going at it through
their employer or as a direct to
consumer model, they would then
verify their employment, they
would verify their wages and
they would be subject to a $7.50
cap for the entirety of that
amount for all the fees, there
is no interest, there is no
interest, there is no interest.
It is a.
One time be for per transaction.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, and so has this
been done in other states and
and in how many other states?
Madam shared the model as we
proposed, um, is unique to New
Mexico. Like I said, we printed
this out, we looked closer, um,
most of this language in the
rest of the effort comes from
the Small Loans Act, the same
kind of protections that we've
established in a Small Loans
Act. Our New Mexico built out of
RLD FID. This has happened in
other states with some variety
and um Nancy might answer that
question, um, please, Nancy,
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
we have have legislation in 5
other states.
Thank you for that answer. And
um
Why wouldn't employers do this
on their own?
Madam Chair, many of them are
across the country and in New
Mexico was New Mexicans are
already accessing their wages
early because of this, our
effort and the purpose behind it
is to regulate it just like
other industries, including the
businesses that are subject to
the Small Loans Act. So right
now they're operating in a
different model, they don't run
interest rates, it's not a loan
that has to be paid back with
interest as it accumulates as
it's based on the outstanding
principle like there is just no
interest. So there's a gap here
in the
that we've um copied much of the
provisions of the Small Loan
Act, but built a proposal
designed around this business
model that is fee based, so when
you access your wage early, you
pay that fee.
So, Madam Chair representative
so often an employer was already
doing this on their own, they
would be mandated to follow the
statute in RLD.
Madam Chair, if the employee
what.
If the employer is already doing
this on their own, they're doing
it with a provider that exists
around the country and providers
are part of the group coming
forward to say we need to
regulate because we want to keep
this industry going, we, we as
the providers are providing a
service that New Mexicans and
many others need and they don't
want bad actors.
So what I'm saying, Madam Chair
and Representative, is if
employers are doing this on
their own out of their own
pockets, not through any kind of
um uh entity.
Would they be mandated to follow
these regulations as it stands,
I don't think so, but certainly
I can look into that, that's not
the intention of this, this is
the intention of this is to
regulate providers that are
providing this service that are
not the employer.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Chairman Luton.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representatives, and thank
you to your expert witnesses,
uh.
Majority Leader Armstrong asked
my first question regarding
appropriations to this, but if
Just to clarify for for my sake.
This is a conversation. You're
not asking for a vote today.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
I brought this bill forward,
what I'm saying is if you all if
you all identify that there's,
that this is an important policy
issue and something we should be
talking about in movie.
And you have ideas that are not
considered in this amendment,
then I would want to hold on,
get those ideas drafted and put
forward in something like a
committee sub, what I'm saying
is I, I'm, I don't have the
audacity to state this bill is
perfect and my amendment
considers everything. I know it
doesn't. And so I'm asking you
all, is 750 the right cap?
Should we allow for tips like if
you all tell me no and no, then
I'd want to address those before
passing this bill out of this
committee, but yes, I've
introduced this bill like any
other bill. All I'm saying is I
want to be responsive to the
insight and expertise you all
bring.
Thank you Madam Chair and
representative, I know how
diligent you work on your bills,
and, and I, I've, I've seen you,
I've worked with you on other
bills. And so I understand that
the way you work and I can
respect that, but at this point
in time, if
How is you, right? I would take
all of the comments of people
that
That spoke negatively about
wanting to support this and say,
OK.
I will work with all of them to
make this bill the right bill,
but until that comes, you know,
I, I think at this point, you
know, I, I don't, I don't want
to see anyone fail. I don't see
you fail, but at the same time,
this is a conversation that
we're having and I think it's
worthwhile, but um.
At this point in time, I wanted
to clarify that for my own sake
so that I know where we're going
in this direction of it. So I
appreciate that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Representative Murphy.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
representatives, thank you very
much.
Um
To
Representative Armstrong's
point.
Aren't there a number of
employers that are doing this
already. I know that um in my
company in granted I small
business. I have 22 employees,
but whenever an issue like this
comes up, we make provisions
within the company to do it and
grant either low or or no, um,
well, no interest loans um for a
period of time, um, I was
grateful to hear about True
Conect, um, and under their
business model, it sounds like
they've capped their uh their
interest rates at at roughly 20%
APR.
Um, but I also really truly
appreciate the concept here
because um.
OK
Capital availability to most
vulnerable is extremely
difficult, right? It's a real
problem, and it's one that I can
appreciate because almost 50
years ago when I started working
in the oil fields, we didn't
have payday, uh, loan brokers
and we didn't have a program
like this we had pawnbrokers and
so anytime I came short I would
typically pawn my favorite
shotgun, which uh I was able to
recover them. I still have it,
so I'm glad to report.
Um, but to me, and this is now
my question,
uh,
is that, um, and
representatives, isn't this, it,
it truly looks to me like this
is a carve out of the payday
loan program and could really
lead to some unintended
consequences. I note the FID
analysis says that the services
providers should not be
classified as a loan or other
form of credit or debt. However,
these products share several
similarities of traditional
payday loan programs. Can you
expand on that a little bit?
and tell me why I Thank you,
Madam Chair. We haven't had the
opportunity to introduce
ourselves yet, so I look forward
to meeting you on we get a
moment.
Um
I appreciate your taking us back
a couple of generations to when
pawn shops were where people
went when they were in an
emergency.
Um, since I've been in my
twenties and opened up my first
banking account. I opened up an
account with the credit unions
and I've had credit unions based
in Albuquerque and now I have a
credit union down home in Las
Cruces.
And what's real, um, Madam Chair
and Representative.
Right now, if someone doesn't
have sufficient money in their
accounts and their account is
overdrafted.
They face a $35 transaction fee.
And that's not a singular $35
for the overdraft. That's 30 $35
hit for every transaction that's
withdrawn from the account until
the account returns to positive.
So, um, while I appreciate the,
I hope it's well intentioned
commentary that we've heard.
It's frankly misinformed and
disconnected, a couple of months
ago, our Las Cruces City Council
passed an ordinance to ban
shopping carts in Las Cruces,
and they said.
All these unhoused people are
pushing around their shopping
carts with all their belongings
and we don't know where they got
their shopping carts. They must
have stolen them. We're gonna
buy shopping carts, and they
have a $500 fee now for someone
that's found with a shopping
cart that they can't validate
their.
How they obtained the shopping
cart.
And my teenager turned to me and
she said, Mama.
1312 at the time.
So they're going to take away
their shopping carts. That
doesn't mean they're housed.
And for me, that's the same
essence of this bill.
If people don't have money in
the account to meet their basic
needs.
We don't change that by not
allowing regulation of providers
like this, like if people don't
have money, whether we like the
idea of a $7.50 fee.
They're still not gonna have
money. We haven't changed their
everyday reality by saying we
shouldn't take advantage of them
or these fees are too high. Um,
my
Like I said, I, I have the small
loans Act printed out right
here. I've looked at these side
by side. We've lifted a lot of
the language from the Small
Loans Act, but this model is
fundamentally different because
it is not based on interest.
There is no interest. It's a one
time fee that you pay as a
service fee to access your wages
early, just like we pay a fee
for DoorDash, just like we pay
fees for other parts of our
life. This is not an interest
based interest based model.
So like I've considered even
this morning.
I'm not opposed to put this
within the small loans Act.
Except that it's not of interest
based model. If, if we can carry
these kind of concepts forward
and capped the fees for these
fee-based models and something
like that would be appropriate
and we could just like we're
doing now, talk about where
those caps should be. But
fundamentally these aren't
interest rates, uh, based
models, uh, just to echo again
the same concern, this proposal
as far as I've imagined it is
not designed to.
Interrupts or get in the way of
businesses, small businesses
that do this kind of have this
kind of care for their employees
every day. Um, I wish we all had
jobs at places, um, like TLC
lumbing and others that we've
seen demonstrate time after time
that they care for their workers
and there's a lot of
consideration around what
something like this would look
like, but many of New Mexicans
are not in those positions.
Thank you, Representative uh
Madam Chair Representative, you
say that it's, it's not an
interest-based model, but in
essence if whether you call it a
tip, a fee, a gratuity or
whatever, it becomes an interest
based model, right? Because it
is, it is an amount of money
that is having to be paid out to
access another amount of money
and it's just a different form,
um, I mean, um, any type of fee
is in one sense or another is a
tax or a percentage of of
whatever you're trying to
representative, I would agree
with that.
That it's a fee or a tax for
that service, but I would not
agree that it's based on
interest because it it's just
fundamentally not.
Well, uh, Madam Chair,
representative, um,
I don't want to quibble, but I,
I will say that the, the
gentleman from Santa Fe I think
described the correct
calculation. You would take the
amount of money that you pay to
access that amount of money and
you divide the the the amount
you pay by the amount you access
and becomes a percentage. So
therefore it becomes an interest
rate and that's just, that's
just not an interest rate well,
interest is express percentage,
Madam Chair, I'm sorry.
Uh, my apologies,
ma'am sure representative, um.
Madam Chair Representative, I
also question whether, um, and
this may go to your expert,
Madam Chair, a representatives,
um, whether it's a sus
sustainable business model as a
fee base.
As fee based, whether it's 350
or 750 because we have two
examples. One is the payday loan
program which this body I was
not a part of but determined
that 36% would be appropriate.
We have a private business model
um being true connected roughly
20%. So, um, we know that in the
in the business world or out
there it's it's going to be
something like that, and I
really wonder, um,
This is my main concern, Madam
Chair, representative, put an
unscrupulous employer take
advantage of this by basically
saying the voluntary gratuity
becomes a mandatory decree
gratuity and therefore the
interest rate because of the
loophole that's been described
here is no longer at 36%. It
could be at some much higher
rate. I took a long time for
that question. I apologize.
Thank you.
Madame Cheno in the legislation
that it's drafted, the TIF,
which is separate than the fee.
These are two different
components, has to be voluntary.
It has to be set at 0. Someone
would have to put that in,
giving a gratuity would not be
uh.
accessing your wage would not be
contingent on giving a gratuity,
so they're just separate,
there's a tip, which I'm not
convinced there needs to be, and
then there's a fee, and that's
the part that for me matters a
lot.
One last question, Madam Chair
representative, thank you for
that answer. I guess I'd also, I
think there was public comment
regard regarding the the uh DOJ
analysis and uh I would uh as
you start to look to improve the
bill, I would pay particular
attention to that. Thank you
very much Madam Chair
Representative.
Representative Matthews.
Thank you Madam Chair and thank
you presenters.
Um
Just a couple things I.
We spent a couple hours.
Couple, couple hours together
yesterday, um, uh, talking about
this.
And uh the our our discussion
pretty much has is reflected in
the discussion that we're having
today.
Um, but
Uh, madam chair, I wanted to
make a suggestion. uh, there's
no question in my mind that
The sponsors are
Uh, absolutely have the best
intentions here.
And there is also no question in
my mind that if there is a way
to provide a lawful.
And not predatory.
Uh, ability for low,
particularly for lower income
people to be able to.
Get an advance on your salary
and what and and help them out
of financial stress from time to
time.
We should do that.
Um, and whether we argue about
whether it's a loan or whether
we argue about whether it's an
interest rate or whatever, it
seems to me that there's a
pretty simple solution to this
situation.
Madam Sher, what, I would
suggest is instead of arguing
about whether or not it's a
loan.
And we simply assume that it's
subject to the small business.
Loan act that did Max.
Uh, uh, amount that can be
charged is 36%.
And think New Mexico and I had
this printed and circulated and
I shared it with the with the
sponsors.
I didn't have the math skills,
madam Chair, to figure out
interest rates, short term.
Bills or or uh loans.
And um, so they prepared this
and it was interesting to me on
a loan amount of $100.
With a
of
uh dollar 38, the fever at 36%
would be $1.38 and at $3.50 it
would be 91%.
Again,
I don't see any point in arguing
about.
Whether
You know, it just seems to me
that the math and the fur also
reflects, Madam Chair, the same
situation is examples. Why don't
we simply say,
That
We authorize these not to exceed
36% APR.
Um
And
Uh, you know, there's still
registration, there's still a
process.
And
My understanding is that the
default rate.
If you're the
Companies that are providing the
loans is something like 1% or
less.
And I would suggest to you.
This is such a no offense to Mr.
Draper.
Madam chair. This is a cash cow
for these people making these
loans.
And if we do that, they will
still make those loans in New
Mexico, and we will have our, I
can't remember what the old
saying is.
Uh dessert and our ice cream too
or something,
um, I needed cake
cake and eat it too. We will
have our cake and eat it too,
because this business model from
the provider standpoint.
is gold mine.
And while they won't make as
much money in New Mexico as they
might make elsewhere. They're
still gonna make money.
And they was, and then our
workers who need to have access
to this additional money, we'll
be able to get it.
So that is my suggestion to the
sponsors and to the committee.
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Serrato.
Thank you, Madam Cherry. Thank
you presenters and thank you
everyone for this discussion.
Uh, we're all our calculators
trying to figure out how people
got some of the numbers. So
thank you. Um, I, I do, I'm a
little confused, uh, because,
you know, the Department of
Justice Agency review says this
goes under the small loans Act.
Others feel that way as well. I,
I, I understand that's the
feeling, however, you as
operators have been able to
operate here charging this right
now, and you've not
Been this is not a violation is
that, is that correct? That's
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
that's correct.
I'm not trying to undermine it,
but yeah, thank you. That's,
that's, it's so it's, it's, it,
it's kind of funny in a sense,
Madam Chair, representatives and
experts, there, there seems to
be at least some sort of
Question that does exist
currently because they are
operating and without any kind
of limitations as it stands,
right? You put,
OK, so there's that. So then,
um,
That's one aspect of it. I and
and I think that and this goes
to your question of like
conversation, something that
myself and a couple of members
were talking about was, oh,
sorry, one other thing.
Back to the question of, um, you
know, interest versus fee and
everything, and I appreciate my
colleague bringing that up, uh,
Representative Murphy, I think,
I think that's part of it too.
You know, it's not an interest
rate, it's a fee and there,
there is a difference in there.
Um, and I think some of these
numbers that we're getting are,
are calculated on how much
people um are estimated to be
using this, right? Um, so one of
the questions that I, and I, I
think you guys would have to
take this back and come back to
us on this, but is there a way
that this, well, let me go back.
Sorry sorry, I'm really out of
numbers in my head. All right.
What is
And I'm curious for the experts.
On average, what is the, no, I'm
sorry, not on average. What is
the minimum loan that you offer
to individuals.
Madame Terrigan
Yes, I think we're agreement
that.
About, uh, the other
representative's point, but
we're not calling it a loan,
right, but how much can someone
access ahead of their pay, their
pay period early, yeah.
Map representative, thank you
very much for your question. Uh,
so our model has $3.50 as a fee.
We have offered two options, 3
options that people can access.
One of them is like
representative mentioned if you
can wait 24 to 48 hours to
access your money, that's free
of charge. We have a debit card
that
has expedited transaction fee
that it goes in directly into
your card and that's a free
charge as well. There's no
charge at all whatsoever. Now,
the amount that people are
actually pulling out from New
Mexico within our app, the, the,
the average is $100. $110
maximum.
section.
I hope that answers your
question.
High Chairman and
representative, uh, so at
earnning we are DC provider and
like daily pay, we have a free
option.
24, 40 hours over ACH and then
the expedite option of 399.
$100. So we have a daily max.
150.
That's one time a day, right?
150.
And then per pay period, so 24
weeks depending how long your
pay period is, you can get up to
750 or 80%, whichever is less.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, representatives and
experts. So just to be clear,
The fee is not that you at least
your companies are levying is
not necessarily on the, the, the
advance itself, it is on, um, an
additional
Experience, I don't know.
Is that correct?
Madam Chair, the fee is, if you
decide that you want to access
your wages in expedite form in
your ACH account. So, Madam
Chair and experts, that is, I
mean, so to me that seems like
it's a charge on the expedited
process, not on the, on the
advance itself. That is correct,
Madam. That is correct. Thank
you. That helps me. So, so part,
OK, all of that helps. So it
should the committee and you all
decide to move forward on it. My
hope is that we could get to a
point where, because a lot of
the, the presumptions here is
that people are utilizing these
27 times a year. And, and
that's, you know, and then once
you put that in 750 every single
time, that's gonna drain your
account. I, I see how that would
be um something that is
considered this, I don't
necessarily need to answer this,
but something to consider, I
would hope is that, is there
something we say, not, you know,
750 per per transaction, not to
exceed X amount in the year or,
um, you know, a fee not to be
levied on the advancement, but
etc. etc. That would be a
consideration, I think that
would help this process in a
sense, um, but I appreciate the
answers and the clarification
because again, it's
How I'm seeing it is it's not
necessarily a fee on the, on, on
the advance. It's, it's a fee on
the, on additional product. So
thank you. I appreciate that. No
more questions, ma'am.
Um, thank you. Is there anybody
else on the list?
Oh.
Representative, um, I don't.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
and thank you all for bringing
this bill, um, I do have some
questions.
Uh, especially about the fee cap
because I do perceive that it is
really high and a little bit of
background about myself, I used
to work with at Oliver Wyman in
a financial consulting firm and
I worked on earned wage access
actually for a large um company
that cannot be named, um, but
you know we had a lot of
restrictions and um protections
that we put into it in order to
make it viable for that company
and for the card.
they were designing, um, and you
know, a lot of um these earned
wage access groups don't charge
$750 so I'm just curious how you
got to 750, Madam Chair.
And representatives.
Madam Chair representative if we
put that as a starting point,
it's above what we've seen in a
scan of the providers across the
country.
I've always said that that could
be an amount that's lower and
potentially it's appropriate for
that amount to be lower. Again,
I really appreciate as a
consumer that this is a fee
based model that it's not
interest, it's not compounding
interest, it's not accruing
interest, um, but that I as a
consumer would have a decision
to make about whether or not I
needed that money early, and
certainly I could use the
service 4 times before I'd even
get to the cost of a single
overdraft fee, um, at a credit
union or bank in New Mexico.
this again is a different model
and I appreciate the intention
of like should this be within
the Small loan Act? Yes, maybe,
but I do feel convinced that the
fee model needs to be accounted
for differently. We need to
figure out what that fee is,
what that cap is. I certainly
think that would be a starting
point, Madam Chair.
And Madame Chair and um.
Representatives
Do you know one of one of our
analysis here says that um the
consumer finance Protection
Bureau in 2020 when, when I was
working on earned wage access
this was not regulated as a
loan, um, but now the consumer
finance protection um Bureau
last year in 2024, they said
that maybe this is actually a
loan and there was some
conversation to revisit that,
so, uh, federally considering
the federal um presumptive law
is this, do you know?
Where that's at, etc. Madam
Chair, Madam Chair, the CFPB did
not finalize that interpretative
rule.
So it was never finalized.
So it Thank you
is not considering these
products as loans. They're
considering um you accessing
your wages or salary early.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that
concludes my questions.
Thank you, Chair De la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Do you
have any idea what the average
default rate is on these
advances, Madam Chair, we've
heard is that it's less than 1%.
And Madam Chair, I, I take that
as something of a positive that
New Mexicans and others across
the country are accessing their
wages early because they are
looking at their budget, they're
looking at what's in their
account, they're looking where
they might be short, and they're
making responsible financial
decisions so that they're not
overdrafting or maxing out
credit cards or turning to
payday loans. And again, there's
we're in an economy now that is
based on fees for service, I
don't like it. I, I hate when
they're hidden. I hate when
they're junk. I hope we do more
to.
regulate that
And again, these providers are
operating in New Mexico today,
regardless of whether or not we
like it and this effort is to
actually put some regulations
and parameters in place to make
sure that everything is
disclosed to make sure that we
have a cap that's fair for our
hardworking everyday New
Mexicans.
Thank you, madam I'm sure it
intrigues me that uh.
That
There's a tipping in the
transaction of this nature. Do
you have any idea what that
might look like? Is there like
an average on that?
Um, Madam Chair, I'll turn to
Zach for his commentary on that.
Thank you, uh, chair and
representative for that
question. So our tips are
voluntary and transparent, uh,
we make that clear even without
the bill, we already do that,
uh, and with this boat would be
enshrined, uh, we want to
succeed as a business and have
our customers, uh,
think us in that way for the
service. One story that stuck
with me is that we have a
customer who used us during law
school, wasn't making enough
need to use us to get by. And
now as a corporate lawyer, when
she uses our service, she will
sometimes tip as a way to say
thank you for the time she used
us, um, our average tip is
$1.19.
Over a third of customers have
never tipped, there's no effect
on your quality of service or
amount you can access depending
on um how much you tip or never
tip, and then tipping is, you
know, millions of people.
Tip of, you know, every day in
this country, including on apps
and platforms such as some
political donations and
including uh CRL who spoke
against this bill earlier.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
lastly,
When
You engage
In this type of activity for
yourself.
What type of information do you
have to provide? Do you have to
provide checking information.
Can you
describe that a little bit if
the employer partnered model
with the payroll integration and
then we'll go direct to
consumer. We're what we call
minimalist company, so all we
ask is for their name, their
employee ID, and that's about
it.
So you don't need Madam Chair,
you don't need access to their
checking any of that. That's
correct.
Thank you, Madam,
oh yeah, yeah, we, since we are
integrated with payroll. The
only thing that we need in order
for us to be able to activate is
the employee ID information. The
way that we operate is we're
integrated with payroll we offer
the service through an employer,
and then the employer decides if
they want to offer the benefit
to the employee and based on
that, we have that information
because we as representative
mentioned we uh
update our app 4 times a day in
order for us to get raw data on
how many, you know, how much
people are making each day, so
they actually see the real
amount there on the app.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It only
concerned me if it was
excessively intrusive.
Madam, I'm sure it's OK.
Yes, sorry, uh,
Different than the B2B model,
the direct consumer, uh,
employer agnostic, so, uh.
You can move around with it and
uh go to different employers,
uh.
That you sign up, you know, put
your name, email, and then you
connect, uh,
You verify that you work either
as a representative said you opt
into either GPS that shows that
you're going to the same place
every day or your work email to
verify. Uh, we connect through
plaid, which is a third party uh
API platform uh that safely
connects to your bank account.
You see the paycheck deposit,
uh, in there, um, and that's how
we see what your paycheck is and
then on your uh paycheck, that
is when it is debited.
Thank you, manager.
Thank you. Um, I think that's
everybody off the committee, um.
So I, I think this is a very
well intended bill, and I
understand where the sponsors
are coming from, um, I think
that we've heard a lot of
concerns about the bill, um, the
just the way the.
The bill is presented is
problematic for me. I think it
needs to be done in a substitute
form versus all the amendments
because it's very, very
complicated and it's hard to
understand and read, and I don't
feel that I would be, I don't
feel comfortable at this time,
uh, voting on something that I
am that to me it was clear as
mud. And so, um, I'm not
comfortable with that. Um, I
also think, you know, there's
There's very, there's several.
Um
Opinions, I guess, whether it is
a loan, it's free free for
service, um, you know, under,
um,
So just in looking at some of
our background information. I
know that the consumer financial
protection Bureau is considering
it um alone. And so I, I want us
to get some clarification on
that because if it is a loan, I
think that uh we would need to
have it complied with the loan
Act.
And so that would be one of the
things I would challenge you
and, and, and ask you to do.
Um, I also think that the fee,
you know, it's 7:50. I don't
know, you know, you said, you
know, that it's, you just chose
that number, um, but first of
all, I think it would need to be
lower.
Um, so, um,
Once again, lots of um
with the bill as it's written
right now. Do you
Would you like to respond to
that and what would you like to
do, Madam Chair, I, I love this
debate and conversation, and I
think you all have offered some
really important questions and
clarity. Um, I would love an
opportunity to work on this and
potentially bring it back if we
feel like there's movement for
it. And if not, if not,
Um, to just summarize, I think
the part that I can agree with
and becomes clear is what
Matthews and myself, I don't
care that it's called a loan or
not. I want to regulate this
model in New Mexico.
Um, so I'd like to figure out if
this belongs back in the small
loans Act. I'm certainly been
open to that, but I want to
create provisions that respond
to this model.
As abased model. I think it's a
different way that consumers are
clearly showing that they're
going, there's hundreds of
thousands of New Mexicans
accessing this. So I want to
make sure we have the right
provisions and parameters in
place to respond to this model,
and there's different than how
we calculate and impose an APR
on a loan. So I certainly think
those are great suggestions, and
we find a place that it has
applicability in the Small Loan
Act. I'd like to work with
Representative Matthews and
others, and
And we find the appropriate
level for the tip, I agree it
could drop below 750.
Um, and then the other piece.
I've already expressed I had a
lot of concern was why do you
need a tip in the first place. I
have said at the least, the tip
should be preset at 0 and people
would have to go in and put that
in manually. But if I hear from
you all and
conversations now or afterwards
that we don't want to tip.
That's another thing that could
be on the table, but I certainly
feel like we don't have to keep
debating whether it's a loan,
but we need to make sure that
this model has regulation in New
Mexico law because today as it
stands, it does not. So I can
appreciate what this model can
mean to consumers like me, but I
can also say as a policymaker,
we need parameters and
regulations on this moving
forward.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I would
love to roll this bill, um, work
with folks individually.
Potentially if there's momentum
asking for some more time on the
agenda.
Thank you. All righty, then we
have a roll bill.
Madam Chair. Thank you.
All righty.
Uh
