Hearing and then the house bill
one forty eight house bill one
sixty.
Representative Rubio do you have
a can you please have your
experts raise their hand will
bring a minutes panelists
absolutely Mr chair it is
secretary Stephanie Schardin
Clarke and Jerry Knowles.
This madam secretary mistrust of
those please raise your hand in
the zoom I will let you in and
if we could please call the
roll.
Thank you chairman.
Representative Dow.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes
Representative bangles.
Representative Hernandez.
Here.
Representative Johnson.
Here.
Representative Martinez.
Your.
Representative Culbert.
Representative struggle.
Representative Dow.
Representative Gaydos.
There.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Serrato.
Vice chair Figueroa.
I'm here.
I just.
I am here thank you all we have
a quorum.
Down to business Representative
Rubio welcome to this committee
is great to have you please up
there to share experts and you
have the floor.
You Mr chairman thank you
committee members I I bring
forth house bill one forty four
it's legislation that looks to
bring New Mexico into compliance
with federal law as the law is
currently written we risk
federal government reducing
funding opportunities for our
state in addition to issues with
the certification of individuals
participating in the commercial
driver license requirements
program other otherwise known as
CD R. CD else I'm I do have my
experts here we have secretary
of tax and revenue Stephanie I'm
Schardin Clarke and and then we
have it Gerry last couples with
the NMED's deputy director for
central appropriations all
handed over to them so that they
can provide further details and
they can also be available to
answer any technical questions
you all may have Mr chair before
I do that I did mention to you
earlier prior to the hearing
that we had initially drafted a
committee substitute in
preparation for this afternoon
because there had been some
concerns that were raised by our
analysts which we truly
appreciated however after
further review this morning with
council of work we're confident
with the language in the
original bill and we ask that we
proceed with that language
rather than adopting the
committee so but this time.
Thank you set us up those madam
secretary welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and
thank you Representative Rubio
it's a real pleasure to be here
with you I think the
representative kind of covered
it again this bill is brought
forth by and do do it with the
intent of making sure that New
Mexico's motor vehicle code in
the way it treats commercial
driver's licenses is consistent
with federal law and that's
necessary to make sure that we
don't stand to lose any funding
especially for DOT thank you
will stand for questions.
Mr Assad has anything to add.
No Mr chair the Secretary
coveted nicely thank you all
right level is so for the folks
are keeping score at home why is
the secretary of taxation
talking about MBT MBT is a
division within our state's tax
department and is exceptionally
well run folks in the audience
who wish to speak in favor of
house bill one forty four please
raise your hand in the zoom and
we can grab your attention.
both the wish to speak in favor
of one forty four please raise
your hand.
Please let in up Mister Franklin
Garcia.
Welcome Sir.
Good afternoon.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Franklin
Garcia with New Mexico
department of transportation the
bureau of a house bill one forty
four this bill will help the
state get in compliance with CDL
requirement we did receive the
information from the federal
motor carriers that the
potential for not passing this
bill by twenty twenty two or
twenty twenty three could result
in a loss of some rope federal
road one money well it's a four
percent hit just to our federal
dollars to raise funds and that
would be equates to about sixty
million per year over the next
three years so the about forty
eight million over the next
three years well the bill the
language from FMCSA does say
that it may they may sanction
that we would prefer not to put
in their hand we prefer to just
make sure we're in compliance
with this law so we do stand and
support.
Thank you very much Mr Garcia
anyone else wish to speak in
favor of the bill anyone was to
speak in opposition.
Seeing no public opposition of.
Members of the committee.
Mr chairman appropriated like to
move it to pass.
I'll take a motion now there's a
motion for do pass.
Second.
There's.
There's a motion for a do passed
by Representative of Martinez
who's also co sponsor.
a second by Representative
set up though there still is
debate Representative federal.
Thank you Mr chair just one
question I'd like to hear from
the sponsor a little bit about
why we're not going with the
committees have quite the
language is correct in what
we're looking at.
Thank you thank you by European
I'll hand it over to madam
secretary if if you want to talk
about that in detail thank you
Mr chair and Representative
Figueroa there was.
It was a back and forth about
definition of terms non resident
and non domiciled and of some
some conversation about issuance
of
Credentials that have been
issued in another state and how
may be rooted here and and
basically we look at all the
definitions and the way that
other states would be treated
with reciprocity and we felt
confident that the original bill
as drafted with sufficient and
F. Mister is this would like to
add anything to that I turned to
him.
Thank you Mr chairman secretary
and Representative Figueroa the
secretary was correct we look at
the verbiage regarding a non
domiciled individual and an
individual who is a non resident
in the original bills language
was correct and so as the motor
vehicle we as a secretary
mentioned we believe that the
the the definitions are correct
the way they stand in the
original.
All.
Thank you Mr chair and and thank
you Mr Santos and secretary and
sponsor
so non resident applies to out
of state residents it's covered
under that term if I understand
correctly.
And Mr chair and representative
hero that's correct the bill has
an existing law as it has this
definition that it's non
resident or non domiciled those
terms are used interchangeably
and the sections so they're
covered whichever one is
referred to.
Thank you thanks Mr chair those
are all my questions thank you
Mr Figueroa other members of the
committee.
Two quick questions Madam.
Of Representative Rubio what
what does C. D. L. stand for.
Mr chair committee members the
CDL stands for driver left
commercial driver's license all
righty and and if you're backing
up by eighteen Wheeler at a.
Twenty five degree angle going
right to left.
What direction you turn your
steering wheel.
Right John will I will take the
motion I was gonna say just give
me a truck and then I'll show
you.
All right we'll do it will do
it the secretary was going to
jump in on that answer there's a
motion for a do pass and a
second please up.
Call the roll.
Thank you
for do you pass on the one forty
four Representative Dow.
Yes.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes.
Representative Gaydos yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative.
Martinez yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Lente sorry
Representative Serrato yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Figueroa.
Yes.
I just.
Yes explain my vote because I
love seventy nine year olds you
have a do pass of Representative
Rubio thank you madam secretary
Mr to set those up would you
pass on house bill one hundred
forty four.
Thank you thank you I.
Representative merits Dixon is
with us in the audience if you
could bring her into the
committee room.
Committee Dyess.
Well not if you see AJ speaker
egolf.
Speaker doctors in the room
please raise your hand.
Yes Representative Dicks and who
do you have any experts you wish
to bring to sit next to you in
the in the zone table I'm yes
thank you Mr chairman Marquita
Russel CEO of the New Mexico
finance authority and we may
also have Anthony Montoya with
Legislative Council services.
Mr moto if you could raise your
hand.
Mr Russell is with us already or
mistrustful welcome Marquita
Russel and Anthony Montoya is
with us Mr major was do you want
to give your spiel knower.
Or after the presentation.
All right we'll do it your guys
is discretion Representative
Dixon we're now on house bill
seven house bill seven you have
the floor.
You're unmuted from our side
going on all right it was my
fault I forgot to on me myself
thank you chairman and members
of the committee a speaker Egolf
at the moment will not be able
to join us he is in House
Judiciary and unable to break
away but I am joins this
afternoon by CEO of the New
Mexico finance authority
Marquita Russel and I believe
that we also have Anthony on
Twitter on the line to was is
with Legislative Council
services.
House bill seven are is it sets
up the opportunity enterprise
fund and it is a partnership and
funding program that we are
establishing within the New
Mexico finance authority to
support local communities that
are interested in building and
investing in commercial or
entrepreneurial space to
directly support their economic
development initiatives.
Local communities are in the
best position to know what their
communities need whether it's
site ready industrial space
smart manufacturing hubs
commercial kitchens or maker
spaces all of this to foster
micro and small business
creation and growth and bring
jobs.
This program is distinct from
Lida and other existing programs
it fills a gap in our economic
development toolbox.
In addition the opportunity
enterprise fund allows us to use
one time access revenue to
support economic diversification
throughout the state create a
multiplier effect and set up
future revenue streams.
Briefly I'll tell you how the
opportunity enterprise fund
works.
So communities in conjunction
with private partners education
institutions for economic
development organizations can
apply for funding from the fund
through the process applicants
must demonstrate local support
and a real economic need.
Betting of projects by the
review board is done in a
collaborative and holistic
approach that includes a wide
range of state and private
experts to ensure feasibility
and transparency.
House bill seven provides two
distinct pathways for funding
through the opportunity
enterprise fund the first is
financing and leasing the second
is through direct loans or loan
guarantees.
Under the first scenario a
community would approach the
fund with the proposal after
vetting and review the fund
would then provide the money for
the building to be constructed
the fund would then own the
building.
The fund through the New Mexico
finance authority would enter a
master lease contract with
General Services Department.
The GST would manage the lease
and charging fair market value.
General Services Department in
turn would use the rent payments
to fund to pay back the fund as
stipulated in the master lease
agreement and also collect
sufficient funds for management
and repair of the property.
Any net profit would revert to
the general fund.
Under the second scenario a
community or developer may apply
to receive loans or loan
guarantees from the opportunity
enterprise fund.
In this situation the building
will be owned either by the
developer or the political
subdivisions upon the completion
of loan payments.
What loan terms include no less
than zero percent interest no
fewer than fifteen years and no
more than thirty years and a
three year grace period.
Loans being may be made either
directly from the opportunity
enterprise fund or via a
commercial lender with a loan
guarantee.
To be selected for financing or
loans a project must be approved
by the opportunity enterprise
Review Board based on a set of
criteria that includes local
support a demonstration of need
within the community and other
criteria as determined
appropriate so with that Mr
chair I would like to offer an
opportunity for ms Russell to
make any comments if she would
like or if the speaker has
joined us if you would like to
as well thank you.
So Mr chairman I believe the
sponsor has done a wonderful job
something that bill up and I'm
happy to provide in the answers
any technical questions you
might have about the finance
authority's role.
Thank you Mr speaker.
And it does and Mr until you
want explain your role or wait
to get us to question I think
it's just my mind.
Well Mr chair thank you I I I I
guess now would be a a good
chance my name's and.
I'm sorry and my my on Mr chair
online thank you I I directed a
budget.
my name is Anthony Montoya I
work for the Legislative Council
Service I am here for the sole
purpose of providing technical
assistance on any matter before
this body and I do not appear in
support or opposition to ponder
before you thank you.
Thank you very much Mr Montoya
anything else Representative
Dixon I thank you Mr chair we
also have an amendment that has
been distributed to committee
members and I don't know at what
point in time you would like to
have that more for in a
discussion.
Is it.
Major change do want to go to
public comment first.
We can go to public comment
first I don't think there's
significant changes the one
thing that is that it is the
loan guarantees component.
Already when we up when we go to
public comment and those who
wish to speak.
In favor of house bill seven
want to go out and raise your
hands and as soon.
This right here click click the
right hand button and you'll
start lining up.
And then so we have folks who
raise their hand will then bring
you in as a panelist well on
mutual on our side you on mute
yourself on your site use the
camera if you can.
And then address the committee
let's start with the miss Carla
Googler followed by Jason
Espinoza.
Can you hear me I can't I don't
have the ability to turn right
here on from we can hear you we
refresh the thank you thank you
so I thank you Mr chairman
members the committee karla
Kugler with associated builders
and contractors we stand in
support of house bill seven we
want to thank the sponsors for
bringing it forward we believe
that this is a great opportunity
to enhance and grow our economic
development and invest in our
business for this thank you for
your time and we support.
Thank you Mr Miller for your
leadership Mr Jason Espinoza
followed by Randy trainer.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
associated general contractors
in New Mexico we stand in strong
support of the legislation
similar to muscular there's
relieve this program and sort
Avenue can spur economic
developments are in jobs for the
state thank you.
Thank you Mr Randi trainer
followed by Steven Anaya.
Thank you Mr chairman the
committee members a Randy
trainer representing NAIOP the
commercial real estate
developments location and I also
P. supports house bill seven
this is simply another tool for
the economic tool boxes
mentioned earlier we support the
opportunity enterprise Act thank
you very much.
Thank you Sir Mr Steven and I
are welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Steven
I asked CEO The New Mexico
association of realtors and the
well as was mentioned this does
look like an additional tool to
help attract jobs for that we
stand in support of house bill
seven thank you.
Thank you Sir anyone else was to
speak in favor.
He's raise your hand in the zoom
continueing in attendance wish
to speak in opposition or
expressed concerns please raise
your virtual hand.
Seeing none raised members of
the committee can we have a I
like to entertain a motion to
discuss amendments.
I move that we discuss the
amendment.
Okay.
So we are we have the amendment
up for discussion purposes so.
Members of the committee.
Mr chair do you need me to
explain it or does everyone have
it.
We do the will of I went to the
committee that will go to the
presenter in a moment the
committee is.
Deep in thought so we will go to
the Representative Dixon why you
got into and not identify the
amendment let's make sure we
have it in our.
In our share file and and give
it the two oh two number.
Thank you Mr chair of the two oh
two number is two two two two
one three point two.
And it it is it is in our shared
file so give us a second to pull
it up.
And it affects
Eight nine I'm sorry page line
pay sixteen could you please
explain the amendment.
Thank you Mr chair the amendment
makes some slight modifications
to the bill online nine on page
nine one three after development
we're inserting project online
sixteen I'm sorry on page
sixteen line fifteen before zero
were inserting no less than that
would then allow the fund to
charge interest rates above zero
percent if it deems necessary.
Item three is on page sixteen
line sixteen.
And it's striking the word on
and inserting in lieu thereof no
later than.
Item four is on page sixteen
after line twenty five
inserting the following new
subsection.
G. the authority may provide a
guarantee to a federally insured
financial institution on behalf
of a person who would other wise
be eligible and it goes on and
the point of this is to allow
commercial lending
through banks where the finance
authority in the fund would
serve as a guarantor.
Thank you Mr chair.
Right explanation I'll go back
to members of the committee on
the bill.
And the and or the amendment.
Mr chairman of the Dobson of the
amendment.
There's a motion to adopt the
amendment.
I second.
There is a split second thank
you the the motion to adopt him
by Representative Figueroa a
second by Representative set up
though any opposition to
adopting the amendment two two
two two one three point two.
Seeing no opposition please note
all those present voting in the
affirmative you have an adopted
bill.
Back on the bill members of the
committee.
Mr Chairman bash.
Have a motion for a do pass by
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
And a second by Representative
Fajardo.
Any discussion.
I think people just overwhelmed
by your presentation
Representative Dixon please call
the roll.
Representative Dow.
Yes.
Representative part of.
Yes.
Thanks yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes.
Representative Serrato yes.
Thanks to Figueroa.
Yes.
Yes yes yes and so you have a do
passed as amended on house bill
seven.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and and and just
just for the record I I don't
recall it Representative
Powdrell Culbert said the magic
words as amended but we all.
We all work that and so that's
the problem with that being in
the committee report.
All right fantastic
congratulations Representative
Dixon we will see you soon.
We're not gonna go to house bill
one hundred twenty nine please
let in
Representative Candie Sweetser.
And please let N. Mr Jason
Espinoza.
And Representative Sweetser do
we need anyone else I think that
should do it right or.
Thank you Mr chair Richard
Anklam also Representative Mr
Clinton you could raise your
hand Jason Espinoza you could
raise your hand Jason's with us
in the as a panelist.
And Mr inclement you could raise
your hand.
as if to speak in a week it's
easier to find you amongst the a
list of attendees on the right
hand side of our screens.
We'll get a more here in a
sector is going to need his help
on a now I'm I'm up one of the
bill presenters with the
Representative Sweetser so I
will turn the gavel over.
To.
Representative Figueroa.
But unless you're taking away.
Thank you Mr chair.
I'm Sanchez would you like to
present bill the floor is yours.
Thank you madam vice chair you
know we we talk about
diversifying our state economy
in New Mexico all the time but
we often overlook the various
ways that our tax code could be
modified to help accomplish that
end or we hesitate to pursue the
needed changes due to out there
estimated initial costs and
while this bill does of a fiscal
impact it also seeks to move New
Mexico toward a more toward a
corporate income tax structure
that is we'll make New Mexico a
more attractive place to create
jobs and develop infrastructure
in short we need to encourage
investment in our state and I
will turn it over to my co chair
chairman my Estes to explain a
little bit about the bills and
before we go to our experts
thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members.
We have a committee substitute
that we would ask Miss
subcommittee to.
To adopt could could we adopt
the motion to
adopt the committee substitute
for discussion.
Hi so move.
Go ahead thank you so much
appreciate that so we appreciate
the folks so in attendance and
and folks.
You know interested in this bill
up you know we introduced.
Built up to get eyes on the
bills do you know that the
original language never becomes
law even if the bill is passed
so we appreciate we appreciate
the anxiety and the.
And the interest that this
original languages cost we heard
you we listen to you we we've
got to so let me talk about the
bill and then we'll talk about
the committee subs to madam
chair this deals with
A fantastic section of law in
our tax code seven.
Dash four dash ten which is the
apportionment of Business income
how do we tax businesses in the
state of New Mexico of this up.
This section was was was part of
the two thousand thirteen tax
package for your old timers in
which we moved closer to.
The single up factor sales to
spur economic growth economic
development and and I think I
played a key role in many
businesses staying here or or
moving here
so I'm familiar with that
section this one goes a full
board the Original Bill disclose
full board.
The a portion of it of business
income in the state as you know
madam chair is
is the numerator of which is the
property factor.
Plus the payroll factor.
Plus the sales factor and the
denominator of which is three so
and then of course there's
tweaks within the code but we
tax property.
We tax payroll or do we tax our
the people factor not Mr the
payroll or or the sales drive
other words how do we tax
businesses of the tax the tax
guy back in the twelfth century
when he signed an additional tax
based on the chimneys that you
have.
So he you do dealt with the with
the property factor and so the
property factor is it is your
business successful because
you're building.
Is your business successful
because you're hiring workers or
is it been successful because
you're making sales and how do
we tax that are fairly and
appropriately without
disincentive provide a
disincentive rising that
economic activity.
If we were a Oklahoma Sooners
breaking the law and going in
Oklahoma before the law allowed
and we started a new economy we
would go a hundred percent sales
factor because that is the best
public policy to have so that
you do not disincentive eyes the
building of plants and and and
equipment and infrastructure and
you don't do not disincentive by
the the hiring of workers the
original bill did that the
original bill went to a single
factor of business income
taxation sales we know that
there's a number of businesses
in New Mexico that I've already
made those investments that I've
already ready made these
economic decisions.
And we and and we heard from
them as and that's why we have
the committee sub to the
committee sub to madam chair
goes single factor sales.
But it has of.
It it redefines a qualifying
entity on the bottom of page
five
page six if folks have not seen
the the substitute.
You know it should it'll be
online here momentarily can text
me and I'll send it to you but
the qualified entities is
defined as
A corporation or a group of
corporations in a combined
filing group with Hey one
hundred or more employees.
And be with a cumulative
investment in property in New
Mexico exceeding fifty million
dollars so if your company has
made over the course of the
lifetime of the entity if your
company has currently has one
hundred more employees.
And you have made fifty million
dollars of property investments
in the state of Mexico then you
can opt out of the single factor
sales apportionment of your
business taxed and you sensually
can can choose current law or
you can do Representative sales
but this is this is that this is
a of this is a shift madam chair
members it's maybe tough for
folks to.
The swallow what we felt
compelled to introduce this
legislation so that that tax
experts the business experts the
business associations and and
the wonderful tax mines in our
in our state can take a look at
it and ask ourselves is this
good public policy I believe
that that it is fundamentally
good public policy and we
And with that I'll turn it over
to up to our experts Mr Espinoza
and Mr but your income thank you
so thank you madam chair of
thank you Mr Senator for being
here.
And madam chair of Mr Anklam was
in the audience I'm not sure he
was able to be promoted.
Thank you Mr would you look for
Mister act on Mr angle would you
please raise your hand so she
can find you I'm.
Did Mr Espen also want to speak
at this point.
Madam chair members of the
committee just briefly Jason
Espinoza registered lobbyists
with New Mexico idea which is
the statewide economic
developers association and I
just want to briefly provided
the committee with some contact
so why economic developers
really believe single sales
factor is beneficial to our
economic development efforts
here in New Mexico as many of
you know economic based jobs are
the key to economic any economic
development strategy they're
essential jobs from which the
products and services being
produced are paid for with
revenue from out of state.
Because they're exporting a
product or service there by
bringing in new money into our
economy for every economic base
job created there's one or two
service sector jobs that are
that are added as well you know
economic based jobs are those
that export product or service
out of the state they bring the
money and through investment and
our payroll the current
corporate income tax
apportionment under the current
system is just advance this I've
been here just a certain
economic base employers
typically because New Mexico's a
roll market most manufacturers
engineering firms software
developers we're housing
operations another act not bad
based companies do not have a
large customer base in New
Mexico so therefore switching
the apportionment to single
cells would create a more
advantageous operational
environment over other states
that would and would put us on
par with neighbors that have
already enacted similar measures
ideally switching to a single
waited sales factor would
encourage more economic base
employers to place capital
expenditures here in the state
and encourage them to hire more
New Mexico residents because
those investments would not be
counted against them in the
single cells factor
apportionment for but we only
managed tractors and
headquarters can elect to be
taxed of the single cells
apportionment and there are many
other economic based companies
that could benefit from this
change again just simply put the
legislation creates a system
that would encourage rather than
discourage economic base
employers from hiring New
Mexicans and investing capital
infrastructure into our
communities I didn't sleep last
point recruiting these economic
base employers New Mexico will
also benefit small businesses
because small businesses tend to
sell products services and goods
to tell big companies which then
support more more jobs and
economic activity across the
state thank you madam chair.
Thank you and and and we're
joined by Richard Anklam if you
wish to say a few words.
Yes we can hear you.
Yes thank you madam chair Mr
chair it's a pleasure to be here
with you I'm here you know more
or less as a as a technical
expert
Not as a promoter but.
You know the conversation is
welcome it's it's it's a
national trend over the last
twenty years or so more and more
states of have looked at that
building towards the the single
sales factor apportionment
formula and about thirty states
now have that so it's it's not a
conversation that's gonna go
away I welcome the opportunity
to discuss and
Certainly here to answer any
technical questions that may
come up.
Thank you.
Thank you Sir for being here and
and with that we will stand for
questions.
Thank you let's go to public
comments if you are here and the
attendee row and you would like
to speak in favor.
Of the committee substitute for
house bill one twenty nine raise
your hand agency Montoya will
draw you in and announce your
name she will you you on our
side if you would and you
yourself on your side and give
us your testimony trying to keep
it to two minutes.
the nail.
Yes thank you madam chair ones
bonding nail representing
eighteen T. New Mexico eighteen
T. as a provider of wireless
voice and broadband services in
the state we continue to expand
our network into rural areas can
provide more broadband to more
homes and businesses we very
much support the amended H. B.
one twenty nine oh we really
appreciate the work of the
Sanchez in working with us to
make some improvements to the
language of which make this a
win win for for us and for the
state we all thank you very much
for your accommodating our
issues we're in support of house
bill one twenty nine thank you
very much madam chair.
Thank you Mr Dignam.
People enter.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee this is JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce which supports house
bill one twenty.
The chamber has long supported
this apportionment method and we
will join thirty other states
with this change our system
currently penalizes multi state
companies from a tax standpoint
and gives the same companies an
incentive to invest build and
employ people elsewhere.
The chamber believes this bill
will help drive investment into
our state that is perhaps not
occurring now this is a tax
reform measure that deserves
full support thank you.
Thank you.
Thank.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee on Carla Sonntag's
CEO of the New Mexico business
coalition.
B. C. represents hundreds of
businesses and thousands of New
Mexicans and we strongly support
house bill one twenty nine we
feel it will provide some
simplification to the New Mexico
tax code.
And it will ensure that all
multi state seed corporations
are treated the same which is
really important in the way our
tax code should be administered.
We feel it will also be
attractive for national and
international corporations to
establish a presence in our
state this will promote job
creation with jobs that will
hopefully lift some of our
economically challenged people
out of poverty this is a
critical thing for our state
because one of the top three
party states nationwide.
We have advocated for many years
for a complete rewrite a
replacement of New Mexicos tax
code.
This bill will provide some
simplification until that occurs
so we strongly support the bill
and we hope that you will as
well thank you for your
consideration.
Thank you Mr.
You madam chair members of the
committee
were associated builders and
contractors the commercial
construction association you Mr
chairman I just mentioned
although this bill doesn't have
a huge direct affect on our
local commercial contractors we
do believe that this will grow
up find jobs and growth and
ultimately have a very positive
effect in helping our state be
more competitive and attractive
so we stand in support of house
bill one twenty nine thank you.
Thank you.
We.
Good afternoon madam chair
members the committee chase we
come after the Albuquerque
Hispanic chamber of commerce the
Senate chamber stands in support
of this legislation this
legislation is about putting
Mexico on an even playing field
basically the some of our
surrounding states while the
state's already moved to have
already moved to single sales
factor California Colorado Texas
in New Mexico needs to stay on
that curve in order to be
competitive in terms of
attracting corporate investment
in the state and as amended this
bill seeks to make sure that
folks already have substantial
investment in the state and
operations here are hard for
while still promoting single
sales as a way to attract
additional investment both from
corporate entities that may
already be in the state as well
as those that are looking to
locate operations in the state
Senator sales is about economic
development really and and
facilitation of investment and
when we do that we locate larger
corporate entities in the state
are they expand their footprint
here we diversify our economy
and it's something we
desperately need we desperately
need to diversify and find other
points of investment in order
for New Mexico how to help the
economy moving forward New
Mexico are about her Hispanic
chamber of support small
businesses particularly and
bachelor benefits to the small
businesses will be profound in
our view and so we stand strong
support this legislation thank
you.
It's almost.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is mark opens all this
restaurant lobbyist for
Verizon's well we want to thank
this bond the chairman for the
sponsorship of this bill and the
amendment were very excited
about it supported very strong
which for many of the reasons
that have already been
articulated there is one small
technical changes we're working
to continue to work with them on
and and we're very happy he's
brought this forward and we
support the bill thank you very
much.
Thank you Mr Gonzalez.
Jennifer Weber.
Yes thank you good afternoon
madam vice chair and committee
members my name is Jennifer
Weber and I am here on behalf of
the New Mexico chamber of
commerce in support of the
committee substitute for house
bill one twenty nine.
The chamber's recent economic
analysis dry The New Mexico's
future identifies New Mexico's
business climate including its
tax structure as being one of
four key economic
competitiveness factors that
need reform or improvement.
Most states now use an
apportionment formula that is
either based on sales only or on
three factors with the sales
factor being more heavily
weighted than the other two for
taxes New Mexico's evenly
weighted three factor formula
can be a disincentive for some
businesses when they consider
locating in New Mexico we thank
the sponsors for bringing this
bill forward after listening to
the concerns of the business
community when crafting the
committee substitute the chamber
does your support thank you.
Madam chair that's the last of
the hands that.
Thank you Mr Doria.
We will now go to opposition if
you are in our ten the room and
you are here to speak in
opposition to the committee
substitute house bill one twenty
nine would you please raise your
hand and Miss moratorium will
move you in to speak.
Madam chair there are no hands
raised.
Thank you.
And we have no one in room three
seventeen correct.
All right it goes to the
committee do you have questions
committee.
Representative Serrato.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
thank you to the sponsors of
this bill for bringing it
forward I'm I had a couple brief
questions I don't think you
address them but I might be
wrong just the committee said
change any of the costs
associated with it in the FIR.
I'm not sure who you're
directing the questions to but
no and it is my understanding
the committee sub simply gives
an opt out option.
A few other things and and madam
chair Representative.
Which represents that though I
believe.
The some of the and maybe not
the the the F. I. R..
But the analysis some of the
they analysis from affected from
I believe contemplates the
committee so of.
What it it's not a major major a
difference this wasn't really a
intended to raise revenue it's
just started but to.
About to spur economic growth by
getting incentives right.
Mr I'm going to have a take on
that question.
Mr chairman of chair I I suspect
that the amendment.
By allowing opt out out for.
You know a select few companies
will.
Will raise the fiscal impacts
somewhat but I don't you don't
have any idea how much I'm not
prepared to do that analysis.
I think madam chair
representative thought though
obviously those companies that
have a hundred workers and have
made massive amounts of
investments their accounts can
determine what's in there it
just so I would imagine it would
on the margin lower the FIR but.
Of.
But I think that we're pushing
it from a policy perspective not
a.
Revenue perspective.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for a for a lot
of information on it can
similarly a kind of what you're
going to as well Mr Chairman I
know that the I know there's
often a conversation about
having New Mexico be aware you
know companies have their back
offices so many accounting you
know offices are set up here
things like that and it seems to
me this bill would simplify that
process of moving you know with
those back and offices into the
state is it like reading that
correctly or my just completely
off on what this bill does.
Mr speaker also.
He's back as attendee if you
could bring him in as a panelist
would you mind up
Representative.
The way on on this project.
Yep the answer to that question
is.
Yes companies that decide should
to invest in that sort of
activity in the state would not
be penalized you know from a
factor apportionment perspective
under this proposal for doing so
so what would what would hurt
them to to do that the current
regime you might make that a
different.
Analysis.
Thank you for that answer you
know I I appreciate this bill I
appreciate all efforts to
simplify it you know the way the
businesses interact with our
state any place that we can at
any level we can so I I do
appreciate this and you know
hopefully we'll be able to
support with our small
businesses those my questions
madam chair thank you.
Thank you.
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you madam chair I just
have one simple question I it's
probably written somewhere but I
didn't understand it correctly
is I just wanna make sure that
this bill doesn't affect our
local small businesses of look
less than a hundred employees
less than fifty million
that cap of who do most of their
business inner in interest state
within the state
I just wanna make sure that this
isn't gonna affect them at all
so it's Representative if
Representative Montoya or start
Representative Maestas or Jason
Espinoza can answer that
question for me.
Mr speaker Mr Smith.
I'm sure.
Madam chair chairman
representatives of member of the
committee also.
On the the change on the tax
apportionment should affect the
small businesses at all because
they're they're doing their
cells here in New Mexico other
located in Mexico but we do
believe that there is going to
be an economic benefit overall
if we are able to land companies
and I think looking you know
specifically in your area
Intel's the biggest example of
that you know we were able to
recruit Intel and then the
really the community I grew
around that because the small
businesses were able to service
that so you know on the tax of
course is that it should just be
a you know status quo but we do
believe economically will
benefit in cells and economic
activity.
Okay
chair thank you thank you Mr
Espinoza I just I just wanted to
make sure I didn't understand
and I'm all for growing I mean
you and I've talked many times
about growing up business and
jobs here and I am in full
support of that I just wanted to
make sure that we're not going
to affect the small you
negatively affect I guess the
small businesses
that are here I ask Miss so I
appreciate that madam chair
those are all that that's the
only question I had.
Thank you reprimand as
Representative Dow.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Hernandez and and
I guess I just my question is
the reason for the one hundred
employee threshold.
Thank you madam chair of
Representative Dow well the
original bill had no threshold
the original bill was hardcore
you know in terms of the shift
toward the single up income of
sales and so we were cognizant
of.
Of what that policy choice would
due to companies that the policy
is to bring companies here what
about the ones that are already
here that have already made
massive investments that that
that this would change of this
would change their.
You know taxed out of.
The more than folks would like
so we are so we wanted to exempt
those businesses out of those
ones that are already here so
that they can keep the current
tax structure that there used to
those companies are thriving and
growing and we do not want to.
I'd do anything to to
disincentive eyes that economic
activity so if so those
companies that currently have a
hundred more workers or have
made massive investments fifty
dollars or more they can remain
under the current tax taxing
structure.
Thank you choose if they so
choose.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and madam chairman madam chair
and representative so you're
saying.
If you have over a hundred
please are under no please you
can choose status quo it doesn't
matter happy employees you have
you can choose that's where.
Madam chair.
Over one hundred employees and
all
no words it's on the top of page
six of this substitute.
With one hundred or more
employees over ninety nine so a
hundred or more and fifty
million exceeding fifty million
dollars investments then you can
then you could remain status
quo.
So miss madam chair Mr Chairman
if you have more than a hundred
employees and you're under fifty
million what happens.
Then you move out you move to
the single factor sales.
And all of mistrust and also did
you want to.
Mr Chairman you're exactly
correct.
And
madam chair Mr chairman Jason
could you explain what the
impact would be to an existing
company in New Mexico with
there under fifty million but
but over a hundred for a sport
they don't have a hundred points
what what would be the impact
isn't what happens to someone
who the status quo changes
because.
And take a stab at the turn it
over to my experts if with your
permission Representative Dow
madam chair one is a would not
disincentive eyes.
increasing your property.
your your property the the thank
you would you would pay no
additional taxes as a result of.
Of investing in property would
pay no additional taxes at if
you grow your workforce you
would however pay all of your
business taxes based on your
sales.
And taxes on sales
doesn't disincentive eyes more
sales so it would be a a shift
for certain companies but.
But from what it's it's good
public policy and and
representative of a has been us
and and miss some I may madam
chair representative but to do
that you yourself.
And up.
We get an opinion from
mistrusting also or if Mr ankle
wanted to chime in thank you.
Madam chair Mr chair
representative at down committee
yeah but for the most part it
should be status quo for those
companies that are here this is
really setting up a structure to
get those companies that are
making cells into our state that
don't currently have capital
investments are payroll is right
now they're disincentive eyes
from doing that because that
would increase their tax
liability this would remove that
disincentive so that hopefully
this retail online retailer or
some other company that's making
cells in New Mexico now would
make the investment in hiring
New Mexicans or investing in
capital infrastructure in the
state and they wouldn't be
punished for that.
And all of the Richard is still
on here you may want to take a
stab at answering.
Yes madam chair Mr chair Jason
yes to that question I think
It is but the New Mexico company
there's just during business New
Mexico is completely unaffected
by the support for a factor of
conversations are changing Sir
there are a hundred percent year
it doesn't matter
it only matters if you're
importing or exporting in the
state and I think that's been
fairly well described by.
The previous.
Speakers so I won't waste your
time.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Representative and J.
center who are Mr chairman if
you want to answer so what is
their differentiation between
contract labor employees.
With over a hundred contract
employees contract employees or
is this.
What's what's the efficient
employee.
More.
Representative don't there is no
definition of a great question
by the way there is no
definition of employee in this
particular.
Tax statute but I would imagine
taxed Rabb does have a
definition
But employees
I think there's a distinction
between employees and and
contract workers
In the tax code.
And Representative down chair
Maestas it says on page six
employees for him wages are
withheld pursuant to the
withholding tax act.
So madam chair representative
out thank you representative to
just help to contract employees
would not qualify.
As for the for the the car about
thank you thank you madam chair
thank you Mr chairman and it was
that something that you did
intentionally or is this
something that that is our wipe
wire why are we not counting
contract employees.
What I'm thinking was
contemplated I think what we
want to do is ensure that those
companies that have.
Made commitments and investments
in New Mexico
don't
unaffected by this by the
Canadian substitute.
So if if it comes to Mr chair
madam chair Mr chairman and
members the committee comes to
your attention that one is
impacted and has less than a
hundred employees but has
invested more than fifty million
then how do how do we address
that.
Thank you madam chair
representative out we've been
contacted by various companies
and organizations that are so
the concerns and that prompted
the committee substitute so just
keep.
Keep in communication with
Representative Sweetser myself
and hopefully members of the tax
committee of this bill.
Receive the the past.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Mr chairman like I I think
this is great I think this is
great I I'm just wondering why
we would have folks that that
would be able to participate
that are already here in our
investing I thank you.
Thank you Representative Dan
thank you sponsors bring in this
bill I think I have a few
questions I want to make sure I
under stand all the pieces up
this correctly and I'm looking
at the FIR and it does raise
some raised red flags I'm sorry
when we go through those and
clarify them a little bit but
it's my understanding that the
purpose of this bill is to
recruit businesses.
To New Mexico.
So one of my my biggest question
is going to be about that
measureable targets there we
have nothing in here to explain
what we're shooting for and how
we would measure success.
So generally her we're trying to
build into tax policy changes a
sunset so that we stop in five
or ten years and look at did it
hit the target students do what
we hoped it would do and so I
wonder my question is what are
the targets is it is it job
creation if so how many is that
I'm I mean how would you measure
success and why do we not have a
sunset in here.
Thank you madam chair vice chair
Figueroa you're correct we do
sunsets.
which is not perfect good public
policy but it's great public
policy New Mexico because
there's so many exemptions
deductions and credits that that
didn't work out so when we
propose a a credit or a
deduction or exemption we do put
a sunset and then we try to
quantify it when that sunset is
is is a couple years out this
one
I don't think we could quantify
it as well as as we do those
specific deductions for a
specific G. R. T. or whatnot.
But
But we definitely want to do a
proposes in the thirty day and
continue talking about it this
summer and fall for the sixty
day next year because that's the
way that the states are going
and it
I don't think anyone would deny
that to tax on on one factor
sales.
in in you know in and of itself
would be could public policy so
that's the reason there's no
sense that is not a deduction
credit or exemption and I think
up.
We'll have to make the public
policy decision.
On this bill at some point
whether it's in our interest or
not but I.
I believe the consensus is that
it's in our overall states
economic interest but it does
affect different companies
different industries.
Different.
Thank you chairman I appreciate
that I think I'd feel more
comfortable with that if you did
have some kind of sense or
targets to measure success I'm
so we knew what we were aiming
for.
If if I'm reading the FIR
correctly this is we're talking
about a seventeen percent yet to
the corporate income tax base
and that's a big chunk I mean
that's a really big chunk so I
would expect some really big
returns out of that and and it
doesn't seem like it's a built
into this bill that we know what
we're aiming for or when we hit
it so it seems like
big hit do we have anybody from
tax and revenue attendees or
anybody here to speak who's
looked at it and can get their
perspective.
And madam chair while we're
waiting to see if someone wants
to ensure that I did want to go
back just a minute to the sunset
clause and just say that when
you're trying to encourage big
investment in the state a sense
that is a deterrent because of a
company is wanting to do a huge
investment in New Mexico and
says but this tax on the change
in five years when the sunset is
in that would not be an
incentive or it certainly
wouldn't
Have the same effect as just
good tax policy that we're
trying to help to recruit them
here so just my take on on why I
would would not like to see a
sunset on it you know we can
always go back and revisit it if
we determine that that good tax
policy is changing but to
actually put a sense that when
you're the company is looking at
to invest fifty million dollars
presence in New Mexico I think
that that would not be and a
strong message to send to them
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative and I
don't see any hands going up so
I don't think we have anyone
from taxed Representative here
I'll ask Miss Sanchez has
additional gone through any of
the interim committees as it had
that discussion yet.
Madam chair of.
Representative Figueroa this
particular section a law is
actually been amended in two
thousand thirteen two thousand
fifteen two thousand nineteen
and and the latest in in twenty
twenty so it has to agree with
and I think many of those bills
of kind of move to a more single
factor sales.
Percentage about this particular
bill no that's
one of the reasons
Representative switch myself up
felt compelled to introduce it
now is to start that
conversation I don't believe
this specific bill is been
introduced or talked about an
introvert and we're hoping to
get on the.
On the revenue stabilization
Agenda this summer but also if I
may madam chair the.
The committee so I think we'll
have a different FIR the.
Analysis that was done today by
tax and road.
Has a state like a slight of.
Increase to the general fund to
the tune of around five million
dollars.
Okay thank you Mr chair and
those are all of my questions
I'm except I would I will ask
them if you know because I'm
looking at the original FIR.
This is going to primarily
benefit national and
multinational corporations and
then the hope is that we're
bringing them to New Mexico but
it's not going to benefit any of
our small businesses here in New
Mexico not the S. corpse LLC's
the PT's probably not to be
course
do I have that right.
Madam chair representative wrote
in terms of their tax liability
it will not affect them.
and we we we prioritize tax
policy in terms of economic
growth when we.
but I think you will benefit
every business in the state of
Mexico because they'll have more
customers it will it will spur
economic development the the
tweaks to this particular tax
law.
I don't think I'm speaking out
of turn that really made me
Intel.
Make decisions with a more
to stand expanding as opposed to
leaving
So so I think good good tax
policy will spur economic
growth.
In terms of their tax liability
we're not giving local
businesses a tax break as a
result of this.
Mr chairman.
One of the.
Yes miss.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I just want to
point out to I mean part of the
economic development strategy
that the state has had and and
local economic development
organizations it's really
cultivate and grow economic
basin players here in the states
so I know this committee has
talked a lot about access to
capital and other tools so that
we can expand existing companies
so this legislation would
benefit those growing exporters
that we have in the state of New
Mexico that we have focused on
cultivating because right now
there they would be penalized
under the three weighted system
for when they at payroll and
when they add a capital
investment if we move to single
sales they would no longer be
penalized for adding those
additional jobs are adding that
additional capital investment so
it would benefit current
companies that are economic base
employers and allow them to grow
and thrive here in the state
without additional liability.
Thank you Mr aspen also I think
I think my concern remains
around our tax policy.
Corporate tax cut.
In the hopes that it brings
business so there is an
immediate and quantifiable
Change in revenue and there is
hope for an uncertain growth
factor and until we identify
those targets and have.
To measure them I have a hard
time with this bill I'd really
love for it to go through the
entire process and the tax wraps
up with legislation and and we
get more conversation around it
but at this point let's see what
the will of the committee is.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam chair.
I think I would I would madam
chair
because we hear you.
I think I'd make a motion to
move with no rack.
Second.
We have a motion to move with no
recommendation from
representative Gallegos second
from Representative Powdrell
Culbert this month and this is a
motion to move with not wreck
the house commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for one twenty nine I assume it
bills and their representative
Gallegos emotions are.
To you not passed the original
house bill one twenty nine.
Yes correct.
This call the roll.
Madam chair.
Representative Dow.
Yes.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes explain my doctor.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes.
Representative Serrato.
Yes.
Madam chair Pieratt.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
And Representative Fajardo to
explain what thank you madam
chair and so I'm I always have a
problem in committee when we do
any when we when we ever do it
at I know rack I'm always of the
opinion it's art this is the
built in our committee it's our
job and our responsibility to
fix it in committee that's why
it sent to our committee I
adamantly oppose now ranks I
always have I think it's
basically just being lazy as the
legislature when we have one
job.
The past good policy and pass
good legislation so when we do
know racks we don't fix things
the committee I have a problem
with that I'm supporting it
because I'm in the minority and.
It needs to go through but we
should if we have a problem with
the bill we fix that that's our
job thank you madam chair.
Thank you have part of.
Thank you Representative
Sweetser and chairman yes yes
you have to.
Passed with no recommendation
for the committee substitute for
house bill one twenty nine.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you committee members we greatly
appreciate the conversation and
and we will we will now advance
thank you.
And Mr Chairman back to you.
All right thank you thank you
madam chair.
Thank you committee members
let's go to Representative Dow
please.
Please sit in the hot though
zoom hot seat Representative Dow
Martinez house bill one hundred
forty eight small business
recovery loan applications for
anyone you wish to a.
Yes you are joining.
Mr chairman I don't think so
already taken away.
Thank you Mr chairman this bill
that was originally passed by
Senator Candelaria hang on just
one second I'm in the floor and
these.
I I should have gone to my
office by the time okay so this
this bill is the five hundred
million dollars that we
appropriated to New Mexico
finance authority to give small
to get small businesses loans
during the pandemic we
appropriated five hundred
million dollars and to date a
hundred and sixty million has
been allocated and the
appropriation period ended and
this bill if you look on page
two line ten.
And eleven just changes the date
to go through it is start on
March third twenty twenty one
and since the date of the loan
that can be authorized.
To where is the.
Representative I'm sorry on page
two line two at that they could
can we could use the remaining
funds allocate those to small
businesses through twenty twenty
three December thirty first of
twenty twenty three.
What I stand for questions.
Thank you let's my co chair like
that thank you.
We will drag him into the
conversation here in a minute
thank you anyone in the audience
a lot of folks were there for
the last bill would.
There's a to attendees with us
any any attendees were to speak
up.
In favor of the bill.
Any attendees was to speak in
opposition of the bill
Representative are Mister
sinister your various you Mr
speaker on the bill.
Chairman members the committee
at the speak in support of the
bill a previous.
I thank you chairman members the
committee Jason Espinoza this
time representing the national
federation of independent
business so we represent a small
independent businesses across
the the state's you know and and
we're still in the middle of the
pandemic businesses small
businesses specifically are
still struggling with supply
chain issues we appreciate than
others so we support you know
any increased access to capital
and we appreciate that the
extension on the ability to
access these loans thank you.
Thank you Mr Jason Weaks
welcome.
We'll bring you in.
Thank you Mr chairman members
the committee just weeks
Representative hospitality
association we sent support of
this legislation number of our
very hard hit industries during
the pandemic quite frankly
figuring out
Whether or not we need these
loans has been sort of process
for the industry individual
hotel owners and quite frankly
extending the time when it
really does as mistrust
ministers that extend the time
limit to access capital that is
you know affordable capital and
and last these businesses to
make responsible decisions as it
relates to how they continue to
recover from the pandemic so we
stand for thank you.
Thank you anyone else wish to
speak in favor.
And Miss Marquita Russel if if
we remove the panelists you
could always just click click
the attendee list and come back.
Because I notice you're still
here at the Dyess anyone else
wish to speak in favor anyone
else was to speak in opposition
members of the committee
representative part of.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative down Martinez
for this bill I'm you know I do
agree that we have to extend the
data needs so many companies are
just.
Right and they can't get through
my only my only problem is I
really hesitant that we're going
to see any more money go out and
I'll tell you why these loans
are extremely extremely
difficult to get you have to
there this site is very
confusing I have a an amazing
accountants who who was able to
reach people NMFA to be able to
walk through a lot of a lot of
these loans but.
It's it's very difficult and so
I'm unless we change the
structure on how the loans are
received and how to apply those
loans and we stop making it so
difficult on small business.
These small businesses these
guys with the mom and pop stores
the ones that you know
the other one state that need it
and is extremely difficult so
maybe as this bill moves forward
I don't know how and MFA can
change that you know that's
their responsibility intent
within their rules and
guidelines but let's having
having that conversation as well
to get the money outdoor because
it's extremely difficult thank
you are being explored.
Thank you Representative.
Members of the committee.
Representative Figueroa.
For the past Mr chair.
I will madam vice chair there is
a motion by vice chair Figaro
with a do pass on house bill one
hundred forty eight.
A second by Representative as
the non this please call the
roll.
Thank you chairman.
Dow yes.
Representative.
Representative gang.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Johnson yes.
Martinez yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes.
Representative Serrato.
Yes.
Representative part of.
What.
Yes I guess again and yet I
apologize.
Representative.
Gaydos yes thank you.
Figueroa.
Yes.
Yes and so congratulations
Representative Dow
Representative Martinez you have
a do pass on house bill one
hundred forty eight.
So Representative down of so
much this one out walk up to the
back to the Dyess.
And Representative set up though
will walk.
Walked to the.
To the panel to the
To the sponsor table we will now
go to house bill one hundred
sixty this committee is very
familiar with this bill.
And we want to thank the analyst
for for doing a rush job on this
on this bill it's in it's
important to.
To get it get over quickly house
bill one hundred sixty
Representative set up the thank
you.
Mr chairman and can I bring my
expert witness Jason Weaks with
Representative Hispanic chamber.
You will join us forth with.
What is.
You representative that they
have the floor.
Thank you Mr chairman so I'm
happy to bring forward to the
committee H. B. one sixty
strictly under utilized
businesses opportunity act
this bill of you are all
perfectly familiar with it's
come up a few times in the past
for context this this version
includes suggestions offered by
tax and revenue the tax revenue
department that we received and
it it replicates it's fairly
similar to what we passed out of
the house last year as a
reminder it creates that have
helped certification for
businesses owned by women and
people of color and allows a
state topper trainings these
hubs is the diversity contracts
a purchasing and create a
searchable database of these
businesses and tracks our state
contracting with hubs district
attorney less businesses it
would enable the tax revenue
department to
be able to work with on to
identify these groups the small
businesses and then these hubs
could also work with business
supporting nonprofits to learn
how to navigate the state
bidding process and qualifies
hubs the tax and revenue
department can also work with
you know federal databases and
others that.
Hi these businesses as well so
that also got clarified on then
the General Services Department
is to keep the database of
qualified helps and track how
their awarded it gives us that
data that we've been looking for
as you all know it doesn't
create setasides or additional
points it just allows us to
collect the data and offer some
support as businesses navigating
the bidding process that's the
basics of it I believe it'll you
know stimulate our local
economies and promote for legal
business opportunities and given
this opportunity really have an
idea of how our state
procurements are taking place I
do have Jason Weaks that
mediation if you'd like to add a
little more.
Thank you Representative Mr
chairman of the committee just
briefly I mean I think this bill
really what it's trying to do is
create mentorship one so that
you know you have small New
Mexico businesses being mentor
by larger businesses and those
businesses are going to be
historically underutilized
obviously New Mexico's majority
minority state so it's gonna
help a lot of minority owned
businesses additionally it's
also about understanding what
our current procurement codes
now in terms of contracts are
going to how many are going in
state businesses how many are
going to starkly under utilized
as this and so forth actually
were already tracking how many
are going to in state races out
of state but this adds another
component that GST and says what
we're gonna track what is the
percentage of a contracts going
to actually store with US
businesses and again I think
it's very important to note
Representative Serrato stated
but this does not create set
aside that's not what this bill
is in anyway about also how does
have existed and a few other
states Texas most notably one
has a an act implemented a
pretty massive have program and
it is facilitated millions and
millions of dollars of business
for small strictly under without
utilized local businesses in
Texas so this is an economic
development initiative thank
you.
Mr chairman if I may just to
close out it is the one addition
to this that was not included in
the twenty twenty one version on
the get the best out of the
house was the addition of the
two full time staffers to help
facilitate this process One in
tax red and one in the General
Services Department and with
that we stand for questions.
Thank you we'll go to members of
the committee appreciate
everybody who's joined us this
afternoon I don't wish to speak
in favor of the bill for an
opposition please raise your
hand.
Anyone wish to address the
committee.
Thanks everyone members of the
committee.
By your Figueroa.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
sponsor for bringing the bill
again and I just want to point
out that appreciate both the
goal and the fact that you have
built in pages I in on work
a whole bunch of metrics by
which you are going to know
whether you hit that goal
whether you made a difference
that's really helpful and piece
of legislation so.
**** the goal.
In here and I'm glad that we get
to see it again let's move on.
Thank you vice chair piccolo.
Pleasure the committee.
Representative Johnson Mr chair
I really do passed second there
is a do pass motion by
Representative Johnson.
A second.
By Representative Martinez on
house bill one hundred sixty
agency Montoya please call the
roll.
You chairman.
Representative del.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative ghost.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes.
Yes Representative Serrato yes.
Figueroa yes.
Chairman my is.
Yes so thank you Representative
Serrato thank you thank the.
The Hispanic chamber of commerce
Mr weeks you have a do pass on
house bill one hundred sixty.
So we will
We will meet on Friday I think
after Friday we will get rid of
all of our house bill's that
that were initially assigned
there maybe one or two in which
we're a secondary committee
Representative seven on this as
you know we're up kind of
considered a primary committee
bills go to us first.
As opposed to second but there
may be a couple and then next
week will pry be relatively
chill until handful the Senate
bills wind their way over to our
Canadian but a Senate committee
work when I think the analyst
for their work the last twenty
four hours to get these bills
out and we will see you one
thirty Friday we are adjourned
thank you.
