To be able to do this for us. I
think it's, we've got several
new members and so, um, I think
it would be very helpful, so
welcome and, and thank you and I
apologize that we're starting a
little late today.
We need to take.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative De la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative L Lente here.
Representative Mason.
Representative Matthews here.
Representative Murphy here.
Representative Parejon.
Presente.
Representative Serrado here.
Madam Vice Chair.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, you have a quorum.
Alrighty.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, about
how long would you like me to
go? Finance Authority does a
lot. We could talk for a while
or I could give you the 10
minutes.
15 to 20, great. Um, so for
those of you that I've not met,
it's nice to see you and nice,
nice to meet you. My name is
Marquita Russell, and, um, as
mentioned, I'm the CEO of the
New Mexico Finance Authority,
and you'll hear our name a
couple of times this session,
some related to economic
development or site readiness
expansion, some related to water
infrastructure. Others related
to capital projects and all of
this is true. We are a
broad-based finance agency
that's been in place since 1992.
Um, we are.
governed, and I'm speaking, I
apologize. I'm speaking from a
presentation here I'm on, I'm,
I'm on slide 2,
just to give you a snapshot of
uh how we're organized, who
governs us. Um, we are governed
by an 11 member independent
board, uh, that's chaired by,
uh, Cathy Keith, um, and has
members of the governor's
administration on the board, um,
they are responsible for
proving.
This does go in and out, doesn't
it? Could I try this other one?
So we are the, the board
oversees our rules. They approve
our rules, they approve our
policies and all of the projects
in uh the that we that we
finance, um, they oversee our
operations and approve our
budgets and they have 5
different committees that meet
monthly in order to do all of
that. Um, as you'll see in a
minute, the Finance Authority
has an expansive array of
programs since 1992, we have
been authorized to operate 25
different programs through 13
different.
acts, um, and the two largest
acts, one related to really
public infrastructure is the New
Mexico Finance Authority Act,
and that has about 6 of our
programs, and then the other is
the statewide economic
development Finance Act, which
uh is about 22 years old or so
and has had relatively little
activity, primarily because most
of our funding comes from
federal sources.
Um, in addition to these two
major areas of uh activity. We
also oversee and administer 3
separate boards, the water trust
board, the colonious
infrastructure Board and now the
opportunity, enterprise and
housing development.
Board review board. It's got a
long name, um, and I'll just
give you a snapshot of who's
there and what they do as well.
Um, and then lastly, I would
note that we are overseen by a
legislative interim committee.
It's uh 29 members this past
year and we were guided by
Senator Padilla and
Representative Joy Garrett.
So on page 3, I will show you,
uh, just at a glance, there are
the 25 programs that are
authorized, uh, for us to
operate on the very left hand
side you'll see a check mark
indicating whether it's active,
and for our lung programs that
may mean that we are still
taking applications or we're
still overseeing an existing
loan portfolio, um, but right
next to that is a check box that
says funded, and that really
does indicate whether or not we
can accept new applications.
Um, our largest areas of funding
are for public infrastructure,
but over the last couple of
years, last 5 years, you've
entrusted us with additional
funding for primarily economic
development reasons. Um, and I
just note, if you look at the
bottom from about 2000 and about
20, 2020 on, uh, you'll see
there was a big break right
before the essential services
working capital. There was 10
years between 11, the last
program that was implemented
until.
You know, 5 years ago, um, and
then 10 programs after that. So
we saw a real burst of activity
beginning with the recovery.
And on page 4 you'll get a sense
of how it is that our activity,
um, kind of balloons up from
time to time, and it really is
based on funding level. In
addition to periodic
appropriations from the
legislature, we are often the
entity that folks turn to to um
deliver federal dollars, whether
it's for businesses or drinking
water projects we are uh an
efficient way in which to
deliver funds, particularly if
you're an agency that doesn't
typically make grants or loans.
So we've partnered with the um
early education care uh
department we've partnered with
the Economic Development
department and with energy,
minerals and natural resources
in order to deliver funds that
they have received from the
federal government. So in
addition to the things you just
saw, we have activity outside of
that.
Would it be better if I just
pushed this back.
OK.
Gladly, um.
So the top 5 pro programs that
we have that receive uh regular
amounts of funding is the public
project revolving Fund, which is
a major AAA bond funded program.
We, um, have not unlimited
amounts of capacity, but we've
not come close to reaching our
capacity in that program. We
make loans from cash that we
have on hand in that fund, and
then we replenish periodically
in the bond market for loans
that we've already made. So at
the time that a client comes to
us, they know the interest rate.
We.
them the same interest rate we
would have received in the
market, so a lot of your clients
are receiving AAA tax-exempt
interest rates, um, when they
wouldn't otherwise have access
to the public market. So if
you're a very small community,
that's a really big deal.
Um, the drinking water state
revolving fund, uh, you'll see a
bill this year that asks for
some changes to it. It's about
20 plus years old and it needs
to be refreshed, uh, the water
project fund you'll see some
bills coming through related to
that. That's the program that's
overseen by the Water Trust
board and um we received the
that fund receives 8.1% of the
net severance tax bond.
Or a
flow through. So it's a, it's an
earmark. Colonious
infrastructure Project Fund
receives 4.5%. It's, it funds a
broad array of infrastructure
and then local government
planning fund, which does a
broad array of uh grants for
planning documents and that's
gotten bigger over the years.
Um, you'll see the next bullet
really deals with our economic
development, and you'll see that
99% of the funding that we've
delivered through that, that act
has been federal dollars and so.
There's been I think $5.1
million back at the initiation
of that program in in 2006 and
hasn't seen a state
appropriation since that time,
it's all been state funding.
Uh, the place where we have seen
some state funding was more
recently, uh, $295 million was
appropriated to 3 different
programs, uh, the venture
capital program or opportunity
Enterprise revolving Fund and
housing development revolving
fund.
I really just already shared
with you the highlights of the
Public Project revolving fund,
so I'm gonna skip page 5, but I
would just, uh, note that it's
there for, uh, the highlights of
of what your clients, what your
communities can receive from the
finance authority.
Um, and I'll also just mention
that we recently broadened the
program based on some
conservative management we had
excess capacity and so now we've
uh got a mechanism in place to
make loans to non-traditional
public credits that have been
for a long time authorized to
use the NMFA, but for which we
didn't really have a home for
them and those include public
improvement districts, uh, land
grant Marceds and charter
schools, among others.
On page 6, I'll just, that's a
snapshot of the water trust
board on the left hand side,
you'll see the 16 members that
oversee that. This program's
been in place since 2001, so
it's, it's made, I think it's
awarded over a billion dollars
to date, um, and it now funds a
wide array of water projects,
uh, including now wastewater,
um, we did not, uh, we were not
able to make changes to the uh
to our rules in time to accept
applications for wastewater this
year.
But beginning in August, we'll
start collecting applications
for wastewater projects, um, and
you'll see those then the next
session.
Um
All right, um, oh, I would also
mention that one other thing
that we've, um, last year you
gave us the authority to use
those water project funds to
help fund technical assistance,
and we're choosing to do that in
two different ways. One is for
small system planning, there are
a number of very small water
systems, often volunteer water
systems, um, that need planning
in order to access capital
dollars for improvements to
their water systems, expansions,
and they are unable often to do
this on their own.
Uh, we have at the New Mexico
Finance Authority, the local
government planning grant, and
they could get 100% grant, but
it still does require them to um
be able to procure an oversee
the procurement of an engineer
and be able to attract frankly
an engineer and in your more
rural parts of the state, that's
really not an uh a possibility,
so we'll be using this fund to
hire engineers.
And take applications in order
and we'll fund their project and
actually oversee the development
of the planning document itself,
so they'll be beneficiaries of
but not applicants or recipients
of the funding. So they'll be
able to get a planning document
done for them by applying, and
the other is for us to use those
dollars in order to um
facilitate regionalization of a
number of mutual domestics often
that are near each other
geographically, but er.
separately and so if they are
willing and and wanting to move
forward with a regionalization
and consolidate into one system,
we'll send out a team of
attorneys and accountants, um,
engine, uh, hydrologists in
order to help them combine their
systems, most, honestly, the
difficult part is combining
their books, figuring out how to
do their rate bases, um, and,
and becoming just one entity and
so that's what this team will
help them do.
The colonious infrastructure
Board for those of you that are
in the southern part of the
state, I would just take note
that uh this is a very active
program for us, um, and I won't
really speak much more than
they're able to access 90%
grant, 10% loan for projects in
designated coloniass, of which
there are about 175 in those 12
southern counties.
I mentioned earlier the
opportunity enterprise and
housing development activities,
um, there are 2 programs within
that, the initial program, which
was the opportunity, um,
development fund which we'll
just call the commercial
commercial building program, um,
and that fund has a.
Was initially received 70
million and then most recently
an additional 50, so we're at
120 million. We've made a couple
of approvals there and projects
are moving forward and then last
year you broadened it to include
the housing development,
revolving fund. We just
completed our first application
for workforce housing and or for
infrastructure related to
affordable housing, and those
projects are now moving through
our underwriting process, um,
and I note that it's governed by
a 14 member board and they're
listed there on your.
on your left-hand side.
All right, that was the fast
stuff. Let me then spend a
little bit of time on economic
development if I could. Again,
most of this is federally funded
and if, if the federal funds
that are currently authorized,
stay in place will have a
significant amount of money to
be able to help the businesses
in your communities, uh, with
their projects, um, so.
Uh
In 2022, the state received
approval to use up to $74
million for various programs,
and we entered into an agreement
with the economic development
department to operate 3 of those
programs, so the first, uh, that
we are operating is a loan
participation program. We work
with your banks, uh, in order to
fund businesses in your area, so
we're not doing 100% of the
funding will come in and either
buy a part of the loan that
there.
party making and help them get
over the lack of collateral that
may exist with the business or
will make a loan right beside
them and again give them first
access to the collateral because
what community banks are, are
lacking is often the collateral
base in which to make the loan
regulations have become much
more difficult for banks to
operate under and what your
community bank was able to offer
25 years ago. They simply can't
offer today, so it isn't really
a lack of your bank's trying.
It's a lack of their ability to
meet the regulations and serve
the clients in your communities,
um, so that's one program and
that's, that's a fairly popular
program, um, the other is a
capital access program which
would be new to this state in
the capital access program
again, we work with the with the
financial institutions in your
communities, and we help them
build with those federal dollars
a loan loss reserve within their
banks in order to help cover any
additional, any loss that they
might incur with um for an
enrolled loan so we described to
them what the parameters of the
loan can look like, and they are
able to underwrite the loan and
as long as they check those
boxes, we'll then make a
distribution of the federal
dollars into that financial
institution, and they can build
over time this loan loss
reserve. This is very popular in
other states, uh, using these
federal dollars because it does
provide you one more mechanism
for uh banks to.
themselves with really small
loans, and those are the hardest
to oversee for them.
And then lastly, um, the venture
capital program and I will spend
a little time later talking
about that, but those two
programs in addition to the
economic developments collateral
assistance program are really
great ways for your businesses
to expand and they're those
three programs in particular are
there to help your banks lend
money to your, to your community
businesses. None of these
programs operate without a bank
or without a financial
institution, they're all there
to.
make those dollars go a little
further, not to supplant them.
Um, 2 years ago, we were
authorized, or 3 years ago now,
we were authorized, uh, on page
10 to operate a non-traditional
venture capital program, um, and
some changes were made to the
law, uh, a year later to make
certain that the intent of the
legislation and the legislation
itself matched and so what we do
in this program is uh we make
investments into private equity
funds that then invest in
businesses or entrepreneurs in
your community.
Not trying to do what the state
investment council does, what
they do, they do very well.
They're looking for returns
because that's their job is to
provide economic returns and to
grow the funds that are under
their stewardship. What we're
charged with doing is to help
stimulate economic development
and to find opportunities for
investment outside of the high
tech, high growth sectors. And
so over the last two years we've
been working to develop a really
effective program and um though
I didn't provide you the list.
It's on our website, um, we have
a, we've invested in a fund that
invests in early stage native
owned companies, um, we've
invested in a uh woman owned
early stage biotech company, but
it's an emerging manager.
Um, we've invested in a uh early
stage New Mexico business that's
building that they basically
look for sustainable uh
companies or companies that are
operating in sustainable
industries, um, we have a debt
program where we're working with
uh an uh a group that will
partner with your CDFIs to help
entrepreneurs get started. These
are going to be very flexible
loans, um, but it's not always
just equity, they're looking.
for loans as well, um, and
that's one that we.
We really led in that area, we
knew that that was an area that
small businesses in New Mexico
needs and let's be really clear,
New Mexico is primarily small
businesses, um, and that was one
way for entrepreneurs to get a
head start.
Uh, we have two funds that
invest in agriculture. One is
the Tiverton Fund, um, and that
is, uh, they invest in food and
agriculture production sectors
and that's an equity fund and
then we have one that's called
the perennial Fund, and they
actually make loans to farmers,
um, that are looking to
transition from regenerative and
organic farming practices or to
organic and uh regenerative
farming practices, so a debt
program there and then uh.
Uh, one that invests primarily
in small Latino owned businesses
or Latinx businesses and one in
women owned businesses. So we do
things that are different, um,
we're trying to hit targets that
the state investment council
isn't hitting, we work closely
with them. They meet weekly with
my, uh, the person that leads
our team to make certain that
we're not spending our state
dollars all in the same place.
We are looking for to bring in
national investors who have um a
a target or an interest in the
kinds of.
Businesses that make up New
Mexico, and I think we've been
really successful in developing
and and delivering those dollars
in the way in which you intended
to date, we have invested all
that we intend to invest with
that $50 million
there is, uh, we, we have a
little bit left over in case
there's a follow on investment
that we want to take advantage
of, but for the most part we're
done with our economic
development investment there.
And but we're really proud of
the work that you that uh we've
done and we were pleased to um
be given the opportunity to to.
Provide our expertise in that
area.
Um, and so then lastly I just
give you a heads up on the kinds
of legislation you're going to
see. I mentioned at the
beginning in Broad strokes, um,
but we will be asking for uh a
bill which comes through
annually. It's an authorization
bill to allow us to make loans
of greater than a million
dollars from that public project
revolving fund and as we know,
economic development is really
driven by infrastructure, um, a
lot it's necessary for
businesses to grow, uh, it
currently has about 150 entities
on it, it will get a.
did once before it um before it
leaves the, the house and moves
over.
Moves leaves the Senate and
comes over to the house. Um,
there's a water trust board
authorization bill. We have
about $166 million that's been
made available to the to the
water trust board for awards.
Um, we have 84 applications, uh,
that have been submitted and
they are on that authorization
bill.
Um, and then there is a bill
that's been sponsored, I think
in the Senate side, Senate Bill
29.
Uh, by Senator Munoz, um, that
appropriates an additional $222
million for projects.
Um, and then lastly, House Bill
41, which is our stand, one of
our standard bills that moves
money from the PPRF over to 3
funds for infrastructure
purposes primarily.
The ones that are unusual for us
are on page 12, um, as I
mentioned earlier, there's a
technical cleanup that we need
to our drinking water, uh,
statute, um, they're all very,
uh, just to conform to federal
regulations primarily, um, we've
asked for some money to uh put
into our, uh, funds that lend
for primary care, for behavioral
healthcare and for childcare.
Um, those are programs that are
quite successful but really have
no dollars.
Um, the solar access fund has
been introduced. It's not a
finance authority bill, but it's
one that impacts NMFA directly.
House Bill 128, and it creates a
grant program for renewable
energy projects by counties,
municipalities, school
districts, tribal governments,
and land grant me says, uh, we
would be partnered with the
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources uh department with
that, um, there's a site
readiness bill, there's a couple
of them out there, but the one
that, uh, impacts us um as
electric utilities.
And rule electric co ops is
eligible entities under the
PPRF, as I mentioned, we
haven't, um, we've been, we
found a way to get additional
capacity in and that would be
one way in which to use it.
And then, uh, Senate Bill 175,
which expands the childcare
revolving loan fund so that more
beneficial terms can be made
available to childcare
facilities that are expanding.
So a lot of what we do either
directly impacts economic
development and the businesses
in your area or indirectly
impacts them uh through
infrastructure development and
with that, Madam Chair, I hope
that was a, a broad enough
overview for you and I'm happy
to answer any questions.
Thank you and thank you for your
presentation. Uh, we've got, uh,
Representative Cerrado on the
list.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Ms. Russell for your
presentation. Um, I had a quick
question, two questions. How
many staff do you oversee?
And I'm sure we are budgeted for
77, um, 3 of those 77 were
mid-year expansion positions
because we do not have space for
them in our building. We're
actually moving into a new
building on April, so if you,
and, and we're not at our old
building now, so we're kind of
um in transient right now, um,
but 77 uh and we have two
positions that are open outside
of that. So that we're hiring
for now.
And Madam Chair, and thank you
for that, Ms. Russell. Um, and
how many of them are, I guess I,
I don't uh the part is that are
they deployed to specific funds?
Do they cross over and their
expertise. How does that work?
So Madam Chair, we used to be
all just organized by fund up to
our accountants, so we would
have employees just for the
public project revolving fund or
just for our commercial
activities, um, but in 2000 in
2020 we reorganized and we are
now organized by function, so we
have a.
Credit team that's dedicated to
credits, they, they oversee all
the credits on our portfolios,
many of which look alike, um,
you know, we have a real co op
in our economic development
portfolio. We have a hotel and
our PPRF portfolio. So they,
they do kind of start to look
alike after a while. We have one
regional finance team, those are
the folks out in your
communities talking about
projects trying to figure out
ways in which to get them done,
um, and then we have a client
service group that actually is
responsible for helping clients.
Do they have any questions on
their debt service, any of that,
um, and then we have program
teams and they are actually
divided by program. That's the
only group, so you have folks
that are responsible for
understanding what's in the
portfolio, uh, making certain
that the reporting specific to
that.
funding source is uh being done,
helping clients with very
specific project-related things
and then we have
A, a bunch of other departments.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and the,
the last question I had was that
you did talk about about this
with the VC fund. I remember
when we passed that bill, you
were a bit concerned because
it's such particular um
knowledge and expertise, um, now
that that fund has essentially
been utilized and probably more
of a maintenance mode. Um, do
those individuals were working
on that fit back into the rest
of the structure as anticipated.
Madam Chair, yes, so we are able
to because of the way in which
we're structured, we're able to
do short-term funding programs,
um, because we're able to to
kind of leverage personnel very
quickly, um, and our systems are
now supportive of that, they
weren't 5 years ago, but they
are now, um, and are in that
particular instance, we had on
on hand our policy person
capital policy strategist who uh
was an impact investor. That was
her background. It was one of
the reasons.
she came to the finance
authority, so she's continuing
to oversee that portfolio
continuing to look at
opportunities again for
potential follow-on investment
but then is spending her time
also on program development. So
she was never 100% venture
capital.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you for that, Ms.
Russell, having worked with you
a lot, you guys take on a
variety of roles and uh it does
help me understand how it all
kind of comes together just so
that more logistical piece.
Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have any other
questions?
Yeah, Adam Chair, Mr. Russell,
um, it sounds like it's, it's,
uh, one of the great things
about this job is you get
exposed to some new things. I
always heard about the finance
authority, but never knew
exactly what you do and it
sounds like you provide some
pretty critical funding
principally for infrastructure
needs in local communities, um,
to that end, Madam Chair, um.
I, I'm curious about, and I
don't need precise numbers, but
just looking across all that you
do, what are your major funding
sources? It sounds like federal
funding is one of them.
Madam Chair, for Economic
development is federal funding
sources is our largest uh
funding source, um, severance
tax bonds, as I mentioned
earlier, fund our water trust
board and our, uh, colonious
programs, so 8.1 and 4.5%. So
that's um 160 and $80 million
this year, uh, the
project
I broke it. Um, the public
project revolving fund actually
receives, uh, there's a
dedicated tax that flows to the
PPRF and that helps make sure
our bondholders are incredibly
comfortable with the, with the
diversity of our credits, and
when that's not used to pay
bonds when it's never been used
to pay bonds, we've never had a
default, um, then that money
flows back in and we make new
loans and that's how we, we
established that capacity and
then the last one is our
drinking water and that's a
federal capitalization.
Grant.
So, um, on the water project by
Nicolonious Fund as well, that's
it's STB stands for severance
tax bonding.
sex.
Yes, sir. OK. And that would be
the severance tax is largely
collected. I know my colleagues
are going to be disappointed if
I don't get this plug-in from
oil and gas principally, is that
correct, Madam Chair? Yes. OK,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you and anybody else?
Ready. Thank you for coming on
such short notice, we sorry we
started a little late today, but
we appreciate your, uh,
presentation and I'm sure we'll
be hearing more from you during
the session. It was a pleasure.
Thank you. Thank you.
Already, folks, we've got 2
bills on the list today, uh,
that would be HB 19 and HB 49,
uh, we will start with HB 19
representative Lundstrom.
And, um, I don't think your mic
is on.
That's why it sounded so we did
ask if they turn it down, um,
and I guess what we're trying to
do is just not have uh have it
away from you a little bit and
hopefully it's doesn't spark up
on us, um, and I know we also
have an amendment on here, so
we'll get to that point, but go
ahead. OK, thank you, Madam
Chair and good afternoon
committee, um, I'm here to talk
to you about House Bill 19, as
I'd mentioned, uh, we do have an
amendment and like to ask Madam
Chair, that someone could move
the amendment for discussion.
please.
Man and I moved the amendment
for discussion.
Thank you.
Do we have any opposition on
that?
Ready.
All righty, thank you, Madam
Chair. I'll take you quickly
through the amendment, uh, is
the, uh, 202 number is 230094.2
and Madame Charles hoping that
my, uh, bill drafter might be
able to be let in to the process
here, there were some questions
that some technical drafting
questions, and that would be
Chase Van Gorder, I don't know
if he's.
Oh.
Trying to get in or not just in
case the committee might have
some questions about that.
But uh just looking at the bill
we start on page 2, line 1,
we're just striking 10 and
insert in lieu.
Thereof on page 14 line 11
strike and I think the most
important uh pieces are madam
chairs on page 14 between line
11 and 12 we would insert the
language provide that operations
and maintenance of a trade port
project are to be performed by
the public partner except for
broadband telecommunications and
energy infrastructure components
of the trade port, and that's
primarily because traditionally.
These are not functions that are
provided by government.
And uh we'd go on to the next
uh.
Um, piece of this amendment,
which is on page 16 between line
24 and 25, we would insert new
material which would be actually
a new section 10.
Uh, applicability of certain
other laws, the construction of
a trade port project pursuant to
a public-private partnership
agreement is a public work for
the purposes of a public works
minimum wage Act and
subcontractors, fair practices
Act and Public Works apprentice
and Training Act.
We would then uh renumber, uh.
The sections accordingly, so
basically, Madam Chair and
committee, with this, uh,
amendment does it ensures inside
of the P3 component of this bill
that um.
We have
Public management, except for
broadband telecommunications and
energy infrastructure and then
we also would just follow the
general laws that we already
follow in public works minimum
wage Act and so forth.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
we do have, uh, Mr. Chase on
online, so if you need to refer
to him, uh, we can do that. Um,
do we have, um?
Any questions on the amendment.
Representative
I, sorry.
Being very cautious with my over
here. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, just one really quick
question, uh.
Representative Lustrom.
The public works apprenticeship
and Training Act is already
language that's existing that we
already follow, right? OK.
making sure. Thank you. Yes
ma'am.
Any other questions on the
amendment.
Representative move the
amendment.
Do we have any opposition?
Not gonna bang that barely loud.
Blow everybody up. Yes, thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you
committee for, uh, approval of
the amendment. A House Bill 19,
as we, we often talk about the
need for economic
diversification. This bill is
one of the um.
Ideas that we have around best
practices regarding economic
development by using existing
assets, New Mexico has often
been used as a bridge state when
it comes to transportation and
what this bill does is it
utilizes both state, local, and
private infrastructure.
Um, this bill also positions New
Mexico for increase of trade,
increase in reshoring, and the
increase on onshoring, and it
also assists primarily with the
elimination of supply chain
disruption.
So when we think about this and
I.
It would be managed by the
economic development department.
The idea is, is that we would
create districts, uh, that's in
section 3 and 4 on page 3 of the
bill.
The idea is is that we would
create these districts, there
are certain criteria that would
have to be met.
And once the criteria met, then
the uh economic development
department would then have the
opportunity to come in and uh
designate a trade port.
area.
Once the trade port area is set
up.
There would be um.
In in in concert and advisory
committee that's that is allowed
for in this bill under section
5.
The advisory committee not only
advises the economic development
department, but with it comes
resources as an example, I've
been working very closely with
the economic developer in Donana
County and also in Bern Leo
County and myself in McKinley
County.
And what we wanted to see with
this advisory committee is they
would come in not only provide
advice to the economic
development department that come
with them resources.
As an example in McKinley
County, one of the issues that
we have is the need for water
and wastewater, uh, lines uh in
an area that we hope to be able
to have designated and um it
would be great when the uh
environment secretary comes to
the meetings that they would say
not only um would you be able to
apply for trade court funds you
would then uh be able to use the
funds that are already provided
in the environment department.
So those two sections actually
set up uh with the criteria
would be for establishment of a
trade port on section 6, page 9
is the um members of the
advisory committee and what
their duties would be.
Um. We would be looking at the
powers and and uh duties of the
secretary under section 7 H 10,
uh, basically a lot of the
responsibility for the
management of everything inside
this legislation would fall to
the uh economic development
department secretary.
We, um, we're looking on section
8 and this is uh.
Out of a cool piece, it's
something that I've worked on
for many years, and that's the
establishment of a public
private partnership agreement
process inside the trade port
and what this would do is
authorize uh public partner to
enter into an agreement with a
private partner.
And it lists all those
requirements that would have to
be a uh.
done before the uh partnership
agreement could be uh approved.
Such as on page 12, you'd have
to have a cost benefit analysis.
And that would have to be
compared to traditional public
partner financing.
I think the key for a P3 uh
agreement is line D, and that is
what is required inside the
agreement. You have to define
the roles and responsibilities
of the public partner and the
private partner provide for
clawbacks or recapture
provisions, provide a financing
plan require a private partner
to provide or cause to be
provided performance and payment
bonds.
Um
The private partner would also
have to provide guarantees,
letters of credit, and other
acceptable forms of security.
So I think within this trade
port, so you, you start out, you
identify a district that the
trade port would be put in. You
meet all the.
For many of the criteria to
establish the trade port and one
of the incentives that's uh
provided for those that set up
the trade port would be the P3
piece.
Um, and on section 9 is the
trade port Development Fund.
What I've done in this bill is
uh.
Asked that a fund be set up
using uh funding from from gross
receipts.
And that funding mechanism is
set up.
On page 18.
What I've asked for in this bill
is that we would actually.
Take
4%.
Of gross receipts that would
normally go into the general
fund and put it into a new
suspense fund for the trade
port.
And this funding would be used
specifically for infrastructure
develop in development inside
the trade port.
So if you think about it from an
industrial park perspective,
it's an industrial park on
steroids with a specific purpose
of logistics, distribution,
transloading.
And movement of commodity.
Um, we would take money also
from the motor vehicle excise
tax.
It's got a 10 year sunset on it,
um, with this with this funding
source, it gives the
legislature, the opportunity to
reauthorize it or not.
Um
But I think this is a good way
to be able to fund this.
So as I explained to the
analyst, when you look at the
title of the bill, it says make
an appropriation.
So she had asked me about that
we've got Chase online if I, if
I don't explain this correctly,
that the idea is, is that.
The appropriation process has
become because it comes from the
general fund uh from grocery
receipts tax to the general
fund, but in that suspense fund
and then when the applications
are made, the economic
development department based on
the advice of his committee
would then allocate those funds.
Uh, there's an exemption from
the procurement code, which is
lots of pages in here.
We have many, many things that
are exempt from the procurement
code, and I think that's page
19.
24, so you look at line 23 on
page 24. We're just adding our
trade port development Act.
So, um,
You know, Madam Chair, this is
uh a bill that's, as I said,
it's got a 10 year sunset.
It um
Takes money from gross receipts
tax that would normally be going
into the general fund.
It is um.
A multi, you know, it's got a
multimodal purpose to it,
because what we have not done
well in New Mexico when it comes
to economic diversification, we
have not focused on existing
assets.
And that's always been a best
practice for economic
development. What have we all,
what do we already have that we
can utilize.
And we've got 3 interstates.
We've got 2 Class One railroads.
We've got passenger air service,
so when you look at it from a
transportation uh perspective.
Those components are put into
this kind of an authority.
With a geographic boundary for
the purposes of trade and
distribution.
I think now with the new federal
administration when it comes to
onshoring and reshoring, we need
to be in the game.
The state of New Mexico needs to
get in the game.
And right now we aren't. I mean,
when it comes to that kind of
activity.
And my hope is is that you guys
will agree with me and that this
bill will.
Come out of this committee so it
can go into the next and
hopefully get approved on the
floor with that, I'd be happy to
stand for questions.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
let's, before we go to questions
from the committee. Let's go
into the audience, do we have
anybody uh in opposition of this
bill.
Do we have anybody in favor of
this bill?
Nice. All righty. um, let's go
ahead and hear from people from
the audience. Let's start with
you, Marco.
Thank you.
Jason, do you wanna go ahead and
come out and um maybe if we can
just kind of form a line here
that way the attendant can, but
go ahead and we'll we'll go
after that, yeah, thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza,
registered lobbyists with New
Mexico IDEO, which is the
statewide economic development
Professional Association. We
stand in strong support of the
legislation, uh, this last year
in partnership with economic
development department, we held
the governor's conference on
Economic Development, and this
was a key session within that
conference talking about again.
utilizing existing assets,
creating these districts that
can attract capital, create
jobs, and especially in rural
areas, so we stand in strong
support.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Clem
Harris. I represent almost 600
members of the Brotherhood of
Locomotive Engineers and
trainmen in New Mexico. We stand
in support of this legislation,
uh, we are working with
Representative Lundstrom on a uh
friendly amendment to this
legislation and we also want to
thank Representative Lumstrom
for bringing forth this bill as
this is a very good thing for
the state of New Mexico.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Marcos Gonzalez,
executive development officer
for Bernalillo County and
representing the I-40 tradear
corridor, which is a partnership
with the Port of LA and two
cities in Arizona and uh the
metro area in Bernalillo County
with Sandoval County, the
village of Los Lunas, uh, the
I-403port corridor has already
brought in over $40 million in
federal funds for planning
assets for developing a trade
port in uh the Albuquerque area
that will help uh the
warehousing and
A logistics of our country move
more seamlessly between trade of
China and the manufacturers in
the middle of the country. So we
stand in support of being able
to add infrastructure and these
type of assets to our project
and projects within the state as
well.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you and thank you to the sponsor
for bringing this bill forward.
My name is Bill Lee, president
CEO of the Gallup McKinley
County Chamber of Commerce. We
stand in strong support of HB
19. It's really going to help
our community build on
strategies and opportunities
around our existing economic
assets, um, assessments from our
primary industrial assets have
concluded that transportation
and logistics define the heart
of the potential for real
economic development in McKinley
County and in recent years, I
reached.
Our region's really been hit
hard, not only from COVID-19
restrictions and impacts, but
also the dramatic changes in the
energy industry resulting in the
closure of a refinery near us as
well as a coal fired power plant
loss of jobs that just
evaporated has been devastating
not only in terms of good jobs,
but it's also been devastating
in terms of the county tax base.
HB 19 would help us uh
capitalize on our competitive
advantages, easy access to BNSF
Transcontinental railway, I.
40, our revitalized air
transportation along with
foreign trade zone designation
being planned for the Gallup
Municipal Airport. We'll all
come together with opportunities
offered by HB 19 and bring us
much needed economic wins. HB19
not only benefits Gallup
McKinley County. It is
designated to provide funding to
support infrastructure
development in qualified trade
ports all across New Mexico.
This is truly the pathway
forward for real
diversification.
Of our state's economy. HB 19
aligns perfectly with its
public-private partnership with
our foundation at the Gallup
McKinley County Chamber of
Commerce of commerce
collaboration and community. We
really, um, urge you to give
this bill a due pass, and I
thank you for your time, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jerry Shallow,
President, CEO of the Rio Raner
Regional Chamber of Commerce,
and we stand in strong support
of HB 19. This legislation
represents a bold and strategic
investment in New Mexico's
future, creating new
opportunities and economic
growth, supply chain resilience,
and infrastructure development.
Trade and logistics are the
lifeblood of our modern
economies by establishing a
trade port district throughout
New Mexico. This positions New
Mexico as a key player in
regional and national commerce,
leveraging our geographic
advantages to attract new
business, create high-quality
jobs, and strengthen our
transportation network. It's
already in place with our rails
and our interstate network. In
addition, HB 19.
It is about job creation,
economic diversification, and
strengthening New Mexico's
competitive edge in national and
global economy.
By passing this bill, we're
laying the foundation for a
thriving modernized trade
infrastructure.
That will benefit not only
businesses but families and
communities across our state,
both urban and rural.
I urged the committee in and we
stand in support of HB 19, and
thank you for your time.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Charlie
Marquez. I am the registered
lobbyist for the city of Gallup.
Uh, we want to thank the sponsor
for bringing this bill forward.
There are many benefits that
would bring to the city of
Gallup.
Uh, as mentioned by the sponsor
infrastructure in Gallup is
really in
Bad need of replacement, and
this would help with that.
Uh, as Mr. Bill Lee, uh,
mentioned, it would also bring
in or attract new businesses,
which also create new jobs.
Uh, the other is, is that it
provides for it allocates funds
for essential community services
such as healthcare, education,
and public safety. There's also
a component in here for
environmental sustainability.
Uh, and which it supports green
initiatives and promotes uh you
know, preserving our natural
resources, uh, it also has a
provision for local business
which we often forget about our
local businesses. This does have
provisions to assist with uh
local business growth.
So for those reasons, we stand
in support and urge urge your
support. Thank you.
Madam Chair, thank you, Mike
Sandoval. I'm a consultant with
Garrett Development, um, we're a
private landowner and
development company on the west
side or Amazon and Tempur-Pedic
have set up my client owns a
thousands of acres that surround
that. We appreciate the sponsor
bringing this forward um and
appreciate her creating a
process of framework and a
funding source um to help
facilitate these trade ports,
and we support this because we
think this will help facilitate
negotiations as we are being
considered for the trade port in
our area. So
you to the sponsor and thank you
to the committee for your
consideration.
Uh, good afternoon, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Uh, my name is Ryan Mast. I'm
the state lead for New Mexico,
uh, for sustainability partners.
We're a public benefit company
that provides both capital
support as well as capacity for
public entities on their
essential infrastructure. Uh,
we've been very active in New
Mexico over the last several
years, helping communities
across the state, um, and
delivering on their essential
infrastructure needs, um, and
that includes many projects that
are trying to advance sight
readiness and other activities
for economic development.
We know that such projects not
only bring forth tremendous
predictable and reliable
economic activity, but all the
other benefits that come
alongside those including
community wellbeing and
sustainability for families and
in all parts of the state, um,
for us, we stand in support. We
really appreciate the sponsor
bringing this forward, Bill
forward. Uh, we work on similar
type projects in other states
and we understand the importance
and value of, of designated
trade ports for attracting
economic activity, uh, and we'd
love to see and would welcome.
see that same level of
commitment here in the state of
New Mexico. We, we know it would
only drive tremendous growth for
the state, uh, and so and for
all of those reasons above and
what other members have said
before, we stand in support.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Carter Bundy with
asked me, We want to thank the
sponsor for reaching out and
working with us on some of our
concerns with this amendment.
Um, they've been fully
addressed, and so we want to
thank her and hope that you'll
look at this bill and pass it.
Thank you Madam Chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Matthew Suarez. I'm with the
Carpenters Union here in New
Mexico, the Western States
Regional Council of Carpenters.
We said in strong support of the
bill and the proposed amendment,
ensuring strong labor stats for
future trade port projects and
urge your strong support. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
I thought I would bring some
gender balance to those speaking
in support.
I am here in absolute support
and want to thank the sponsors
for introducing this piece of
legislation, it has been since
the time that I was elected and
took office, it has been um
Our intent to create these type
of trade ports, but also I want
to bring in the fact that we
have uh worked very diligently
with other countries, such as
Taiwan, in order to be able to
Improve not only the trade
relationships, and this is a
perfect way to do that. And I
want to particularly thank
Representative Lundstrom because
she's been uh who I have been.
Uh, working together with on
various committees and of course
all of you know that I'm from
the southern part of the state,
but I also know that this is a
benefit to overall to the
workforce, uh, and I appreciate
all of labor's um comments today
because I think it's incredibly
important that we show in which
we did today demonstrate, Madam
Chair, uh, unified, um, support
of this bill. So thank you and
thank you for allowing me to
give a gender balance to this.
Thank you.
Um, we have somebody on Zoom.
Um
Stephanie Mays.
Hi everybody, um, can you all
hear me?
We can.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, my name is
Stephanie Mae. I'm a registered
lobbyist representing the New
Mexico.
Building and construction Trades
Council, and the council, we're
an alliance of 15 craft unions
and collectively we represent
tens of thousands of
professional tradespeople across
New Mexico. And we really want
to thank the sponsor, and, um,
express our deep appreciation
for her thoughtful approach to
crafting this proposal. And
similar to, um, some of the
other comments that have been
made has taken those concerns
and turned them into really an
important amendment.
And so with that change, the
building council is very happy
to support this bill. Thank you
all.
If all Westfall.
Good afternoon committee members
and Madam Chairwoman. I'm Duval
Westfall executive vice
president for policy and
programs at the greater Al
Chamber of Commerce and I like
everybody else in the crowd, um,
just want to extend the chambers
really strong support for this.
Um, it's a smart reinvestment of
GRT and motor vehicle excise tax
revenue into what drives those
revenues, and that our supply
chain. The global pandemic and
the economic downturn laid
the vulnerabilities in our
nation's supply chain. And
having New Mexico establish
trade for districts along with
everything else in that bill.
It's going to help New Mexico be
a real part of the solution. The
basic role of the trade board is
to provide as essential
infrastructure and services to
handle various types of cargo,
including bulk commodities and
containerized goods and liquid
cargo, and we can be a part of
that. We have a built-in
North-South corridor with the
Santa Teresa the borderplepos to
maximize existing and planned
expansion of the manufacturing
plant in Mexico. We've got
existing east-west corridors of
I-10 and I.
authorities that are already
integral to getting goods to and
from the West Coast and beyond.
Communities from Bernalillo
County to Gallup in McKinley
County to Santa Teresa have
recognized the need for and the
opportunity in developing these
inland ports, and 19 is gonna
help but these and other
communities not only make them a
reality, but gets them on the
road to reaching their full
potential. And so we
respectfully joined everyone
else in the crowd to ask you to
the police to the support House
Bill 19. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, do you have
anybody else on Zoom?
OK. And uh I was.
Moving a little fast, I didn't
ask for uh if anybody was in
opposition on Zoom, we just went
straight into.
Into the, uh, in favor, so, um,
but I don't see any hands up.
OK, so we will go to the
committee.
Representative Matthews.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, and
thank you, Representative
Lindstrom. This is a really
impressive bill.
Um
And a real hopefully model for
something that we can do in
various places around the state,
but I do have a couple of
questions that are based on some
some.
Comments that are made in the.
Um, and the first one is on page
6,
And it talks about the tribal
sovereign immunity provision.
And notes that as written
apparently it's, it would not be
a constitutional waiver.
And I'm wondering,
Um, if that's a concern to you
or if it's something that should
be amended, um.
Moving forward or,
It
Uh, and tribal sovereign
immunity.
FIR
I, I'm sorry, it's page 6 of the
FIR.
Yes
Representative, is your
microphone on?
Sorry, madam Chair, I uh only
have the tax and rev department
in front of me and your analysis
I afraid I do not have a copy of
the FIR.
Um, OK, um, Madam Chair.
Sure.
OK.
Thank you very much.
Madam Chairs, page 6.
I'm looking at that madam chair
and what I see is that this
allows for.
tribes to enter into P3
agreements.
And my understanding would be it
would be.
Authorized
And that inside of the
agreement.
Obviously the tribe would bring
it forward and what their
concerns would be, would be
inside the agreement, so if they
would.
Not want to be held in a state
court.
I would like to use tribal
court. Um, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, so it, it says
that 2nd paragraph under that.
Um
Description in the express
waiver of tribal sovereign
immunity should therefore be
included in HB 19.
And an in-related
Uh, legislation and agreements
involving the Indian Nation
tribe or Pueblo to preserve the
states for pursuit of default
and other contract remedies, and
I just want to be sure that I'm
understanding you think that.
Existing methods of dealing with
the sovereign immunity question
would, would
would negate the necessity for
an amendment.
What I'm excuse me, what I'm
saying, Madam Chair
Representative, is that.
This is tied to P3.
When the tribe initiates a P3
agreement
that
they would set what those
requirements would be. OK, Madam
Chair, thank you, thank you for
that clarification. And then uh
um.
Madame Chera on page 7.
Um
At the top of page 7 of the FIR.
It also uh notes that the bill
does not include an initial
appropriation.
Administer the program, and I
wondered if that.
One was accurate, and second,
if, if you see that as a.
problem of what your plan is for
that.
There's not an initial
appropriation uh to the economic
development department yet.
But because the economic
development department would
manage.
The funds that go into the trade
port Act.
The appropriations process would
allow for administrative funds
to be moved to their department.
Once the funds are, are
provided.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all my questions. I just wanted
to be sure those.
That was uh uh.
Provisions were
And I can say, Madam Chair,
those are good those are good
points, especially for the
department, they're undermanned,
they're underfunded, and they
need some of this funding to
actually operate this program.
Thank you and thank you again
and Madam Chair, thank you again
for
would
uh
what's probably gonna be a model
for.
Other
Reports in the state.
Thank you.
Thank you. Representative Leia.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Thank you, Representative. I'm
gonna, I'm gonna ask my
questions based on
The
Document titled House Committee
analysis Report that should be
in our and I.
I still
hurt her or do you have one? I
have one. OK. OK. So it, it
goes, and I, and I appreciate
the clarification on the
sovereign immunity stuff and,
you know, a lot of those things
can get a little squirrely when
you talk about jurisdictional
issues, but um,
It, my, my, my, my questions are
related to
Uh, my, my, my short time that
I've been on on legislative
finance committee and, and you
have been on that in regards to
how things are done in the
budgetary process and, and this
being a part of, of that, and
I'm glad that uh Representative
Matthews asked the questions
regarding, regarding
appropriations and so, um, my
question is, is one,
looking at the trade port
development fund is created in
state treasury is a
non-reverting fund.
Administered by the Economic
Development Department.
And so my question would be that
Did the economic development
department make any request or
or present this idea or concept
or maybe did you in legislative
finance.
to
Garner support for the eventual
use of the money that maybe
maybe going to uh the general
fund and such.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, the um cabinet
secretary for the Economic
Development department was part
of our team in developing the
bill.
So he's very aware of what we
have in the bill, um, we have
not had any.
Negative comments only concern,
and he's been very clear about
this is they need the staffing
capacity. This is complicated.
It takes time, um.
And they're gonna need they're
gonna need staff to make sure
this happens.
And so and representative on
page 2 of this, uh, notes two
funding sources. It's bolded two
funding sources.
And it and it makes mention that
uh together they represent a
recurring appropriation to the
trade port Development Fund
amounting to an estimated
$8485.76 million in FY 2026. Uh.
Are, are, are, are we setting
ourselves up for for failure,
uh, knowing that we haven't even
Go forward in front of maybe LFC
or maybe should this go in front
of appropriations so that they
can understand what what the
intent is here.
I think Madam Chair, uh.
Mr. Chairman, it's a tax bill.
It's a tax bill and and and as
you're aware.
Text committee and the
appropriations Committee often
negotiate what they want to see.
My hope is, is that uh this will
go through your committee also
at some point and it'll be heard
next hopefully in your
committee.
But the point is, is that it's
not unusual to have.
Tax bills that don't necessarily
tie to the appropriations Act.
Serving as the former chair of
appropriations and former chair
of LFC that often happens
because you have new ideas, we
have new members that are coming
forward, new projects that
aren't necessarily heard in the
interim.
So we don't, we don't try to
squash that, we try to hear
everything.
And I appreciate, Madam Chair
and represent the dialogue. I
just want to make sure that,
that we're, we're upfront about
what's going on here so that
that we can get a sense of how
this is gonna lay itself out uh
as, as we move forward, but I
appreciate the the conversation
today. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Um.
Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you for bringing this
forward. We've
Talked about public-private
partnerships for.
Way too long since, since I've
been here for sure.
And so I, I appreciate that. One
of my questions is, um,
Who, from what I understand
reading the bill,
The designated trade port
districts will are to be
determined. Is that correct?
That's correct because it's uh
Madam Chair representative, it's
an application process.
So those that want to do it and
feel like they meet the criteria
would actually put an
application together for the
economic development department
that then to come out and do an
assessment.
If uh it makes sense that you've
got a good cost benefit
analysis, you've got a good
financing plan, because at the
end of the day, it's a.
Industrial Park with the
purposes of trade movement, but
inside that industrial park,
you're also gonna see light
manufacturing, you're going to
see uh things like cold storage.
Because of the kinds of things
that are being just, you know,
distributed throughout the
region.
So you make the application.
They give you a thumbs up or a
thumbs down, or you have an
opportunity to uh.
Make corrections to the
application.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative, I.
I um
It worries me a little bit just
because it's already not already
designated, I want this. I am
for this, but I, uh, I can see
it, I-25 and I-40.
And uh
Kind of leave some of our
districts out, so I was
concerned about that, but
ultimately it's good for New
Mexico.
And, uh, and overall that's what
we all need to be concerned
about is what's good for New
Mexico.
Uh, one of the other questions I
had is, do you know the
percentage?
Uh, I know, I know it's 21 and
86.
100% of the road fund tax. Do
you know what that amount is or
estimated would be. Yeah, but
with both funds, what we have
done some preliminary work on
it, we think we're gonna
generate over the 10 year
period, $550 million.
And um 10 of that per year will
be coming out of the road, uh,
motor vehicle excise tax, the
rest is gross receipts, so
Madame Chair, representative,
the way this would work.
It's uh I set up my trade port,
so it gets designated in my case
in McKinley County, if the
county does apply.
What we need is wastewater lines
from this trade port into the
sewer.
As an example,
So that would be the kind of
public infrastructure project
that would be applied for if
we've got a trade port
designation in McKinley.
I would suspect Bernal Leo has
similar kinds of needs and down
in southern Donana County, they
have similar needs.
There are other areas that I
think would be natural areas for
trade ports. One is in Carlsbad.
One would be in Luna County.
When you think about where the
major interstates are and where
railroads are because it's about
moving commerce and its
transloading.
You get an FTC if you've got
passenger air service.
Thank you for that, uh, Madam
Chair and Representative, um,
one of the things that I'm a
little sad about is that the
private.
Public private partnership
agreement agreement is for trade
point.
Feed port development only. Is
that, am I reading that
correctly? Yeah, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, that's true, we
put, we put the P3 into the
trade port Act as an incentive
because you'd be in the trade
port you can use other
incentives like LIA and these
other things that are available
through the state.
But uh there'll be other P3
bills coming through, I assure
you that, um, but for this
purpose, we think, you think
about the magnitude of the kinds
of infrastructure that would go
into these trade ports.
And the need for moving it
quickly.
It seems to me that that is a
very good tool.
Because it's very expensive
infrastructure.
Talking about
You know, interstate, uh,
development, uh.
Additional, um.
Latter tracks, you know, things
like that.
Uh, and that's expensive.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. And, and
now I'm just gonna ask a really
blunt question. I read through
here and tried to find it, but
with your amendment.
Um, this doesn't.
This doesn't prevent non-unions.
From bidding these projects. No,
it doesn't, what what does, what
this amendment did, is it
clarified in the bill that says
we're gonna follow all state and
federal laws, that's a standard,
uh standard language in most
bills.
But I was asked to clarify that,
so all we did was just restate
what's already in law in New
Mexico.
Thank you for that. I, I just,
uh, want fairness, so appreciate
that. Thank you, uh, Madam
Chairman. Thank you.
Representative Murphy, did you
have a question?
thank you.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lindstrom, thank you for
bringing the bill. Um, I share
some of uh my leader, um, uh,
Representative Armstrong's
concerns about um the ability
for rural communities to attract
that, but as I've gone through
uh um it looks like there's
nothing that really prevents
that as as as long as you you
meet, um, as many of those um
individual uh criteria as
possible, um, I mean, nothing
here would preclude, as you say,
Carlsbad or even Rawls
or talus or some of the the uh
smaller communities and more
rural communities from
participating in this program if
I'm reading this correctly.
You're correct, Madam Chair,
Representative, if you look on
page 4.
Uh, line 20.
through page 5 line uh 7. Those
are what I call rural density
factors and what we've tried to
do in here is to balance this
program because we've got the
two metropolitan counties or,
you know, doing great and
they're they meet a lot of the
criteria that we needed to make
sure that we had some rural
density in here also and for
poor counties like the one I
come from.
So we actually have an
opportunity to try to apply for
something like this. I would, I
would put Lunna County and some
of the others in the same.
Same boat.
And chair representative Lester,
thank you for that answer and
just from a broad, um, I'm
fairly new at this system from a
broad look at this.
Really what this does is it
provides some procurement
exceptions.
It
It provides for the P3 private
government partnerships that
might not currently be allowed
under existing law.
I would assume.
Um,
Madam Chair, Representative, we
do not have a P3 authorization
law in the state of New Mexico
currently.
That is, we've we've tried many
years a lot of people on this
committee have supported P3s. We
haven't been able to get it
through, but at least inside of
this law we'd be able to use um.
Public-private partnerships.
So it provides for that and your
representativelument provides
for that and the third component
that funds it, and I through the
questions in your presentation,
I understand why you're doing it
the way you're doing it. I'll
just make it one last final
comment is my company in the
Department of Energy have been
in numerous P3 agreements over
the years. They're really great
structures. They were primarily
uh or attacking or addressing um
either technical or um um
research areas and um if they're
done.
structured properly and done
properly, they are a really
great economic tool.
And so I, I, uh, thank you for
bringing this legislation
forward.
I'm thank you Madam Chair, and
we've seen that throughout the
state for energy, I know that in
my part of the my part of the
state, we've been looking at
hydrogen development.
With the utilization of a
retired coal-fired power plant.
I know that the tribe that I
represent also has been looking
at major energy initiatives in
Northwest New Mexico.
Um, thank you. Do we have any
other questions from the
committee?
What is the uh
Will of the committee.
So you pass. Do we have a
second?
And, and, uh, leader.
Uh, I'm sure
It would be a, yeah, there we
go, uh, Madam Chair, I move a do
pass as amended on house bill.
We have several seconds.
already.
That to take the role.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative de la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative L Lente.
Yes.
Representative Mason? Yes.
Representative Matthews? Yes.
Representative Murphy, yes.
Representative Parejon.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair.
And Madam Chair,
Yes.
Madam Chair, the final tally for
the DuPass as amended motion. 9
votes yes, 0 votes.
Thank you. uh, Representative,
you have a due pass, uh, as
amended.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee, um, thank you for
hearing us today and I just
wanted to say, Madam Chair, this
was the bill that I was trying
to get in front of your interim
committee and it wasn't ready.
Uh, when I'd made that, uh,
comment.
the interim, but it's ready now
and I thank you all for your
support.
All righty, we've got.
OK, we've got HB 49.
Representative are we, are we
ready?
OK. Um, and I know we have some
additional um.
People in the room, we've got
the interpreters, do you want to
talk about that a little bit, or
would you just like me to uh
recognize that they are on a.
On the monitors and here in
person.
Madam Chair, I will be
introducing them, um.
So thank you for um hearing us
today, Madam Chair and members
of the committee, um, I'm
sitting.
Is it too
louder.
Louder
Um
Madam Chair, I know I'm from
Espanola originally, but I never
thought I would have a low rider
chair to go with it,
um.
So, uh, Representative Cynthia
Borego District 17, um,
presenting to you House Bill 49,
Madam Chair, and you should also
have um an amendment.
And I, I would ask that we could
uh move the amendment.
Do we have anyone that likes to
move the amendment?
move the amendment for
discussion.
The, um
In opposition of moving the
amendment.
Right.
She, it's been
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I'll just uh discuss the
amendment first, um, in working
with the um legislative staff,
um, they.
Recommended some uh
clarifications and basically
that's what item one is on page
4, line 6, strike person, and we
inserted business and because
this would be, uh, you know, a
business, not a person per se,
and then the second one is on
line 4 on page 4, line 14,
strike and add insert in lieu
thereof, or we had the word and.
So, um, those are the two
clarifications that we have for
the bill.
And um if you accept that, Madam
Chair, I can go on and discuss
the bill for you.
Do we have any um opposition to
that.
All righty. So then, um,
Let's go ahead and move the
amendment.
And um
to adopt the amendment. Here we
go.
Any, OK, so.
And with no opposition, the your
bill's been, we have adopted it.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you members, um, so House Bill
49 is a closed captioning act.
It requires owners and managers
of public accommodations to act.
Before I do that, Madam Chair, I
want to introduce my guests. I'm
sorry.
Um
We have a co-sponsor
representative uh Patricia Royal
Caballero.
And we have Johnny Hooper, who
is the chair of the New Mexico
Commission of Hard of Hearing
and also a representative for
hearing loss association of
America. We also have norm
Nathan Gom, who is the director
of the hearing loss Association
of America.
We have palm parfait, I think
that's.
um, who is with the hearing loss
association. We have Jennifer
Herbold.
Jennifer is sitting in the 2nd
row.
in the back, um, and she is the
superintendent for the New
Mexico school for the deaf. We
also have with us today two
interpreters and the young lady
that's sitting right up front
who's doing our interpretation
and then there was another
second row.
It's one of our interpreters as
well.
Um, so with that, Madam Chair,
I'll go back to the bill and so
house bill 49 is a closed
captioning act. It requires
owners and managers of public
accommodations to activate
closed captioning on all
television receivers, and I
stress the word television, um,
that are turned on and operating
during regular hours with
specific exemptions and the
attorney General is responsible
for the enforcement.
and for establishing a complaint
process, and there are civil
penalties for violations of this
act, Madam Chair, and with that,
um, I would turn to my
witnesses.
Or my co-sponsor.
Thank you to um Madam Chair, may
I proceed?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, thank you to, uh,
Representative Cynthia Borego
for asking me to join her on
this piece of legislation, as
many of you have known and
heard, I am hearing impaired.
And um I wear a hearing devices.
And it's, it's incredibly
important that those of us that
are hearing um challenged
hearing impaired.
Uh
are accommodated.
We have Madam Chair, all of the
rights.
Of
Participating like anyone else
in public locations, public
places, and so it becomes very
imperative for us to be able to.
Participate fully and the only
way that we can participate
fully and that is if we choose
to go into a restaurant, we
choose to go into a, a sports
arena or a sports um location
that we wanna sit and watch.
Uh, we cannot hear without close
captions and so it, it's uh not
a great deal in my opinion, to
ask that these accommodations be
afforded to us.
Oftentimes.
Physical, uh, or other types of.
Disabilities are associated with
physical, something you can see.
Not very often associated with
what you cannot see, and what
you cannot see our individuals
that do have um hearing
challenges and that must be
accommodated. And so many times
from my experience, Madam Chair,
I have had to ask.
Um, actually more times than I
want, uh, for this
accommodation.
And unfortunately there have
been some cooperative
businesses, and there have been
others that feel insulted, uh,
if they have to accommodate me
versus a room full of others,
and so I don't want to have.
Uh, this
Situation uh occur.
To a vast number of our members
of our community young um and
old, it doesn't matter, so I
just wish to express that as
having been my lived experience
and um encourage.
The committee
to please vote in support of
this bill. Thank you.
Uh, good afternoon, I'm sorry,
I'm too loud. Uh, good
afternoon.
Uh, members of the committee,
uh, my name is John Hooper.
hearing loss all my life.
Uh, I used close caption.
I have to
All time, but
In public places, it's, it's
like.
Uh, if, if, uh, top yellow
has mentioned that uh we need
that accommodation, but this is
only applies to TV programming.
Uh, no movies.
Theters or incent.
But if you go to a movie
theater, they supply glasses.
For testing
Or that I think
Just hearing.
The summer
Consumers
The summer
and everybody I think everybody
should have that accommodation
if they need to see something on
the television, it could be uh.
A major crisis.
With oil prices, they like we
had a recent fires.
Floats
Ornadoes
Uh, or in things happen in the
world.
Madam Chair and members, um, I
would just uh mention that um
there are 3 other states in the
nation who have adopted these,
uh, this type of um an act,
Washington, New York, Oregon,
and New Mexico would be number
4, so we would be, uh, one of
the leaders in this type of uh
of uh an act, um, and as Johnny
mentioned, there are important
public
emergency announcements that are
often televised and people can
see them, but oftentimes they
can't hear them. So if there's
ever a a critical life saving
news on the on the um on the
television, uh, people.
And my mom is 96 years old and
she can't hear, so, um, you
know.
She would not know
That there was an important
emergency, uh, news flash.
Um, and Johnny mentioned, which
is really important, is that.
This does not include film. This
is strictly for television,
televised, um.
Uh, facilities.
And if there's more than one
facility, for example, if you're
like in a sports bar.
Um, or a sports restaurant or
something like that, and there's
several televisions, only one is
required to be.
Um
closed caption and um the way
that um.
That the um
Complainant would.
Contact the AG is that they
would complain that AG has
worked with us to agree that
they would probably give them
several opportunities to comply
before they imposed any
penalties. So that is our
presentation. Thank you.
Thank you. Um.
So with that, let's let's um.
Look around the room and see if
anybody is um in opposition of
this bill.
Does anybody want to speak on
behalf of this bill.
You can just keep your comments
to about a minute, that would be
great.
And they're they're getting,
yeah, they're getting a mic.
Yeah
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jim Jackson on behalf
of Disability Rights New Mexico.
We're a legal center for people
with disabilities, and this bill
is all about equal access and
that's what our organization is
all about as well. This is
simply an opportunity for people
who are hearing impaired to get
an equal benefit from whether
it's a sports bar or whatever
else, these are public
accommodations that everybody
gets to go to. It's only fair
that people with a hearing
impairment have the opportunity
to benefit from that, uh,
program. So, um.
We think it's an easy process.
It only applies in situations
where you could do captioning,
so uh we encourage your support.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, my name is Eli
Frescas. I'm an attorney, work
in the field of civil rights and
disability advocacy, I'm
strongly in favor of this bill.
I just want to note a couple of
things. The first one is that
the Americans with Disabilities
Act was recently amended its
rules to include captioning in
websites and.
And apps, uh, although this
doesn't apply to places of
public accommodation just to
supplieses to um
Local government and state
government, it's showing a trend
towards greater access around
the American Disabilities Act,
and I'll also mention that the
city of Albuquerque and the city
of Santa Fe both have analog
bills that are very similar to
this, and it's been very
manageable locally in both those
jurisdictions and it would just
create greater access across our
state and make New Mexico a
leader in accessibility. Thank
you.
My members Committee. My name is
Nathan. I'm a person with a
hearing loss and I'm also the
executive director, as I already
mentioned. I just wanted to give
you a little bit of context real
briefly, uh, in terms of the
hardware TVs have been since
1990 able to provide captioning,
uh over the the years we've had
analog, digital televisions,
everything's been involved and
changed over the years, but the
one thing is remain constant is
that they all have the
capability of providing
captioning as long as they are
over 13.
ages. Now, the issue that a lot
of people have had is that
they're not able to figure out
how to turn on the captions, and
recently.
We're all guilty. Uh, but
recently, uh, the federal
government has also introduced
laws that have made a one-button
solution. So, what we're gonna
see is a relatively simple
process, just push the button,
captions turned on, and we're
good. And as a person with a
hearing loss who's in Washington
DC during 9/11, I can attest to
some of the things that they're
mentioning that knowing what was
going on when I was in
Washington DC was an important
part of my experience, knowing
what was happening, who was, who
was doing what.
why this was going on, whether
it was CNN or Fox News was a
real critical part of my
experience and not having that
information at that time would
have been detrimental to my
ability to travel safely.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
I'm the superintendent of the
New Mexico School for the Deaf,
Doctor Jennifer Herbel.
And we're not just the New
Mexico School for the Deaf, but
we also support deaf and hard of
hearing students throughout the
state.
And this is critical for them,
having access is so important.
Not just from an accessibility
point of view, but from an
educational point of view as
well. I think that's something
that needs to be brought up.
They have research that shows
that captions help kids learn to
read.
And I will use an example. I
have 3 children who are deaf.
One, I adopted.
When she was 7,
And she started watching TV. You
know, she's from another
country, and so she had no
English at the time, no sign
language, so she never really
needed captions, she just
watched the TV and she'd think,
why do I have to have the
captions on there? I don't, I'm
just watching the show. And then
after 2 or 3 years, she started
watching the captions. And then
if the captions weren't there,
she was frantic. Where's the
captions? I need to understand
what's going on. She'd start to
ask me, what does this word
mean? Mom, what does that word
mean? So, really, it was her
access to English. And I'm
really grateful for that access.
My oldest son,
Scored almost perfectly on the
ACT for reading, and I honestly,
I give credit to captions in a
lot of ways. So, it's not just
accessibility, but it is
education as well. I have
hearing family members that
cannot live without captions
because they've gotten so used
to it. So I think it's really a
good thing for the whole state.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
not sure how far away to help
this, um, Ellen Pines
representing the disability
coalition we represent or
advocate for the interests of
people with disabilities of all
kinds and has been mentioned um
earlier here. Not all
disabilities are vis visible,
but that doesn't mean they don't
exist and people with
disabilities that are not
readily seen or readily
apparent, still deserve equal
access.
the same way as all of us do.
This is an important step toward
achieving accessibility for
people who are deaf or hearing
impaired, and, um, as has also
been explained, this is a low or
no cost.
Measure that is really easy and
the idea that we don't have
this, um, this form of
accessibility throughout New
Mexico is um scandalous, and I'm
glad that the co-sponsors have
brought this bill forward. Thank
you.
Thank you. Uh, we'll now go to
Zoom.
Nat Dean.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
can't quite see if it's
Mr. or Madam vice chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Nat and A T D D E A N.
You see me around the around the
house quite a bit. It's a round
building, you can get lost and
still end up in the same place,
but I am a person with an
auditory processing disorder,
which developed in about 35
years into my 41 years of having
a traumatic brain injury, I
highly support the closed
captioning Act, and
all of the needs that go along
with it, captioning sign
language interpreting, anything
that lifts us up and helps us to
be able to participate and
understand. An example is the
captioning that we now have in
committees in the interim, in
the session and how important
that is to engage in the
process. Thank you very much for
bringing this forward to the
community. I am part of the
community that's often
discounted as an APD auditory
processing disorder. Thank you.
Osamba. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Oamba Umi. I'm the
advocacy director for AARP in
New Mexico, and we support this
so strongly because hearing loss
affects more than 30 million
Americans, especially older
adults who may become hard of
hearing as they age. In fact,
some of our, our most valued um
volunteers experience hearing
loss and through them, I'm
constantly reminded of the
challenges they face in.
or the need for public spaces to
accommodate them and others like
them, um, not only are they
sometimes not privy to certain
important information, they also
experience can experience social
isolation, and as a result, they
might be inadvertently excluded
from fully experiencing certain
activities. And so all the New
Mexicans want their communities
to be livable and inclusive
places to age and be part of and
close captioning is just one way
to get our state closer to.
these ideals, so we, uh, urge
you to pass out 49. Thank you.
Colleen Feldeer.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, can
everyone hear me OK? Yes. Yup.
OK. Um, I wanted to introduce
myself. My name is Colleen
Elderward. I am an audiologist,
doctor of audiology here in
Santa Fe and um my support for
house Bill 49 is threefold. One
is as an advocate for my
patients, um, I see on a daily
basis where many of them do.
require the use of hearing
assisted technology, hearing
aid, but they also really rely
in um appreciate the ability to
recaption on the TV, um, second
reason is I myself have a
hearing loss and um I can attest
to being a younger child growing
up with hearing loss, how
important it was for me to
access and develop my own
language by having um the
ability to read.
Captioning during um TV at home
and I'm slowly seeing in certain
areas that we are getting more
captions in public spaces and I
would love for that to continue
that upward trend and then the
third reason is um my partner um
he is actually completely deaf
and so he is completely reliant
on visual communication where
you can read the captioning, um,
and so.
So it, um, that's a very
important thing, not only just
for education for younger, but
also old as we get older, um,
into our middle to older adult
life to have access to um closed
caption. Thank you very much for
your um ears. I appreciate it.
Have a good day.
This may be a duplicate, but
Colleen F.
Yes, that was, yes, that was me,
um.
OK, thank you.
Alrighty. Thank you. So let's go
on to the committee first on the
list is Representative Matthews.
Thank you Madam Chair um first
of all, I.
There's so much I love about
this bill and I absolutely
support the intent and the need
for close captioning.
I'm concerned somewhat about the
enforcement through the attorney
General's office.
And, and I would
And, and I say that as somebody
who's been an assistant attorney
general and a deputy attorney
General.
And
It's been a while ago, but
nevertheless, um,
The Attorney General's office
and I'm not trying to be.
Incorrect in any way, but uh it
this is.
It seems to me that this is a
better kind of a law where the
enforcement starts with a, for
example, disability rights.
One of the state's disability
rights organizations.
And, and or, for example, the
alcohol and, and saloon people.
Um, and that we were that first
layer of enforcement.
That that be at a different
level, and then if there's not.
If you don't get the results you
want from them.
Um, then report to the Attorney
General's office.
And make it a higher penalty.
So that this will have teeth.
And we'll have a process by
which you can actually get your
complaints answered. It's hard
to see. I see here that the
Attorney General says we would
have to hire 2 FTEs, one
coordinator and one assistant.
It's it's hard to imagine that
the Attorney general's office,
if they get a complaint that's
somebody in TC is not.
You know, captioning their TV or
something that you're gonna get
an assistant attorney general or
an investigator to go out,
whereas you could use local.
People
Uh, local officials to.
Have more impact and get the
problems corrected or quickly
with the AG is the ultimate
authority if there's continual
violation.
That would be my suggestion.
Man, would you like to respond?
Yes, I would, thank you and
thank you, uh, Representative
Matthews, um, just FYI this bill
came before all of us, um, 2
years ago and it reached the
Senate floor.
Um, it didn't go anywhere
because we ran out of time, and
we were working with the
Attorney General's office then
and have continued to work with
them up until this point.
Um, the civil.
Process that's involved.
After somebody has not complied
over time, uh, through the
attorney general's office does
not exclude.
The idea of it going to a
disability, uh, through a
disability complaint process.
So that would be my response to
that.
Um, is that we did work with
their attorneys.
Ready.
Um
Representative Anya Norri.
Thank you very much, I'm chair
still perfect.
Um
I want to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill. It's really
important um I.
I'm a big believer in making the
world, you know, more accessible
for everyone living in it. I
just had like two really quick
clarifying questions. So,
As outlined on page 2, a movie
theater as Johnny mentioned, um,
would be exempt, but there would
be hopefully glasses available
to provide close captioning to
those who wanted them, but then
an establishment later on then
screening a movie on a
television screen would be
subject to the bill. Is that
correct?
Could you repeat that? Um, so if
a, if a movie theater is
screening a film.
That movie theater is exempt
from requiring closed captions,
but then if a business or an
establishment.
Like if a movie was playing in a
bar, they would have to be
subject to the bill, OK,
um
I already pretty sure I know the
answer to this, but then all
streaming services and all the
programs on the streaming
platforms would be considered
television programs under this.
There are um regulations from
the FCC that basically define
what a TV network is, and that
is what we are, that is the
intent of this bill. It is not
for film. It is not for um uh
like if you go into a giant
movie theater and there's a big
screen that is not the intent.
Now, if a movie theater has
several TVs in an area where
they may have billiards, um, at
least one.
of those TVs should be um.
closed caption.
Thank you very much and, and
it's clear in the regulations,
Madam Chair, and, and
representative Anna Nonu that
um.
The FCC is very clear about what
a TV network is and that is also
defined.
In the bill itself.
page.
I think it's 3. Let me just
double check.
Um
Yes, uh, on page 3 under E and F
television program and
television receiver. It's very
clear as to what that what our
incentives. Thank you. Thank
you.
Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for your presentation.
I have
Is it defined in the bill
anywhere that every television,
say, a sports bar.
Does every television have to be
on closed caption?
And is that defined in the bill
somewhere?
Um, Madam Chair, and, and, uh,
representative chair um
Armstrong, leader Armstrong, I
think it is, um.
And I'm still getting all the,
the definitions right there, but
it's defined in the bill if.
tell of it if there's several
televisions and they all are
streaming the same program, and
at least one of them has to be
closed caption.
OK, thank you for that. I, I
appreciate that, uh, because
sometimes I had to turn my
clothes captioning off last
night because I couldn't see
what was happening.
On the show, so I was, I was
curious about that, so I, I
appreciate that. Uh, the other
thing is where if if there are
fines imposed.
Who receives the the fine, the
money who receives the money,
and where does it go and what's
it used?
Um,
Madam Chair and uh Leader
Armstrong, the fines would go
into the general fund.
Uh, via the Attorney general's
office.
OK, thank you for that. And is
there an appeal process?
Um,
Madam Chair and um.
And Leader Armstrong, that would
be part of the AG's
responsibility, um, and it is
defined in the bill that the AG
would have to set up that
process. OK, thank you, uh,
Madam Chair and thank you,
Representative. I.
Oh, what about um?
What's the definition? Is there
a definition in the bill of a
movie theater, and I know
they're exempt, but I know, um,
Madam Chair and Representative
sometimes there's pop up.
Outdoor
Uh
Movie theaters and are those
held to the same standard with
the closed captioning.
I know there's been some, uh,
Madam Chair and like Albuquerque
at the Blue Fiesta Park.
Um
Madam Chair and uh Leader
Armstrong, um, specifically
theater is not called out in
this bill.
It is, there is a mention of it
on on um page 2,
but it's just not defined.
It is actually defined as part
of the FCC regulations.
So Madam Chair Representative,
so what I'm understanding is
that they would be held to the
same standard, because they're
not an actual theater.
It's a pop up, drive in.
Theater, would they be held to
the same standard?
To have the close captioning.
Madam Chair and Leader
Armstrong, I.
I would think that um.
If it's a film, if it's related
to a film and not a television
network.
Then it would
It would be exempt.
That would be my, my
interpretation, but.
I'm not an attorney.
Madam Chair and, and
representative, sometimes that's
the problem we set these up and
then we don't have definitions
and and it's not clear, and when
we leave gray area.
It's uh, it can get muddy and so
uh I'm just concerned that, you
know, um.
I let the FFA.
Do a pop-up film in my warehouse
for the kids to have something
to do in rural New Mexico and I,
I don't want to get fined
because they didn't have close
captions. So I, I just need it
to be very clear so that people
know what is expected.
And the other part of it is.
Uh, I'm a little concerned about
the policing.
Of it as well.
I
We, we pass a lot of legislation
where we require policing, but
nobody's really polices.
So
Thank you Madam Chair and and uh
Leader Armstrong, I'd love to
work with you before it goes to
the next committee to possibly
define that further.
Thank you. Um,
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Pajon.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. My
questions have been answered and
asked. Thank you.
Any other questions?
Uh, Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representatives for
bringing this forward just a
couple of questions that I
And our problematic to me. One
of the speakers.
But I'm sure said that uh.
FDA rules didn't but in my
Republican and analyst report.
States, the federal ADA already
regulates closed captioning to
be activated on televisions in
public areas.
So my question is, why do we
pass a law?
That is already alone.
The federal law.
Madam Chara and uh
Representative Mason, um, I'm
sorry, I, I, um.
Testified before you before, and
I appreciate your question. Um,
I would tell you that there is
this is law in Albuquerque and
Santa Fe and, and I know because
I'm the person who passed this
in Albuquerque. This is law
already and so these are more
detailed laws than what the
federal law.
Regulates, and that would be the
FCC sir.
Madam Chair, representative.
Fine states, the federal.
ADA
Already requires this close
caption.
So, you know what their law is?
If I may, Madam Chair, I'll
respond.
Excuse me, trying not to.
To
get too close. I tend to speak
loud because of the
Hearing impairments all right.
Um
So I'm gonna respond this way.
We have
ADA is a federal compliance, as
you mentioned.
However
We're addressing the businesses.
Um, at the, at the state level,
and I'm gonna give you an
example.
Um, when we.
Had the incident.
That
Damaged my knee, for example.
ADA compliance.
Was in place.
However
It was not clearly defined at
the state level.
And
The same thing has occurred with
other incidences at the um local
level, which is why local
ordinances.
Which is what you
Instituted
At the city level
And state we have.
The obligation.
local
Governments as well as state
governments to ensure
That we offer accommodation
accessibility and protections.
In addition to what may already
exist as the umbrella of the.
Federal law and federal
protections without those, we
don't have the ability within
those jurisdictions to do what
this bill is doing, and that is
affording a um.
the ability to complain, um, and
for their be thereby be
compliance thereafter.
And it's very minimal in the
sense that we just described in
terms of what would be taking
place, so it's, it's imperative
on us to ensure that our
citizenry, whether they reside
in those local jurisdictions or
in the state are further
protected and afforded
accessibility and accommodation.
Thank you, Representative, Madam
Chair, I understand all that,
but my only problem with it is
without being able.
Nobody here can define what the
federal
When you get into the terms of
Uh, regulation and fines and
stuff.
You know
I know I see several times we
passed a law that has a lesser
penalty than the federal law
that's already in fact so who
takes who, who is in charge?
You just the not
In accessing the information is
a problem.
But uh we'll move on anyway. I
mean we appreciate this bill. We
want everybody to be.
It's, I just hate doubling up on
every law that there is in the
country.
One thing, another problem I
had, and it's already been
mentioned, is
Regulation of this thing.
This is gonna affect hims of
thousands.
businesses
Cross the.
And, and like someone mentioned.
They
DA's office is not gonna be
able.
To
Actually enforce a law.
It uh
It'll only be through.
If I get
Somebody turns me and, you know,
it's a
It's, it's gonna be
Basically on them and.
Uh
This the problems of lack of
definitions.
On
How many times do you get a
OK
Reprimand before they actually
find.
Yeah I mean there's just lots of
things that are not.
Specifically defined in the bill
that I would.
I'm a
Structure person. I like to see
everything.
written out so I know.
Exactly, if I do this, I don't
want to know exactly what's
gonna happen to me and if I
But right, I want to know what's
gonna happen, you know, the
benefits that I will.
And the benefits will be.
Uh
You know, uh, we want everybody
to have access, you know, it uh
But if it's already a law.
Another law won't make more
people abide by.
But anyway, I thank you for your
bill. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Madam Representative. That's it.
Thank you. Representative
Murphy.
Madam Chair, thank you. Um thank
you all for coming forward, um,
as you've heard in a few of
these committee meetings, many
of these subjects I've known
very little about. I do know
something about this particular
subject.
My uh youngest daughter uh is
hearing impaired. She's got
severe loss in her left ear and
moderate in her right ear.
Um, she is, uh, does also wear a
hearing devices.
Um, at the uh way of background
at um age of 18, she was um
found to be failure to thrive.
Um, we were told that she would
never walk or talk.
She now lives independently with
her husband in Pagosa Springs
and makes do very well with her,
her hearing devices.
So this is a subject that's
close to my heart, but I also
share many of the concerns that
have been expressed here on on
both sides of the aisle. And so
I guess my, my first one is, is
that, um, because of her
experience, I went through the
IEP process and somewhat
familiar, certainly not an
expert, but somewhat familiar of
the rights under the ADA.
And broadly the ADA, as I
understand it, will always
require reasonable
accommodation.
Always
Um, so, as it has been suggested
that you know our do we really
need a new law for this.
I also note in some of the
material here that I've read
that um you do have this
protection in Albuquerque and
Santa Fe because of the
localities have decided that
that's what they want to do.
And I guess I would suggest that
if there's not protections under
the ADA.
Given the size of the two areas
that you already have local
ordinances aren't many of the
businesses in the state already
covered by this.
Madam Chair and um
representative Murphy, um, thank
you for your question.
Um, I think that.
You know, yes, Santa Fe and
Albuquerque are the biggest
cities in the state. There was a
reason for us doing this in
Albuquerque, and that was to
ensure that businesses would
provide public accommodation and
that they were responsible
business owners, um.
There are many businesses
throughout the state that are in
rural areas that, you know,
sports bars, Applebee's, um,
chilis, those sorts of places
that people frequent.
And there are, you know, in in
those smaller communities and I
happen to have grown up in one
of those smaller communities,
um.
You know
I think the important thing is
that if there were an emergency.
And somebody who is hearing
impaired could not hear what is
happening.
They would be able to read it.
And I think those are the key
things is that.
In our instances in our nation
right now and what's happening
across our country, there are
emergency situations, and we're
seeing it more and more, and I
think that
The detail
As they say, the devil is in the
detail, um.
It's imperative upon us as
legislators and leaders to
ensure that everyone is um
provided for, and I think that's
the reason that I, I decided to
bring this bill forward in
Albuquerque, and that's why I
decided that it needed to be
enforced at the state level.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Um,
I absolutely agree with that.
Those accommodations do need to
be made and um I don't um oppose
the goal of the bill, uh, but I
do share a couple of, I share
the law enforcement in, in some
of the details that represented
Mason went into and also
represented Armstrong. I also
have one other concern, and that
is we are putting an additional
burden and, and folks may say
it's only a small one, but it is
a part of the cumulative burden
that we're putting on our small
businesses.
We have an excessive regulatory
structure in the state compared
to the adjoining states. We have
high taxes.
And well somebody may say this
is that well it's just a small
accommodation representative
Murphy. The fact is it's, it's
at some point these become
cumulative, right? And they
become very, very difficult,
especially if not addressed
through a enforcement mechanism
that is reasonable, appealable,
um, you know, I, I mean, if a
small business is forced to hire
an attorney to go represent them
in front of the AG's office or
whatever, that's a real cost to
that small.
So if you could, if some of
those concerns could be
addressed, um, I would be more
inclined to support this, but I
welcome, I, I thank you all for
bringing this. I have of all of
those affected, including my
daughter and I think that if we
work on this, we can get it
right. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Um.
So we don't have anybody else on
the list, but I just have a
couple of comments. Um, I think
it's really important that we
have clear uh laws for
businesses to understand and
follow.
Um, and so I would, I, I look to
see where this bill goes next if
we were to pass it out of here
and it goes to the judiciary.
Um, and I, I would recommend,
um, if it does get out of this
committee that um some of your
definitions may be tightened up
a little bit and also, um, you
know, I think, uh,
representative uh Matthews
really did talk about it, uh,
and pointed out, um, some of the
problems with the, what I would
consider an unfunded mandate by
the AG, um, you know, you talked
about working with the AG, um,
but it seems like, uh, or having
discussions with.
AG, but I would sure like to see
um how they would respond to
that and um if they do need a
Some, if they need funding to be
able to enforce that because
then once again, you know, we,
we don't want to have an
unfunded mandate, um, all that
being said, um, I'm very much in
favor of what your intent of the
bill is and um would hope to see
that the language and the uh
follows through on, on the
recommendations happen before
you get to judiciary should this
pass. So at this point, uh,
what's the will of this
committee.
I'm Reba Dupes.
We have a second.
And it's gonna be as amended
represented. I'm, I'm sorry, um,
I do pass as amended, as
amended.
Yes, I'm sorry. OK. And do we
have a second?
We do have a second. OK. If I
can get down, Patrick to call
the roll, please.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative de la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative L Lente.
Yes.
I can explain my vote as well,
please.
Representative Mason.
No
Representative Matthews.
Uh, yes.
Representative Murphy? No.
Representative Parajon.
Yes, I'd like to explain my
vote. Representative Serato.
Yes, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes, and I'll let everybody else
explain.
Madam Chair,
Yes. And I'm sure the final
tally is 6 votes, yes, uh, 2
votes no.
Representative to explain his
vote. I don't want my vote
anymore.
I'm kidding. No, it.
Beautiful intent, wonderful,
wonderful purpose. I I I would
have hoped that maybe we have
rolled the bill, um, so that you
had the time to really work out
the kinks before it gets out of
this committee and goes to the
judiciary. I'm just afraid
they're gonna tear you guys up.
Well, when you get there.
So if you don't, if you don't
Do a better job in drafting
this, then it's gonna fail.
Unfortunately, I think so, but
more power to you. I think the,
the, the purpose is wonderful.
Thank you.
Representative Palehon to
explain her vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
also don't want to explain my
phone. No, I'm kidding.
following whatever Lin did that,
um, Madam Chair, I, I really
like this boat. I'm one of those
people that needs um close
captions when I watch anything,
movies, TV, etc. um, and I my
real hesitancy was in the
enforcement piece and um exactly
what represented Matthews, um,
was talking about and what we've
talked about also in some of
our.
bills that we're looking at is
uh the AG, you know, can't
enforce everything and so I'd
really encourage you to think
creatively about how it might
otherwise be enforced, um, or to
even consider a tiered system of
enforcement. I'm, I'm sure a lot
of businesses, if this did go
into law, would not, would
possibly not know that it is the
current law as many businesses
don't, um, so I, I would
recommend also looking at that
piece.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Sarada, to explain her vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you presenters. Uh, I really
appreciate the bill and its
intent. Uh, just, uh, again, I
will actually uh uh stand with
the chairwoman on on the idea
that just again, those
definitions and clarifying that
we'll make it um much easier to
vote for on the floor as we look
at this as an economic
development committee. It's a
different perspective we look at
it in the whole. So cleaning up
those definitions will make
overall really helpful. Thank
you so much.
So, um, Representative, you, you
have a 62, um,
The bill, as amended, did go
through, but I think you will
have trouble in the next
committee and um on the floor,
so I would really recommend that
you uh that you take care of
the, the loose ends at this
point.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh.
Thank you to the members and uh
the messages are loud and clear,
and we will work on. Thank you,
um, and
Before we conclude, um, I know
that we don't have several of
our Republican, um, uh.
counterparts here, but I did
wanna say uh thank you to you
all. Uh, we had, um, I guess it
can this bill came in a little
bit after the a lot of time we
asked for the 24 hours, but
since a lot of it was
wordsmithing, the, the
amendments were wordsmithing, I
went ahead and let it go through
and asked, um.
Asked the Josh Hernandez, our
ranking member, uh, if you all
would be OK with that. Um, um, I
do want to make sure that we
stress that any kind of
amendments we do put in within a
24 hour notice, uh, to give
especially if it's a um a
substantive change, we need time
for our analysts to be able to
look at what the changes mean
and how it impacts the bill, um,
in this particular case, it was
literally two words, so I
thought it was OK, but thank you
so much for.
Uh, working with us to do that
and with that, uh, we will see
you Friday, um, for, for
committee.
