Here and Madam Chair.
You have a quorum.
OK, thank you. We will go ahead
and begin with HB 220.
Presenters are ready.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee, um.
Representative Tara Lujan and
representing House Bill.
220 relating to property.
Um, insuring prior mitigation by
allowing ignition resistant
construction in property
interests, and limiting
conditions that pose fire
hazards, allowing ignition
resistant construction and
homeowner association bylaws and
limiting conditions that pose
fire hazards.
And I'm sure simply, simply put,
this would allow New Mexico
could um.
Constituents to property to
properly mitigate their property
while living in an HOA.
Um, I want to keep this kind of
very simple and and introduce.
My, uh
My expert witnesses and one of
them is online and I'd like him
to go first after his
introduction, so today.
We have Melissa Robert
Robertson. She's the property
and casualty, um.
Cheap, um, bureau for OSI, we
have Elizabeth Johnson, who is
the associate counsel at OSI and
online is Michael Newman. He's
the general counsel for IBHS in
the Institute of Business and
Home, uh, and safety, home and
safety.
And with that, thank you very
much, I would um ask that
Michael Newman online, um,
introduced himself again and and
uh.
Give his position for us. Thank
you.
Good afternoon to the committee.
Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you.
Thank you very much, uh,
my name is Michael Newman. I'm
the general counsel and Home
Safety IBS is a 501c3 nonprofit
research communications
Institute. We're able to
recreate severe weather
including wind, rain, hail, and
wildfire, and conduct full scale
testing of residential and
commercial structures that
allows us to identify the
vulnerabilities and the
mitigation actions that will
make our homes more survivable.
like wildfires and more.
Um, I just want to keep my
remarks very brief.
When it comes to wildfire, what
concerns us the most is
conflagration, which we define
as uncontrollable building to
building fire. It's what we saw
in Los Angeles earlier this
year. It's what you have what
you have experienced in New
Mexico several times in the last
few years. So when wildfire
reaches into a community or
neighborhood and we just see one
home after another burning.
The good news is the science has
really caught up to the wildfire
and we now understand ways to
drive down the risk of ignitions
for the property level and at
the community scale because
wildfire unlike almost any other
natural peril, you really do
need to reduce risk to
individual homes and a whole
neighborhoods in the context of
wildfire, we all are our
brother's keeper.
Now HOAs are a really sit at a
really important space when we
think about wildfire risk at the
neighborhood scale because they
set the rules for what
homeowners can and cannot do
within that HOA so they can be a
force for incredible good for
risk reducing action or they can
have rules that set the entire
neighborhood back and put her at
risk.
In the New Mexico context we see
HOAs that have requirements
about coyote coyote fences
or um privacy defenses. Now
those are often made out of
wood, which means they are
combustible and when it comes to
reducing conflagration, what we
know is that two things are
incredibly important, more than
2, but I want to highlight now.
One is connected to fuel that is
pathways of combustible material
that can be vegetation that can
be manmade like.
that create pathways for them to
fuel to travel between
properties from home to home.
And defensible space. It's
incredibly important that we
remove all combustible material
again, anything that can burn,
including fences from the 5 ft
around homes.
So HB 220 is a sensible approach
to ensure that HOAs are part of
the solution and not part of the
problem that they can't require
things that will put the homes
in those HOAs at risk.
I appreciate your time. I'm
happy to take any questions you
have about our science, um, but
I, uh, I appreciate again the
time to speak with you today.
Thank you, madam chair now.
Melissa, I'd like to speak.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
representatives.
This bill really focuses, we
know right now that there are
wildfire challenges in New
Mexico, which are leading to
insurance challenges.
And that rolls down that's that
leads into um challenges
obtaining a mortgage, as well as
even to sell a home.
Um, I have been working with
some of the largest HOAs in the
state, and that is their
concern. Some of these HOAs,
these homes.
Or essentially their retirement
plan.
And they cannot sell these homes
right now. Buyers cannot get
insurance, they cannot get a
mortgage.
And so what has happened and
what we're seeing is in these
HOAs I'm gonna read a couple of
rules that I've pulled from
different HOAs across the state
and all of these are actually in
fire prone areas.
And I think it will give a sense
of what Michael Newman was just
talking about.
Um, the first one all disturbed
areas are to be revegetated with
the native seed mix and native
trees and shrubs all planted to
match the same density of
vegetation as surrounding
untouched land.
We are now requiring that
people.
Re-vegetate their land against
their home.
Again
Uh, posing a huge fire risk.
Another one is approved list of
materials for fences and walls.
Coyote fences and Latias.
Cedar and pine slats.
And on that same HOA off fence
and wall gates shall be
constructed of wood.
The last one again in New Mexico
has a very diverse.
Layout, we have high mountains
and we also have grasslands.
Grasslands and.
Grass fires traveled just as
fast if not faster.
And this one, drought resistant
evergreen trees and other
similar types of plantings.
Or an approved screening method
when sufficiently dense or used
in conjunction in conjunction
with existing structures on the
property.
So these HOAs are.
Essentially setting up their
community as an extremely high
wildfire risk, not only to the
homes in the HOAs.
However, extending past their
individual HOAs and now in two.
Thank you.
Um,
Madam Chair, we know the high
risk that we have here in our
state for fires as we've just
gone through some of the worst
fires, um, on record in our
history. Um, these are as
mentioned, this is how one of
the the pieces of the puzzle to
mitigate how we can help um.
Control when um we have these
type we have um.
Fires
And
I would just say
One of the reasons why I brought
this forward was because I was
part of the LFC subcommittee,
participated in the LFC
subcommittee we're talking about
fire mitigation and fire and
fires that were um.
There are, they were, I think at
the time still or just put out
or just starting in Riodoso this
past year.
Um
But in, in that reference we
heard from OSI at LFC numerous
times during the interim, and
this is one of the things that
that kept coming up, and so this
is one of the things I said. Let
me see how we can address this
um.
In conjunction, well, you'll
you'll be hearing other bills,
we'll be hearing other bills
that are really looking at the
emergency um.
efforts that we need to put
forward when we are faced with
these um.
These fires in our state, so
with that, I think we will stand
for questions right now from
from the.
The committee
When
Thank you. Thank you for your
presentation today. Um, I, uh,
apologize that I was late today,
had another meeting, so I, but
I, I did look over your bill and
um I wanna.
And, um, so I want to make sure
that we have time to to get
ready for public comment. Um, do
we have anybody here in favor of
the bill?
In favor. Yeah.
So if you'd like to speak on the
bill, if we could get you to
line up.
And we can get one of the
attendants to hold on to the mic
and we will.
Do, uh, one minute, uh, please
say your name, who you are, if
you're with somebody and um how
do you feel about the bill?
Hi there, I'm Steve Robinson. I,
uh, about 5 years ago, about a
lot at Monte Sereno, a
development on the north side of
uh the city, and one of the
attractions was that the
homeowners association had
Firewise and also the design
guidelines included positive
information about Firewise and
so I was attracted to
Monteerreno. There are also some
other guidelines about screening
and tree preservation, but I was
convinced that we were all
adults and we could come to a
compromise on those two issues.
That was 5 years ago, I'm still
working.
working on it. I have not gotten
permission. I've been very, very
careful.
Admitted things I studied with
the insurance bureau that you
just heard from, I studied with
the fire department. I studied
firewise. I still have not
gotten permission from the HOA,
but I do have a lot of nasty,
threatening letters. I support
this bill. Thank you.
Next
Yeah, if you like to form a line
that way it'll it'll move faster
for anybody that wants to speak.
Um, my name is Jim Jenkins. I'm
also with Monte Sereno. We're a
Firewise community, one of 3 in
Santa Fe and the organization
Firewise is a is a US wide
organization whose charter is to
have communities work together
to reduce the likelihood of
wildfire losses. Um, we've taken
our organization or our HOA over
the last 10 years and we've gone
from 0 to where we're spending
about 55,000 a year by
homeowners on Group HOA centric
um fire reduction activities.
With that, one of the challenges
of an HOA is, um, you'd think
that HOAs could make their own
sort of mutual agreement on
rules, but our HOA is still
developer controlled, and the
developers in selling lots want
everything to look nice, but
they're less concerned about
fire losses, and so we've sort
of thought.
If you will, you know, the, um,
HOA mandate of planting trees
right up against the houses that
make them that screening makes
the houses less um
Intrusive to the to the wildfire
area, but it makes them much
more fire centric, so we're
working really hard. We're
trying to get the word out and
we highly support this bill, and
we hope you guys do as well.
Thank you.
Yeah. Anybody else?
In the audience.
We do have somebody on Zoom.
Carol Walker.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, I
assume you can hear me OK?
Yes.
Thank you. Uh, I'm Carol Walker.
I'm the executive director of
the Rocky Mountain Insurance
Association for Regional Trade
Association representing
property and casualty insurers
in New Mexico, Colorado, Utah,
and Wyoming. They make up 85% of
the homeowner's insurance market
in New Mexico. Thank you so much
to Representative Lujan for
bringing this important safety
wildfire mitigation bill and
also thank you to the OSI New
Mexico Forestry Division, Mexico
Fire Marshal for their
partnership on helping
homeowners.
protect their homes. Our
association is standing in
support of House Bill 220, which
prohibits HOAs from requiring
property owners to use non-fire
resistant building materials to
put their homes at greater risk
from wildfire and can impact
their insurance. This concept
originated from a group of
homeowners who lost their homes
in Colorado's devastating
martial fire who were being
forced by their HOA to rebuild a
community with cedar fences that
contributed to the home to home.
ition spread of the fire that
burned more than 1000 homes and
working with the OSI on the
Riodoso fire recovery. We
believe New Mexico residents
will also benefit greatly from
this law. HOAs can play a
pivotal role in these reduce
their wildfire risk and make
properties more.
All righty. Um, now is there
anybody opposed to this bill?
We have anybody on Zoom?
All righty.
All right, let's go to the
committee. Any questions?
Representative Matthews.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you representative and
presenters, um.
I met with the state forester
this summer.
And we talked about
Fire hazards and we talked about
building constructions and
landscaping and so forth that
could seriously reduce the.
Seriousness of
The fires and so um
I thought I, I
I mean, this is important in
terms of where we are in the
world right now and the heat and
so forth that's happening.
But I do have a couple questions
about sort of the.
How this bill would actually
function.
Um, and so,
My first question or my first
comment is.
Um, HOA.
I
Is, is
Obviously a homeowners.
Association.
Um
What if you can't reach
Agreement. What if somebody
refuses to do this.
Um
Do you have any particular view
as to
Uh, how this would actually be
enforced, particularly if you
had some people who couldn't,
for example, afford.
To make changes in the
landscaping and so forth.
Madam Charon representative
Matthews. Thank you for that
question, and I think it's
really important to understand
because I think we forgot the
two main bullet points of what
our bill does and hopefully once
I explain those to you, to you
and to the rest of the
committee, it'll be abundantly
clear, so the purpose of this
bill is to prohibit homeowners
associations from enacting
covenants that would require you
to do something that is not fire
safe or to prohibit them from
enacting.
that would not allow you to do
something you want to do, that's
fire safe.
So
Currently as it stands, it's
more of a contract issue with
your particular HOA and there is
no law governing.
This type of thing, so we feel
it's critical to put this in
statute.
Um
Madam chair and thank you for
that answer, but I.
But it does seem to require.
Um
We already have HOAs that have
provisions in them that are not.
Conducive to fire.
that encourage.
Uh, landscaping or whatever that
it would be a a problem in terms
of fire, correct? What I'm
wondering is, are you?
This law would make those
provisions illegal. Am I
understanding that correctly?
This law would be.
Prospective, meaning that any
provisions that exist that
conflict with the law after it's
passed would no longer be in
compliance with statute, but let
me be abundantly clear, it does
not retroactive.
Ah man I'm sure, um.
Presenters
I, I, I still have the question
though, what if
You have provisions in there.
That
Are conducive to fire.
Um, the law goes into effect.
You're saying it's not going to
be retroactive, but.
Is there an expectation that the
homeowners will their
agriculture or their not their
agriculture, but their
landscaping.
Madam Chair, yes, we would hope
that they would become um.
Better actors and take those
initiatives upon themselves, and
that's why we believe this this
law is necessary
in order for us to move forward
in the right direction so that
then they can, um, they can have
a provision and those that live
in the HOAs can have a, have
that provision to help them.
When they are addressing their
age way so that they don't have
to have the, so that.
Maybe they can um revisit their
their rules and regulations so
that then they would be.
And my expert witness would like
to ask.
Madame Chair and representative,
I actually have and as we as.
Uh, thank you and Madam Chair,
uh, so are there?
places where you can find
certified rules for these
things? Is there a body of?
This is, this is what you should
be doing somewhere that's
certified by some appropriate
organization.
Yes, madam chair and
Representative Matthews, I would
point you to the definition of
ignition resistant construction,
which relies heavily on the
standards promulgated by the
IBHS.
Which is the foremost authority
on these types of issues.
Thank you Madam Chair and I just
have a couple more questions.
One is, if somebody lives in an
HOA.
And doesn't
Follow and doesn't implement
changes after this goes into
effect, and so forth.
And, and, uh, there is a fire.
Oh
And perhaps it's, it's generated
from their property, would they
have additional liability.
To the other homeowners.
Or
Um
The destruction that that they
may suffer.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Matthews, um,
that's an interesting question.
I think that that's outside the
scope of this bill, I will say
determinations of liability are
gonna be specific to the fact
finder in the court that they're
in, so it is possible that that
could be considered, it's also
possible it might not be
considered.
And I'm sure and.
Presenters representative Lujan,
last question.
Wouldn't it be better to do this
through building codes than
through HOAs.
I'm gonna, I'm gonna lean on my
expert witness, but I hear where
you're coming from, Madam Chair,
um, Representative, um.
Just an interesting, we'll have
an offline conversation about
building codes, but I'll let
Melissa answer that now.
Madam Chan representative, we uh
started a coalition actually in
January and it uh construction
industries, so we. Thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Uh, Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation.
Uh, thank you uh for clarifying.
Oh, the the those two bullet
points. So let me just make sure
I get this straight.
So existing HOAs.
Don't have to go back and
The people that live in those
HOAs that don't have the
firewise. They don't have to go
back and change things.
Moving forward.
It is implementing where it's
more firewise, correct. And I'm
sure that is correct. OK, just
making sure because I kind of
heard a little bit of different
opinion there. I just want to
make sure, you know, people are
choosing Madam Chair, to live in
an HOA.
And pay that for, you know,
certain things where they move
into a.
And so I have had more
complaints.
About HOAs,
there's an HOA in Dale, New
Mexico.
Yes.
And so my biggest question is,
Moving forward,
What is the
What
What, um,
Authority
Does an HOA have?
If the
Homeowner doesn't comply.
Madame Chen representative.
Within the HOA, the covenants
that I have been reading into
there are certain fines and
regulations within that that the
HOA or that the covenants would
address.
Um
Also on that note, we have to
the HOA are still individual
homes.
And these people want to keep
insurance.
So there's, I think there's 2 in
protect their largest
investment.
And so they want to keep that
insured and then again it moves
to the community level at the
age.
Mm
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm, I'm
just a little bit concerned
because.
I mean, I understand where
you're coming from. I have had
more complaints about not being
able to get insurance.
Then I have about
An HOA
And so my question is.
Do you think that it would be.
Um
That homes would be more
insurable from the insurance.
people's standpoint, even if
There's a caveat here.
The HOA is in the middle.
Of a national forest.
In Dadtle, New Mexico.
Sorry, Madam Chan
representative.
Yes, we are starting to see
companies file.
At a plot, so even though this
bill is focusing on HOA. We are
running, we're getting ready to
run a very large education
program across the state on
individual homes.
Um, including in that Mnert is
actually running.
Um, an additional education to
where we're gonna follow Utah
where 80% of their fires were
human.
And so we are really going to be
focusing on the IBHS standards
that is what industry is
accepting and that way we step
outside the HOA said.
And we have, I believe, 2
companies now that have.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
personally would not like you to
go through the building codes.
Because all that's going to do
is drive up construction costs
and.
Make winners and lose. But thank
you, Miss Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Lou Hong for
bringing this forward.
indictment to start with, we all
should realize that something
has to be done.
So, from the insurance
standpoint on the.
properties, especially those in
In the forest land more so than
anyone else.
But
The, uh
And I believe this is good that
the homeowners association.
Requirements in some it sure
make pretty neighborhoods, but
uh.
You know, only thing is, could
we somehow include in this that
requires.
Existing
HOAs.
The Fall of the standards.
You said this was not
retroactive.
It uh should it.
Madam Chair and Representative
Mason, first of all, it can't be
retroactive because we have a
constitutional provision
prohibiting that.
However
In a weird way because the
statute will be enacted, people
will have to comply with it, so
clothes that are not up to date.
are going to be in violation of
the statute should it pass.
Thank you, Rickson, Madam Chair,
uh,
I have one set up, I support the
concept of this bill.
I have uh one point that, uh.
That's thick for me,
representative.
I
The
IBHS big deal.
instead of
Madam Chair, um, they are
providing guidelines, but they
are not the authority in setting
the rules, um, and I'll add.
The legal terms to them. Yeah,
madam chair and Representative
Mason essentially you actually,
if you pass this statute and
you've read the bills it's
written, seeing how we define
the IBHS standards, technically
it does have your seal of
approval through the
legislature, so yeah.
Oh. Yes, sir, sorry.
Thank you.
Madam Chair representatives, so.
Can you point to me in the bill
where it states that this
I can look these rules and
regulations.
I guess I skipped over that.
Yes, madam chair and
Representative Mason, um, it's
gonna be on page 2 lines 11
through 14, the definition of
exist ignition resistant
construction.
And, uh, that and that would
meet all the requirements
established by the insurance
institute.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
but I read that part.
But I still don't see a line
item.
You know, you must do this, you
must do this, you must do that.
I guess that's what
I like
I like to see black and white.
If I build a house, I have to.
Ruf has to be a certain.
Construction type, the walls,
the fence.
I, I like it written out, so.
Oh, gray area.
Madam Chair and Representative
Mason, I would be happy to email
you the IBHS standards, which
are several 100 pages long for
your review.
I mean, I don't know that, thank
you.
But
Could that be stated in the bill
is.
the rules and regulations number
the.
In the bill, so
People that are smarter than me
can look them up.
And builders will know.
And say, well, I didn't realize.
In working with CID meetings,
they have also, I brought, I
well I brought IBHS out here in
January presentation.
Um
And they have, and actually it's
5 pages of the standard because
they they have um home wildfire
prepared home and wildfire uh
prepared home plus and so what
we have learned and I know is in
the base plan, really the major
factors that.
And putting screening correct
size screening over vents to pre
uh prevent ember.
Um
Going into the house when it
comes to the wildfire prepared
home plus there are contractors
already take time, it doesn't
happen overnight, but I knew
construction, it is literally
pennies on the dollar.
Thank you represented.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Not sure, but I think maybe
you've answered my question only
I guess the main point for me,
madam chair is.
There's
IBS HS is given.
Powers to set the standard.
What
Like IBHS.
that would require
if this bill, if this does
become statute, then and if that
were to happen, then it would
require a change or amended
amended statute.
But then that that
I just Adam chaired and I don't.
Want somebody change standards.
With
Having to come in some
organizations.
Thank you. Thank you, man.
Thank you. Any other questions
from the committee?
Um, I actually had a couple of
questions on the FIR on page 3.
It talks about um the
definitions.
Uh
New Mexico Attorney General
states that term the terms fire
hazard and ignition resistant
construction are not included in
the New Mexico building codes,
uh, which could create potential
enforcement issues.
Madam Chair, I think we would
have to be looking at the
building codes much to what um
Representative Armstrong
mentioned she didn't want to
have a stew and let do it
represent Matthew said she would
like us to look into. I think
that's where we would see a
conflict if we were amending.
The, the part that I was more
concerned about is that the
terms didn't seem real clear,
um, and so.
I just wanted to to flag that.
Madam Chair, um, thank you for
that.
Input, um, as the drafter of the
bill, the term for ignition
resistant construction was
formulated, um, from a
definition of the sister law in
Colorado, but with reference to
the IBHS standards and the
definition of fire hazard was
formulated out of the
dictionary, so just as just as
context.
I appreciate that. And the other
um the other thing that that is
flagged here on the FIR, um, is,
it was unclear whether the
provisions apply to condominiums
or timeshare projects or to
landscape vegetation, um,
You.
Madam Chair, when it comes to
condo associations, it does not,
that is, they have different
standards, um, because of as
well as businesses.
Thank you. I just wanted to get
clarification on that, that's
all I had. What's the, uh, will
of the committee.
Which representative uh of
Chairman Lent. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I would you pass,
Patrick, to take the role.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative de la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente.
Yes. Representative Mason.
Yes.
Representative Matthews. Yes.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Parajon.
Yes, and I'd like to explain my
book.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair. Yes. Madam
Chair, yes. Madam Chair, final
tally is 10 votes, yes, 0 votes
no. OK, and I don't want to
explain her vote.
Um, I just wanted to express
that I think this legislation is
really terrific overdo in New
Mexico, and thank you.
Thank you and could you once
again give us the the telling.
Final tally is 10 votes yes, 0
votes no.
Yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you committee.
Alrighty, if we could get HB 215
up next.
So.
Oh.
Do we have anybody here for HB
215.
If not, we'll go to HB 179,
which is my bill.
This is the 2nd time I've been
on this site and I do want us
to, uh, Patrick, if you wanna
see if we can get some new
chairs, these are terrible.
Madam chair, whenever you're
ready. Thank you. Uh, HB 179 is
um uh I am pleased to
reintroduce this bill. This
bill, um, is the Saturday after
Thanksgiving, GRT Sunset
extension. Uh, we passed this
bill.
Uh, we passed passed this bill
about 4 or 5 years ago.
I cannot find my date, sorry
about that. Um, and basically
we're, we're getting ready to
sunset, uh, so we have brought
this back, uh, what the what
this bill does is it'll extend
to 2030.
And it's the small business
Saturday, Thanksgiving weekend
grocery receipts, tax deduction
for items.
Uh, with the purchase price less
than $500 sold in a New Mexico
business that employs no more
than 10 employees, and with
that, Madam chair, I thank you,
do we have anyone here in
support of the bill?
OK, if you would like to give
public comment, please form a
line in the center aisle and the
attendant will hold the
microphone for you. Please limit
your public comments to Debbie
Moore, president and CEO of the
Great Las Cruces Chamber of
Commerce, and we have been in
support of this from the very
beginning. It's very vital. It's
another tool in the toolbox for
small businesses. So I encourage
you to pass this legislation.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
thank you Representative for
bringing this bill forward and
uh we are uh certainly
supportive. My name is Bill Lee,
president, CEO of the Gallup
McKinley County Chamber of
Commerce, um, what we know is
not only this does this help
drive business to our small
businesses in Gallup and
McKinley County, but beyond
that, um, the trade that it
brings in during this time of
year, um, certainly expands the
GRT collection um in other areas
and so.
We see it as a real win-win, and
again, thanks to the sponsor and
we ask that you give this a due
pass. Thank you.
Do we have anyone in support on
Zoom?
Enrique Nell.
Mhm
Thank you so much, uh, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is um Enriqueel, and I'm
here today on behalf of the
Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce. We strongly support
House Bill 179. The tax holiday
on gross receipts, taxes, is an
effective tool to support our
local businesses, encouraging
people to buy local, helps keep
money in our community, support
small businesses and create
jobs. Out of $100 spent $68
stays in our community if you
shop local.
It's important for policy makers
to support our small businesses,
both owners and employees, and
help them be competitive and
successful. Strong local
businesses need a stronger tax
base overall for New Mexico. Our
goal for this session is to make
New Mexico more competitive and
this small business Saturday
deduction helps us make local
businesses more competitive
during one of the busiest
shopping weekends of the entire
year. We respectfully ask for a
due pass on House Bill 17.
29. Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anybody else
on Zoom?
Do we have anyone here in
opposition?
OK. Committee questions, Rep
Matthews.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh.
And thank you, madam
You all everybody, um, I'm just,
I'm curious on page.
Um, the third page of the bill,
subsection E.
And it used to, it looks like
we're taking out the requirement
that there be any kind of a
report.
About the
Impact of this.
Um
Process
And um OK. And instead it go to
the tax expenditure budget
something or other.
I'm looking at
Am I on the right bill? 170 on
the last page.
Lines 3 through
Well
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Matthews, that's
how the first film was and so
that language had been taken
out.
In 2014 and so.
Um
So on line 13, it talks about
the deduction provided by this
section shall be included in the
tax expenditure budget pursuant
to Section 7-1-85 or 84, excuse
me.
Man share, uh, yeah, I, I, I see
the the three lines that got
added, I guess I'm just curious
why you're saying that the
report was taken out 10 years
ago.
It was uh because they, they
just weren't utilizing it, um,
and they transferred, um, they
started to, they fit it in with
with those with them gathering
those numbers. Um.
I'm sure I think that's the
first time I've seen it.
Language that was repealed.
10 years ago still showing up in
the.
It's kind of strange. It was
strange, yes.
Um
Man, I'm sure, but I do have
another question, um, so,
Um, this year, because I'm a
member of this committee and I
got to be Thanksgiving weekend
and I thought, well, I'll go
shopping because it's gonna no
tax day.
Right?
Um, and
And I went to a couple of small
businesses cause I like to
support small businesses.
And none of them were
participating.
And I'm just sort of curious if
anybody else has had that
experience and how much this is.
Um
And what the department is, I
assume this is economic
development.
Um, that economic development is
doing to make
Uh, business is aware that this
is available and take advantage
of it.
If you know.
So I, I, I know that we um
started off strong and then the
pandemic hit, and I think that
there has been a lull in some of
that, um, but we, uh, I know in
Las Cruces, uh, we did have a
press release, it was utilized,
especially like in the town of
Mesa, where you see some of the
mom and pop type of shops. Um,
but yeah, I I I agree with you,
I think it needs to be better
utilized.
And I'm sure, hopefully that
will be the sort that your next
bill you sponsor us, right? OK.
Thank you very much.
Reprato.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um, I just
wanted to note, I, I appreciate
this bill and its impact, um,
and I was looking at the effects
on the uh revenue that, you
know, we're anticipating coming
from this, um, and it, and from
my perspective, this looks
great. It looks like there's a
lot of use that's coming out of
this, um, and looking at the, I
will just point out as
co-sponsor, it's, it's great to
see the variety of locations,
everyone's kind of from really
pointing to this is making a big
impact. Um, and my only question
for you is, you know,
basically do this after
Thanksgiving. We also do it
before school. Are those numbers
comparable? Do you know at all?
I'm just kind of curious if you
had to do that off the top. um I
know that the school one is
definitely much, it's, I think
that people are more aware of
that one, so you see a much
greater, uh.
I think having some add
additional media would be great
to push this one.
Representative L Ling, thank
you, Madam Chair. I move we do
pass.
OK, we have a due pass motion
from Representative Lee and a
2nd from leader.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative De la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente, yes.
Representative Mason? Yes.
Representative Matthews? Yes.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Parajon.
Representative Serrado, yes.
Madam Vice Chair. Yes, Madam
Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, final tally is 10
votes. Yes, 0 votes, no.
So we are, um, looking for the
two bill sponsors of the next
two bills, we will give it a
couple of minutes, so we'll take
about a 2 minute um break to see
if we can get a hold of anybody
and uh we'll be back.
High Representative, would you
like to?
Oh, OK.
Do you need some water?
OK. All righty.
All righty. Um,
We can start with your
presentation.
All right, thank you, madam
chair and members of the
committee, thank you for I.
I am here to present.
House Bill 1:30.
Which is late and it will be to
enact the public.
Thinking at.
Which creates the public Bank of
New Mexico.
Establishing a board of
directors.
the actual structure of.
The act
Provides duties.
permitting certain investments.
Lending actions.
Purchases
And it prohibits any conflict
conflicts of interest.
And it creates a state.
And I have with me today.
Several expert witnesses as
needed, but with me at the table
introduce themselves.
briefly
And
again.
Excuse me, Madam Chair, my name
is Peter Smith. I am a.
On a personal note, recovering,
uh, and former state senator
Republican state senator.
From Vermont is lieutenant
governor in congressman who
had the good fortune to move to
New Mexico about 14 years ago,
um.
And I know enough to know.
I don't know how, how you guys
get it done because you work
incredibly hard and I'm not
trying to be gratuitous. I just,
wow, uh, and I wanna thank you
for your work and for your time
today.
You might be asking why I'm, I'm
supporting a public bank for New
Mexico it's on the move and.
25 to 30 places around the
country now. There's only been
one for 100 years, but I think
there's, there's a reason
there's several reasons that
make sense, and I
Um, I was very taken with the
earlier testimony about
Local small business and local
economics, and I think we're
losing control of our local
economics. I really do and uh
uh.
I'm supporting the public bank
because
The appropriation is a one-time
expenditure.
Uh, and it makes it a great use
of surplus revenue.
Number 2, and there's some
confusion about this, it does
not compete with what works
through.
Local banks and credit unions.
So there is no, no competition
at all. It allows them, in fact,
to
Work with those local
institutions to fill what the
NMFA documented as a significant
loan gap of where there are if
you're a small local business,
fewer than 50 people, fewer than
25 people.
Fewer than 5 people. There are
all sorts of reasons why you
cannot get the support you need
from a local bank, and you're
not getting it at all.
Um
Ultimately it will generate loan
revenue or loan volume of 10
times the initial um allocation
of state of state deposits, um.
The interest gains in the loan
repayments are reinvested
locally.
Lenny doesn't go anyplace else.
It doesn't take money from any
other banks or programs given
current levels.
Of, of, of support.
Uh
Because our revenues.
We hope it continues and
continuing to grow.
Uh, we would.
As for some of that expanded
revenue base.
I think
Is the case in Vermont and I
think it has been recently the
case in New Mexico that we've
done.
Public, private, and, and.
Local kinds of cooperatives and
nonprofit cooperatives to extend
electricity, to extend computer
connectivity to um.
A rural communities and I.
I'm thinking that
It would be a great thing to do
for local small business.
And finally, it strengthens
local communities by
strengthening local economic
activity.
Especially in
New Mexican indigenous and other
rural communities and to me.
In an age when
We see more and more pressure on
small local businesses.
Uh
This is simply something that
will make our community stronger
socially, civically,
economically. Thank you very
much.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, thank you for.
Having us here today, I'll
introduce myself a little bit.
My name, uh, Harold Dixon. I.
Um, I'm a native New Mexican
native Santa Fe and uh had been
in the banking business 40
years, um, recently retired a
couple of years ago, uh, spent
16 years on the bank side spent
25 years as president and CEO of
State Employees credit unions,
so we, we did a lot of financing
with businesses. We did, uh, we
saw a lot of.
Good growth in that in that
arena.
became familiar with public
banking about 567 years ago and
saw the need where where.
There is a need for public
banking there there is a gap in
the financing for small
businesses today that does not,
it's not getting met and so I
think this public bank is a
great opportunity.
To
To make that happen, um, as
Peter said, the, the public bank
is not taking, not taking
business away from from other
banks and credit unions, it,
it's not a competitor but really
compliments and allows, allows
banks and credit unions to make
loans that they're not they're
not making today, um.
You know, over the last several
years, the, the banking industry
has become highly, highly
regulated and as a result, no
bank or credit union.
Wants to take typically
collateral that's not not
marketable, that's not easily uh
appraised and so as a result
there's good loans out there
that are being turned down.
Um
And the public bank is not a.
is not a source for substandard
loans, but, but really loans
that qualify financially.
But maybe has collateral that
doesn't doesn't fit in in the
typical bank portfolio.
Um, I, I would like to give the
example of a.
A dental office or an
optometrist, I mean, that's is
very specialized equipment, it's
drills, it's X-ray machines,
it's um
Certain types of tools, things
that are not typically.
Market at other places and so as
a result, average office, let's
say, is half a million dollars
to set something like that up it
it is just difficult to they may
have a good plan, they may have
good financials, but.
But when it comes to.
Financing that nobody, no bank
or credit union typically wants
to take that.
That is collateral, and this is
where the public bank and come
in and say these are not bad
loans. The default rate on those
types of loans is, is almost
zeal and so, so let, let's have
a public bank back of a bank or
a credit union that comes in and
says OK we'll we'll take a,
we'll take a portion of that,
we'll take 50% of that, we'll,
we'll take 25% of that and we'll
support you bank or credit union
to do that, so we're not, we're
not loaning to that individual.
directly were loaning.
In collaboration with other
banks and credit unions to make
that work.
So we just think there is an
opportunity there that is
missing today and
Um, as a, as a retired banker, I
I wish I had had this when I was
in the banking business to be
able to have a source to go to
to make.
To make loans that we couldn't
otherwise do typically.
Um, I, as
You have a whole presentation in
front of you. I'm, I'm not gonna
go through every page of that,
but really that that is really
a.
I think a good summary of what
Public banking is about and.
Hopefully we can answer some
questions for you from there.
Production Senator, he's the
co-sponsor joint that time is.
For you. Thank you. We stand for
questions.
All righty. Uh, do we have uh,
anybody, uh, in support of this
bill.
OK? If you guys want to line up
and we can.
And there'll be a one minute
timer.
Madame chair members of the
committee. My name is Gina
Morales with JD and we represent
the city of Santa Fe.
The Santa Fe City Council
recently adopted a resolution
supporting the creation of
public bank, the city of Santa
Fe for this bill.
Thank you.
Afternoon, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, my name is
Melissa Pickett. I'm a retired
licensed professional clinical
counselor and native uh New
Mexican.
We have a behavioral and mental
health crisis here in New
Mexico, and we're seeing how
this is rampaging our small
businesses and creating a lot of
problems, greater mental health
needs necessitate greater need
for additional counselors,
especially in the area of
addiction. In order to become
licensed in New Mexico,
counseling internship
requirements are 1500 hours. It
can be a hardship for people to
find the resources needed in
order to finish these
requirements.
Counseling interns in North
Dakota can access an addiction
counselor internship, loan
program through their public
bank.
To cover living expenses while
they're completing an
internship.
The flexibility of a New Mexico
public bank will address
real-time needs, and I ask for
your support for this. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and thank you
representatives for hearing us
today. My name is Dee Gamble.
Uh, my husband and I have been
volunteers with the Alliance for
Local Economic prosperity for a
number of years.
At the beginning, I would like
to say.
Thank you
To any community bankers who
might be in the room.
And I wanna say thank you to
you.
Community bankers.
Credit unions, CDFIs, because
you are the nexus for helping
build wealth in rural and small
rural communities.
And it has been surprising to
us. We have no idea.
Why these organizations would be
opposed to this idea.
That helps them expand exactly
what they do.
In rural communities, that is
providing loans to a small
farmer or rancher.
Providing loans to a brand new
dentist.
Providing loans to a uh to a
Native American artist who wants
to be more creative.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Elaine Sullivan. I moved
to New Mexico in 1990.
And for some number of years
after that, I thought.
I love living in New Mexico.
And we're a poor state and we
can't do any better than this.
Well, I certainly found out
we're not a poor state.
But we are not stepping up to
our potential.
I, today's headlines in the New
Mexican included that our
reading scores are the lowest in
the nation. So that tired old
joke about thank goodness for
Mississippi isn't even relevant
anymore. We're at the bottom.
Anyone who believes that our
status quo is working well
enough, is not reading the same
stats that I am.
I believe that passing this bill
and creating a public bank can
be a game changer for New
Mexico. We have so much
potential here. It will require
From you and your colleagues to
be both fiscally responsible and
bold.
And I am asking that of you
today, please pass this bill.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, chairwoman,
members of the committee. My
name is Sharon Argenbright.
I've been in resident of New
Mexico for over 30 years. I'm a
nurse, so mom.
Grandma, I was introduced to the
concept of public banking in the
early aughts by Craig Barnes,
who warned us of a plutocracy.
This bill is clear, succinct,
unambiguous, specific.
Accountability is evidenced,
risk management provisions are
included. There's a provision to
evaluate low performance to pull
in local control of our money
now is even more important than
ever.
If we can take care of
ourselves, we can then offer a
hand to others, which I
anticipate I will have to do
much more than I ever have
before to save our democracy.
This bill has stood the test of
time, which is now, please vote
for 138.
Thank you.
Alrighty, is there anybody on
Zoom?
Nancy Bierce, you have one
minute.
Nancy Beers.
Yes, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Nancy Burst, and I am
the most recent past county
treasurer in Berlio County. I
have been in favor of this
public banking act for many,
many years. As a matter of fact,
in Berlio County, I poed this
public banking on a small scale
in the county.
It works. It's been fantastic
and phenomenal, over 400 people
have been employed a new jobs,
new income, uh, as well as the
growth of small businesses in
Burnleyo County that needed it
right after COVID, and it
continues today. Please pass
House Bill 1:30. We do need
additional public banking tool
in our toolbox. Thank you so
much.
Brian Skeel.
Star
Yeah.
Brian Skeel
Mr. Skill, can you hear us?
There we go. Sorry, I, I just
found the unmute button. Thank
you.
Um, I've studied public banking
for a while, and the, and one of
the things that just stands out
to me is in across the nation,
we average one bank per 60,000
people in North Dakota, they
averaged one bank.
For 10,000 people.
And North Dakotas is where
public banking started in the
US. So it just shows to me,
speaks to me how, how wonderful
this tool is. And of course, I
expect that it will do just as
well in New Mexico. So please do
pass.
Right. Do we have anybody here
uh in opposition?
Alrighty, let's, let's form a
line again. We'll get the
attendant to hold on to the mic
and you all have about a minute.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Chris. I'm
the president and CEO of the
Independent Community Bankers
Association in Mexico, and we do
oppose hospital 130, uh, New
Mexico has a robust financial
system that's already in place.
Our community banks, regional
banks, credit unions, CDFIs, or
quasi governmental agencies do a
really good job of providing
capital and credit to all our,
all of our New Mexico small
businesses, families, and ag
folks. And for that and many
other reasons, we oppose this
legislation.
I don't share members'
Committee, thank you uh for uh
This hearing, I'm John Anderson.
I represent the New Mexico
Bankers Association, uh, we're
in opposition to this bill. Uh,
let me just, uh, for a minute
just discuss one of the problems
we foresee in this bill.
The definition of public bank is
basically uh says it would be
chartered pursuant to the laws
of the United States, we
interpret that as saying that it
would become a national bank and
very likely have to be chartered
by the OCC.
The problem with that one, if
you don't get chartered, you're
not eligible for FDIC insurance,
but more importantly, in
section, I believe it's 10 here
in this bill, it says.
That in the appropriation
there's a $60 million
appropriation contingent upon
being tired.
And that money is intended to be
lent, so what would happen is if
you're not chartered, you
wouldn't be eligible for this
contingent, um, appropriation
which basically.
Thank you.
Chair members of the committee,
my name is Alison Riley,
director of public policy with
the New Mexico Chamber of
Commerce. We're standing in
opposition to this bill, some
reasons being we're taking money
from the general funds to create
additional government while
private banks have proven
sufficient. This is why 49 other
states do not have state-run
banks.
Recruitment and retention of
state employees remains an
issue, so adding another
department that would need to
hire hundreds of folks just
doesn't seem realistic.
When you establish public banks,
you're exposing taxpayers to
risk since since the banks are
government run financial
shortfalls falls back on the
taxpayers.
Also, public banks are
susceptible to political
influence, decisions on lending,
investment and credit
allocations might be swayed by
the political climate.
Rather than the market
realities.
And this leads to unwise
financial decisions that favor
short term political gains over
long-term economic stability for
these reasons and the others
previously mentioned, we are
opposed to this legislation.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you again, um, Bill Lee,
president and CEO of the Gallup
McKinley County Chamber of
Commerce. We stand in opposition
because we believe that this is
a very big and expensive ask
that is not needed as pointed
out in the bill's FIR by the
Economic Development Department,
they know that they're already
great state entities providing
funding to support the credit
needs of New Mexico businesses,
municipalities, and support
existing lenders NMFA State
Investment council, um, the New
Mexico Small Business
Investment.
Corporation and the economic
development department itself
would be a bill that duplicates
these agency programs that
already collaboratively work
with our banks and credit unions
small business development
centers and regional economic
development districts. We also
believe that this bill creates
an unfair and unlevel playing
field for our local community
banks, which will undoubtedly
lead to less competition and
fewer choices for consumers. For
these reasons and others we
oppose. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and committee
members Debbie Moore, president
and CEO of the Greater Las
Cruces Chamber.
commerce and on behalf of our
board, we stand in opposition of
this bill and for the reasons
you just heard, but I just, I've
been blessed in the state of New
Mexico to serve the communities
of uh Hobbsreer Rancho and now
Las Cruces and on staff at
Albuquerque. There's a special,
special relationship with
community banks, and I, I, it's
my opinion this might be lost in
this, and I know how the
community banks get back to the
community, and they also help
our small business for those
reasons, we stand opposed.
Thank you, Madam Chair and all.
I'm David Gordon. I appreciate
the opportunity to present a
citizen's uh.
Perspective here perhaps. Uh by
the way, page 2, I think you're
missing a comma on line 9
treated as a public.
A comma politic and corporate I
think would be more appropriate.
Um,
Page 3 gets interesting where
7 of the 11.
Or of director appointees are
made essentially for directly by
the governor.
And 3 more by people appointed
by the governor, so that's 7.
Then you get 4 from the
legislative council, I see
nowhere the public is involved.
So this is not
A public bank
Uh, effort, this is a state
bank, and I think you might want
to consider that.
Um
One of this operations is to
page 9.
Number 5 at the top, purchase
bonds, lend to other state
financing programs. Why would a
public bank in this state do
that.
Thank you.
Thank you, sir.
Sure, that's it.
Thank you. All righty. Uh, I see
that we've been joined by
Senator Steinborn. Would you
like to make a some opening
remarks. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I apologize.
We have, we have some people by
Zoom.
Jay Jenkins, you have one
minute.
Hi, my name is Jay Jenkins. I'm
president and CEO of CMB Bank in
Carlsbad, where $900 million
community bank. We are proud to
work throughout the state of New
Mexico. We stand in opposition
of a state-owned public bank and
as many have said the FIR
references dozens of reasons of
why this is not a good idea. I
can't think of one reason why we
would want to risk taxpayer
dollars, uh, at
high-risk loans, we're already
meeting the needs of our
community, uh, make no mistake
about it, it's direct
competition. We have over 100
employees at our institution,
and I'm here to protect those
jobs. We're very proud of what
we do, and this would be direct
competition. So thank you for
your consideration, and again we
stand in opposition.
Bruce guardian.
Yes. Thank you. Sorry for the
login name. My name is Bruce
Stidworthy.
And I, uh, am here today on
behalf of the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
Uh, our viewpoint is that the
1:30 uh is a solution in search
of a problem.
Uh, we represent many small
businesses, uh, you know, who
are purported to benefit from
this.
But who have voice that they do
not believe this is necessary
and that they're well served.
By the vibrant banking
infrastructure that exists in
the private sector today.
Private banks driven by
competition are efficient and
nimble and able to innovate
faster and better than a public
bureaucracy.
They developed new financial
products and services to meet
customer needs and have strong
incentives to improve efficiency
and reduce costs. They are
politically independent.
And can attract top financial
talent.
In addition, a public bank would
duplicate the efforts of the
state investment council and
Mexico Finance Authority
Authority, Mexico small business
investment Corporation and
economic development department
under the current.
Jason Wyatt.
Yes, thank you. My name is Jason
Wyatt. I'm the president and CEO
of Western Commerce Bank
headquartered in Carlsbad, New
Mexico.
Establishing a public bank in
New Mexico is a deeply flawed
idea that continues to resurface
year after year despite
overwhelming opposition from
community banks, financial
associations, government
studies, all concluding that the
state bank is unfeasible and a
waste taxpayer taxpayer money.
New Mexico already has multiple
government-backed loan programs
ensuring that anyone who
qualifies for a loan can get
one.
the gap that this is proposed to
fill simply doesn't exist for
the record, I'd be happy to
finance.
Uh, any dentist office or a
loans and have done so in the
past.
Proponents compare this proposal
to North Dakota State Bank, but
the truth is North Dakota model
relies on full control of public
funds, something that would
devastate New Mexico's community
banking system, uh, for these
reasons amongst many dozens of
others, I encourage you to vote
against.
This bill. Thank you.
Jennifer
Yes, Madam Chair and members of
the committee. My name is
Jennifer Weller, and I'm the
chief operations officer of
Citizens Bank in Farmington, New
Mexico. We are a local community
bank, proudly serving San Juan
County since 1905. I oppose
House Bill 1:30. New Mexico has
a deep rooted financial system
that includes 28 locally owned
community banks employing more
than 2500 New Mexicans and
operating branches across the
state. Community banks are the
cornerstone of
New Mexico's diverse economy,
providing small business loans
and agricultural loans directly
fueling our economy.
Additionally, our community
banks have the liquidity needed
to serve New Mexico, with the
current 57% loan to deposit
ratio, we have adequate
liquidity to meet the borrowing
needs of small businesses and
individuals. There is no
shortage of capital, no lack of
access to credit and no market
failure that would justify the
creation.
of a state-owned public bank.
Instead of solving a problem,
House Bill 130 would disrupt the
financial system in New Mexico
that is already working. Thank
you.
Carlos Sontag,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Carlos Sanag,
President and CEO of the New
Mexico Business Coalition. We
respectfully oppose House Bill
130. We believe that the needs
of the banking area are covered
with our community banks. We've
got hundreds of locations.
They're currently providing
about 60% of the small business
loans and over 80% of
agricultural loans. They do this
by building trust and
personalized
relationships in the community.
And that's something a state
cannot do.
And when they have that trust
and they know the people in the
community, they have better
assurance that that loan is
gonna be repaid. And that's what
we need. We're setting ourselves
up for failure by looking at a
state bank, that investment that
you're looking at with state
taxpayer dollars would be better
spent on education, healthcare,
or infrastructure. The community
banks are serving the needs that
we already have met in the state
and we appreciate that and we
urge
you to say no to this bill.
Thank you.
Bob Bydel
I'm chairing members of the
committee. My name is Bob Badal.
I am the executive vice
president of Century Bank, which
is headquartered in Santa Fe.
We've been serving in Mexicans
since 1887. I oppose House Bill
130. I want to emphasize a
critical issue. New Mexico
already has financial
institutions and other
state-backed quasi-governmental
agencies in place that serve the
exact role of public bank would
attempt to fill. Today, New
Mexico benefits from multiple
state agencies to provide.
financial support, including the
New Mexico Finance Authority,
the New Mexico Economic
Development, New Mexico small
business Investment Corporation
and the mortgage Finance
Authority. These agencies work
in partnership, hand in hand
with community banks to meet the
financing needs of our
businesses and residents. A
public bank would not add new
capital to the system. It could
divert funds from existing
programs and completely and
compete directly with private
lenders. It is an unnecessary
duplication of resources.
That creates risk without adding
real value to the state's
economy. For this reason and
many others, I oppose House Bill
130. Thank you.
Alan Shettlesworth.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Alan
Shettlesworth. I'm the president
CEO of Maine Bank in
Albuquerque, New Mexico. House
Bill 1:30 is unnecessary.
There's just no gap in the
financial services of a public
bank would fill. New Mexico
already has a well established
financial infrastructure or
financial institutions and other
agencies already provide
financing for economic
development, infrastructure,
housing, small businesses, often
in partnership with community
banks, creating a state-run
public.
Bank would not add new
capital.on being redundant, a
public bank also poses serious
financial risks. It would not be
FDIC insured, meaning taxpayers
in the state of New Mexico, not
regulators or private investors
would bear the burden of
financial losses, losses from a
commercial bank failures are not
limited to the amount of capital
that a bank has, as we witnessed
with the failure of Silicon
Valley Bank back in 2023, losses
absorbed by the FDIC far
outweigh the capital lost by the
shareholders of Silicon Valley
Bank.
Under this proposal, public bank
deposits would not be subject to
the same pledging and security
requirements that protect public
funds in community banks today.
History has shown the dangers of
these models when North Dakota
established a public bank 18
community banks failed due to
the reallocation of government
deposits.
Jet Fanning
Jed Fanning.
Yes, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Jed Bannon,
President and CEO of Citizens
Bank in Las Cruces. I oppose
House Bill 130. I want to
highlight some of the financial
and regulatory risks associated
with this bill. A public bank
does in fact have the potential
to divert public deposits away
from community banks, reducing
our lending capacity and
weakening the economic support
that we provide to local
businesses and families that
make up our communities. The
public
Bank would be exempt from the
pledging and security
requirements as you just heard
that all financial institutions
holding public funds must
maintain putting public deposits
at risk in ways that community
banks would never allow. And if
the public bank were to fail,
the only option would be a
taxpayer funded bailout. The
risks far outweigh potential and
untested benefits. Lastly, I
urge members of the committee to
review the fiscal impact report.
worked, you'll see references to
multiple unknowns, likelihood of
large opportunity cost,
duplication of several
government agencies and
unnecessary redundancy and plain
and simple, more risk. For these
reasons and many others, I
oppose House Bill 130.
Ian
Yes, good afternoon, chairperson
and committee members, really
grateful for the community banks
who turned out today to tell us
uh how there's no lack of
funding in the state of New
Mexico and uh lament that none
of them, uh, brought the numbers
to share how many, uh, inquiries
are not followed up on or uh
business loan applications they
have to turn down. Um, I'm a
small business owner here in
Albuquerque, and uh
a small operation and just a
couple of years ago, we had to
go seek finance.
And uh ran into dead ends across
the state on Agbanks, community
banks, uh, nonprofit, uh,
business lenders, and, uh,
luckily with a federal program
and uh private individuals who
offered the rate at half of what
our community banks, um, those
that did have the decency to
reply to us and talk to us about
our um uh atypical uh business
plan and uh
Um
Uh, we, we were able to secure
funding and and then continue
and grow our business, so, um,
although I may not exist to all
these community bankers online
and in the room, um, uh, it
feels disingenuous of you to
speak for so many Mexicans that
surely have run into similar
issues. I hope the committee
strongly supports the public
bank. Thank you.
Brett Dimiliano.
Yes, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I am Brett Dimiliano,
EVP and CFO First American Bank.
With locations throughout New
Mexico and I strongly oppose
House Bill 130.
Uh, public bank is vulnerable to
political influence where
lending decisions are dictated
by government mandates rather
than sound financial judgment.
This is why many states and
cities have studied public banks
and ultimately declined to
pursue creating a public bank
due to legal, financial, and
governance concerns.
For this reasons and many
others, I really strongly oppose
House Bill 130. Thank you.
Adeo rose.
Hello. I'm a concerned citizen,
um, and I feel like um I had to
step in and say something, uh,
because I feel like the
Um,
We, we, we shouldn't be asking
uh community banks to be writing
all the regulations for
themselves. Um, we need to, uh,
listen to the citizens, we need
to see the people who are
suffering on the streets.
Thank you very much for your
time, members of the committee,
Madam.
Thank you, and that's it. OK,
we'll start again. Senator
Steinborn, would you like to
introduce yourself and give an
opening statement.
Madam Chair, committee, good to
be with you, uh, talk about this
really interesting proposal. I'm
state Senator Jeff Steinborn and
One of the original sponsors of
this bill several years ago and
spent a whole year working to
create very thoughtful
legislation that deals with many
of the issues that you've heard.
Um, how to create a responsible
financial instrument.
That was not politically
governed.
That could do public good, um,
and we had a
We had to work diligently to do
that and you'll see in this bill
if you look at the management
structure of experienced
financial managers who've
managed equal or greater
institutions, um, you'll see
that the fact that it's
chartered as a bank is another
very important threshold that
would have to be achieved.
Um, we also want to be sound
fiduciaries of taxpayer money,
that's got to be your first
threshold.
To meet with the Ste and be
viable. I just wanted to say,
ma'am Chair, the reason I
support this.
Um
Probably for the same reasons I
introduced bills to create the
outdoor division.
Or the creative industries.
This is low hanging fruit
opportunity, ma'am, I see, to
use another New Mexico resource
to create more economic
diversification.
I'll remind my colleagues,
everyone listening, this is
public money, we're talking
about using.
That's money
For public purposes we generate
the citizens of the state,
generate billions of dollars in
receipts that we are sending.
Banks and were paying lots of
fees on them.
We're not asking for all that
money, unlike North Dakota that
puts billions of dollars in, I
think we're saying $50 million
really almost as a pilot in a
way, and that's how I think
about this. Although it's fully
setting up the model.
Um
Of using public dollars for
public purposes.
Of using taxpayer money to
generate more money.
As a financial opportunity that
we have to use our own money to
generate more income and New
Mexicans.
That's what this is and.
Respectfully, when we say, well,
Our community banks are meeting
all the needs. First of all,
there is no direct competition.
The bill is clear if you look at
it, this public banks prohibited
from making direct loans to
consumers, so they're not in the
same space. They're a resource
for public banks. Now, I won't
mention their name.
One of our banks, who I use um.
In Las Cruces said to me one
time, we're, we're strapped for
resources. They have to have a
certain amount of capital to
make loans.
So a public bank becomes a
resource to community banks as
it is in North Dakota 2, there's
areas of loans that are citizens
need that they don't have access
to that.
Maybe it's a micro loan. I
remember there was a time ago
where the building industry, not
exactly a left of center cause.
Development, you know, building,
they could builders could not
get loans from banks because
they were not meeting all of
their thresholds.
Um
So the interesting
entrepreneurial aspect of this
is that we got to create an
instrument with our own funds.
To do things that maybe are on
the margins that are additive,
um, that can pursue industries
that are desirable for the state
or community benefit projects,
we get to kind of create this,
but in a fiduciaryly sound way,
so, um,
It is innovative. It is
interesting, but again, when you
know, we have to look for every
loaf hanging fruit opportunity
we have to create economic
diversification. This is just
Our money that we can use for
our purposes and I'll just
close, Madam Chair by saying we
already do this in a way.
We gave out probably a billion
dollars to NMFA since COVID. We
found that to be a very
convenient instrument to make
loans to businesses. They were
loans. There was interest
attached to that.
We gave out grants, COVID
grants.
And we're very comfortable with
that instrument. I see this as
being similar to that, but
better in the sense that this is
a chartered bank. We make money
on that, we save money from
fees. It's almost better than
NMFA in that way that we're not
just giving out money, but it's
actually more like a revolving
loan fund.
But again, we're already doing a
billion dollars, so I see this
is a slightly different
instrument with really cool
entrepreneurial upside,
community benefit upside.
that can help our citizens who
really need it, who frankly may
not have it, access to it, but
sometimes where the community
banks need capital to make their
traditional loans.
So that's my argument for it
and, and again I, I would ask us
to think, why not, you know, if
we feel like we can protect it.
And make good financial
decisions, why not do a pilot?
Uh, that we're proposing here uh
to help economically diversify
and strengthen in Mexico and its
citizens.
That is all I have. Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, first on our list
is uh.
Representative De la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I heard earlier that it will
work with banks if this entity
is established, how will that
happen?
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, so.
Here, here's the best way uh
customer comes in needs a loan
they would go to their community
bank or credit union, they would
work through that entity, that
entity would then go to the
public bank and say we have a
deal that.
Perhaps doesn't fit in our
normal guidelines at at the bank
or credit union, we need some
assistance like for that similar
to what may be SBA does today,
but, um, hopefully it'll more
streamlined fashion and so so
that.
That entity would then be.
Supported by the public bank or
the actually the bank would
support the the the public bank
would support the bank or credit
union coming.
With the request saying, you
know, we'll guarantee that 25%,
40%, 50%, we'll do the, we'll,
you know, you, you take a first
lane, the public bank would take
a second lian again these are
qualifying loans that would meet
meet their standards but.
For whatever reason and
typically it's collateral maybe
terms of loan, that type of
thing that don't allow it to sit
in there in their normal
policies.
Does that help?
So Madam Chair, you're talking
about.
Somewhat of a referral.
It's probably, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, yes, that
probably a good way to say it is
a referral that the bank is in.
Referring that loan to the
public bank or a share of that
loan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. How, how
would you?
Set interest rates.
Madam Chair Representative, so
rates would typically be shared,
let's say, um.
6% loan. I'm just gonna make up
a not say it's a 6% rate today,
so if, if the public bank shared
6% of or they would share that
6% based on the percentage they
they're guaranteeing whether
it's.
25% or 50%, so that money gets
shared.
Uh, equally between the bank and
the and the public bank.
The public bank is taking.
Taking that that percentage away
from it.
So if I'm understanding this
would be a new government
office.
Madam Chair
I'm sure.
Um, it is an instrument of the
state.
And fully with that also comes
all the transparency to the
legislature, the LFC. So typical
credit unions, banks are located
in communities, how would it
work for this entity you're
gonna set up lots of offices,
central office.
So Madam Chair representative,
so this is actually, again
another example of why it's not
a community bank and shouldn't
be thought of in terms of
storefronts for citizens as it
doesn't do direct lending, you
don't, it's not that kind of a
model where you need offices and
people walking in. It's uh so
whether it's limited to one
office here in Santa Fe could
be.
Or a few offices around, I
wouldn't know it probably be
resource dependent. I'm sure it
would probably start with one
office.
here, but it's not a storefront
serving.
Consumers in that way.
Last question, manager.
I heard earlier that there is a
gap.
loans
Finance opportunities for small
businesses.
Why is there a gap? What creates
that gap?
Madam Chair representative,
sometimes it's, it has to do
with capital because the bank
has to have a certain amount of
liquidity to make a loan. I
heard that directly from a bank.
I use in Las Cruces,
circumstantially, but they need
deposits in order to be able to
make loans, and they make those
loans and that grows their
capital and they're able to make
more loans so we can be.
A resource for capital for
banks, so that's 11 issue of of
of capital. The other are
there's just frankly if.
The notion is that, you know,
banks make a loan to any single
entity that walks through the
door, that's just not true.
That it meets every single need.
Let's talk about micro.
Microloans and the kind of
experience in developing nations
where they have literally
created jobs at the singular
level for small amounts of
capital. So I think there's
opportunities that.
Frankly
We don't necessarily have to sit
here today and give you 10
different examples of products
that things that could help
again, they would be products
available for uh uh uh a local
bank to be able to offer those.
It would be done through the
public bank itself. But anyway,
there's there's.
There's gaps there and in a
variety of ways I'm sure I'll
make just one more.
So back in 2008 during the Great
Recession.
Uh, there was a lot of
businesses that folded because
of a variety of reasons.
was
scarce or small businesses. At
that time we set aside a million
dollars.
To do microloans.
Anything from $5000 to $25,000
to help keep small businesses
afloat.
That being said, did you explore
that type of an option because
at that time what we did set
aside the money, we made it
available to 501, I think it was
uh I won't see 3 type.
institution called the loan
fund.
So they held that money in trust
and lent it out, and the county
actually did make money.
On the loans, but they were low
interest loans. Did you consider
doing that versus creating
another government office.
Thank you.
Ma'am chair representative,
thank you for the question.
That's exactly what this is. I
mean, what you just described,
except I would say in a more
responsible way because this is
a chartered financial
institution.
And um lots more checks and
balances and management
structures to make sure it's
managed correctly.
So it is basically just as you
described, just as a.
Different instrument rather than
granting it out
Uh, to another entity to do that
that may or may not have that
experience or those sideboards
or those protections, this
would.
Then the other thing is, again,
I think it's, it's better than a
grant program where you just,
and I know you described like a
revolving loan program, which is
really a more appropriate kind
of a.
Or Larry did this, so.
That's Uh, Representative
Parajon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
thank you, Representatives and
senators for bringing this, um,
I have a few questions and
points of clarification, you
said that. Did you say that
other states have this, or is
there's only one in the US, it's
the North Dakota.
Madam Chair.
There are
think about 30 states.
That are in the process or in
the flux of establishing.
Going through the processes and
the procedures of establishing
but currently there is only,
excuse me, the one that has been
established and I forgot its
inception date.
It's been the long-standing
established and only existing.
To date, the good news is, since
we began and I joined the
senator, Madam Chair and
Representative, uh, when I
first, when we first joined,
there were just very few in the
flux, and now we have more than
30, and I think we probably will
be adding even more given the
current financial.
And we're not sure about what's
going on I'm sure when, when you
say in the flux, they haven't
been established, the
legislation hasn't been passed
or it has been passed.
Um, thank you, we had to see our
experts a little bit
differently, so, um, Madam Chair
and Representative 5.
Have been
We're 4 have been established
for sure and and maybe 5 by the
time we finish with this
discussion, thank you, Madam
Chair and Representative, um,
and, and I'm sorry, Senator, you
also said that this was a pilot,
but is this a pilot or is this
the establishment of the bank as
I also said, Madam Chair
representative, this is creating
the full instrument.
It's a pilot in terms of scale.
That it's, you know, $50 million
is.
Very small amount of money
relative to our whole state
deposits.
In North Dakota when they
established it, they said this
will be the instrument for our
state deposits.
So they kind of get control of
their finances and have reliable
credit to the farmers at the
time who were dealing with
drought and a collapse of their
economic system. So, so that's
the way I, I look at it in terms
of scale more than anything, but
we're setting up the full
instrument.
is what I'm proposing.
Just kind of at a pilot scale
and Madam Chan representative,
I, I think, um, Kota is.
Can you explain a little bit
further what the 4 are that are
established, I I for my
research, I think it's only
North Dakota that's established,
is that not right, Madam Chair
I'm gonna go ahead and it'll be
clearer if she sits at the
table.
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, there is
legislation in California that
will allow up to 7 and we, um, 3
at least 3 if not 4 in process
now one of them has an executive
and.
They're hiring and they're in
different stages of chartering.
And then, uh, New York State and
New York City are also
advancing.
pieces of legislation and
varying stages all around the
country, Madam Chair
representative, so they're not
chartered yet, but they are,
they're in process,
um, and, uh, I'm, I'm gonna move
on because I have a few more
other questions, sorry, um,
Madam Chan representative, um,
and senator, Senator, you said
that, um, we're already doing
this with the new with NMFA, um,
and I, I mean, I think this is
kind of getting to a
representative dela Cruz's
questions here too, but.
was struggling to really see how
it's materially different from
what NMFA does besides the fact
that it is a covered entity
bank, and I, I'd like to know if
you've spoken to NMFA and if
they do, do they agree, how do
they feel about this?
Madam Chair, there's been a lot
of conversations with NMFA over
the years and um
So it's different because of the
way a bank operates, and it's
not just an account that you put
money into and cash comes in,
cash comes out, you're able to
leverage deposits on a
multiplier scale.
It's the way a bank works and so
the fact that if you have $100
deposited NMFA gets to then give
$100. A bank may, for example,
be able to use that 100 and loan
out $300. So it's fundamentally
the way a bank works gets to
leverage money in a better way.
The other thing is there's other
fees and stuff now if we
consider the opportunity costs
of saying, OK, we're not going
to put in a public bank, we're
going to set a commercial bank,
OK, now putting in an instrument
we're paying fees, sometimes
those fees can be as much as 40.
40%, it's it's amazing the
amount of the cost of fees on
financial transactions that if
you put it in your own
instrument, you're saving money
just by doing that.
So
I think, uh, but in terms of
what you can do with the money
and how you leverage it, that's
what's different than NMFA. How
it's the same is the fact that
COVID
What the legislature did we we
did a, I'm forgetting the names
of the programs, but you know,
we did something kind of ming
what they did in Congress where
they're given all these grants
to businesses. Well, we created
a program here. I think it was
in two tranches anyway.
But over 2 sessions.
And we literally gave it to NMFA
at low interest loans. It was
essentially a public bank, but
it was not a public bank because
We didn't have those other
virtues and at the time it was
like, you know, if we had a
public bank.
Think about how much more we
could have leveraged that money
and so.
But you know, so anyway I I'll
stop there but that's how it's
different that's how it's
similar,
so let's talk about the
multiplier scale then, um, is
that all, what, what is the
process for that, if we're if
we're.
That's a great question, Madam
Chair, and I will definitely
defer to a banker in the house
or.
To uh.
Madam Chair Representative, so
your question is the losses on
loans.
Yeah, Madam turn representative,
um, some of the literature that
I've read on the banks, I mean,
there's definitely a lot to say,
um, that people like for
instance the North Dakota Bank
people love that bank, good
idea, um, but also some of it is
the concern that then the
taxpayer dollars have to bail
out the banks, right? Um, so,
you know, how do you cover the
faults and the state taxpayers
cover that.
Madam Chair Representative, so I
mean essentially the the there
is.
They are not FDIC insured, but,
but they wouldn't be anyway
because there is a.
$100,000 limit and so there's
gonna be.
A huge
Number way over that number, I
mean, so they're not, not
insured today unless they're
pledged against, I guess, but,
but in order to cover losses,
right? I mean it would come from
there is a loan loss fund that
is set aside just like every
bank and credit union does
today. There is a, there is a
reserve for loan losses, and so
there is a, there's a risk
involved in everything that a
bank does or a credit union does
today and there'd be no
different than the public banks,
so there would be a loss reserve
set aside, and that was, that
was outlined in the finance.
s when we went through all that
and so that is, you know, it is
a normal course of business, uh,
there are lossess just like any
business typically would have,
so it is, it is, it is accounted
for,
what you're saying is that
there's a a loan fund that's set
aside to bail out when there are
defaults, but.
Occasionally that doesn't always
cover all the defaults.
Or Madam Chair Representative,
so, so there is a reserve, um.
Just like every bank has today,
so whether they set aside
typically.
And I'm doing this from memory,
I think the loss ratio is about
10 of 1%, uh, typically and so
I, I think what we set aside the
loss reserves for the public
bank we put in 1%.
Um, or it might have even been
2, I think we, we put a little
more aggressive in there and,
and it was still.
still became a profitable bank
even at setting aside 2%, so
there is a reserve.
It is set aside out of out of
the
The earnings of funds that come,
come into the bank.
Um, Madam Chair representative,
uh, and senator and expert.
Um
So I'm, I'm hearing two
different things, and this is my
last question question, Madam
Chair, um, I'm hearing two
different things. One of them is
that, um, you know, like as a
bank, this is a higher barrier,
um, because it's a chartered
financial institution and
there's processes to become
chartered, and then I'm, I'm
also hearing, but it's also
lower barrier because then we
can make micro loans and make
smaller loans and, and, you
know, I, I do see that there
are.
in the FIR, you know, there are
a lot of different options for
where people can go, so does
that mean that our bank?
This bank would be taking the
riskiest deals, Madam Chair and
Representatives.
Ma'am Chair, representative,
great question.
No, not necessarily. There are,
uh, it is still going to be a
professionally managed financial
institution that has to, as a
bank.
You know, you can only lend
against assets, you have to have
a certain, you have to be
financially sound, but um I
think that will be the job of
the financial managers to
ultimately decide their risk
profile. Can they make more a
risky loans or do things that.
Uh, in the public benefit to
help, you know, help
entrepreneurs get a start,
perhaps because we may decide,
but I'm not gonna say that. I'm
not going to prejudge that.
Uh, but that wouldn't mean that
they're bad, it just means that
we're offering seed capital,
maybe again as a product from a
community bank that they
wouldn't ordinarily do.
Um, but, but that would be the
decisions of the financial
managers of the bank in a
balanced portfolio strategy of
how they would manage risk.
But
But I think it's also an
opportunity in a way to help New
Mexicans out who might be shut
out of a community bank in their
traditional products.
Mature and um senators
representative, I, you know, I
think, uh, thank you for
answering my questions. I think
that there seems to me that
there does need to be I'm still
not exactly clear. I, I don't
know other folks, but exactly
how the bank.
I'm, I'm still hearing the
coordination is like.
The, the deals can be riskier,
but it's also lower barrier, but
it's also at a higher standard
and I'm not really clear still
about where it sits within MFA,
so maybe I can um talk a little
bit longer with y'all
afterwards. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Uh,
representative Hernandez, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Um, OK, just a couple of
questions.
Um, OK, so in the bill proposes
an initial appropriation of $50
million from the general fund
and another $60 million
contingent.
On being chartered, is that
Oh yeah, sorry, these
microphones are so touchy.
Um, OK, so the bill proposes an
initial appropriation of $50
million from the general fund
with another 60 million
contingent upon the bank being
chartered, is that right? like
is the basis for a couple of
more questions.
Excuse me, it's in machair
representative, um, it calls for
$50 million appropriation to
capitalize the bank.
Which sets the equity on the
bank and then once it's
chartered, the treasurer would
be, um.
Requested to move.
Uh, $60 million from revenue
into the bank because the bank
is becoming an additional
depository in addition to Wells
Fargo, Bank of America, and
other depositors.
Um, OK, thank you. I, I wanted
to make sure that I've gotten
that. So the 60 million is not
an initial or an additional.
Appropriation that comes from.
Money that's already within.
The deposits of the bank.
Right.
You know, I, I get what you're
saying, yeah. They would already
be deposited, sir, it would
already be income to the state
and we worked with uh FID with
the financial institution
division on identify how to set
that up.
OK, perfect.
Um, OK, so, Madam Chair, my, my
next question is, OK, so,
If the bill, if the bank fails.
What happens? Who's on the hook
for making it whole, um.
do when we get chartered all of
a sudden we're covered by FDIC,
like I, I don't understand that
process of if we fail, cause we
always have to think about that,
um, especially in banking
because it's money and risk and
all of the other fun things.
What happens if the public bank
fails. Um,
Yeah, we'll just
OK.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, if it fails,
then number one, the whole
country is hurting because um
this ought to be, um, last
resort that this bank is being
hit.
Um, but, um,
Uh
Number one, we have the reserve
funds, but #2, we have um as
backup is the.
As North Dakota does, we talk
about the good faith and credit
of the state of New Mexico.
Which is not so different about
the backing of the bonds that
NMFA takes out.
Or um backing up all of its
loans.
Um, they're essentially.
Um
Banking a couple steps back.
On the same thing to uh this
first to get the bond rates that
they are and then the, the loans
that they're OK. Thank you. Uh,
Madam Chair.
Um
OK, so just
Uh
Few others, um,
Has anyone, and I know we've run
this bill for a whole bunch of
years, um, has there ever been
an independent risk analysis to
determine what the long term
fiscal impact of this would
actually be on the state.
That, that worries me as we
continue to go along. If it's
not.
As you guys are saying, you
know, all of this money that's
gonna be, you know, constantly
going up if there is hiccups, if
there is.
A 2008, if there is a 2020, if
there is a 2023 when, you know,
1012 major banks, you know, got,
got hit all at one time, and
it's banking, it's, there's risk
involved in that it, it.
scares me. So I want to make
sure that there is some
projection or some risk.
Um, analysis that's been
conducted somewhere that we
know.
At least the possibility of what
could happen rather than just
saying this is going to happen.
And
Then we're, you know, we're
blindsided in a year, 2 years, 5
years, 10 years.
I, I, you know,
We need to prepare for that. We
have tons of data to do that. I
just want to make sure somebody
has run down that path.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
um, we have done a pro forma on
this for the 1st 7 years, but
we've also other.
Projections and we show the bank
becoming first but the other
facets of that, um, any chance
of what happens with the
recession is that um.
We also have looked at uh well
it's why that's one reason why
there's been so much attention
to the public banks because with
more isn't as much of their risk
that the Wall Street banks Riva
Davis and the other kinds of
financial products that they
were, that were crashing in
2007, 2008.
And that's been one reason why
trying to bring local control on
local revenue to make local
investments has been the
underlying foundation of the
public bank.
Um, so that in
The
Projections show and have been
our pro forma has been audited.
With in terms of looking at the
assumptions.
That we should uh have less
impact.
On any of those kinds of hits
than what the Wall Street bank
should have.
OK, Madam Chair, thank you for
that. Um,
OK, so you keep saying Wall
Street banks. So what about, um,
I guess my next question is
what?
What is the benefit of having a
state bank rather than, you
know, we heard from all of these
community banks, the, the local
guys, the, you know, I, I
recognized one of the
One of the people who
came in and spoke, which was uh
main bank one location focuses
on community projects, you know,
local here, yes, FDIC and and
attached that way, but by no
means a Wells Fargo.
Um, or a Bank of America. What,
what is the?
What, what are they not doing?
What are these the local guys
not doing the credit union not
doing.
That we need this.
Entity to come in. I, I don't
understand where the, where the
lack of service, services that
they provide are where we need
to put this in.
Sent to the
Um
The FDIC last FDIC report shows
that the banks of New Mexico
have a.
Um, 60% or deposit the ratio of
deposits to loans, and what that
means is that, yes, as one of
the community bankers noted in
the comments, they are highly
liquid, but with that low
percentage, which is way below
the um the average for the
country is about 80 82%. And so
that what that means is the
deposits for the shareholders,
uh, to make money that they're
investing.
another paper.
Um, products or other ways
because the those deposits are
not being used to leverage uh
the loan nearly the loan
capacity that they have.
And so that's one of the issues
and that's what uh one of the.
Borrowers was addressing in the
comments, uh, that we heard
through Zoom is.
Um
That the those loans aren't
coming through, um, the FDIC
report showed that
Our community banks are doing uh
most strongly in commercial real
estate loans as collateral, and
they also are doing some um
except.
Specific
Thanks, doing much in farm and
agriculture to help with
adaptations due to climate
disruption, so there are some,
there are definitely gaps in the
lending.
And in terms of the availability
of the funds that are going to,
especially the smaller.
Businesses and also our rural
communities, that's one thing we
haven't emphasized as much this
afternoon, but we really want
this to focus small business
development, rural areas are
tribal and Pueblo lands.
For a small business development
and ultimately community.
Sure, um
Thank you for that. Um,
And I won't go down the rabbit
hole that I could with that,
but, um, OK, so last thing, um,
as we've been sitting here and
as we've been talking to people
for months and months, um, I
think, you know, all of our
small businesses, big
businesses, really anybody in
business, um, has been talking
about how, how hard it is to
find.
people to work, I mean.
one of the companies that I,
that I help run is having that
problem.
Um, you drive down the main road
in my city, which is Rio Rancho
right outside of the metro, and
there's Hope wanted signs
everywhere.
Um
And with a workforce
participation rate in the 50
percentile somewhere in there
that I, if I remember correctly,
um, I'm really worried that
we're gonna be able to find the
experienced banking
professionals that we need to
run the, you know, run a public
bank the way that.
It needs to be run and I'm sure
that if I asked any of the
bankers or community banker,
whether, you know, any level,
they're probably having the same
problem finding everything from
a teller to, you know, sea sea
suite level, um, just like the
rest of the businesses are, so
that is another thing, uh, you
know, so I guess how does the
state?
And on attracting those people
here, especially in a
Government-run institution when
I think all of our
Um, departments are
You know, have a big vacancy, a
big vacancy rate, um.
So that, that's just one more
thing that worries me and you
can answer or not answer. It's,
it's OK, but
Uh, I just wanted to explain
that.
That
Employment and finding the right
people to run this bank is also
a huge concern of mine.
We get the wrong people, we're
gonna make wrong decisions and
that's a lot of money.
That started out as taxpayer
money that, that is at risk.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Mason.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank you
representatives for bringing
this forward. I have a few.
questions that I'd like to ask.
Uh
11 problem I see.
The board of this how.
How is it set up who's gonna,
who runs this?
Well
chair
Different customs in different
places, Madam chair.
Um, and.
It stipulates that the governor
would or and hers other
departments would appoint for a
7, and then the final 4 would be
appointed in other ways. It's,
it's particular in the, in the
bill.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you.
Uh, you know, the problem with
that to me is there's no.
Oh bikers on this board unless
the governor decides to have
one.
All
Majority of the
Of the board will be appointed
by a governor, this governor,
the next governor.
The governor
Any point in time.
Uh trying to pick on the one we
have now, but 20 years from now.
The governor decides she wants
different people on board.
So
That to me
For some of the
Continuity to an organization.
Majority of a board is at the
whim.
One person.
And no professional
Bikers involved in the situation
unless appointed by the
government.
Man in.
I think the thing the anchor to
this.
Is that this bank isn't going to
do.
Do anything that a local credit
union or a commercial bank.
Doesn't bring to them.
So, in fact, there's discipline
built in the system now, I still
think you're you're raising a
very real and important point,
and I thank you for that, um,
and we'll, we'll be.
Think about it, but to me the
anchor in this are established
institutions that are already in
the community that are already
um
started in FDIC insured and all
the rest of it and trusted on
Main Street. This bank can't do
anything.
Other than in partnership with
them.
So that's the anchor.
me
Thank you.
Represented
Madam Chair, uh,
One other
I don't know if it's a problem
or what.
But, uh, in listening to the
comments from my my in my area.
Because I am a represented
citizen and the people of
And uh
Have no
Nobody from the Southeast.
So
None of my bankers that I know
personally, none of my
Uh, chambers of commerce, none
of my organization.
And a lot of it I think comes
from.
I
earlier
Does this not take
Money out of
We're depositing this model will
not it hurt.
The banks that we are now using
depositories for the.
Man Chan, sir.
The, the fact of the matter is
that
As the revenues of the state
grow.
This bank would be asking for a
shooter, a smaller share of
those revenues in the early
days.
I do not see a scenario if you
look at the last 3 or 4 years
where there will be
Any bank will lose any money.
Some banks might not get as much
more.
Because some would come to the
public bank.
But I don't see anybody losing
money.
Like you're upset.
Adams here, uh
This bank
will only receive
Will this bank only received
funds from
From the state
Well
won't receive
Any money, so
All state funded.
And one more question and I'll
Uh
It was
Madam Chair
Representative it was stated
earlier by one.
Uh
Expert witnesses that there were
other banks.
That have this are.
Uh, analyst reports.
It stated that
Does not stated
It says that
North Dakota is the only state
with a public bank.
What other states you
Adam, you
There were 5 others, is that
what you?
What are the states that have
this?
Can you name the states.
Excuse me, Madam Chair
Representative, uh.
State of California has passed
legislation that is allowing up
to 7.
public banks to be actually 4
banks and and various stages of
progress underway right now in
that state.
They're not they're not
operational yet, the one that's
closest is a regional, it has a
staff, it has, uh, requirements.
their funding, so.
Um
It's the closest one to opening,
but the California legislation
is allowing 7 public banks to be
state of California.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you California the only
closest I'm not sure if the
state of New York or the city of
New York City is going to uh
next one in terms of
legislation.
They're both working.
have a big fight with the Wall
Street banks which they're in
progress of legislation in both
of those areas and Rochester,
New York as well.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, one more question.
Have any of these been
chartered?
Oh
That's what I was saying about
the Oakland um area, the South
Bay area, uh, they are.
In the final stages of
chartering that bank now.
Thank you. They're in the
process, but none has actually
received.
the
They have the enabling
legislation passed.
In the legislature though for up
to 7.
Regional or municipal banks in
the state of California.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representatives.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all for me today.
Thank you.
Oh, there he is.
I was, um, just going to mention
this and I was going to refer to
Senator Steinborn, we had a
moment before he had to leave,
um, there were some additional
comments.
And a couple of potential issues
that we'd like to visit on.
Um
In order to make sure that we
clarify some of the
Comments and questions, and I, I
would wonder if you would be
amenable to allowing us to roll
this bill.
Yes, ma'am.
Yeah
Alrighty. So we'll roll the bill
and thank you.
Thank you, it's been very good,
very helpful, but there were
just a couple of points that we
need for the clerk, so thank you
very much. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you. All righty, if we
can, if we can get you all to
quietly exit and we can get our
next fill up uh HB 215.
Already representative, are you
ready? All righty. Please
present your bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. House
Bill 215, um.
is about rent manipulation using
AI, which is a current practice
that's unfortunately happening
in our state and across the
country, um, in the many
different materials you'll find
that the United States
government has already gotten
involved in litigation with a
company called RealPage, um,
that is using this manipulative
software, um, that is
essentially creating a
non-compete between landlords
where they can go in and you can
do a quick Google search for
this, um.
Where if you wanted to price
your uh place to put it up for
rent. You can use this software
to figure out what that price
should be.
And how do they do that?
Well, based on your address,
anybody that aggregates that
material or the information that
they pull from crawlers on the
Internet and figure out what
that price should be, they can
tell you everything from you
shouldn't be renting this
because you can raise the rent
in a month.
To the fact that we've seen
these massive increases in rent
when we look at 14, 15% CEOs,
including that of RealPage has
even admitted to the fact that
they've seen, um, this software
actually raise rents. That's
absolutely happening in our
communities now and this is why
we're trying to put a stop to
it. Um, there have been
enactments in several cities
between and other states,
they're currently looking at
legislation, um, because this is
such a new issue.
I'm happy to talk about some of
the facts of what we've been
seeing across our various states
and certainly in New Mexico, um,
and look to um inform our folks
about how this um software is
being used to manipulate rents
in our state.
Um, and with that, Madam Chair,
we'll stand for questions.
Alright, thank you. Do we have
anybody um in favor of the bill
today.
But if you want to get up and um
we'll get our attendant.
Hello, Madam Chair, members of
the committee. My name is Winter
Torres, and I am the founder and
CEO of New Mexico Eviction
Prevention and diversion, um, as
you will find from the data that
was presented um in front of
house of probes last night, our
rent.
On average has gone up by 60% by
what nationally it's 25%, and
every day we can see that it is
primarily the result of out of
state landlords coming in and um
and raising rents uh very
quickly, the way it works is
they can sort of check what uh
two bedroom, what everybody else
is charging for a two bedroom,
um, apartment and a certain part
of the west side of Albuquerque,
and then they can meet it, and
rents can change day to day,
literally.
I didn't had a friend in New
York that said his rent could
change day to day when he was
signing a new lease and I had no
idea two years later, it's here,
um, the United States Department
of Justice in 10 states have
filed suit, including Colorado.
I hope New Mexico will join that
soon and um
We are losing people in the
streets to homelessness and this
we've got to um
Make it fair. This violates
anti-trust laws.
Thank you. Uh, good afternoon,
chair and members.
Uh, my name is Barbara Grous. I
have been a landlord in
Albuquerque for since 1988,
let's say. I have a small number
of properties which I manage and
Deal with the tenants myself.
And I can tell you that the,
the, um, pressure.
On people like me to sell to
these kind of corporations who
come in and do this is
relentless. I received phone
calls on the regular begging me
to sell my properties, and I
know what they'll do is raise
the um on the street.
I lost a tenant to mental health
problems, just over the weekend,
there are no resources when you
drive around Albuquerque, you
see elderly people in
wheelchairs all over the city
living outdoors.
We have no services for these
people and no place for people
to go and when I was looking for
a place for my sister to move.
Icountered exactly what this
other uh person just said, and
that is that they could not tell
me what the rent would be until
the day we signed the contract,
and that was because they're
using this kind of technology to
determine the ramp on a day to
day basis. Thank you.
Go to zoom.
Maria Griego.
You have one minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Maria Gringo. I'm with
the New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty and we thank the sponsor
for this important bill. Uh, we
stand in strong support of this
bill because all New Mexicans
should have an affordable place
to live, uh, New Mexico, as you
know, is in the midst of an
ever-increasing housing crisis,
uh, with skyrocketing rents, New
Mexicans struggle to find
affordable housing, and right
now nearly half of all renters
in New Mexico are cost burdened,
meaning they spend more than 30%
of their income on housing.
For many, that number is even
higher, forcing them to make
impossible choices between rent,
food, and healthcare, and other
necessities. Some corporate
landlords are using AI to game
the system, sharing pricing data
in a way that undermines fair
competition and drives rents
even higher than they already
are. These tools don't just
suggest prices, they
automatically hike rents and
discourage discounts like 3
months' rent or moving specials.
These deceptive practices
maximize profits for some
corporate landlords while
harming renters.
Especially low-income families,
seniors, and essential workers.
When AI is left unchecked, it
forces people out of their homes
and makes the housing crisis
even worse. We need real people
making fair decisions, not
algorithms driving up rents just
to boost profits. For these
reasons, we strongly encourage
the committee to pass this
important piece of legislation.
Thank you.
Alyssa.
Hi, thank you Chair and members
of the committee. I'm Alyssa
Kenny Guyer. I'm a former state
legislator from Oregon, served
10 years, and for 6 of those
years, I was chair of Human
Services and housing. So I'm
well aware of the impact of lack
of housing on our communities.
I'm a huge supporter of more
supply. I know that may come up
later and I served for a 3-year
term on the New Mexico uh
housing Trust Fund board under
MFA and uh here in Santa Fe, I'm
on the community development.
mission, so I believe in in
supply, but I think we need to
do everything we can to lessen
the burden on renters, um, to
help them stabilize their lives
and prevent homelessness in our
communities. Please support this
bill. Thank you.
Mo
Uh yes, hello. Can you hear me,
guys? Yes.
Yeah, sorry about that. Uh,
hello, my name is uh Mohammed Al
Jubouri, and I'm a member of OA
and a renter here, um, thank
you, uh, Representative Romero
and Rubio for bringing this bill
up. I just wanted to say that we
already face so much
discrimination when trying to
rent an apartment. Racial
discrimination, class
discrimination, income
discrimination, etc. etc.
There's a whole obstacle course
just to win the privilege of
renting an apartment. Uh, please
don't, uh, put another hurdle in
front of us on this obstacle
course.
Especially not um artificial
intelligence where every AI
project ends up destroying every
average person's life that it uh
has some power over all just so
one CEO can buy a bigger yacht
this year than last year's
yacht. So please vote yes on uh
HB 215.
Thank you. Do we have anybody in
opposition?
If you can
Once again, line up and we'll
have our attendant get the
microphone.
OK.
Um, Madam Chair, member of the
commission, uh, committee. My
name is Richard Gay. Um, I'm a
registered lobbyist for the
aforementioned real page. We do
not stand in opposition of the
spirit of this bill, the issues
brought up are real. Um, we just
stand in opposition of the
broadness at this point.
Um, we feel that the way it's
currently written.
We could possibly be kept
unintentionally capturing
reasonable data collection.
Uh, with that said, we, we
opposed the bill as standing but
would look forward to working
with the sponsors on it. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, my name is Alan
Lee. I'm the executive director
of the apartment Association,
uh, similar to what Richard said
here. We oppose this bill
because it's overly broad. This
actually bans the, the
collection of public data, um,
including historical data, um,
you know, it's many companies
use software like this, your
airline tickets are done the
same way, you're, you're
Or Uber, you know, ride share is
done the same way, ticket
prices, all kinds of things
companies use this, and it's a
collection of data. Um, you
know, I think what we're really
trying to get at here is the
antitrust law. Um, you know,
ultimately, the consumer, the
owner, the market, they are who
dictate the rent, not AI.
AI does not dictate the rent.
The ultimate say is in the final
consumer chooses to either rent
or not rent, and the owner can
has the final say in the price.
You know, all these algorithms
do is dictate, or all they do is
to tell you what the market data
is. And like I say, it's, this
is widely used among other
things too. Uh we understand
that the intent of the bill, um,
but we do oppose the bill as
written. Thank you.
Thank you. Do we have anybody on
Zoom?
Jean Vance.
One minute.
Yes, I'm Jean Vance and I'm an
attorney who's practiced
extensively in the tenant area,
my comment is really pretty
similar to Mr. Gays that trying
to do something about what real
page was accused of doing makes
some sense, but if this bill
goes way beyond what was
involved there. It's not just
about AI. It includes a landlord
using its own private software
maybe a, uh,
A spreadsheet and gathering
public information and using it
for himself or herself, and I
urge that you look at the at the
consent decree and the real Page
case and look at what was really
done there and try to try to
address that problem, uh, rather
than passing something this
broad.
All righty.
Uh, let's go to committee, we
first on the list is
Representative Matthews.
Thank you Madam Chair and thank
you, uh, representative for
presenting the bill.
Um, I, I'm not gonna even
attempt to answer ask questions
about AI because.
I find it virtually
incomprehensible.
Uh, but what I am concerned
about is what you were
describing.
Which sounded a little bit like
price manipulation, price
fixing, perhaps even an unfair
trade practice.
OK, that part I understand.
Um
And I'm concerned that the way
this bill is written, the only
remedy for this.
First of all, it doesn't.
Uh, it says it's unlawful, I
think, but it doesn't.
One make it a crime of of any
nature.
And instead it's required a
person who is injured by
unlawful actions.
Provided by this section may
sue.
In a court having jurisdiction
in the county, which would
either be uh in Albuquerque, the
whatever the court's called and.
Uh, or district court.
Um, and I'm just, I'm trying to
figure out how.
The person who is injured is
typically going to be the person
who wanted to.
rent the property and the price
was manipulated.
I'm understanding the problem.
And trying to prove
And first of all,
It's hard to
Putting that burden.
How do I say this?
A lot of times these are going
to be low income people.
Uh, who were not able to rent a
property.
Or price
And putting them in the position
of having to go to court.
In order to prove their damages
and their damages is.
A little bit speculative because
they didn't rent the property.
And so we don't know how.
Long
The problem would have existed
and so forth. I'm kind of
rambling here, but
I would really like to see a
much more.
Focused
Penalty and process.
For people who are damaged by
this, including
And, and if it was in the nature
of a misdemeanor.
Um, then we could actually have
some.
Perhaps better teeth in it. I,
I, I just think this is.
What we're expecting the victim.
To be the enforcer and the
victim is frequently not going
to have the resources or the
ability to be an enforcer. I
think we need to.
I would just suggest and I said
you might think about some other
remedies.
OK.
Um, I
We'll say a couple things and
maybe this will help clarify for
a lot of folks here. First and
foremost, this is in the uniform
um resident relations Act. So a
lot of the landlords intent, uh,
landlord tenant law, we want to
have in plain language, and I
think this is really putting
landlords on notice, right,
right, we're not working on the
antitrust side of this at the
moment, um, because as a price
fixing bid ridding market
competition and um
monopolization of that, that's
already available to folks who
are experiencing.
this, um, in our Department of
Justice, they could come and
perhaps bring a class action, we
can do that today. And that's
why we see the Department of
Justice, um, already in
litigation with RealPage at the
moment.
As it pertains to criminalizing
an act or bringing the motion
forward. I think what we're
trying to attempt to do here is
not criminalize or penalize any
of the um landlords who um would
fall under this act and and
those that are looking at this,
but rather put them on notice
that using these manipulative
tools where we're creating this
essentially collusion of uh
price fixing in certain
neighborhoods, areas and across
the state that we no longer want
that practice.
to happen. And so giving that
opportunity for tenants to be
able to come forward rather than
criminalizing anybody on the
other side, at least provides
the opportunity to have that
discussion and dialogue and a
course of action for folks to be
able to, to have this, being
that it is so new, we don't want
to, uh, criminalize landlords in
the process. We want to inform
folks that this is their right
to ensure that, however, price
point is reached isn't being
manipulated by AI and that those
algorithms are.
are not part of the process of
price fixing, um, these uh.
These
And I'm sure if I and thank you
for that explanation.
Um, we've just had a.
Our last meeting we had a
Uh, a long discussion about
another situation caused by
The computer systems and fintech
and all kinds of things and.
Um
I, I guess I would just suggest
that.
I it feels to me like we're
running as hard as we can to
catch up with new.
Um
Technology.
And
Without
I mean it's fine to give notice
that we don't want you to do
this, but I really, really, this
is hurting people. Thank you,
uh, Chair De la Cruz.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative, thank you for
the presentation. How do we
determine if AI is involved.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you representative. I think
that's part of the process that
we're trying to determine right
now, correct, right, we're, we
know it's being used and we know
that part of why these certain
rental dwellings, including, you
know, large apartment systems
that may not be renting,
keeping, um.
Certain units, uh, vacated in
order to raise the rent for
everybody else, you know,
basically manipulating the
housing stock in order to
increase the price um by um
having this non, you know,
supply demand continuum makes
sense for folks. Um, what we're
trying to do is really
investigate this, and if folks
feel that they are being
manipulated, this gives them a
cause of action to bring it
forward, so until there's
something that actually triggers
this that says, you know what,
my rent just went.
up $250 in a week, you know, and
I can't have no control over
that.
Um, or my lease was super
strange, and we're seeing this
more often that it was a 7 month
lease or a 13-month lease and
not a standard 12 month lease or
a 2 year lease, um, that these
are part of those sort of
indicators that.
These things might be under
manipulation with these tools
and these algorithms that are
being used, so.
Again, when once we get into an
objective place like a court
that can ask.
You know, that landlord did this
happen, um, we would be able to
create that cause of action. But
this at least allows for
somebody to bring that forth.
So it's not something that.
You're trying to determine
whether AI is used in advance,
it's a result of what.
tenants are experiencing
because I was struggling to
understand.
What would be the difference if
I'm a landlord.
Uh, and
I look at the newspaper.
And I see that, you know, oh,
that house that's next on the
next street over there is
renting for this now, my wife
and I, we never raised rents
while people are living there.
We wait till they become vacant,
but at the time they become
vacant, then we try to figure
out what's going on in the
neighborhood, right?
Just so that everybody's aware
of Madam Chair panel, I
generally do not support
government setting prices and
for goods and services,
generally speaking, but what I
do think is important to
consider that this.
Behavior
With unethical landlords, it's
its own form of uh price
gouging.
It's, it's where you're
basically know, there's a
shortage of.
Homs, and so you're gonna charge
whatever you want as high as you
want, and if you see the other
guy doing it, you're gonna do it
too or whether it's AI giving
you information or whatever.
Then I think that we, we have to
consider that we may be looking
at a form of price gouging and
government does get involved in
that.
So that people are treated
fairly because
capitalism is a beautiful thing.
It can have its downside. That's
the time it has its downside. So
I think we have to look at the
larger picture statewide, and
maybe even nationally.
That
This is its own form of price.
Thank you.
Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
thank you for your presentation,
uh, apologize for missing part
of it, but I did read the bill
and I've read the um analysis on
it.
I just think, um, my, just my
personal opinion is that it's,
it's overreaching.
I believe in a time of uh
shortage.
Of housing in general in the
state of New Mexico.
With incentives out there now to
to um build housing.
When we start talking about
things like this.
Things like rent control, other
issues.
Telling individual.
Entrepreneurs
what they can and can't do, what
they can and can't use.
I think I see a problem with it
because we're trying to
incentivize building more
housing in New Mexico. We all
know it's a, there's a shortage.
Um, I understand what you're
trying to do, but I personally
think it's, it's um.
It's overreaching. I, I know my
husband and I are landlords as
well.
Uh, in Albuquerque and
Magdalena.
We don't want to be in
Magdalene.
But there's a shortage of
housing.
So we're renting our empty
houses, and usually.
Uh, very minimal rent.
My husband gets mad at me, Madam
Chair, because I, I can't be in
charge because I give everything
away.
Uh, and then usually.
End up getting in trouble for
it.
Um, but I, I just think that
we're going about this
backwards. I think that we
should wait to see what happens,
um, with this entity that's been
being investigated or charged,
whatever the name of it, the
company was, see what happens.
Let the feds figure out what
they wanna do and then follow
from there. We always talk about
New Mexico as a unique animal.
And what are we doing here?
Let's look at national data,
national data is not New Mexico.
Mexico is unique and so uh my
personal opinion and and I
apologize, I don't really have a
question, but I just think that
in a time of.
Of uh
The crisis we have um.
And trying to find affordable
housing. I think this scares
people.
And not want to build
apartments not want to build
housing and be a renter or a
landlord in the state of New
Mexico right now. So thank you.
I appreciate what you're trying
to do though. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
All righty.
So, um, there are no more
questions, what's the will of
the committee?
And we would do pass.
So the second.
Patrick Calwell.
Representative Armstrong.
Representative de la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente.
Representative Mason.
Oh
Representative Matthews.
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Parajon.
Yes.
Representative Serrado.
Yes, and I'd like to swing my
vote. Representative Hernandez.
Madam Vice Chair
Yes.
Madam Chair
Madam Chair, the final tally is
6 votes yes, 4 votes no.
Representative Matthews wanted
to explain her.
Thank you Madam Chair and thank
you Representative for your
presentation. Um, I'm not
voting. I didn't vote no because
I don't think this is a problem.
Uh, I voted no because I think
the bill needs some work.
Um, and.
Um, we're just facing this
problem on rents and private
equity companies and all over
the place and
Uh, I'd really like to see some.
Um
Some real focus on how we deal
with this because I also
understand and appreciate what
What uh
Uh
Minority leader
Um
Armstrong said with these these
have these laws are going to
have market implications. I
think we have to figure out how
to do this in the right way, and
my concern is it's sort of just
passing a bill.
We're not
We're not really grappling with
maybe the what we ought to be,
we're not working hard enough to
figure out how.
To figure out the right balance,
and so that's my concern.
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Palejon, did you want to explain
your? No? OK.
OK, thank you. Resentative
Serrado.
If, if you want to, you can take
to be clear, to clarify, not
explaining my vote currently,
just to clarify, I did not ask
to explain my vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you presenter for the bill, um,
uh, you know, reading the, the
materials we received from
various places, it's clear this
is a problem nationally that's
happening and I can't imagine
I'm not a renter anymore and I
can't imagine renting in a
market where I don't even know
what I'm going to pay until I'm
I've accepted it. With all that
being said, I appreciated the
concerns that if industry that
we heard, this committee has
traditionally always been really
big on collaborating and finding
out where we can meet some of
these. So if there is space to
narrow it, if we can make it
where it's workable and
amenable.
Um, you know, to make sure that
the small apartment owners that
are in New Mexico are still that
they're able to do their, you
know, right and good research
without feeling like they might
be crossing law is important,
but I, I don't think this is an
issue that we can wait on that
much longer for folks who are
looking for housing. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Hernandez.
Uh
Um
I want to echo a lot of
sentiment. I absolutely feel
like this is a problem. I feel
like your bill goes far enough,
um, some of the definitions also
about AI and algorithms, um, I
don't think we're
Worded
As far as they needed to be, um.
I would love to work with you on
this bill at some point, as, you
know, a techie and someone who
develops an AI as myself, um, to
make sure that we get this
right.
So that the people that, you
know, people of New Mexico
aren't.
Affected by this, I want, I also
want to make sure that we're not
disadvantaging the
Small 1 and 2, you know, a
landlords, um, against the
Really big guys that own 100s
and 100s.
I don't think that that was your
intent at all, but I want to
make sure that that also doesn't
happen cause that's
You know
My neighbor, your neighbor,
somebody on our committee.
Um, I don't ever want to
disadvantage those people
compared to the big
conglomerates who do.
Uh, yeah, thank you for your
presentation. Um.
We still have somebody else, uh,
representative de la Cruz would
like to know the late. We've
been here a long time, but I
just feel compelled to say that.
That, you know, one of the
things that's good about being
old, you have a few experiences,
uh, back in the middle 1990s
when Clinton was the president.
His secretary of HUD was Henry
C. Snetters, who had been a
congressman out of.
Uh, out of uh Texas.
And he came to Albuquerque, and
it was a breakfast, and he gave
this speech about housing.
And it it resonated with me that
he said that in the upcoming
millennium that we were going to
have a housing shortage.
How he foresaw that was
something that they had, he did
not explain, but he said that.
He said that in the new
millennium, we were going to
need every kind of housing.
He said we were gonna need
single family dwellings that we
were gonna need multi-family
dwellings. And the thing that
really stood out for me is he
said we're gonna need a traders.
Well, we didn't take that to
heart. Maybe it wasn't right
enough, you know.
Put out into the
Public sphere
But it has come true a few short
years ago, very fortunate, I was
on the county commission, and I
was almost crucified for
supporting something called
Santolina, it was just the name,
it was just the name of a
subdivision, a development that
would have provided 50,000 new
homes, and you would have
thought it was the end of the
world.
But it's those kinds of things
that today, the city of
Albuquerque.
is providing free plans.
For you, if you are a homeowner
to build a casita in the back of
your house to provide more
housing.
I'm, I'm amazed by that.
So
Representative, I applaud what
you're doing here, but as this
body, we have to look at this on
the bigger.
Scale in a bigger view.
Bigger vision.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. And Representative, I mean,
you do have a due pass today,
but I think that I would hope
that you would hear some of the
uh recommendations of this
committee, um, I would recommend
that you do talk to industry,
um, I, I would like to see this
be able to get off the floor
with no problems, but I think
that there's still questions in
people's minds, and if you would
tighten that up and have those
conversations, I think it would
be in uh in your benefit. So
thank you.
