Representative SAINATO.
Madam chair to get all.
I'm here.
Chairman Maestas and I'm here
thank you so we have a quorum we
have a twenty seven attendees
what we let Rebecca Dow she's in
the attendee room what we put in
letter into the committee room.
And then Senator Pirtle if you
can raise your hand.
But a lot of Representative
Hochman Vigil into the committee
room as well as a courtesy.
And and we'll wait on Senator
Pirtle to to present Senate bill
one hundred to.
For those folks who this is
their first hearing where
So virtual zoom hearing many of
us if not all of us are in the
roundhouse in our respective
offices social distancing
And then the senators on the
floor right now we did not
anticipate a floor session when
we schedule this hearing right
now the plan that chair Maestas
I'm I'm actually gonna be
presenting Senate bill one oh to
on behalf of Senator Pirtle and
tastic thank you let him know so
he might focus had over and with
that we have a Representative
they often Miss Vigil presenting
Senate bill one hundred to we
also going to do a Senate bill
ninety eight senator Tom and
several to to center for the act
Senate bill three sixty five
Senator Kernan and Senate bill
two eighty one Novell or
renewable but without any
further ado an hour earlier an
hour late I don't know which
said Representative Hochman
Vigil take it away thank you so
much Mr chair members of the
committee US Senate bill wanted
to is the infamous daylight
savings time bill what it does
members is upon the passage of a
federal law allowing for this it
would give New Mexico the option
to exempt itself from the time
change once we are supposed to
fall back for daylight savings
time there for putting us on
daylight savings time
permanently and with that Mr
chair I stand for questions.
I'm chairman just isn't having a
really hard time hearing you all
the sudden thank you know I was
muted Representative thank you
very much without any further do
do you have any expression which
to sit next.
Not at this time Mister chair
and let me see if the if there
is someone in here hold on.
It looks like Scott Yates if he
is available.
Mr gates thanks for raising your
hand and so anyone else besides
Mr gates that's that Mr chair
right fantastic welcome Scott
Yates used to address the
committee briefly.
You're in the virtual committee.
Yes sorry I was economic are
thing and now I'm over here so
sorry.
No that's our bad we should wish
to address the committee yes it
would thank you very much hi my
name is Scott gates I'm
international leader of the walk
the cost movement otherwise
known as just me in my blog I've
been covering Senator Pirtle
talking about this for years and
years now he was clearly a man
ahead of his time he is no
longer had this time fifteen
states represent of New Mexico
and pass something that is very
similar to Senator pearls Bill
we have had democratic states
with Republican states and then
you may have noticed that the
there is no three bills in US
Congress most recently
introduced was from senator
Rubio's office but he had
cosponsors from both sides now
including senator Markey from
Massachusetts who was
instrumental in extending
daylight saving time you know
used to be that we changed in
April and then we moved and
changed it to March and so I'm
sorry if you guys roll little
sleep deprived this morning the
whole countries will sleep
deprived since morning because
of the our the one o'clock when
half an hour earlier than our
bodies for expecting that this
seems like a light hearted issue
but actually really instantly a
lot of traffic accidents a lot
of workplace accidents there are
a lot of great reasons to do
this the and did you know but I
I I think that you guys have
heard all these arguments
millions of times so I won't
belabor them I'm happy to answer
any specific questions I know
that when it came up in the
Senate there are a couple of
concerns about communities close
to el Paso and commuters close
to Mexico and would this be a
disruption for business
interests and I think those are
really legitimate concerns I'm
not particularly worried about
those because I think there's
almost zero chance that New
Mexico would likely call
confirming a daylight time and
that Texas would not also do the
same I can't speak for Mexico's
much but I have a hunch that if
all of the United States stop
switching the clocks there's a
greater chance that Mexico would
follow suit so with that it's
not always to testify in great
standing next.
Mexico I'm sorry zoom I I drove
down to testify a couple years
ago in center proposed House
and.
Yeah and that was a great
pleasure and honor and anyway
I'm happy to answer any
questions that I can't thank you
Mr chairman thank you to members
of the committee thank you Mr
it's and where are you now in
Denver so I'm I'm with you in
the mountain time zone than
testing thank you very much.
So there's twenty nine people in
the attendee rumor essentially
the the virtual audience why
don't we hear for up from the
folks who want this to happen
the folks who I see with Mr
Massey with your hand up I
believe you may be.
Of.
Against it but anyway let's talk
about the people who who are for
the bill that proponents for the
bill will call your name and
then you on mute yourself Mr
chair us Senator Pirtle is on
his way over he didn't have the
siblings so he'll be here soon
marvelous okay so we have three
people in support of one massive
all by Tiffany prepare.
Yes.
Mr chair this is one nasty and
no I'm actually against it you
know I am a member of the border
industrial association a board
member and I also engage in a on
a daily basis and international
trade transactions domesticated
right to the root of good take
your hand down and all of that
we will flow with the meeting so
you can talk with the opponent.
Okay thank you Sir those who are
in favor of the bill or wish the
bill to pass or are in favor of
the idea of the bill please
raise your hand Tiffany Rivera
followed by Terri Coles.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee Tiffany Rivera
registered lobbyists for New
Mexico formalized Act bureau
thank you for the opportunity to
provide comment this morning
New Mexico farm and livestock
bureau supports New Mexico and
the United States remaining on
standard time all year our
membership finds that the
adjustment for daylight savings
time is quite unnecessary for
our membership many who are
older is an extremely burdensome
task to have to accommodate the
new time schedule and many of
them of their negative impacts
on their bodies when adjusting
to this hour shift what we think
Senator Pirtle for his
determination and really
sticking with this bill year
after year and we hope that we
can see it come to fruition
thank you.
Thank you W. secretary called
followed by Joni Arends.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Terry
Cole I'm president CEO for the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce we support keeping the
state on daylight saving time
year round the time change twice
each year is unnecessary
disrupted and contributes to
sleeplessness and lower
productivity in the days and
weeks after each sweat
lengthening the time available
each day for outdoor activities
will greatly benefit the tourism
recreation and leisure
hospitality industry it will
keep people out and about longer
in the man's dining on patios
playing ball shopping engaging
and family fun secretary of it's
simply make sense the darker
mornings and longer lighter
evenings is the best way to
maximize work productivity
across the economy and provide
the greatest opportunity for our
residents to have available time
for gathering shopping and
various forms of leisure after
all what's the worst that could
happen if that doesn't work we
can go back to the way we do
things now we stand behind
Senator pearls long effort here
and we support the bill please
pass the bill thank you.
Thank you miss.
Mr chair I Senator Pirtle is and
but he needs to be promoted to a
panelist.
Senator if you could raise your
hand we could find you easier
Ajani Aaron's.
Unmute yourself miss Aaron's.
I'm.
My apologies.
My name Mr chairman and members
of the committee for all of the
reasons that have been stated
thus far I personally support.
I'm staying at one time zone.
all year round and the reason
that I do that having grown up
on a farm I'm very familiar with
the
Impacts that changing the time
has.
And I want to thank the senator
for his continued efforts to
make this change thank you very
much or thank you very much.
And Senator Pirtle I saw you a
minute ago if you could raise
your hand if we could find you.
And put you in the.
Into the committee room anyone
else wish to speak in favor of
Senate bill one oh two anyone
else wish to speak in favor.
All righty one wanted to go up
first.
What if you could raise your
hand within the zone and then
everyone else who wish to as
opposed to Senate bill one oh
two everyone else was opposed to
Senate bill one oh two.
In a raise your hand up Mr
Massey welcome followed by Jerry
particle.
And there's all there's six
people speaking so everybody got
about two three minutes.
Mr Massey what do you go first
followed by Jerry Pacheco yeah.
Welcome.
Good enough on mute yourself.
Okay can you hear me now your
can welcome.
Okay thank you so much sorry
about that yes Mr chairman
members of the committee good
afternoon thank you for hearing
us today I I just wanted to to
what just give you a little bit
of background you know as you
know senator resources been the
you know an area of of growth
and development for the state
and job creation and it's been
so against all odds for the last
you know thirty thirty five
years we compete heavily against
West Texas namely the ports of
entry in el Paso between el Paso
and what is and against these
odds we've done an incredible
job as a state as the business
community in and grow in this
region and it's it's really
created a lot of jobs and in
industry and economic
development for the state in the
past several years and part of
these efforts you know that I've
been involved in you know at
least for the past sixteen years
is increasing our our crossing
ours so I been that dealt with
delegations to Washington DC to
visit with C. B. P. homeland
security and up in the
congressional delegation and
members of Congress and you know
we've every we we fight very
hard to increase those hours you
know one by one to where we we
get now we're finally being a
little you know more competitive
and you know and competitive
without West Texas with del Paso
and their border crossings
because they have longer hours
than us so this is been the you
know I'll fight tooth and nail
do you know which been a lot of
of ours has been a lot of effort
and we finally you know gotten
this done and the you know they
and and and every time there's a
crisis you know that good thing
we seem to get to take a you
know a couple steps back and do
you know what it's been the case
with the.
COVID you know what's impacted
our hours and now with this
legislation that would it would
also make us lose an hour and
every hour losses you know in
the aggregate over the year it's
millions of dollars and in lost
trade opportunities so that's
what you know and if if Texas
doesn't change this page they're
unlikely to and they're gonna
take it as an advantage and
they're going to market it as an
advantage you know Mexico is not
likely to the changes so you
know this is just another step
backward for us for a loop for
the state of New Mexico and
international trade this should
be something that I taken on by
Congress you know uniform with
you and I think that that would
be a better solution if we were
to engage Mexico but right now
we're just handy got a big gift
over to to what the taxes from
their point of entry so I I
stand in strong opposition to
this bill you know I'm a member
of the border industrial
association I do a lot of trade
myself with Mexico on a daily
basis what the state of to what
what this would hurt my business
it would hurt our industrial
base and it's just you know bad
for trade Mexico is our main
industrial or our main for
international trade partner of
New Mexico and this is going to
have an impact thank you very
much Mr chair up members of the
committee.
Thank you Mr Jerry by check
followed by Joshua arose school
yes Mr Chairman can you hear me
yes Mr chairman Jerry but check
on the presence of the border
and national association thirty
years working in this industrial
base it together toward is we
represent the state's largest
industrial base you can take all
the rest of the state doesn't
what we have production down
here R. as Mr Massey said
uniformly done at the federal
level that's what we need to do
it before we do something so
rash like this is what this one
with the other we really study
the effects of the part of the
state
recent national base if you
could be on a different time
zone Bill number national for
four months of the year first
connected to global supply chain
to this is almost every one of
our businesses here we have
businesses from all over the
world here they will be this
year to disadvantaged firms
located now pasal that will
continue to share the same times
on stage while I would testimony
on this bill before humans are
creative they will adapt yeah
they certainly will be if
they're simply gonna pack up
shop the firm that we have a
leases and move from Senate
resell pasal I noticed investor
based like the back of my hand
and that's what would happen
were also you were recruiting
pipeline thanks for watching
consultants and brokers will
mention this discrepancy when
assisting a client with selected
the site the state invested
hundreds of millions of dollars
in this industry based private
sector billion this is all put
at risk because of this bill we
don't want to operate as the
expert witness hunches on what
Texas New Mexico we do right now
we have almost a million square
feet of new construction on the
way we're the only secretary
during this pandemic that's
actually grown it's it's based
so we need to let the federal
government act when it comes to
daylight savings time out across
the time zones one decisions
made New Mexico could make its
own decision to opt in or out
based on careful economic and
social analyses this.
It was passed in the Senate
strong message to companies were
trying to recruit and the ones
that we're building the million
square feet of space for that
we're certainly unfriendly
business state the changes the
rules are in the middle of the
game thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Sir good to hear from
you Josh what all school
followed by Alex Sierra.
Mr also got in on yourself
welcome thank you Mr Chairman
can you hear me sure can thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Joshua does
come with the border industrials
Association
Senator reset is responsible for
sixty percent of all exports in
New Mexico you heard that right
a majority of New Mexico's
exports come out as senator you
so if this bill passes we will
see an immediate effect on our
ability to for those exports and
something that has been rising
in recent years will turn around
the reason for that is this is
gonna have any more enormous
impact on supply chains if you
can imagine part of entry that
closes an hour early relative to
our counterparts in el Paso and
what is increases costs
enormously for for companies to
have tight supply chains and and
remember supply chains used to
be measured in months and weeks
now they're measured in days
hours and sometimes even minutes
for for companies with tight
supply chains they are going to
have to immediately move to el
Paso for companies that have
looser supply chains.
It's going to increase our
costs.
Now what when we recruit
businesses it's important to
know that we compare our cost of
doing business in New Mexico
verses el Paso right now we're
just behind el Paso with this
bill that switches to a passes
to the state of New Mexico have
to offer more incentives and tax
breaks to readjust that
comparison why for the media
impact because imagine if you're
a company willing to invest
millions of dollars in New
Mexico but you hear that there's
this this bill we're New Mexico
can suddenly shift to daylight
savings time depending on
congressional action you're not
gonna will be willing to take
that risk you're gonna just set
up shop in el Paso for companies
that are already here but on a
leases is soon as those leases
are up they're not going to take
that risk they're going to shift
back to apostle so we urge the
committee to vote no against
this bill thank you.
Thank you Sir Alex set up
followed by William Anderson.
Good enough on mute yourself.
Okay
sure canister set up okay.
Thank you chairman Louis this
and committee members a good
morning good afternoon depending
on what time zone you're in.
I just wanted to make my
comments regarding of Senate
bill one oh two and I stand in
opposition against it we are an
international and I'm sorry I'm
the plant manager for acme mills
we are supplier of industrial
textiles to the automotive
industry and as Joshua was
mentioning supply lines are very
tight we work in the hours and
minutes of days are a not a
luxury that we have of being on
a third times and.
would add another layer of
complexity that really we don't
need it would also be confusing
for our supplier base which
mostly is based out of el Paso
despite our best efforts and our
employee base as well it would
cause confusion for them as to
when we start when we finish.
It gives concern for them
regarding
When they'll actually be off
when they can be home for to
meet their children as they get
off of schools in Texas.
That would that would make it
very much more difficult to
recruit.
So for those reasons I do stand
in opposition of this bill and
ask that you vote no against
thank you.
Mr chair.
Good call the call thank you
William dials William Anderson
followed by Michelle Donaldson.
Good in underuse or self Mr
Anderson.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm bill
Anderson I'm the vice president
general manager for care to a
in fox New Mexico I run stations
here in Roswell in Durango for
owners out of Dallas next are
broadcasting.
First of all let me just say
that that
this is challenging to us in and
broadcast segment way are the
second largest television market
the country geographically
collectively servicing.
Hundreds of antennas on hundreds
of hell topside and maces all of
the state in order to provide
free over the air programming to
viewers from the Navajo
reservation in Arizona to Utah
that Colorado corner West Texas
all the way down to Mexico so as
you can expect New Mexico's
already won the least profitable
places for broadcast owner to do
business and yet they do why
because we kind of punch above
our weight we are ranked forty
seventh in the market in the
country is a TV market.
What the TV markets based on
household to TV's New York be
number one Glendive Montana
would be number two hundred ten
so is rural and as weird as we
often are perceived to be we've
been a good place to do business
and one of the reasons why is
because we're also assigned
Colorado counties two of them
San Juan and apply to counties
and missed out soon and I have
full power TV licenses located
up there and we bring them local
and regional weather etcetera.
Why do New Mexico legislators
care about TV or TV markets and
for that matter southern
Colorado counties because we
don't need to give the Colorado
border viewers another reason to
reject New Mexico if they do we
become market fifty or Bob if
we're market fifty or above we
are cut off from national
advertising a lot of it that
that that retailers in New
Mexico depend on it's about half
the revenue.
Of a local broadcasters so I'm
we are and and tourism does know
does not.
Reach New Mexico Colorado by way
of New Mexico if we are cut off
so for these reasons on a number
of others were urging you not to
consider Senate Senate bill one
of two thank you Sir.
Thank you John and Michelle
Donaldson followed by get a
mole.
Missiles and welcome good enough
on mute yourself.
Welcome thousand we could hear
you.
Good and check your device
missiles and you're you're
unmuted on both both ends.
Stick with a stick with us we'll
go now to our get home welcome.
Get a garden on mute yourself.
And then introduce yourself.
Well yes you're welcome.
But afternoon
Is getting Lopez are important
are more likely so am I'm also
not sure then all the water in
the special schedule.
Mr chairman members of the
committee are would like to
request what law on Senate bill
one local basically I represent
a company here is about the S.
R. manufacturing companies we do
pre here are all different
levels a lot of commercial work
and not we also have a planning
what is Mexico and these plants
also awards also our service
which you Pam between I want to
wake up here and the one that we
are not what is and work orders
in Montebello California.
basically if so this bill is
signed it and eventually becomes
are hello that's something that
is time buster old base will be
on a different time some from
apostle and motor New Mexico R.
for around for for months of the
year.
These are will bring on that
aspect consequences thought
about our business and court
case
yes the startup
the program three this in some
progress on our will be in a
different time and log I will
create a lot of activations to
vote or go specter for and right
on the borderline and also to be
competitive on a national basis
are with other states right R.
thanks.
I use bill get signed and while
we need where by the way to
way that we're doing business
here and our maybe pool in order
to consider other options of
moving or appropriations or at
the store the with our but we
conduct business optimal so
that's the reason that I'm
requesting to open all on this
side bill Senate bill one of the
thank you so much.
Thank you Mr Lopez up miss
Donaldson welcome.
Your unmuted on our side and I
and on your side.
Good I just check your device
the speakers and stuff.
We cannot hear you.
Stick with those missiles and
what because we want to hear
what you have to say now we're
gonna hear from R. T. C. M. ng
slash S. T. R. T. S. ng provided
that introduce yourself and
adjust the committee.
Our DCM welcome.
Welcome Sir can you hear me you
sure can got an annotation so.
My name is captain Scott hello
thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you to committee members
for taking the time to to hear
of our our point of view.
my name is captain Scott madam
president of railroad track
construction and maintenance I
am also the CEO of Roach of
Santa Theresa rail transloading
services we wanted to say that
we are opposed to the time
change.
Everything that we've heard so
far is assuming that the rest of
the states will change our times
assuming that Mexico will change
or times of I think on as a
benefit for us for for and the
state with the millions of
dollars that we've invested to
be able to bring a rail
transloading services to Santa
Theresa will start to change the
dynamics of the flow of rail the
rail system.
Not only will the rail system
and the rail cars the imports
and exports of rail cars so are
going through el Paso or and
will be more enticing for the el
Paso or Texas you also have to
think about the port that
Senegal us the goal is to also
the rail system will start going
to Arizona so not only will we
be competing against Texas we
will also be competing against
Arizona and with what is being
one of the largest cities in
America New Mexico itself it
will now start putting us in the
middle of having a non
competitive
advantage when we are sitting
right here with David you know
rock throwing distance from
Mexico and able to move our
imports and exports without any
trouble.
Thank you for R. two for your
time and us as a as both
companies would like to propose
the SP want to daylight savings
time thank you for your time
thank you happen Lansing Adams.
Mr Chairman can you hear me yes
Sir.
Great thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Lansing Adams on the tourism
development director with the
New Mexico tourism department
and I'm speaking on behalf of
secretary Shriram Department in
opposition to Senate bill one of
two New Mexico's tourism
industry has traditionally
benefited from the state's
generous on shining outdoor
activities and many businesses
are designed to operate during
daylight hours exclusively in
order to take advantage of this
changing New Mexico's time down
to permanently remain on
mountain daylight saving time
would likely mean that outdoor
businesses that operate in
daylight hours would need to
adjust their business hours to
accommodate the changing and
they lose revenue due to this
for these reasons New Mexico
tourism department respectfully
stands in opposition to Senate
bill one of two thank you.
Thank you and thank the
secretary Johnson
Welcome.
Thank you Mr chair Johnson of
the public education department
we also are speaking in
opposition of how Senate bill
one of two percent we have some
concerns about specifically
around students in the early
morning waiting for buses
traveling to school as it is
there some students are already
catching buses early having to
wait in the dark if we were to
maintain daylight savings all
year long that would mean even
earlier wait for them in the
morning we have some concerns
about safety and for that reason
we are sending an opposition to
the bill thank you.
Thank you Mr Senator and all the
band members thank you anyone up
anyone else wish to speak in
opposition and what we have so
there's twenty nine folks in the
attendee room one one more
gentleman try to markets
welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman of Charlie
workers Representative
accountability and all of your
many of the reasons that were
previously stated we do stand in
opposition of the internal mode
of facility donors up to the
rest of create a substantial
issues in terms of bill and
of business transactions of so
for those reasons we stand in
opposition to this thank you
very much.
Thank you anyone else wish to
speak in opposition so there's
twenty nine attendees one last
one Christopher Lyons.
Welcome.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for your
time today.
you've heard a lot of the board
I am the president of Senator is
a land company I have been
involved down incentive to
reserve a for about I just over
thirty years very worked very
closely with Jerry to Czecho
also a board member of the
border industrial association
hi you've heard a lot of the
reasons from our our our board
members and businesses in sentry
so why this doesn't make sense
for us I think it needs more
study on the impacts of
statewide are and and then why
can't we just wait for the
federal government to up decide
what to do.
It any change that gets us off
but gets us in competition with
el Paso Texas that
is any any change from el Paso
Texas really would hurt us
because of the uncertainty that
it creates in the region and we
have been working extremely hard
for thirty years to promote New
Mexico as a as a place for
businesses to locate versus
Texas and so we need to we need
to at least have as as much of
a.
Competitive advantage without
pass was possible and the change
from that will hurt us
economically so we respectfully
hope that you we we respectfully
oppose Senate bill one oh two.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr lands we will now
go back to members of the
committee but before we do we're
joined by Senator Pirtle whose
on the Senate floor
disrespecting the president to
attend our committee I welcome
center any of any final thoughts
on on Senate bill one oh two.
Thank you Mr chairman and I'll
I'll be as brief as possible
just out of respect we're based
time we're in that crunch time
right now we're all trying to
adjust to that time change time
change which is why we're all
little grumpy and cranky these
last couple days and so you know
that's really the reason why
we've brought this before you is
if we exempt ourselves the
standard time which is available
under the current law it really
creates this checker board
system which would cause the
problems at all the opponents
said today and that's not what
we want to do we don't want to
create the issues that were
brought up today was sent to the
S. and and all those areas so
that's what's important about
this legislation and that's
something that we need to really
pull away into the conversation
is that this bill will not do
what it has been brought to you
from the opponents this is
actually a solution that says we
need to fix this nationally so
that all the time zones change
at the same time so that when we
move to daylight saving time
permanently el Paso does to New
Mexico will follow as they did
when we went to eight months of
the year daylight and four
months standard time they
followed right along with the
sports right and so I think
there's and and I don't want to
discount the concerns but I
think there's a little bit of a
an over reaction here because
this would require federal
congressional action and this is
really I hate to say if we don't
like to pass memorials disguised
as bills but let's be honest if
we passed a memorial saying
Congress please do something on
a national level it gets filed
thirteen.
Fifteen other states have passed
this legislation that says once
it is legal to do so we want to
go to daylight saving the
reality is Congress isn't going
to do that but what this will
say is now there are sixteen
states that want you to fix and
go to one universal time year
round this changing back and
forth is killing people it's
causing health problems it's a
huge mental health issue that we
have to tackle and so I just
want to reiterate that Mr chair
members of the committee this is
going to send a signal to
Congress to fix it that sixteen
states have passed legislation
not memorials legislation and so
I think that's an important part
of this we've all had the emails
I probably at a hundred emails
out of Dona Ana County saying do
this past this bill we have to
have this and so I think it's
something that if if everybody
understands that this bill
doesn't put us off of el Paso
and would take that time to
realize that it's going to take
federal legislation and it's
going to be national so central
will be you know not bouncing
back and forth Mountain us will
not be bouncing back and forth
so that says we won't have a
problem with Paso that I think
will send the message that
Congress needs to hear that
we're fed up with it let's fix
it and and quit killing people
with heart attacks and car
wrecks thank you Mr chair.
Thank you center thanks for
joining us will now go to the
committee Representative this
thank you Mr chair thank your
thank you Representative Hochman
Vigil thank you Senator Pirtle
for the bill I think this is the
first time I get to hear this
bill although I know that you've
been working on this for.
For a long time
can you can you expand low but
more on the why and I heard a
little bit during public comment
I mean I heard the greater
chambers say you know this helps
with tourism you know I heard
the statement about car
accidents and heart attacks I I
can tell you the last couple
mornings have been a little bit
tough for my children and other
school age capitalism off a
little bit but you know in the
next couple of days probably
fine trying get to the to the
root of of of why what's the big
problem here we're trying to
solve through this bill and
Mr chairman and representative
of Martinez I really appreciate
that question and you know I can
tell you the the problem it is
multi faceted you know in the
winter whatever we fall back
we've heard testimony that a lot
of people don't feel safe
walking to their cars in the
dark whenever they get off of
work this the change really
affects those that have mental
health issues and and really
causes lots of severe problems
and and is is really a health
issue and the main reason the
people want us to stop changing
I mean we get the emails back
and forth which one which one
but you know I think the the
biggest issue is the fact that
this is a grassroots effort that
the people want to stop changing
there's no real reason to change
our clocks and that's the issue
here is that we might have
little small issues that that
don't seem like a really big
thing to to any of us but there
isn't a real issue or resent to
be continually changing the
clocks it's antiquated thing
that's not necessary anymore the
majority of us really especially
Mr chair and and representative
of Martinez with your children I
don't know if if if you do but I
really enjoy that extra hour at
the end of the day to maybe go
play catch or do some of those
outdoor activities with my
family when it's daylight saving
time.
Time and so I think that's one
of the big issues now that I'm
getting is from families saying
we like that time in the
afternoon but this this again
would require federal action so
that we wouldn't end up with
with the checker board that's
that's been put forward by by
the opponents today thank you Mr
thank you Mr thanks and thank
you Representative Senator
Pirtle for that response is
there is there data that suggest
people are more prone to heart
attacks people are more prone to
heart disease people are more
prone to car accidents because
of that time change and and Mr
chair representative you know as
this has become such a popular
topic
Since I brought four nine for
nine sessions ago I think was my
first time with standard time
that one failed because it would
have created a checkerboard
situation but since then it has
grown popular in every
legislature putting it forward
so NCSL Mr chair and and
Representative Martinez has some
really amazing information with
with health and the amount of of
health issues that that surround
it
but that's really the main
reason for for doing this and
for bringing it forward and
that's one of the major concerns
with a lot of people is the
health issues and and
depression and things that go
along with with the changing of
time it's amazing how as a
humans how simple changing one
hour can really affect our
biological clock but we are
creatures of habit and it's just
unnecessary thank you Mr chair
thank you Mr and and I I I I
tend to agree with you I mean
you know thing to happen
definitely it takes adjusting
twice twice a year to one where
the other but I think what I'm
trying to get Mr chair is is you
know often times we hear bills
for which there is a a perhaps a
public health.
Reason
you know tobacco bills which
we've we've heard in this
committee there's a public
health reason for and there's
there's there's measureable data
in terms of youth access to
tobacco products you use of
tobacco products.
Rates of heart disease rates of
lung cancer rates of lung
disease tied to the specific
legislation in this case is
there you know that doesn't do
New Mexicans experience more
heart attacks when we make these
transitions twice a year do New
Mexicans experience more car
accidents when we make these
transitions twice a year I think
that's really
You know what what I what I'm
getting at Mr chairman and and
senator.
if if there if there isn't
and and I and I agree with you
I've heard I've heard a lot of
constituents this is one of
those bills this in trapping are
very hot button issues in this
district for some reason even
though I'm in the urban core
Albuquerque but the figure but
it it's as I as I went through
them it all seems to be an issue
of of
Just like practicality right
lake yeah I like to play catch
with my kids for an extra hour
one hundred percent
and I don't like the time change
in the mornings you know this
morning at six AM is pitch black
and just kind of the service a
little bit my mic my pets
although I have to stay with our
puppy he went from waking up at.
You know for the morning to five
in the morning sits better in
that sense right but it seems to
be more
The emails I I received it seems
to be more about you know an
inconvenience right in and we
all like to be you know.
You know what what we do we want
to be inconvenienced as much and
that's what it seems to me that
these what I'm hearing is what
this is really about.
without.
The access to to information
with regards to what is the
health problem being cost you
what is the health of public
safety issue that we're
tackling.
Now I will agree with with you
Mr chairman and senator on
you know how how I would date at
the practices I mean I.
The I'll give you another
example of an outdated practice
this meeting right here this
legislature the fact that we're
citizens citizen provided our
the fact that we convene for
thirty or sixty days it's
because farmers had to get back
into into their crops the other
time of the year the only reason
we need to now talk about.
Talk about updated right so that
they're they're going to
examples I think that.
Certainly could be updated and
and I believe that you're right
you know I I think somebody
called you a man have your time
I think it was in a newspaper
article with regard to this bill
and I I mean I have to agree
when when you first came in and
and this is before my time of
legislature but I saw this and
I'm like what's wise is get
working on this make sense it
makes it makes perfect sense and
and I congratulate you for
sticking with it and and
building upon this movie
I have to say though Mister
chairman Senator.
I hear deep concerns from the
opponents from from from the
supporters it's more about them
it seems to be more about
convenience right it's more
convenient for me not to have to
make this time change from the
opponents I'm hearing some very
serious.
concerned about what it could
potentially due to specific
pockets of our state primarily
this on that that is a border
crossing in you know we've spent
well over one hundred million
dollars dating back to the
Richardson administration in
upgrades in infrastructure
investments in that area to
compete to better compete with
the apostle crossing and and I
think with with very good
results you know we heard today
over sixty percent of our global
X. for exports go through this
and that that is a border
crossing
and as I weigh the decision and
and and out of out of complete
transparency with you all I I I
did my homework on this bill
late last night and I was like I
don't I don't know which way I
go because my emails from my
constituents are like fifty
fifty I mean this is one of
those issues where it's not
black and white at all but
hearing the public comment today
from the folks that are on the
ground.
developing the economy of New
Mexico diversifying the economy
in New Mexico through the good
work that's happening in some
that this
It gives me a great deal costs
again convenience on the one
hand.
Deep economic concerns on the
other
now Mr chair Senator you you
mentioned that if this passes it
doesn't happen automatically the
feds have to approve it.
In that sense what's to keep the
feds or what's to say the feds
will approve it what what is
that process is like and how
likely it is that they approve
it.
And Mr chair representative I
really appreciate that question
because I think that's where the
opponents have kind of gone off
the rails unintended with with
the railroad there but have gone
off the rails with this whole
arguments is that somehow if we
do this that it's going to cause
all these issues and I'm not
trying to discount Mr chair
representative those concerns
because they they are valid
concerns and that's why we've
thought it through and I thought
it best that we go this route
because you know two years ago
standard time was passed out of
the house that would have
created a checker board were
eight months out of the year we
would have been behind el Paso
in two hours behind Texas it
would just been this crazy
kind of checkerboard time zone
system what this does is it
requires an act of Congress not
just approval Mr chair and
representative but they'll
actually have to pass
legislation.
and the legislation right now
that's being put forward is that
the entire nation go to
permanent daylight saving time
so that el Paso in New Mexico
and Colorado would all be on the
same time of that we are right
now year round and eliminate
this checkerboard possibility so
that's why I think this is
important is that you know I
hate to say Mr chair
representative that that this
does nothing but essentially all
this does is tell Congress
passed legislation to fix the
time change on a national scale
and that New Mexico
well is is supportive of that
and it's an important thing to
say that that Mr chair
representative that it's been
legal for quite some time for
states to exempt to standard
time in only one state has done
that in the contiguous forty
eight sixteen or fifteen have
passed permanent daylight saving
time.
with many more as as Mr gates
mentioned earlier are doing the
same thing so the the nation
wide approach is that daylight
saving time is where the
majority of people want to go
and that this is a stronger
message to Congress to fix it
this is their problem we figured
out that that state by state
solutions is going to create a
checkerboard send the solution
to Congress have them fix it
will send a message that New
Mexico says we want you to fix
it and that's what I think this
does Mr chair and representative
and if I if if you need more
specific data on how many car
crashes and how many heart
attacks you know I can
definitely get that specific to
New Mexico but all the studies
show nationwide increase in
heart attacks increase in car
crashes right after the time
change that is one of more
serious things and and the
reason why I brought forward
this bill originally was Mr
chair representative I was
contacted by a mother who had.
Five children one with special
needs and the concern within the
community of with children with
special needs it is is real and
it's serious and that's one of
the main reasons why I bring
this forward yes we talk about
Mr chair representative on the
baseball with the kids is
because I don't have a child
with special needs but I get
those emails I interact with
those people that's where the
real passion in the fire comes
from to keep pushing this
forward yes it's a convenience
for me but I get those emails
and I get those serious health
related emails because I've I've
been living this for nine years
and I know more about time and
time zones and I ever wish there
ever wanted to but it is a
really serious issue and that's
really the driver that pushes me
every year to to push back
against the opponents and say I
respect your opposition but the
seriousness of this is why I
bring it forward but but Mr
chair and representative this is
not going to create the the
issues that have been brought
forward by the opponents and and
I can assure you take that Mr
chair representative how you
know however you want but that's
the reality is fifteen other
states have done this we're
waiting on Congress and they're
gonna do it nationally and this
is a message to them thank you
Mr chair thank you.
Chairman and senator is there a
magic number of states that have
to pass this in order for
Congress to to to pass the time
change.
And and Mr chair and
representative no is just it's
it's sending a message that is
more states to this and and a
lot of you brought back the the
point that legislature's meet in
small time friends will so many
states still do that so we can
have a have this little time
frame that we're in and other
states are in and so if we can
get enough states to send that
message this year which we're
going to I want to Mexico to be
on board I think it would be
great with our sunshine that
extra hour
in the evening to play golf for
ski for tourism I'm still Mr
chairman Representative little
concern used as to why the
tourism department was against
that but anyway but there's not
a magic number it's just it's
about sending a message there is
a bill that's going to be moving
its bipartisan senator Rubio out
of Florida which they were the
first state to pass this in in
California on the opposite end
of of of the country.
I had actually passed a
memorandum to the people before
they could even change the the
low legislation to do the same
thing that we're trying to do
today and so I think some of our
our big hitters are heavy
hitting states have done so and
and I think New Mexico should
join with those Mr Chairman
representative thank you Mr
chair Senator if if this bill
is really about sending a
message to Congress why not just
send that message through a
memorial.
which I mean you know if if this
doesn't have the force of law
neither does a memorial when I
just called the memorial route.
And Mr chair representative for
a multi multiple reason so as
our State of done that's and so
it's unifying with those states
to do the same thing the other
thing is I don't know Mr chair
representative how many
memorials we believe that
Congress or any of the of the
members read when when we send
them I'm ninety nine percent
sure they just get file thirteen
and it it's just a waste a piece
of paper so this is a stronger
message that we put in statute
that we want you to to fix the
time issue Mr chair
representative.
Yeah I I I agree with you I
think my first session I made
the mistake of doing a memorial
and then quickly I learned that
David do much and and I'm I'm
just I'm I'm.
I'm not sure why a bill that
doesn't have the force of law
would not be filed in file
thirteen I agree with you on the
memorial part but I also don't
know how these changes that it
seems to me Congress really has
to act in a.
Comprehensive way Congress has
to make a decision and the
president has to make a decision
on how to deal with with the
issue of time change and if if
in fact there is a growing body
of research that shows
you know heart attacks and
whatever else I mean I I just I
haven't seen it and and I would
love to see it because I think
that can help inform these
decisions I I feel like you know
are there heart attacks tied to
the tent I'm sure there are I
mean absolutely is it a it
doesn't rise to the level of
changing public policy.
I don't know I I I'm not privy
to that data and I think it
would be useful to have it you
know before people make take
both to make decisions on on on
things like these.
Because you know we're caught in
this tough place right we're
here from the opponents saying
please don't do this is going to
affect
and severely.
Undermine the one hundred
million dollars in investments
in that port of entry in some
that that just out but then you
also Mr chair Senator you all
are also telling us well don't
worry about it's not gonna
happen this is more of a message
to Congress
I mean I would match it if if if
we're gonna do a message to
Congress I would much rather
send them a memorial with a
strongly worded letter to our
congressional delegation asking
them to take action on this
issue
and you know not not really rile
up I think folks who are very
invested in that communities and
that the design who are
concerned that the message we're
actually sending is that we may
not be open for business at the
same time as as the other places
and and and perhaps you know
diverting traffic to the other
ports of entry away from our so
I I just I have I I I I get it
I understand the purpose I I
understand your your position
that this is outdated I I would
I would probably agree with you.
I just don't see why we would.
Potentially send in in in our
attempt to send the federal
government a message we're also
sending a message to investors
and and economic developers and
industries that are vital to the
diversification of our economy
that we may not be open for
business at the same hours as
other places and and and I just
without the data without us
understanding really the issue
we're trying to fix other than
the convenience issue for many
people I just I feel like this
is probably not the way to go
and again that's coming from
somebody who until last night
was sort of way.
You know do I hate.
Our the change I do I think
it's.
Kind of a.
data relic of the past
but what's the best way to fix
it and I just feel like the Feds
really should do it one last
question Mr chair have you had
any discussions Mr chair and
senator with members of the
congressional delegation I
wonder where they stand on the
issue and I wonder what their
commitment is to push this at
the national level.
And and Mr Chairman
representative if you have an
Avenue to put me in contact with
them I would appreciate it you
Mr chair representative probably
have have phone numbers that I
don't have with regard to
rational delegation so if you
could help me with that I would
be greatly appreciated but if I
my Mr chair have my expert just
quickly on that issue one minute
or less touch on some of the
concerns if that's okay Mister
chair.
Up please do.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Representative Martinez I will
tell you I talked to the staff
of the senators and
representatives quite often in
Washington and they tell me the
number one way that they can get
co sponsors for the federal
legislation is to go to the
members from the state that has
passed a law like one of those
fifteen states and say look
clearly the intent of the people
in your state is that they want
to see this happen and so will
you be a co sponsor and that's
the way that they get the US so
you know we've got a great bill
just got introduced couple days
ago from send Rubio's office he
right away got
The Senate from senator Markey
Massachusetts and from senator
Murray in Washington state and
it was because those states have
taken action very similar to the
action that you're talking about
with Senator girls Bill.
So this is it's it's it's tough
you know the other states have
passed actual bills not
memorials and those are the
things that have been able to
get the attention of the people
in Washington.
Thank you Mr chair Senator thank
you Mr gates I I I see that I I
just I and that's certainly not
I find I find it but I I find it
interesting that staffers from
congressional delegations are
members of Congress would.
Sir put on the state and it
seems like if that's the case
then by golly we should be
passing that all kinds of that
station asking the Feds to do
something there's a lot of
things that I feel the Feds need
to do and it feels it seems to
me that we could really tie up
the legislature's time with.
I can give you half a dozen
examples right now bills we
should pass us Congress do
something and if that's the way
the these Congress people that
you're talking about
provided that I'd be very
concerned for those states that
that is the leadership they're
electing
you know they're they're
legislating via what the
legislature tells them to do
it seems to me like elections do
that you know I I I I don't know
that this has been a hot button
issue on in any of the
congressional elections that
have taken place we've had quite
a bit of turnover as you know
here in New Mexico you know
we've had down in the southern
regional district we've had two
different Congress people the
last couple of terms here in
Albuquerque we've had some
transition and we're about to
have another transition up north
there is a brand new member of
Congress and we have one brand
new Senator with senator
Heinrich us now being the
longest serving
federal elected official in you
know I haven't talked to them
about this particular issue I
don't know where they stand on
the issue happy to share their
numbers with you Senator Pirtle
I actually think I have a
congresswoman Harrell's number
two second sure that went to if
you need.
But I I I really I I really do
appreciate your tenacity on this
and and you know you're you're
definitely one of
my guess is that allowed but I
miss it a lot you want my
favorite senators
in in the work that you're doing
for number reasons but the you
know I I think that this this
issue just I I just I can't
really wrap my head around it I
just I don't see I don't see the
urgency of changing.
Because I don't see a public
policy reason for it again
unless Congress acts and we move
in a uniform way that's another
story but it seems like an issue
of convenience at the risk of
undermining economic development
in the state and then ultimately
it's a message to Congress right
at the end of the day this is a
message to Congress and I'm not
sure how
You know how impactful message
to Congress can be
you know on on any issue
including this one so I'll stop
there Mr chair and senator I
appreciate the time and I
appreciate the responses thank
you Mr chair and representative
of but to your question about
heart attacks twenty four
percent increase in heart
attacks on the Monday following
time change so I just think of
that today as as there's twenty
four percent more people have
heart attacks today as we are
sitting here this committee so I
just look that up in a
nationwide reporting from from
all the hospitals that
voluntarily turned from that
information thank you Mr that
state with that's the statewide
use nationwide twenty four
percent increase in in heart
attacks the Monday following the
the time change Representative
that's national okay thank you.
Thank you at the center of the
bill could raise his hand in the
zoom will will bring you into
the sit behind us on the virtual
digests in Alberta
Representative Gallegos.
I thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you as senator and
representative for bringing us
to this proposal you know every
year at a I think we started
around the same time Senator and
so I know you've been bringing
this a couple years and I think
we've had some elevator
conversations on it and I really
appreciate where you're coming
from and I and the health issues
are definitely something to to
talk about it and look at
but every time this bill comes
out
I'm from Las crucis and my area
it goes berserk I get hundreds
of emails and you know I've
really and when I first started
I didn't really you know for me
having that extra hour of sleep
Mr Mr chairman with the I'm
really happy with that so I was
very much you know I thought it
would be fine
the N. the more I've heard about
this bill and the more reaction
I've had from my constituents
I've had to just really
To evaluate that and so you know
what I will I want to talk about
is you know one of this is
really an issue that affects
southern New Mexico and we've
worked really hard to build up
that border area and you know I
I've gotten but parted on the
negative impact it would have on
trade of the only people funding
it would put us with the economy
and our with Texas I'm it you
know a lot of our residents
commute back and forth.
And that would be problematic
just having just being right
next to each other and having to
to jump back and forth
you know we we.
We border with Mexico with taxes
and
you know we we worked really
hard to to build that up
I guess when I hear about you
know and tourism got on and said
that they would be negatively
impacted are we heard from
that children would be
negatively impacted
one of the things I always
notice when I come up to Santa
Fe during this session is just
the television news.
He is such a difference between
Santa Fe and then outcomes so
and we in Los crucis get out el
Paso news and it was now then
turned it for an hour difference
I think that that would just
blow up our the market within
our area and so
I don't know that I I have to I
I'm kinda grasping for a
question and I'm I'm kind of
just rambling through my head of
all the impact that it could
have and so I'm just very
uncomfortable passing a bill
that we're seeing that you know
you're telling me would have
really no impact because it's
more of a statement.
And that just makes me
uncomfortable with I'm hearing
from directly from constituents.
About how it would affect their
livelihoods the economy and the
investment we've already made in
southern New Mexico and so I
just think that there's other
routes of getting our our
progression of delegation to get
on board and make of of federal
correction verses
you know making this as as a big
gesture and so I guess I don't
really have a question I just
was just pontificating for a
little bit and I appreciate you
allowing me to do that Mr chair
and as senator but I just want
people to understand that this
really does affect southern New
Mexico and there's really
already such a gap and I would
hate to go backwards and I would
I would asked that you find
another way to to get Congress's
attention thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative and
there's
There's several more built this
this afternoon but I just want
to place the order a little more
and enjoy the conversation to me
up center part of those kind of
three things going on number one
is people hate the change people
hate to change that the change
in and of itself for me for some
reason I adjusted like two three
days so it doesn't really.
Bottoming out although I love
gaining an hour rather than
losing in our
And then also what people talk
about with the exception of the
secretary from Pat is whether in
fact daylight savings time is
better than standard time.
Arizona are you mentioned we
don't need federal permission to
go to standard time were what
were our entire state is one
times on could we go to standard
time right now legally Senator
Pirtle.
We could exempt ourselves but
that would put us an hour behind
el Paso eight months of the year
two hours behind Texas would
actually create more problems
than
than what was discussed from the
opponents so that was that's the
reason why Mr chair and members
of the committee that we have to
do it this way if we're going to
do it is so that we don't have
the checker board so that we
don't get off an hour that we're
always the same time as el Paso
that's why we have to do it this
way and when it when when it
comes to PED account I find it
interesting that that they came
up to oppose it when all the
studies I've seen show students
perform much better when they
start at nine ten in the morning
I know that's what they do in
Lubbock county that's where of
some kinds of money go and
depending on how old you are
they've done lots of research
and figured out that high school
kids shouldn't start school too
okay middle school kids should
start to line in those types of
things so I find it interesting
that that here we are arguing
about the kids going to school
in the dark when if if we really
wanted to do some research we
will find that they should be
going to school much later in
the morning anyway than what
we're doing now.
No that's a great point all and
I'll follow up on that and the
secretary but I think the reason
Arizona went to standard time.
You know to have less daylight
is because it's really hot
there.
It's really hot you can get a a
tee time any time in the
summertime it's so darn hot and
so
So it was interesting besides
the pad Representative no one
really talked about the virtues
of daylight versus standard.
But no question about it
daylight saving time is better
than standard time for New
Mexico it's not super super
baking hot like it is in Phoenix
and more time with your family
in the evening is more
beneficial I lived Center pearl
but you know it might back in
the day at in my twenties I
lived in Seattle Washington
which is latitude forty seven I
think Albuquerque's like
latitude thirty five.
And you just got started for
forty five you're you're leaving
the office at five and it is
literally dark as dark as
midnight a depression is
incredibly high there it's just
kind of wrecks you for like you
know for five months so no
question the sun going down at
nine is more beneficial for the
family and for activity and
togetherness thence the sun
going down at six also what
nobody talked about Senator
Pirtle is up this crime.
That that daylight savings time
of decreases crime on the margin
of granted there's some crimes
that are conducive to the day to
the daytime like residential
burglaries nobody's at work but
but all things being equal it's
it's beneficial for crime
to have more daylight during
during you know activity hours
and then also folks the and one
of the N. Allen Alice's that I
read it says.
if you change the time and this
is present okay then you have so
anyway daylight savings time
versus standard time I think New
Mexico needs to go to daylight
savings time but then you have
this issue of the border and was
interesting Senator is
You know you carry this bill for
eight eight years I mean I would
I would never do that to carry a
bill for more than five years I
think it's crazy but good luck
but a but the border when you
first did this bill senator
nobody talked about the border I
think it's a tribute to the to
the work being done down in Dona
ana and and aposs county and our
and our sister country may go
it's a tribute to that economic
activity because that argument
exists when this first came up
but we have to consider the
border we have to consider TV
You know I think it's it's weird
the way the east coast folks
stay up till one o'clock
watching NFL football it's it's
the time time zone that you live
in just kind of part of your
life so we got to get it right
but it but real quick before I
wrap it up there was one of the
analysis says we can't change
the time because down is that
that that just a we would open
one hour earlier.
I don't think you would think
you would vote at the exact same
time it would just be a
different time on your watch it
would be the exact same moment
that that that the other border
openings open up and so you can
adjust.
You can adjust your time I
suppose once that time is made
but lastly
There is a memorial and a and a
and a piece of legislation a
memorial is saying please
federal government do this if
this were to be enacted however
and the feds were to pass a bill
that we automatically would go
to daylight savings time correct
Senator.
And Mr chair that is correct the
the feeling and in the message
being sent from Congress though
is that they don't want to do
the checker board so they're
going to make the decision
nationally we're either hundred
percent daylight saving or we're
a hundred percent standard time
and and that's that's one of the
issues that I'm I'm trying to
bring up that when Congress does
this the issues that we're we're
stated from the opponents will
not be an issue because it'll
will still be the same times a
Paso will still be one hour
behind Texas all of those were
just either gonna be permit
daylight or permanent standard
this is just like as you said Mr
chair a strong worded letter of
more of a message to Congress to
fix it but but I don't think and
there's any possibility that
they would pass legislation that
would create a checker board
times on system they're going to
pick one or the other and this
is just saying we want you to
pick permanent daylight saving
time we spent eight months on
daylight saving time we enjoy
that extra hour you're tired of
the heart heart attacks a six
percent increase in fatal car
crashes the week after the time
change I mean it's more serious
than just we and we enjoy it I
mean there's some serious health
issues surrounding this well
fascinating the
And then lastly
You know I I argued a bill on
the house floor yesterday.
That changed of student athletes
in New Mexico but also put
pressure on the Boller a to
change its bylaws and this is
somewhat similar to sort of pass
it kind of forces Congress to to
deal with this time change you
know people are just tired of it
there's really no need to.
To be dark you know half the
year but at the same time the
the economic stress that it
places on our friends in doing
in a county I think the need
needs to be considered they
don't know that it's not going
to change I don't know that that
when Congress does act that that
el Paso and Dona Ana County will
be the same and I truly believe
that may go will follow suit
either to coincide or soon
thereafter the US government
deals with this I want to thank
you for being a champion on this
issue up for folks up.
Folks who can recall I think
like four five years ago when
your bill first came over from
the Senate house bill actually
went over arguing for standard
time of the sponsor of that bill
now is a senator and I believe
as defer to you on this issue so
we need to send a strong message
that New Mexico supports
daylight savings time and I
think that whether this goes
through or not I think you've
done that if if this bill is
unsuccessful I commit in my
interim committee economic
growth developed to have a
economic analysis on this issue
also that when and when and if
it does happen our our ski
resorts are tourism ministry the
drug the folks that drive across
the border in your neck of the
woods Senator Pirtle are
comfortable with that we can be
two hours away from another
state but to be one hour away
from taxpayers are no big deal
but we have to be the same with
a passel we have to be the same
with without while hada so with
that
With that members of the
committee.
So it appears to have all there
is a motion to table as a non
debatable motion.
Mr so if you could call the
roll.
Thank you chairman.
Representative Baldonado no.
Representative Dow yes.
Representative will.
No.
Representative Gaydos yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
The next yes.
Representative Culbert.
Hello.
Representative bill.
This is the table.
Tabling motion yes thank you
yes.
Yes to table and chairman my
instance well yes to table
explain my vote the the the bill
has been tabled but the messages
strongly received.
We will communicate with our our
convention delegation have a
bunch of rookies Congress of as
a result of the process is our
senior member
but we'll do everything I can to
push this through as long as we
points I would also talk to our
friends and make a to do the
same thank you center prepare
leadership thank you Mr chairman
thank you members of the
committee.
We'll go to.
Senator home.
Or is it.
Welcome
to all to bring set over back
over to.
Senator.
I'm I'm presenting sentiment
senator Thomas bill Mr chair.
Well ninety eight economic
development can reports
as.
Is there a here's.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
members of the committee SB
ninety eight would require
entities that receive public
support classified as economic
development tax credits rebates
exemptions deductions IRB's RB
approvals to report to the
Economic Development Department
specifics related to employment
salaries and capital investments
made in the previous calendar
year EDT would compile that this
information from qualifying
entities and submit an annual
report to the legislative
finance council's interim
committee and revenue
stabilization and tax policy
committee and also Mr chair
might Dawn Iglesias and she's
here she's my expert people are
over.
Miss Iglesias is with us right
when the diets the whole time
well great and tastic I'm asking
and it would also require
cabinet secretary the taxation
revenue department to compile
present taxes expenditure budget
on an annual basis no later than
the fifteenth of October and
that report would include
specifics related to any tax
deviation or tax expenditure of
the tax expenditures not greater
than ten million it is not
subject to analysis and with
that Mr chair stand for
questions.
Thank you Mr glass said anything
that at this time of year for
questions.
Yes absolutely thank you Mr
chairman thank you members of
the committee one thing there
are a couple things that I'll
just add about this bill one is
the tax expenditure budgets will
be required in this bill is a
continuation of the tax
expenditure report that is
already published by the
taxation and revenue department
however that tax expenditure
report was required by executive
order and is not currently
required in statute we feel that
this needs to be in statute in
order to ensure that that tax
expenditure report continues to
be published every year
regardless of what
administration for any
administrative changes from the
executive level the other thing
that I'll just clarify real
quick on that additional
reporting for economic
development incentives the
taxation and revenue department
when it publishes its tax
expenditure report determines
the the purpose for tax
expenditures and for those that
are designated with the purpose
of economic development and have
a cost of over ten million it
will be required to perform an
objective economic analysis
thank you hi terrible trusts has
consistently rated New Mexico is
trailing other states in our
evaluation of tax expenditures
this is a step forward for the
state in order to begin that
objective economic analysis
really for economic development
incentives and hopefully as a
framework for how to further
analyze other tax incentives
that are available in the state
the current tax expense report
is very helpful and very useful
report the tax department
without but it only puts out the
annual cost and the number of
claimants of the particular tax
expenditures and that's not
sufficient data you are and
whether or not the tax is
beating choir purpose and what
it's doing what it was intended
to what we really need our
objective economic analyses on
those particular incentives that
the legislature can be fully
informed whether or not to
continue with those incentives
moving forward and this is a
step in that process with that I
would and have you also stand
for any question.
Thank you for being with us now
we'll go to a members of the
audience Representative twelve
people in the audience please
raise your hand if you wish to
speak in favor of Senate bill
ninety eight.
Please raise your hand to speak
in favor of Senate bill ninety
eight Mr Bill Jordan.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee of Bill Jordan
with New Mexico voices for
children
we want to thank the sponsors
for their persistence and
bringing back this legislation
again this year every year we
for go hundreds of millions of
dollars in revenue it gets spent
on the tax side of the budget
without any evaluation of
whether or not it has achieved
the goals intended or the
promises made if we're serious
about accountability then let's
score these bills after they
have passed to see if they are
paying the dividends promised.
You all are right to now put a
sunset on all of the tax bills
and tax breaks that you pass but
what good does it do if you come
back in a few years and have no
data on which to base a decision
on whether or not to renew the
legislation if we want real
transparency if we're going to
be good stewards of our tax
dollars than this legislation is
an essential part of that
stewardship we strongly urge
your support thank you.
Thank you Mr Jordan anyone else
was to speak in favor anyone
else wish to speak in opposition
anyway in opposition so now we
have nine folks in the audience
with us will not go back to.
The committee.
Representative Martinus thank
you Mr chair and thank you
Representative and senator I
don't see Senator is a senator
Neville senator Tom is here in
spirit and Representative
Hochman Vigil is a co sponsor of
assuming right correct got it
got it thank you thank you Mr
thank you Representative.
I appreciate your bringing this
forward as as the as Mr Jordan
stated it's it's been a long
time coming
yeah I just have a question and
make and maybe it's for for
missing the list is but I'll I
believe that the recipients.
Already have to report
you know some sort of progress
because we have clawbacks that
are associated with media so
what what what what are the not
reporting now that this bill
would require them to report.
Mr chair representative Martinez
you're absolutely correct all of
the information that this bill
would require is already
reporting requirements of from
the economic development
department this would simply
codify that the economic help
development department had not
been previously collecting a lot
of this information that change
the new administration and that
the information is being
collected now again it subject
to who's in the executive at the
moment or who's as as leading
the economic development
department there for this
particular piece of statute
would codify the collection of
that particular reporting
information got it thank you Mr
chair thank you Representative
Hochman he'll thank you miss
Iglesias I appreciate the bill I
will supported thank you.
Thank you anyone else from the
committee.
Pleasure the committee.
The past Mr chairman.
There is a motion for a do pass
is there a good.
There is a motion for a do pass
by Representative Baldonado
there is a second by
Representative Figueroa.
Up since its virtual like let's
just call the roll.
As opposed to looking to my left
and my right this everyone the
faces.
Thank you chairman
Representative Baldonado.
Yes Representative Dow.
Yes.
Representative.
What's.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Culbert yes.
Representative yes.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative.
Yeah.
Representative that was a yes.
Yes.
Representative most yes thank
you madam I stripping it all.
Yes chairman Maestas.
Yes and so you have a do pass
this will get reported out on to
the floor please that Senator
Tallman no thank you
Representative thank you very
much Mr chair members of the
committee Representative by the
a great to see you Sir.
Two oh two thank you Mr chairman
members the committee I bring
before you send a bill to to if
you have two witnesses expert
witnesses in your waiting room
not sure if they're in.
Christina Chavez director of the
secretary of state's office and
running I'll been secretary of
state's office also.
Mr Jarvis you could raise your
hand and as soon we could
provide you and the second name
you mentioned is not running
out.
Miss all that is not with us but
but definitely up.
When she gets in the audience
will bring her into the room
okay which thank you Mr chairman
essentially that cynical to a
two has had bipartisan wide
bipartisan support through two
committees in the Senate and the
entire Senate floor and what it
does is it's a transparency bill
for the secretary of state's
office that it had a desire to
add additional
Transparency to we're doing
business with Mr chairman
members of the committee some
businesses operate are filed
with the secretary of state but
operate under another name and
and vice versa we did have a
seat and amendments and Senate
Judiciary Committee us we should
be turned into a substitute to
ensure that it was in good shape
there to add DBAs you do have an
amendment for this committee Mr
chairman which would make you
aware of it at a time I believe
the secretary of state spoke to
you directly and and with that
was is going to do is to have
limited liability since the same
categories all the others that
we brought in the original piece
of legislation so if you have
that amendment we're happy to go
where we'd like to go at this
point.
And members of the committee
with the rest of the amendment.
Well let's go to move for
discussion first of all withdraw
that motion what that's going to
move for discussion and I'll
give us the the two oh two
number and explain them in.
Okay the the real case of the
two oh two number should be two
two zero seven four nine dot one
all right and we have it before
as well founded on our
Our computer room yes and it's
dated March twelfth at the top
Mr chairman and it's a it's a
amendment Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute presentable
to to essentially on page twelve
nine six it's gonna after the
work company it's going to
strike the remainder of the
lines we can add language which
is item number two all the way
to the word Mexico online eight
but essentially what we're doing
here is we're simply adding as I
mentioned before limited
liability companies are proposed
to transact business in New
Mexico and all the different
names that they may operate
under as well Mr Chairman so
that their their articles of
organization.
All right fantastic we are an
agency Chavis what do you wish
to tell that I was going to add
yes we do have two expert
witnesses Christina Travis
director of business operations
of the secretary of state's
office and I'm not sure about
running the vote has been able
to join that the meeting yet
she's also one of the managers
there within that division as
well mistrust.
Welcome.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Christina
Chavis and the director of
business services but Mexico
state secretary of state's
office.
Padilla has I already told you
additional is going to provide
transparency job is to be able
to provide accurate information
to our constituents and then
also it will help us to ID
businesses to effectively
communicate with them is needed
so again this is a transparency
male this is going to be an
assistant to start constituents
as well as assist anybody that
wants additional information on
on that the names of the
businesses within our state and
I do staff any questions
amendment thank you very much.
Thank you for joining us and the
other generate is not with the
center but yes so we'll go to
members of the audience there's
six folks in attending anyone in
the audience was to address the
committee on now.
Six on Senate bill two oh two.
They're just waiting in
anticipation of members of the
committee I think we took care
of all of the public comment Mr
chairman of the Senate
committees thank you.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr chair when
appropriate like Melissa do pass
have you adopted the amendment
have not okay so inappropriate
available would be passed.
Want to drive you to if it.
And yes we have a motion to
adopt the amendment a second by
Representative of Figueroa any
objection either way your
virtual handle your real hand
any objection to adopting the
amendment you have an adopted
bills
Representative Martinez will to
pass as amended.
The motion for do pass as
amended on Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill two oh two please call the
roll.
Yes Representative Dow.
Yes Representative will yes
Representative enables.
Yes.
Representative Johnson yes
Representative ****.
Yes.
Representative called part yes
Representative at the yes.
Madam you get all.
Yes.
Estes a yes so you have a do
pass senator on in the amended
bill and
And we'll we'll get it right out
today thank you very much Mr
chairman and vice chair members
of the committee.
Thank you thank the secretary
state for us.
I don't see Senator Kernan up on
Senate bill three sixty five
chairman I'm gonna put that the
one person that's that's right
since you're here Representative
occurs when we go to a senator
Neville on Senate bill two
eighty one hearing no objections
center welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman this is a simple bill
it as a new section to the Lita
Act the local economic
development act that allows for
contract renegotiation primarily
due to the COVID situation with.
We've had a number of businesses
around the state that's had
difficulty due to comment they
can't work from home they can't
do the things that some
businesses can if you're
manufacturing or if you have
extensive files those kind of
things you have to have your
workforce in place in these
businesses have not been able
to.
To proceed to meet the needs are
the requirements of the contract
this allows them to renegotiate
those terms they've been worked
with and everybody's tried to
accommodate and that this would
make it in statute so that that
we can try to make sure they're
not to.
Put in a bind on this and and
can actually continue with our
leader program that's all it
does Mr chairman I'd stand for
questions.
I think I have a customer in the
middle for for questions we are
for experts we need.
yes yes please up one spot into
the.
Into the committee room.
So we could sit next to the
Senator in the virtual.
It's all hot seat.
Yes Mr Scott Scanlon has its
hand raised.
Welcome would you like to add
anything to the presentation.
No Mr a no Mr chairman and
members of the committee I think
the Senator handled it very well
we're just asking for an
opportunity to renegotiate
contracts if needed thank you Mr
chairman thank you and welcome
anyone in the audience was to
address the committee.
Well I folks in the audience
anyone in favor anyone opposed.
Members of the committee.
I move it to pass Mr chairman.
We have a.
We have a motion for a do pass
by a Representative Baldonado
any second by Representative you
project Representative Powdrell
Culbert so yes it is all right.
And then before I take the
motion
I just want to thank you for
bringing this forward it's much
much needed and it's very shows
a lot of leadership and in light
of the the COVID situation what
is this.
This is if this were to become
law what is if you can start it
doesn't have an emergency clause
so would kick in as of of ninety
days is our statute or our
current rules Mr chairman okay
so the bill would become law in
ninety days but it deals with
contracts from three four years
back that's correct okay
existing contract yes got you
all righty there's a of the
there's further discussion
reserve to grow.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
senator I.
I was my understanding that we
had companies under the to have
the opportunity to renegotiate
if something happens outside of
their control so I'm wondering
why this bill is necessary are
those renegotiations not being
allowed at this time.
You may have some information I
don't have they have the
attempted to work with the
the leader contracts contractors
however it's not in statute as
far as I understand Mister
Scanlan might have more
information on that yes Mr
Chairman representative you are
correct most of the entities
have been very forthcoming in
trying to work out the the
particulars of a of a contract
but they don't have to and
that's the issue and for example
my client safelite
there's eight hundred thousand
dollar clawed back.
so they are they have good
relationships with their local
community and we would expect
everything to go forward in a
very positive way but again it
doesn't have to and so this this
bill would just say.
They would have to be some sort
of renegotiation the
communication.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Mr Scanlon so it's an
extra layer of protection.
Okay thank you that's my
question.
All righty thank you up
Representative Martinez the
second time.
Some of for someone this was the
chair what you.
You know feels like one big
hearing this I guess.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
yeah and I think it's a good
idea I'm just wondering on the
dates
so looking here between the
dates of January one twenty
sixteen December thirty first
twenty twenty one why why those
five years what I'm I'm.
We used to statute Mr Scanlon
would you explain that a little
more it yet Mr chairman and
representative what we were
trying to get at is contracts
that were very close to being
completed when COVID hit so
so you had these companies that
were had entered into a contract
year to prior they would hit all
of their employment numbers or
whatever the other criteria was
in the in the lead up agreement
and then COVID hit so we were
trying to to go back to to some
of those existing contracts that
very frankly were on the very
tail end of their life.
Thank you Mr chair and and
senator and Mr scale and that
that's helpful.
is there is there I don't see it
here is is there anything in the
bill that specifies
How Covid nineteen impacted the
business it's it's seems pretty
open ended.
There's companies I'm sorry
could there be companies that
entered into these contracts
that maybe we're not performing.
You might just go to the state
and say look he was COVID that
does this verses just.
For management or whatnot.
Mister chairman Senator
Representative it says in the
last paragraph the qualifying
unity was forced to close or
reduce its workforce as a result
of a public health order issued
to address the Corona virus
disease twenty nineteen public
health emergency so thank you
thank you point that out I see
that now thank you Mr chair
thank you senator I yell let go
what was said I mean I think
this is this is smart and it
provides our business community
with the ability to to
renegotiate and you know just a
shout out to my hometown
newspaper who feels like this is
the most anti business session
in history here's yet another
example Mr chair of
Republicans and Democrats
Committee gathered to to address
the needs of in this case not
very small businesses to qualify
for the day we get to be fairly
large so I'm proud to support
the bill and and thank you for
bringing it forward Mr chair and
senator thank you.
Thank you observe I believe
refresh my memory Representative
Baldonado made the motion.
She.
And okay great so we have a
motion and a second there is no
further discussion you please a
call the roll.
Thank you to the second
Representative Powdrell Culbert
thank you.
Representative.
Yes.
Yes.
Well yes Representative was yes
Representative Johnson yes
Representative but the thing is
yes Representative Rod Culbert.
This.
Yes.
The yes.
Mr funeral.
Yes and chairman Maestas yes and
so Senator you have a do pass on
to anyone just to make sure
great so what we did out of the
on the house floor maybe they're
there to but D. N. P. do not
panic thank you senator okay
thank you thank you members
appreciate you already we are
going to go to Senator currents
Bill.
Three sixty five is a pretty
future her Representative
Baldonado the way thank you Mr
chairman good afternoon
everybody again
house or Senate bill three sixty
five it's a they're all simple
at this point Mr chairman it's a
simple bill doesn't change very
much it's just a few words but
it relates to mortgage loan
origination and it it changes
some requirements related to
certain adjustable rate home
loans I needed to sell to bring
in very hard then he should be
in the participants are raise
your hands around.
There we go.
So.
Mr chairman the changes don't
occur until late in the bill
there was a Senate Judiciary
Committee amendment to took out
some languages have been.
Into the into the the language
change for the for the for the
bill but that came out so
basically we're only changing
handful of words and the way
it's set up now on a on a.
In our state law on the
adjustable rate mortgage lenders
the services are only allowed to
raise the.
Raise or lower the interest rate
by no more than two percent to
two percent cap per year
with the only do it once per
year and what this will do is
change it the two percent still
stays in place but they can
change it every six months one
percent of the time so it gives
that flexibility and all all
that Mr Moran speak to the to
the why there's a bigger reason
that that this needs to be done.
Mr her on welcome thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee Larry horrendous
lobbyist for the New Mexico
mortgage lenders association the
reason that we have to come in
for with the statutory change is
the way they determine the
interest rates for just rate
mortgages are based upon
national indexing entities and
and one of used to be is called
live or which the London and
interest eight bank offer right
there switching to the secured
overnight financing rate and the
the secured overnight financing
rate index is change once every
six months so the practical
effect is if we don't make this
change in statute then then we
won't be able to sell these
loans on the secondary market so
we will bill to make these loans
really in New Mexico if we don't
make this change the amendment
that occurred in Judiciary was
at the request and suggestion of
the financial industry division
to improve the bill and so
that's why we made that change
so Representative Baldonado said
it exactly right this does not
affect what annual change would
be for a homeowner would only be
up to two percent annually but
it's one percent every six
months so I and I stand for
questions thank you Mr chairman.
Yes.
Representative ready for
questions Mr chairman all righty
is is there some folks in the
audience
That one was to address the
committee on this bill you're
for or against.
Mr and I welcome thanks for
being here.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Steven
I asked CEO The New Mexico
association of realtors and as
was mentioned earlier this is a
simple fix that would allow
lenders to continue do an
adjustable rate mortgages and we
stand in support of US Senate
bill three sixty five thank you.
Thank you Sir anyone else was to
address the committee.
Members will now go back to the
committee members.
Mr chairman over the past we
have a motion for a do pass by
Representative Powdrell Culbert
a second there is a second by
Representative Figueroa there is
still further debate
representative that out the.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
the number for bringing this
forward I'm just curious if
you're experts have more
information about how this would
affect
homebuyers I I did see in the
FIR that mention that not doing
this would limit the decreases
their ability and choice of
mortgage loan products available
to Mexicans but I was just
curious if on the average
homebuyer first time buyer would
be negatively impacted by the
ability to for this right to
adjust every six months instead
of Mr chairman and and
Representative Serrato the when
you tighten up any kind of
market everything supply and
demand so if you have more
products to offer so so lenders
can offer a that they need a
loan or a VA loan or
conventional loan I'll be honest
with you
I just a rate mortgages are not
nearly as as common as they were
on before the two thousand eight
market crash and quite honestly
it doesn't rate mortgages were a
big part of why that passed the
we did but there is a definite
purpose for for that moment so
if Fannie and Freddie those are
the big mortgage loan holders of
servicers of of five of your
loan or anybody's loan I think
it's about fifty percent that's
what they they have or more
minutes more but if they can't
if they're not gonna buy these
loans because they're not set up
correctly then the lender the
frontline lender can't unload
the loan they're far it dries up
their capital from making loans
so it does affect the entire
market and it would affect the
fire at some point so.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for that and I'm
curious I mean you know this is
I guess kind of a side but
parallel question you mentioned
that A. R. and some decreased
and I'm curious if you have a
feel or idea of what percentage
that mean maybe a market but
that again is pro question I
think and in my case that we had
to sell real estate for living I
haven't seen just already loan
done in years now but maybe Mr
and has some data on that let's
ask him.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Serrato.
And I think one of the other
reasons and I I would ask
Representative Baldonado to
confirm this when the other
reasons we're not going to just
wait mortgages because the
conventional mortgage interest
rate is so low so as interest
rates will go up because they
will then it'll be more
important for us for especially
for first first time home buyers
to have this is a as a lower
interest rate but I don't know a
percentage but I I think the
representative census is very
good that because rates are so
low right now we haven't really
needed to use these but we're
gonna need to use them again in
the future.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative I appreciate your
you know on the ground
experience as well and I
appreciate resistance Act that's
all I had thank you.
All righty Representative
Martinez thank you Mr chair
District quickly reading through
the bill Representative and and
Mr and could see you I haven't
seen you all session first time
it only took fifty five days
I'm just I'm a along the same
lines as Representative set up
though
So we're really bill right now
they can just once a year up to
two point is you're requesting
see every six months up to one
point is that the long and short
of it that's the gentleman Mr
Chairman yes okay and that
allows the servicers to.
offloading these mortgages as
you were saying and get a cash
infusion but the interest rate
doesn't change for the.
For the borrower.
With
It changes but only one percent
every six months to a maximum of
two a year.
Mr Chairman there you can
address that Mr Chairman
representative of that's
correct.
Okay and Mister chair and and Mr
Karan.
Is is I'm trying and I'm not in
the real estate business so I
excuse my ignorance here but.
When you say you're this offer
this creates more.
More opportunities to offer more
products is that because the
servicers can sell off the
mortgage to somebody else and
the ability to do this every six
months how does that help those
servicers a lot of the mortgages
so that they can have more
capital to offer more.
Through so Mister chairman
and we are trying to give an
example the way that so when you
go to a lender the states of
mortgage broker there's plenty
of these folks have a friend
that runs place called RPM Lente
let's use him he goes in and he
sort of the middleman so you'll
have for five lenders big
letters that he works with to to
bankroll the deal and get
someone closed well as soon as
that deals done that lender
they're in the business of
making loans not servicing loans
so then they'll sell that that
off you if you have a mortgage
in your in your life it's it's
almost the next month after the
mortgage closes you get a letter
that says you're being sold off
to X. Y. Z. servicer well behind
the scenes a lot of times of
Fannie and Freddie will have
those if a loan.
Has a problem if it's if it's
not the reason that the
underwriting is so tight in the
reason that they the fine tooth
comb everything in the in the in
the deals because that loan has
to meet quality assurance so
that they can and then do have a
good product to sell so there's
something wrong with that loan
I've seen it were a vendor
account cannot upload alone
because they did something wrong
they were to make a long and so
they have to type that money or
some other sort of secondary
market so it's just a tool in
the toolbox and as Mr her and
pointed out the fact that
interest rates are are still in
the three percent range which is
phenomenal go buy a house you
can right now
but the the idea that if
interest rates get the five or
six or seven percent an
adjustable rate products can be
offered at a lower introductory
rate and you know that's we have
to be cautious you know as as a
first time borrower you've need
to refinance that loan is Mr
credits better their interest
rates come down and things of
that nature so but it does is
give people tools and
opportunities to to pay housing.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
representative Baldonado that's
that's useful
I have I have a total questions
just because from what you're
describing I I I think there's
several avenues we can take care
but in the interest of time I
think hold off maybe we can go
grab a beer after pandemic is
over and you can give me the
rundown but yeah we're in in our
mortgage has been sold off
One too many times I don't know
we bank with anymore so that's
useful but but it does it does
help me a little bit just
because I know that these
adjustable interest rates are
part of the B. problem we had in
two thousand eight was you had
people walking into a three
percent loan only to go up to
eight or nine or ten percent a
couple years later and so I'm
glad that these this sticks to
that two percent and then the
one every six months.
I shoot last question is out of
curiosity that the Feds tighten
up these adjustable interest
mortgages a post two thousand
eight is that why.
Here it's capped at two percent.
Mr Moran Mr Chairman
representative two things on my
question in when we we revise
our home loan protection act and
I'm trying to think back in two
thousand a two thousand nine we
put in that one year two percent
cap but actually what you're
talking about what happened at
the federal level the reason
they're changing from one what
I'll what I'll call live or to
what we call the so for the
indexing is because that live or
indexing was deemed by
regulators to be part of the
problem so that's actually one
of the protections were putting
and that's where they're going
to this new indexing because
they're more reliable and so we
can help protect the consumers.
Got it.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative Baldonado thank
you Mr and great to see you.
Thank you members of the
committee.
Seeing no further debate there's
been a motion by Representative
Powdrell Culbert a second by
Representative.
Fajardo please call the roll.
Overruled.
I will go yes.
Representative Dow.
Yes.
Well yes.
Representative.
Yes Representative Johnson yes.
Martinez yes.
Representative well Culbert yes
Representative bill yes.
If you go to a.
Yes and this yes and so you have
a two passed let's in our
current no do pass and Senate
bill three sixty five thank.
Thank you before we go to go
back to Senate bill two will to
Senator tool to centered by the
US bill it was a motion for a do
pass as amended by
Representative Martinez.
Is anyone recall maybe the
second.
I don't believe there was a
second so we'll now go back to
Senate bill to to Representative
Martinez.
Mr Amadou pass as amended and I
hope that somebody seconds with
this time.
Right if you have a second by
Representative Figueroa there
any opposition to the do passed
motion as amended.
Saying no opposition civil to
put you has officially.
Received a do pass so everyone
thank.
Our very souls of.
The one Tate I mean
They'll get us for joining us
indicate credible you know you
got a lot of going on we were
just so grateful to the staff
Giselle about as we I don't
think we're going to meet again
we may have an emergency meeting
on Thursday night at two in the
morning but I don't anticipate
but just want to say I'm just
incredibly proud of all the work
that everybody dust.
Present day here in the
roundhouse anybody have any
parting shots for twenty twenty
one.
What is your.
Question.
You guys know that I would would
incur with your your your
Remarks about the staff in you
know doing it in the zoom world
it's a little bit crazy and and
after a couple days of the
committee that stuff figured out
but hopefully would have to do
it like this next session I
think that would be better to be
in person but thank you for
letting us because everybody Mr
Chairman huge kudos to the staff
and I heard that a bill coming
over to give them a three
hundred dollar one time hazard
pay for all this and being
subjected to testing repeatedly
up their nose at hope that we
all hope for that.
Thank you I'm so impressed with
the staff.
All right now I would share
please yes thank you just say
thank you to the staff as well
thank you to you I had not been
on this committee before and I
really enjoyed it and it just
just the bills that come through
interesting there was always
good conversations and just
really appreciated being the one
of the newer newer members on
this committee so thank you.
No thank you Representative your
chair last but not least I think
we've.
We've are turned into a pretty
good committee Committee were
great committee that has worked
together well.
The session and I think.
Right pieces of.
Legislation.
Interesting thing is that it was
a lot of thought into some of
the pieces that we've had to
hear this year and so.
I would also like to thank our
committee.
and the staff we've done a good
job this year.
Mr chair I would reiterate of
this staff has been incredibly
flexible figuring out how to do
this in any way fast with their
analyses and information that
they share with us and just
consistently top notch and I
would also agree with the
Representative statement said
this is a good committee we ask.
Our questions.
And have difficult discussions
about a wide variety of
provided of legislation it's
always interesting so thank you
Mr chairman thank you committee
it's an honor to serve with all
of you.
All right thank you all have a
great day a great week if we
don't reconvene.
Congratulations great twenty
twenty one session to all.
We are adjourn thank you Mr
chair.
