Representative mason
representative matters made a
vice chair and madam chair here
madam chair you have a corn
thank you already well let's get
right to the point now we're
here today
is going to be presenting.
The.
Thank you madame chair this this
bill has an SB honor because
senator my estimates graciously
agree to to move this bill
forward and and since he's a
senior member I told you was
appreciate about that fact
actually with us today of course
we have center masters he could
speak to the bill himself but we
also have richard spinosa who is
the director amongst other
things that he does said our eld
here with us as our expert
witness the the inessence the
bill really reauthorizes the
commission without the
reauthorization of the
commission we wouldn't have any
professional competition in new
medicine simply by the fact that
every professional whether it's
may or a professional boxing has
to have ranking you're not going
to go fighting at state were
your fight means nothing to that
ranking so this is an essential
piece of legislation for the
competitors particularly around
boxing and m a and with that I
center myself would like to say
something.
Thank you madame chair
representative it was actually
attached to decision to make it
a senate bill I have more
confident more competence in the
house in the last three days
to get stuff done but but up but
also it's up it's in order to
be on this bill with the reps
and lot of delicate use actually
a member of the commission prior
to getting getting elected and
so we had to jump off but the
every state regulates boxing
now boxing is mm
kick boxing all kinds of other
unarmed combat as it said in it
has a powerful wonderful
tradition in a mexico blue
they're not madam chair there
was a heavy weight challenge of
fight in last biggest new mexico
in nineteen fourteen jack
johnson whipped up on some dude
so we have a proud tradition
here in the mexico we think that
this is in addition to the sense
that we we modernize some
aspects of the statute a
hopefully next year we can
modernise the entire statute the
commission up it has great
leadership and has done all this
by rule the past couple of
decades we as need the statute
to catch up to the rule.
With that matter which time
thank you so I know there's the
rumours credit today so is
anybody in favor of the bill.
In opposition.
Anybody in our position of the
bill.
Already let's go to the
committee.
Oh representative don't.
Thank you manager just one quick
question what are the trees now
and what will they be going up
to because
some of my two hundred percent
in some over fifty percent.
Are you addressed there thank
you for the question
but center myself never thank
you very much
the that was at the suggestion
of the of our elder it's on page
eight managed her the fees were
set in nineteen eighty so they
gold either from fifty dollars
to seventy five from twenty five
dollars to seventy five if which
if it tracked with inflation
that twenty five dollar fees
would be about ninety two
dollars so it is an increase but
i'm hoping to do managers
reviews up the budgets over the
intern because this agency
really should be funded in
hospital to
its country percent of funded by
the fees at collects and so it
really should be a drug part of
state government and then the.
Thank you.
Okay representative
onya nor.
Thank you membership
hunted i'm just going to sit
back here thank you represent
anything you said I just had a
question about kind of updated
some of the definitions and just
purely out of my own curiosity
it looks like wrestling was
taken out of like the
professional sports setting in
fixed sort like solely under
like an inter entertainment
it's like always resling like
entertainment wrestling can you
just tell me what that's worth
thank you
madame chair representative
that is part of what senator
masters talking about when we
have to modernize the reality is
that professional resting is
entertainment we left it alone
because we just probably I mean
yeah for brevity so that we
could reauthorize by it will
drop out later.
Thank you manager okay.
Thank you representative
martins.
Thank you madame chair
representative senator I am just
curious on page fourteen
widers and effective date on the
commission why
did you not when you drafted
this bill removed the sunset.
All the boards and commissions
when i'm sure represent martin
is have a sense that provision
there's actually a sunset act in
a separate statute so all the
boards and commissions do have a
sense that I think the policy
behind that is so that we have
last leaders left see can review
every fives or so years review
that particular board of that
particular commission so instead
of removing the sunset I we like
we doing tax bills at the tax
bill is is is is good public
policy these sons has actually
remain
so that we can then review the
work of that border commission
from.
Representative matthews
thank you madame chair
and presenters
i've been getting a lot of email
about
women and men in sports this is
not that bill that his causing
that controversy is it thank you
madame chair nor it is not okay
thank you and the the only other
comment I would make is that
many many years ago many years
ago when I was much younger
gorgeous george junior asked me
for.
That's that
representative
will take that off like
representative enough
for sure one question I happen
in all of these things the
mexico athletic commission.
But what makes up the new mexico
I see no definition of the
order.
Right but I didn't read the bill
so that this asked the question
thank you madame thank you
madame chair reps in a recent I
think we're remissed the
gentleman to my left as mr
richard espino sees the
executive director of the new
mexico at lead a commission
which is under
I've board members all fibre
pointed by the governor and then
there's also a medical advisory
board
as well and it's in other states
or back in the day they were
called boxing commissions and
now they've moved into atlantic
commissions but it's it's not at
least in terms of all sports
itself
what they call an armed combat
sports you know.
So it is.
Representative it manager so it
is actually controlled by
whoever's the governor can set
whoever if she wants on the
boards
man of chair representative
thing that I like about this
particular board it's not
partisan there were both parties
on the board of the five and the
duties are are interesting if if
I could take it just a minute it
overseas every aspect of the
fight it's off including the
officials to make sure that
they're trained properly that
they're certified at the fights
make sense we work with the with
the preblose and the nation the
reservations
they don't have to have but they
always elect to use the
commission and the rules and
regulations because that we
they'll have to invent their own
and so it it it's buried in the
terms of the activity meet once
a month and it's not partisan
thank you thank you thank you
medical representative
any other questions
I I actually have a couple
questions so
senator in and representative so
if this build does not go
through does the commission
cease to exist.
Madam chair the commission would
cease to exist and there would
be no revenue and no
professional competition in new
mexico for the reasons that I
stated earlier you want to have
ranking you want to if you
defeat somebody you want to know
that you move somewhere here it
wouldn't happen because without
the commission it would be
unsanctioned.
If if this word has sunset the
entire statutory scheme would go
away like these status would no
longer be in place in terms of
required head gear required that
the companies are equal wait
things are then it will be
it does not contemplate it would
be
would be the only unregulated
state well that's what I was
gonna ask me it sounds like in
order to take maintain or to
make sure that there's
regulations safety percussions
and the safeguards we need to
have the commission yet yes
madame chair represented it was
also the lfc brief on the sunset
review recommended to extend the
s.
In reading the the fire sounds
like in raising the fees with
this keep us out of the red it
almost made it seem like that we
weren't generating enough money
to keep the some of the the
board.
To keep that going.
It's just a peculiarity madam
chair that this agency is
hundred percent funded by the
fees at collects and that's just
a remember but.
You know barebones governmental
structure we've had until now so
i'm hoping to work with them
with the executive and let's see
the
to have it come from general
fund that we can.
Because we we don't have a grt
on boxing in a mexico but
there's also but their speeds
assessed to the promoters things
that nature we
oh I eventually want to take a
less top out in and have this
agency
be funded through house bill too
is very minimal
and
just license listings licensing
and regs
have roll making authority over
over this
they do they he is under that
department for a reason but
interestingly enough he's the
director of this
this commission however he has
other duties of at all as well
so it sounds like there still
needs to be it sounds like we
need to pray extend this but
during that time it also sounds
like there needs to be a lot of
work probably within the intern
to bolster what what the needs
are because it's not in the bill
madame church clearly outdated
he's it needs to work we just
needed to get it real though
okay that's all the questions I
had I think we have a one more
are republican analyst earned
the bit madam chair
representative marked with the
last question.
Is one of his posting dollar or
an elvis report is does this
government
I say that on tv it's a blast.
Okay.
Thank you.
Representative
I just wanted to ask your expert
would didn't the lfc in their
bill extend your son set
the last time to my knowledge I
madam chair representative is
that they they tabled it if i'm
correct but I don't know that it
was
yes madam chair lfc has annual
sunset bill for all boards and
commissions that are ready to be
some set and usually what ends
up happening it's many different
boards and commissions that are
put into that each year there
they're different each year I
would suspect the reason they
need the legislation is possibly
the sunset but it's more because
they're changed something in the
statute is the reason so they
need both but I would suspect
that the lfc would have already
included this in there and.
Call but they do have one every
year for every board in
commission that's.
I'm adam chair and something
that you're correct in the sixty
day session there's the there's
the sunset bill of all the
boards and commissions that the
for some reason this was taken
out and I think I don't review
the tape but I think the
presenter the board member who
was there that day was so
animated about it and it creates
so many questions
that it was removed.
But I don't think it was
deliberately removed to to
ensure it seems that it just was
removed from that bigger bill I
think in senate plan.
Already any other questions do
we have emotion.
Patrick to.
Representative and you know
yes representative dunkin
yes representative hernandez yes
representative lender
representative little
representative lunchtime
representative martinez
yes representative mason yes
representative matthews
man in vice chair yes madam
chair yes madame chair final
tell his ten votes yes zero
votes now you have to do pass
and i'm chair of the time thank
you so much thank you madam
chair thank you members.
