House bill one fifteen and have
will be rolled in we are not
sure when that will be
rescheduled so if you're here
because that bill will not be
hurting.
We will start with house bill
sixty nine.
It will start as soon as we.
Representative and in our.
Representative dot.
Representative Hernandez your.
Representative Lente yeah.
Representative.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Mason here.
Matthews.
Questions about the yeah.
That is here.
We have a quorum okay we can
start with.
Vice chair selective.
Thank you madam chairwoman
Representative Serrato
introducing house bill sixty
nine with my expert witness Mr
McCorkle I'll mention some of
his back in a minute where would
you like to go to that now.
Have it's it's a great he is a
board member of a the
Albuquerque regional economic
this is the alliance and he's
one of the co founders of the
Sandia response and technology
point and so very important
person in developing our economy
so far he'll be speaking
unsporting can give a little
more color what we're doing but
if I may we do a friendly
amendment from Representative
Hernandez on if we can at the
motion that for adoption to be
considered
Session.
Seven.
I have the.
So it just depends that can give
us.
Great.
Thank you.
Yes in a foreign the general
community.
Thank you very.
The work.
The temperature.
Thank you.
Fourteen degrees.
That's.
With
our.
Or I.
So madam chairwoman as a with
the amendment just being
discussed this bill it would
update the current angel tax
credit to extend sunset from
twenty twenty five until twenty
thirty and also include increase
the annual aggregate from two
million to five million on this
bill works hand in hand with
some other work that we've been
doing in the state last year
many of you know we passed a
bill to create a venture capital
fund through the NMFA The New
Mexico finance authority which
would provide late stage start
ups with the funding they need
to continue and grow within and
mature in New Mexico and what
this bill really does is gives
of creates an incentive to
increase capital to early stage
startups in New Mexico right to
the point they really need to do
a quick Google search on angel
investment in the surrounding
areas we see our neighbors in
all promoting their efforts to
have angel investors in their
states this is how we increase
the sustainable Connie let us
talk about and just increase
business in our state
and as we heard last week the
next ten years are going to be
very critical for business
growth in our state to
diversifier Tax base but also
ensure that we're we're creating
the jobs that are paying the
wages that New Mexicans or need
all right so I believe this will
make New Mexico competitive for
both workers and for businesses
and if it's alright like to head
over to my experts who can talk
about the impact of the angel
investment so far and what we
were hoping to do with this bill
on what.
Thank you very much
representative madam chair
On the surface this bill sounds
kind of simple and casual but it
is not it's a truly significant
bill.
Most technology based start ups
rely on first investors they're
called seed investors angel
investors
the best jobs we have in New
Mexico are in fact the
technology based jobs we started
the sandy ascension technology
park in nineteen ninety eight
there's about three thousand
people that work in the park now
and that average salary is
ninety eight thousand dollars
which is a tremendous shower in
the state of New Mexico.
Technology based companies need.
Some folks up front that are
willing to put in high risk
capital because there's a harsh
reality over half of all
technology based start ups fail
in the first seven years so
those investors lose their money
one hundred percent this
provides an incentive for New
Mexicans to invest in start up
companies she didn't seed
investors and it has over the
last eight years created several
hundred well actually thousands
of jobs in New Mexico because it
gets
gets New Mexicans who will
invest.
If you're at a startup
technology based company usually
has to happen to eight four
hundred to six hundred thousand
dollars just to just to start
and so the seed investors in a
six hundred thousand dollar
investment would probably be two
dozen to thirty people so they
make they write a check for that
amount of money this gives them
a twenty five percent credit on
their New Mexico taxes for the
amount of the check that they
wrote to help start that company
it is the single.
Is probably the the on a cash
basis it looks very small in the
in the reality of the technology
jobs in New Mexico this is the
big dipper this is the big
leverage that allows those
companies to start in the first
place thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and and
lastly I'll say the amendment
that we are adopting into this
bill would remove the refundable
element of this that was before
included and we can discuss that
another time but at this point
we would make the bill only
extended twenty thirty an
increase that that agreed amount
tell five million with that we
stand for questions.
Representative Lundstrom I need
to have a minimum explaining
anything that which of the
amendment for discussion.
I don't understand okay so
The amendments will take out of
the by the bill would be tax
credit on.
In the title which is fifty one
like a lot of it.
They were
angel investments it removes
credit and.
And on four lines nine and ten
it removes
Okay so we're gonna strike the
under score.
Language which would have made
this refundable at the bring
back the bracketed and strict
restrictions through likely to
carry forward for five seconds
the reason.
Chair LESC white guys and was.
end of the taxpayer's taxable
year maybe Kerry for for five
consecutive years okay thank.
Any other questions.
Anybody else have any questions
of you.
Any objections.
Though we have to figure that.
Yes.
Okay back to the.
A great manager when I believe
we explained the bill in told up
to tell the so.
Questions.
Okay.
One of the people that are here
in favor of the bill.
House Bill.
At the site in favor.
It is here Representative.
As.
Four agencies.
It changes.
Arizona meeting we.
House and it lasted
for years in the business is our
state one major challenge.
It is not.
A little bit chambers we.
Thank you Mr chair and the
state's twenty year strategy
highlighted the need to increase
in New Mexico in order to walk
out.
He knows is that.
Jobs yes.
Six thousand names into the tax.
Mexico it's only around twenty
more.
We only have about as much
attention.
Most of the country extending a
of the existing.
Tax credit as well which is the
new town hall road.
Chairs and anybody's Jabal
speaking to the daily on.
Jim Connors what is legislation
because it tracks capital Mexico
station colonies that are in the
start up phase will be to watch.
In the state this is the worst
fire eight it helps track jobs
most importantly it helps re
investors to the table and one
loss letter.
Right is this thank you thank
you Mr Rosen.
Many styles as a.
Yeah what will.
Also investment bankers.
Yes
what this bill
was two significant problems.
One reason is
what.
What was this about on the.
Models
Eight a question.
Representative action thank you
very much thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill forward question I have was
in in terms of the amount if
we're only spending nine hundred
thousand a year why are we going
to five million.
The.
Madam chair a Representative
Lundstrom we at we anticipate.
The New Mexico angel
organization and then the other
the three universities and
seeing them all now raised money
for seed investing so we
anticipate we're going to grow
this seed funding substantially
would you find extended to
twenty thirty we need to cap
that's large enough to grow it
thank you.
By this in this echoing how to
turn it down but
I also support this is certainly
important to the work I do
outside of the legislature.
I was wondering about that
amount it just seems to me that
this isn't used to utilize to
now.
Madam chair and the gentleman
that's investment banker factor
that actually uses these
all this is to all what's the
problem why we using more of it
just curious if I may.
Using more.
You don't have to the days of.
We don't have angel investors in
New Mexico most of them are in
California or on the east coast
a number of them so.
Excuse me this is important
because of the.
Because of the chair yeah madam
chair if we have
For me growing up program.
And you feel that.
We're gonna be having higher
utilization.
I'd like to know why you think
that madam chair.
At seven fifty one thousand
three hundred thousand dollars
you know.
On.
The one eighty
more likely to.
Thank you.
Representative Lente.
Thank you madam chair would be
passed.
Second.
As.
That is.
Motion and.
Representative and in order yes.
Representative.
Okay.
Yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente yes.
Representative little.
Representative Lundstrom yes.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Mason yes.
Representative.
Questions are out of yes.
Madam chair yes
yes it's seven nine zero have
you have a act.
As amended.
Thank you.
That H. B. seventy seven.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee do you
prefer at this microphone or
that whatever whichever you
prefer thank you very much my
chair we're here to discover
we're here to discover to what
discuss HB seventy seven
relating to aviation requiring
units for the painting and
marking certain neurological
evaluation towers providing
penalties we do have one
amendment is like to discuss
madam chair I believe secretary
receded from the twenty four
hour loan.
Rural and we can do that now or
I can introduce my expert and
then do the minutes up to your
pleasure madam chair what we
introduce.
For witness make sure that
everybody's out of this of that.
That's just the beginning at
this time I to introduce
different from the on duty
aviation Office.
Thank you madam chair.
It is yes thank you.
Madam chair actually looking at
this ammendment does not appear
to be the correct one all.
What.
That.
I.
Madam chair if I may approach
yes yes.
Representative may have all of
them.
Fortunately that is not the
correct amendments so I think
that gives us a couple of
different choices here we can
either talk about the bill as
proposed the amendment just
changes one definition this is
not the right ones.
I just changes the definition of
the meteorological tower for the
bill so I had sent a text
message for my commute Committee
secretaries Senate to meet we
need to do the amendment on the
fly or we can just talk about
the bill and I can amended the
next committee.
Representative.
The act that we have is.
by two to four four nine seven
point one which is that we are
looking for I'm sure I can tell
you that is not the amendment
you're looking for I just
settled on the final amendment
with the analysts I don't have a
to to number for you on that but
my committee secretary will be
bringing and second now with
that that they had been
delivered to your committee but
apparently that was not the case
so again I I leave it to shares
discretion as to whether or not
it's one small changing the
definition
I think it could easily be
accomplished just and amending
the bill as is I think what I'm
gonna do and.
Because it is such as much as I
think that we there was a at
miscommunication what I'd like
to do is have a.
Put you on hold we get that the
right amendment and we we can
get you back in the game
in line but I'd like to right
here in other bills why we're
doing that I apologize for the
confusion but I like to make
sure that all the members have
the correct information in front
of them absolutely madam chair
thank you.
So if we can then switch and go
to.
HB eight.
Chair of.
Thank you madam chair.
That work.
Yes I turned it off.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I am very pleased
to present to you house bill
eight
along with my esteemed colleague
I'll pass the Mike to in a
minute house bill eight
establishes a creative
industries division and the New
Mexico economic development
department.
We believe this division will
help fully leverage New Mexico's
creative and cultural assets as
drivers of economic development
for both rural communities and
urban centers we have been
working with creative
professionals across the state
from communities large and very
small and the outpouring of
excitement and support has been
truly tremendous the cultural
sector currently provides five
point six billion to New
Mexico's economy and we believe
this strategic investment will
further fuel job growth and
economic base expansion across
the state for decades to come.
And as we madam chair are
continually looking for ways to
diversify our economy and create
good paying jobs this initiative
puts New Mexico's heart and soul
our creativity at the forefront.
This division is designed to
help the spectrum of creative
businesses from artists to
practice creative traditional
crafts handed down generation to
generation to large scale
industries like video game
design and metaverse production.
We already have incredible
talent in this arena our per
capita account of visual artists
alone is seventy eight percent
greater than the national
average our count of visual
artists or people of color is a
hundred forty percent higher
than the national average.
this bill simply establishes the
duties of the division along
with creating administrative
funding and a grants fund the
division is designed to provide
direct grant funding
professional services marketing
services workforce development
and infrastructure capital that
will help our creative
businesses of all sizes take the
next step make those next hires
and break into their next market
and I especially wanted to point
out madam chair members that
fifty percent of the funding at
designated in the grants fund
will be awarded to projects or
programs in rural or underserved
communities as defined by by the
division by rule and with that I
would love to at have my
colleague senator Jeff Steinborn
also make some comments that's
okay madam chair.
Thank you.
Good afternoon committee great
to be with you and great to see
some faces the new faces of I
know for a long time that are
not on the Legislature welcome
madam chair thank you for
hearing this bill today this is
a bill that came to represent us
night from the state statewide
advocates involved in the arts
from southeastern New Mexico to
our home in Dona ana county to
to northwestern New Mexico and
San Juan county and and all
point it's a bill that truly
plays to our strengths as a
state to grow economic
development in the arts but in
the creative industry which is
actually goes beyond the arts
several other states have done
this in fact the state Colorado
the governor made it one of his
top five big initiatives and
that's the funding amount that
you see in the fund we look at
what happened in Colorado we
said that's a great model here
it does require or can require
significant investment it just
depends what you want to get out
of it
but this is something that is
will benefit all parts of our
state as represents the past he
said which is a fascinating
statistic New Mexico has more
than seventy five percent more
visual artist per capita than
any place else in the country so
it's a strength we should play
to our committees are hungry for
this type of economic
development is just really low
hanging fruit fruit for economic
diversification so we hope
you'll support it it's a very
exciting initiative thank you
thank you Senator for being here
today.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to introduce my expert
witness who is Sabrina Pratt she
is the owner of as to be
practically to strategies and
she's been an arts consultant
following a distinguished twenty
seven current year career for
the City of Santa Fe in economic
development arts and tourism and
she has worked extensively with
the bureau of economic research
at UNM and and helping us with
the reserves that formulated
this bill.
Thank you madam chair for free
being here today okay
you are do we have anybody here
supporting the bill we can see
it right show of hands.
And
anybody opposing the bill.
Okay let's start out of this
side of the thank you very much
chair of those jobs and I'm.
Residents of the capital our
nation and I'm also regional
museum of New Mexico I'm not
here officially in either of
those capacity.
so product that we have and this
is that was on the the war to
overseas Santa.
Thank you.
Yes I said yes.
Hello I agree on that as a
member.
This is really.
Now all those wires out of vital
residencies.
That is then the not.
We the members of our state
always is required to.
Also that.
A at the level.
Thank you.
Thank you this other.
James Rutherford Madam chairman.
On Monday in New Mexico and.
I'm lucky enough to carve out a
life in the creative industries
in and around the creative
industry for the last forty plus
years part of that was serving
as director of the governor's
gallery in the mid eighties and
early nineties under three
different governors and helped
start the capital markets
indication
Like what you see in the capital
where you can go to every corner
of the building and see hard
artwork by artists from every
corner of the state this bill
will ignite the.
Talent and
spirit artist in every corner of
the state I think it's
beautifully crafted in that.
It places the responsibility
under the economic development
department where they have the
skill sets and the experience.
Such a program
I think that.
It's it's it's it's been a long
time coming.
I think that it's it's a once in
a generation opportunity to.
We provide a sector that.
Has really been important to the
state going back before state
are are created
Sector is been so important
numbers for three four five
million plus
I stand in support of this bill
thank you.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name is Allison
Smith registered lobbyist for
the New Mexico restaurant
association we stand in support
of this bill we're really
pleased to see the culinary arts
in the year and as many of us
know we're very very lucky to
have a unique flavor here in New
Mexico and share that with us as
well as of training workforce at
this to reflect our thank you Mr
stands for the.
thank you madam chair Scott
Scanlon registered lobbyists for
the Santa Fe opera and the
operator is very excited about
this piece of legislation and
in the state they do a lot of
singing and we're so happy that
this year we're going back at
full strength after COVID body
was built.
Thank you.
Chamber of commerce for many of
the reasons stated here today
yeah we're full support of the
bill I'm really excited and
saying and our communities that
are here in New Mexico as we.
Thank you.
Yes.
Sure and then
having the.
How the state and I have our
rural areas like being out in
other spaces bars
having visibility Spence the
state and I'm also a member of
the New Mexico association of
the regional rep.
That is we're just suffering
from every type of this activity
happened with that with wires
and you have one around that
what we really need jobs and we
need I will have all the
memories.
With our natural resources and
the
Related just recently.
Recreation.
That this created the
A lot of them.
That.
This the state so much thank you
thank you.
And even anyone else in favor of
the bill.
Opposition.
Anybody else in.
Yes with that nine to ten people
as soon so we can write that
down to about one minute a
person.
This call of the person's name.
I read all of our.
Madam chair vice chair committee
members I am Irene Oliver Lewis
from Dona Ana County I live in
the mesquite street historic
neighborhood the original town
site of Los crucis I have been a
practicing professional theater
artist writer and producer for
some forty years in New Mexico
and around the world H. B. eight
is the most innovative and
monumental legislation that has
been created in my history of
New Mexico arts and culture I
have been an artist in residence
all of your school districts
throughout my cultural career I
know first hand how H. H. B.
eight can assist in economic
development education and
business passage of this bill
will ensure that our state is a
national leader in arts and
culture with integration of the
diverse economic development
model we have created I urge you
to support house bill eight and
I emailed each of the committee
members with specifics on your
districts meet us yes.
Thank you just all really just.
Gregory Smith.
Thanks the right you know.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Khan which you know and the
restaurant lobbyist for the
public so back him and tiles and
we stand support of it house
bill eight
primarily because both of those
would benefit from the creation
of a a creative industries
division within the Economic
Development Department
you know they would also benefit
of the new initiatives that are
outlined in the bill but
especially creation of the
industry fund that would provide
grants for programs and projects
in rural areas
Ackerman as you may or may not
know has a cultural center and
museum Taos pueblo is in the
process of creating a character
center with museum and gallery
both Pueblo seven credible
artisans and potter's and both
places are destination points
for the tourist industry but
more than anything madam chair
in order for.
Any sort of economic or business
development to current tribal
lands really requires
formulating a comprehensive plan
taking into consideration many
factors in order to assure
projects except excuse me
project success profit potential
and job creation that for these
reasons chair we stand support
which we have thank you.
All the.
All the.
I want to at bit.
Representative at and.
Hello can everybody hear me.
Yes.
Okay this is Goldie Tom.
I am a licensed cosmetologist
and a certified make up artist
for the past ten years I reside
in Gallup New Mexico and I owned
a business called Goldilocks
studio that I just recently
opened back in may of twenty
twenty one and I also work in
the film industry and in the
fashion industry I am hoping to
create a mentorship and a
As the workshop in my community
in my salon and studio to help
the community members and I
would greatly appreciate your
support and I also do support H.
B. eight ad because it targets
the investments in our rural
communities such as the Navajo
Nation and Gallup New Mexico
which are also rural areas thank
you so much I also do have
someone here that's in support
as well too I can we can I get
this person on as well.
Yes one minute.
This is Lauren at thirty.
Committee member of delta Mexico
fully roll tribal member of
Navajo Nation.
I am a working actor producer
writer director I also hosts
workshops for youth and the aids
up advocating for prevention
work and advocacy for entering
into the film industry I am in
support of a this bill and I
thank you for your time.
You madam chair members of the
committee thanks for your time
today my name is war not sick
from the director of economic
development city apartments in
New Mexico and we are advocating
many different parts in our area
whether it's pulmonary arts
being taught in our.
In downtown Farmington or for a
visual arts and film at San Juan
college and we are very keen to
find ways to expand the arts in
our area we are applying to be a
certified distort will district
in our downtown and actually
actively working to attract
sculptures and an art to the
downtown corridor so I am very
much in support of this bill and
thank you for your time.
See Serret.
Yes.
I'm from the Gallup McKinley
county area and I just want to
echo what everybody else has so
eloquently said
this bill would absolutely
Enhance the work that are
councils have been doing around
the state and I just echo what
everybody is saying and I
support HB eight thank you.
Okay.
Kate.
Right to die and Hensley.
Hello I mean Dianne Hensley and
I live in Albuquerque I'm a
grant writer for Rio Rancho
creative crossroads and is yes
singers of Santa Fe and I can
first hand see the economic
impact of of being able to hire
a company is the creator
crossroads is also a theater
company and just adding to the
whole.
the whole value of the
communities in which arts is a
vital part so I stand in support
of it SB eight thank you.
Antoinette and that.
Good afternoon my name is
Antoinette match and I am a
music therapist and music
educator that owns major music
and wellness studios in Gallup
New Mexico I'm also the
executive director of the Gallup
community concert association so
I can see how this bill will
really help the communities
throughout the state as well as
in the four corners area of.
I did also like seeing the
information about supporting.
All of the arts video game
development and so forth but for
the performing arts.
And for using music and wellness
to help.
At risk use us as well as a
people persisted living in the
nursing homes and so forth this
this bill could help so many
people so I to amend support
house bill eight.
Thank you.
Susan garbage.
Good afternoon committee members
thank you so much for your time
my name is Susan are but I'm the
general manager at yelp Santa
fe's exhibits
we know that the ark to stick
Connie is essential to the
state's continued success and we
know this bill will help
individuals and businesses both
big and small and so we
respectfully ask for your
support for H. B. eight as the
strategic investment will feel
job growth and economic
expansion for decades to come
and thank you so much for your
time.
Gregory spent.
I think I got it this time.
Really thank you madam chair and
thank you the committee members
I'm Greg Smith executive
director of Dona and arts
council in Los crucis I've got
that job for about two more
weeks but we are very supportive
here of what house bill eight
tries to do no.
Creative industries have been an
integral and powerful part of
making New Mexico what we know
it to be now let me urge you to
consider the power of creative
industries bring to our state's
future when oil and gas industry
is no longer a centerpiece in
our economy we will still have
creative industries in New
Mexico when agricultural
construction and many service
jobs have been relinquished to
automated and digital providers
there will still be
opportunities in our creative
industries.
What house bill eight is
proposing deserves very serious
consideration for the power it
means for New Mexico those of us
living here and those who will
come after us here I thank you
for giving HB eight your thought
hello attention.
At last Erin how.
Hello thank you my name is Irene
how I am the assistant director
of the New Mexico again for us
this test years in Santa Fe and
the course master Representative
quest as well as the executive
director for we went to creative
crossroads and that that
supports children's chorus youth
chorus and theater and we
definitely says stand in support
of HB eight to think that it
could definitely bring a
revolution in arts and
creativity here in New Mexico
thank you.
madam chair that is the last
person.
Thank you
turn it over to the committee to
seventy have any questions.
Representative Mason.
What.
The stock market was.
You know we talked about how
much money this.
How much we're spending.
You gave an amount of money that
is generated that much but it is
within the like this to our tax
but.
Hi seven point are we going to
that was after the yes all the
money that was that.
from that in those.
The other for more takers than
they are given.
But thank you madam chair and
Representative Mason we don't
have revenue asked specifically
for creative industries what I
can give you is wages and twenty
twenty one which was
Two billion four hundred million
give or take and so those are
the wages estimated on workers
that are currently employed in
the creative industry so you
know you could extrapolate some
I income tax data from that
potentially.
There
are many people.
Are actually what is the I got.
I can.
Thank.
Mr.
What Madam chair representative
Mason
that is that forty one thousand
one hundred and thirty one at
individuals employed in the
creative industries.
Senator one more question
R. the.
Why is this at this point time
needed
Division of the eligible life.
The Economic.
Well with the visions of that
balance thank.
This is actually increasing our
budget.
That this I.
Thank you thank you
representative madam chair
the reason we brought this
forward is because it this
industry is
in need of the most support
particularly in rural areas and
I think that it is going to
require a lot of the programming
that this division will provide
to help people who may have a
day job and then how do you
create do something creative in
the evening sell their pieces on
the weekend they may participate
part time in the creative
industry assisting those
individuals in registering for a
business license assisting them
in in understanding how to
manage a business how to market
the business and really bringing
the department to their doorstep
rather than forcing everyone to
kind of fit with
at the protocols that may be
more designed for larger
businesses and really what we're
trying to do is turn some of
these part time gigs into full
time full blooded livings for
two that could support a family.
one more question.
we talk about all of Mexico's
with and hello I am from South.
All the testimonies I also was
mentioned one.
Still as far develop.
Albuquerque side of the house.
Nobody to tell my constituents.
Out of it is that what I deserve
this right on us or we will
actually see that in the.
Madam chair representative there
is actually a very robust arts
community in southeast New
Mexico and a number of them
protect participated in the
creation of this initiative
we've been very proud to have
that in you also have some very
fine arts institutions in
southeast New Mexico and so all
of the folks that have brought
those to fruition have been
working with us so it's been a
great effort.
Thank you.
Representative Mandy.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee at the
presenters
I think is a very interesting
bill and getting more
interesting when I got to sixty
five billion.
Which is.
I was that I should leave the
legislature to take up my
painting lessons again that was
never give me anything.
question that we already have a
robust and.
System for helping the film
industry and so forth.
And my question is.
Is it the intent or would it the
current that the six it's some
part in the sixty five billion
would be going to companies like
Netflix to
To these to these producers of
film and TV and so forth that
already or benefiting from our
economic programs for that
industry.
Sure thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative for the
question I think it's sixty five
million but just as a lot of
money that yeah absolutely in
Taos your question we film is
not included in this division so
the direct answer is no they
would not be a constituent of
the creative industry division
we already have a film division
in the economic development
department it does involve some
new media some digital media so
there's a little bit across over
there but up some creative
industry divisions in Colorado
well in Hawaii specifically I'm
thinking does include film but
when we look at that model here
that that part wasn't
appropriate for us because we we
have a thriving film division so
we took that out we would want
to subsume that that would've
been the wrong thing to do so it
doesn't include film and that's
one secretary this doesn't
include.
Here Senator thank you for that
but I'm I'm looking at the
language on that trying to argue
with you there just looking at
the language on.
line beginning on page one two.
Antitoxin that performing visual
and literary arts entertainment
media information and
broadcasting.
The question popped up in my
mind because I've read that
the laws language as.
Including.
the possibility.
Our current film industry is.
So forth and I just.
That was not the intent was to
add another layer support for
these commercial.
Products but.
That is and I want to think that
that language might be a little
broad.
Madam chair representative it is
broad language and and so to
give that impression that it's
the same thing but in fact it's
in these are definitions we took
of national definitions of
creative industries but we took
the film part out so I mean
entertainment to brought word
that goes well beyond film of
course in a dance and music and
all kinds of things and of
course media is also a very
broad term and as I mentioned
this little overlap when you
when you get into the area of
digital media and but I think if
anything
it's clear with the delineation
line is some more film division
statutes are very clear a film
incentives all that I think
there's a synergy though having
said that where there is a
little bit overlap and they
definitely are all complimentary
being in the economic
development having a film
division
but yeah I know I mean there's a
I could see that some of the
words abroad thank you get that
impression but but.
Don't include the.
Madam chair.
Senator I appreciate that answer
I wonder if it would be
appropriate to consider some
kind of.
Language to make it clear that
this we don't need to add to its
two different buckets.
because I don't think that's
your intent but we have.
I think it maybe could.
Allow that.
And then I if I might.
Chair I have one more question
the sixty five million.
Sixty five million he is
recurring.
As I read.
Cheerios and I'm just wondering
if.
That should be recurring before
we see the impact of this sixty
five million dollars on the
industry and have a better sense
of what.
To low to moderate act I know
the version ever too low
Six.
Here is what you're feeling is.
Madam chair at and
Representative and
The sixty five million dollars
appropriation is intended as a
one time fund.
And there there the reason for
that the size of that which we
know is extremely ambitious and
I certainly is probably
something that we will have to.
Work on approaching that level
over many years is
we have looked at similar
programs in other states there's
only a handful of states here
that we really have a huge
opportunity to push New Mexico
forward at the national level
only a handful of other states
that have investments in
creative industries like this
one of those is Colorado and
they're currently investing over
a hundred and ten million in
creative industries it in the
and economic development
projects I brought I have a list
of all the projects there
investing in currently and
Understand that a big chunk of
that funding would be for
infrastructure so for example in
Santa Fe we recently had a
foundry closed during the COVID
all of that and that foundry not
only was a tourist destination
and a place where families will
go to picnics and things like
that but it also was sort of an
economic hub for all of the
metal part is that rely on
foundries for their product now
all of that business is going to
Colorado so that might be an
opportunity for the of a public
private partnership and
investment of these kinds of
bump into something that could
be a real boon to local artists
and encourage for their high
growth it of of users of that
boundary.
That.
Thank you madam chair and I
would just add to that you know
when we created the outdoor
division we also had an
aspirational ideal number of how
much would staff that with we we
did end up with that and I I
don't think you should look at
this fund is being all or
nothing proposition that the
success of this depends on that
fund that's that's kind of a
full vision of you want to talk
about public infrastructure like
arts and culture districts like
what they want to do in San Juan
County what mistranslation but
to for what they've done in Los
crucis public infrastructures we
now is costly but you can
started a vision with a couple
staff members and instantly get
R. O. Y. and instantly start to
incredible work that's exactly
what happened with the outdoor
division then over a period of
just a few years now we're
giving ten million we're
building trails all over the
state we've gotten thirty two
thousand kids outdoors our
outdoor industry growing faster
than average so that's where I
would encourage you to think
about that this is an industry
that is just ripe for support
and at whatever level we support
it and you know that's kind of a
full vision of what it could be
but just whatever funding were
able to attend.
Madam chair members of the.
Senator thank you for your
answers and answer questions.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for centers for this bill I
did want to follow up on that
point because in in section five
eight.
It says sixty five million
dollars appropriated one hundred
feet of industry for expenditure
in fiscal year twenty twenty
four and subsequent fiscal years
Senator so it does seem that the
rate of my colleague just say
read that it would continue to
be sixty five.
Which seems like something you
need to and then on.
That's it I will have to check.
Judge response at that.
Madam chair representative I
think that languages.
Basically indicating that it's a
one time appropriation of sixty
seven sixty five million it is
available for expenditure and
subsequent fiscal years because
if you look at later on line
twenty it's is it shall not
revert.
but with you know I think my
colleague and I are fully aware
that we will all present this
bill to House Appropriations
next and.
you know be at at incorporated
into the budget or or not
depending on on their wishes.
Representative Lundstrom thank
you madam chair I also have some
concerns about section five but
before I get into section I I
just want to be crystal clear
madam chair Sanchez is the film
industry eligible to receive
this yes or not.
And if it is not madam chair I
think there needs to be some
kind of amendment for the next
committee that says these
requests cannot be combined with
other incentives offered by the
state there has to be some very
clear language in there that
says that I don't think it's a
little bit Madam chair of of the
dipping of your total so to
speak and madam chair on section
five and I'm looking at the
appropriation this absolutely
says it's recurring.
Just absolutely since its sixty
five million dollars as
reoccurring you're after you.
What but but bothers me the most
about section five madam chair
is the fact that that is not
reverting but then you look at
the part that really matters
under the and it says it shall
revert to the general fund so
what this bill says this is that
the sixty five million dollars
keeps coming in every year and
will not refer but the main
foundational operational peace
reverts.
And that doesn't make sense to
me madam chair I mean you want
to make sure that you have
continued staffing continued
Review of these requests that
are being reviewed I mean you
don't want to take went over
half the operate.
So madam chair I think there's a
problem with this piece I
strongly suggest that under the
sixty five million that it it
shall revert to the general fund
if it's not being used and under
identity that it would not refer
to because you want to keep the
operation in place and madam
chair Sanchez is the department
here is the economic development
department here to talk about
this bill the group that's going
to be directly affected.
Is there anybody from the
department madam chair the
audience.
I'm not seeing anybody is there
anybody.
Because I have manager talk to
them and they do support it I
support this concept also I
think this is a good way to
diversified economy the
additional needs some work thank
you madam chair.
Representative then.
Madam chair representative
center thank you for bringing
this forward I think this is a
great idea.
I have a I do have a couple of
questions my first question is.
Is this sixty seven million
dollars already been accounted
for almost two.
Madam chair and of
Representative
And I.
Do you want to.
I'm.
Representative thank you for the
question Madam chair at no it's
not on that level I think
there's a million dollars in the
LFC budget to get the party
started and you know we
introduced a bill and now we'll
continue those conversations
what the finance committees.
Representative thank you for
that.
Like I said I do like this and I
hope that at least a major
portion of that money doesn't
get a corporation to
I do have another question madam
chair Representative Senator
it seems like this will was
already part of one.
Our tourism jobs.
Is there are.
As discussions between the
Sanchez and those two agencies.
So good question madam chair
representative we we spoke in
more with economic development
and cultural affairs because
really those were the primary
domains we felt this bill cover
we're we're having conversations
with the tourism department
respectfully there is not
overlap
We're very much overlap just a
synergistic thing if anything
else with the department of
tourism because of the state
this division is is focus on
targeted economic assistance
mentoring etcetera to this
community in a way that that
really do you can either the
Economic Development apartment
or
tourism nor cultural fares for
that matter offering so this is
additive I think it will be
complementary because when we
create unique assets in the
state obviously those then
become tourism assets just like
when we protect lands on we you
know create a trial date and
become tourism assets so it's in
that way that everything works
together but this is additive
and yes we're going to continue
those conversations with tourism
and.
And also the EDD the that the
leader requests that
Representative Mason refer to
the Economic Development so
those also is a different kind
of animal the what we're talking
about here you know the kinds of
requests of these folks might be
able to get through this Sunday.
Madam chair representative
senator.
I think that when agencies can
come together table becomes a
force multiplier
and it would really be nice to
see those agencies and you're
supporting a bill like this
if you're going to House
Appropriations I'm sure you're
well aware you may want to have
them in the room to answer some
of these questions.
Thank you.
representative Duncan.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Senator hi this
bill gives me Harper.
When it's a sixty seven million
dollar ask in in years it
doesn't seventy two four million
four
this industry and ten million
for this industry we don't even
know if that sixty five million
can be spent and so.
Where did that number come from.
Madam chair representative so
really came from what we saw
happening Colorado where they
appropriated a similar amount of
money I think even with even
more money to kind of go into
these
these areas and so we just you
know we didn't want to it's
always a balance between being
to prescriptive and legislation
and sometimes not prescriptive
enough and we were juggling that
with how do we summarize the
activities that that that are
included in this grant Fund
without being overly
prescriptive knowing that as
they get into it.
You know they're going to figure
out the balance but what think
we do put some important
benchmarks we say fifty percent
has to go to the rural areas for
example we include that there
has to be strong support and we
do include a few metrics and
their what you would have to do
to qualify but but yeah it's not
on the level of specificity that
you're suggesting and that and
that was I think probably by
design.
Thank you madam chair so.
If we're going to do the same
amount madam chair the if we're
going to the same amount of
Colorado did how many more
people this Colorado have been
at the New Mexico.
Katie.
Okay so.
I found a friend Madam chair
representative Duncan Colorado
is a hundred and some odd
million so let's do the math but
I don't know maybe that map
works out the way you're
suggesting but at Colorado's
obviously.
There but but there they
appropriate a lot more we're to
expenditure that's my point if
you came to me and said the
state ten million dollars this
year and see where it goes I
would be all for this bill
and then one more question our
who will work the requests.
So madam chair representative
you know we may end up in a
number of you know sometimes you
put a number out there you know
it's process right so
yeah we'll probably if we're
lucky we'll end up where you're
at we'll all be singing come by
out it will be the division that
what were the requests and
that's the same way it works
with other divisions like the
outdoor division we give ten
million dollars for the equity
fund and trails they they end up
doing it really through the
department so economic
development department in that
sense thank you madam chair.
Representative led to.
The thank you madam chair thank
you sponsors I saw your both of
you on the news last week as
awesome as your news regarding
this bill and I don't think
anyone of us here in this room
and stay with us with the
support of this want to see it
come to reality but I think at
this point.
Based on the discussions that
based on on the discussions here
with regards to the language in
the bill.
The work I would suggest to the
sponsors that I would hate to
see it die here so maybe it's
time to to to roll it in and
come back another time just so
that you can we we feel good
about it.
Thank you mentioned.
Representative I.
I've been talking to both sides
of of our committee here in we'd
like to see a cleaner bill I
think the you've heard some of
that the comments I think we are
really happy with the concepts
and would love to to see this
move forward but also this
committee wants to make sure
it's a clean bill and it does
move forward in their desist are
there too many questions at this
point so I'd like to to request
that you all wrote the bill and
come back and see is when you're
ready.
Thank you madam chair.
One eighteen next.
Please.
This week.
At the.
Representative laying.
Very happy to see in our
committee today please tell us
budget amendment thank you madam
chair a privilege to be here so
madam chair this bill creates
the office of entrepreneurship
within the Economic Development
apartment.
And the let me share with you a
couple reasons why I think this
is a I needed void to be filled
with our state so madam chair I
have a unique perspective
in that in my private prep
practice I can so with a lot of
entrepreneurs.
some of them are very
sophisticated some of them have
been in business for years some
have multi million dollar
businesses but many of them are
first time business owners they
don't come from a family of
entrepreneurs they don't know
the first thing about starting a
business they have a concept.
but they don't know how to
actually go and get to the point
where they can actually have a
business and so what I I I
learned through that is there is
that there's a need I think in
our state for that and frankly
not everybody can afford to pay
me three hundred dollars an hour
and so I think that
entrepreneurship encouraging
that is critical for helping
folks escape poverty
a generational level.
And so this this office would
essentially it would do a few
things but one it would be
designed specifically for
businesses that are zero to five
years so it's not it's not small
business department it's been
around for twenty years these
are these are brand new
businesses that are within that
zero five time frame and it
would be to help them sort of
navigate state government if you
will it be a one stop shop for
the com um and no with if you
want to open up an ice cream
shop these are the the boxes
that you need to check to make
sure that you can have that that
brick and mortar store that food
truck that are that ice cream
cart ready to go the other thing
it does is it it encourages the
department to continue to just
foster entrepreneurship
throughout the state I think our
economic development partner
doing a great job of making sure
that everyone knows that New
Mexico is open for business and
this is one more step I would
submit in that path as well and
then finally I I'll point to
within the bill.
it creates an image entrepreneur
impact statement and I think
that's helpful to just so that
we as legislators have an idea
of bills that were passing how
that's helpful to growing
entrepreneurship so with that
I'd stand for any questions.
Thank you Representative.
Do we have anybody in favor of
this.
What vehicle.
If we can start on the this side
of the room with those in favor
the bill.
Anybody.
Chair representative maybe one
Walters reparations for the next
this is what was it and we all
know that the value that for
to the state in terms of both
economic growth and jobs.
Very important aspect.
And all of the.
It's so understanding how to
navigate government kinds of
things that risk helps minimize
that.
Small business development
center we were very close to.
All of them are ready.
Other folks that have in this
office just like we work with
economic development was needed
J. two of those would be.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Judy
willing to and I'm speaking to
you today on behalf of the great
rock chamber of commerce's for
this legislation we have done a
lot of work good work as a state
to make this a favorable climate
for entrepreneurs in terms of
providing access to capital job
training providing them with
commercial space to operate
their businesses and to grow but
if you take a look at our state
employment from ten thousand you
still have some gaps and we have
some shortcomings and what this
legislation would do would
provide the infrastructure to
further help those entrepreneurs
have the opportunity to see the
pictures are coming thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee committee members of
the committee here on we have
covers.
New Mexico state better manage
of the state's animation assets
including supporting on new
years according to the chamber's
recent economic competitive
analysis director New Mexico's
future and highlights the need
to nurture the arch of the.
It's important ideas that to
John
which we're sure plays an
important role in building
wealth and families communities
and.
Thank you Representative.
Anybody else on the Senator.
Etcetera.
Madam chair what is in the
cities of your to us.
It also.
Mexico as.
so it's use the last two years
last year I spent designing by
as far as an advocate trying to
find out why and there is work
the edge exactly hi.
yeah it's a and a lot of that.
Yeah start up costs or any of
their.
We are very much more than
possible.
Thank you thank you.
Yes in the state room.
The committee.
Of the person this using.
Because of this.
K. real.
Good afternoon members of this
committee and madam chairman
chasing grow up with the right
to start organization we're a
nonprofit that looks to expand
opportunity for all throughout
the country New Mexico is a
state that is very important to
us our co founder Garcia Jr
founder and CEO is the is the
namesake for the rainforest at
the University of New Mexico
that was named after his book
we are very excited about this
potential for an office of
entrepreneurship and believe
that New Mexico would be a
leader in the country if this
came to fruition as far as
interacting with entrepreneurs
having someone from the state
who actually is the leader the
kind of galvanize these efforts
and reduces barriers
frontrunners to start new
businesses create almost all net
new jobs in our economy at
there's a lot of barriers that
they face and we believe that
these should be reduced and we
believe that they are that the
start of sample will will in and
more companies will start which
will create more jobs increase
community wealth grow GDP in
Star communities diversified
business services increase
lifetime incomes while fighting
inequality and poverty so we're
fully in support of this
legislation and thank the
sponsors of this bill for their
advocacy on behalf of
entrepreneurs in new and young
companies in New Mexico.
Anybody else.
Both the number and the the
temporary peace to see if this
is something that is in fact
successful
so that's that's the thought
process there to make sure that
this we're not committing
something long term that
Doesn't do the work that we
anticipated to do.
And that Europe stated that the
issue with this.
A meeting I love.
And in this bill she urged the
signing on.
That is in the department I just
rambled cases staffing.
It was into the to make my own
submission the service this year
the program.
All the men.
Higher.
maybe is.
Education.
As senator Neville.
I I think that.
Representative sure that.
It should be their advocate.
There is anybody in your area is
it important initiatives or
community with the but I don't
think.
Thank.
Thank you.
Representative Martinez.
Madam chair representative thank
you very much all.
Representative Lundstrom always
have the first question is is
this money already incorporated
thousand to.
Madam chair representative
Martinez so I've been in
discussions with both EDD and
appropriation and we anticipate
that the funding will be there.
Madam chair well.
Thank you very much
Just a question of curiosity on
after Representative Lundstrom.
Chair representative why is
economic development your dad
which is.
Madam chair representative
Martinez so I I can tell you
I've been in a full discussions
with the EDD that excluded date
they appreciate the bill
there's some limitations on the
number of of new departments
that they can start and so they
are still working through that
and turn a level
because there are a number of
proposals this legislative
session that would create new to
new divisions within the EDD and
so I think they're just sifting
through
which of those they they're
gonna be able to to support.
Madam chair representative that.
Representative and you.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee.
I am the let me preface my
question with that
the fact that I taught.
Your nation entrepreneurship for
many years.
At CNN what teaching it and
hopefully a few of the students
are now millionaires.
That.
but but my question is.
Knowing something about the sort
of bifurcated nature that.
On entrepreneurship programs are
in this state.
Continue.
Can you talk a little bit about
what.
What your bill is going to add
that we don't currently have and
how will that.
Groove on Community ship in the
state.
Madam chair representative
Matthew so I think.
Out at sea at a local level in
certain regions of our state.
They're doing a fabulous job
with this of helping
entrepreneurs who have an idea
maybe don't have a lot of
experience with starting a
business and and doing that
lifted off the ground into the
community you know and I know
Senator college where I live as
a small business incubator
department they do a great job.
But that's not true throughout
the state.
And so I think what this will do
is it will have a state level
initiative to make sure that
those areas that are currently
being served
They have an opportunity to have
the same benefits.
Madam chair at.
Representative Lane thank you
for the answer I've.
Eight and this is just a comment
I have the same problem this and
the others are having these are
these are bills that affect
economic development division
and they're not here.
Just tell us how is going to
work in their organizations
whether this is gonna be a
positive or negative and then
that really concerns me and and
I appreciate that that is not
within the power of
Representative late to caught.
But I'm.
I'm curious whether that's been
true in the past before this.
That economic development
doesn't show up.
As.
It
is it.
So
We ask that.
that as today we're we're
Representative latest line so.
I just I have been on this
committee before mentioned that
I was asking the question
because it's difficult with the
state agencies come in either
love it or they hate it made it
real clear about where they are.
Thank you thank you.
Representative.
That is that.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Committee for work and full
disclosure I'm when the sponsor
of the bill I am curious I know
that Representative ladies been
working longer on this more and
more conversations of economic
development and I'm curious in
your conversations with them on
if they had a idea of how long
how long that five hundred
thousand would.
So they that was the number that
that they suggested to fund
eight dot two FTE ease for that
two year time frame thank you
madam chair and thank you for
that I'm just that I'm looking
at this in terms of and it into
the pilot programs and if you're
looking about them that's that's
gonna be around.
Two to three years is that
correct Madam chair.
Madam chair this thank you and
so most pilot programs that we
see come through often or for
three to five year time period
you know three years to kind
understand it's working in in
five years to kind of see the
full implementation of the
overall and so I'm just kind of
curious I I know that we have
here that was here in tax we
discussed the difficulty of you
know kind of getting started in
New Mexico and all the different
agencies you have to touch base
with all the different elements
with this office then addressed
that concern of all the the you
know I was like Frogger trying
to find what budget my to
support business or what
different incentives might exist
or what other you know property
when you go through to services
in our state.
Madam chair yeah I mean.
For those in the business
community realize how quickly
you have to act you have to
react to the market
you know business moves at the
speed of life so to speak and so
for folks that are trying to
jump in the space for the first
time that's that's a big
challenge.
And so whether it's filling out
applications weathers and even
knowing which agency to go to
next all those repairs that I
think that this office could
help remove you know and and
zero five year businesses are
the majority of job creation I
do the majority of innovation.
And I think those are concepts
that I think most of New Mexico
wants to see and once he
developed a continued so I think
this would be a step towards
that direction thank you madam
chair one last question I guess
there was some concern about
overlap the from your
conversation see that there
would be a role this bill that
would be beyond what's already
being at present being offered
to anyone.
Madam chair yes so there there
are I think this would fill some
of the gaps are currently being
served with the need to do thank
you mentioned in the my server
conversations of from what I
understood from EDD is that
they're gonna withhold comment
any any bills related to their
department.
But what I think it is
absolutely worth it and for the
last to start another thank you.
Thank you what's the desire of
the committee.
As
a defense of the second.
Representative.
Representative and in order yes.
Representative don't get yes.
This.
Representative Lente that yes.
Representative will.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Mason yeah.
Representative Matthews.
Yes.
Questions yes.
You madam chair yes.
Madam chair this is a hard line
in the nose or one of the best
thank you madam chair should.
Okay it's B. one twenty six
Representative Romero.
Chairman excuse me.
Representative lanes welcome
luck rubs off on me.
The server just
is.
All right are you are you ready
I am they see that you you have
are a minority leader staying
for another round of definitely
it's a good time you can.
All right so thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee this is house bill one
twenty six.
Those of you that are returning
members of the legislature may
remember the bill a Kerry last
year that passed out of the
house with only a handful of no
votes is a graduation
requirements re working that was
something that got put off the
and Senate education and on with
Senator souls wanting to do a
deep dive of the graduation
credits during the interim and
our legislative education study
committee and that's exactly
what we have here which is why
myself as a vice chair
legislative education study
committee and
Representative Lane are the co
sponsors of this some of the
notable changes
to the bill
for credits of social studies so
one of the things you may be
here to stay
is questions around for example
financial literacy is I did want
to highlight
through the interim we've had
discussions between ourselves
the public education department
in trying to find this balance
between
In requirements as far as
teaching standards that teachers
have to teach as part of our
work so we're keeping the
economics requirement for
example I think it's a lot more
wholistic it incorporates large
aspects of financial literacy
into the standards so that
students are getting both the
very nitty gritty of financial
literacy but they're also
connecting it to to broader
themes forty minutes of English
still required three of those
need to be consecutive
I'll talk about what that means
here in a moment
three science credits
Our continuing on two of those
need to be laboratory sciences
and the other change is we're
reducing the amount of elective
two four here's the thing about
the elective so is that within
each of these requirements
there's a lot of flexibility
within the requirements so I
mentioned social studies I'm a
social studies teacher I teach
government economics
one of those is left blank and
that's at the discretion of the
school district one of the
things in the conversations with
stakeholders was the importance
of local control and we feel
that dated within the bill we
also feel that there's a wide
array of options for school
districts to have as part of
their requirements as well
within these units as well on
the required units there's a
strong component if you notice
the language in the pages twelve
thirteen fourteen I believe are
the the requirements
there is a career technical
aspect so the department to
approve career technical
education as part of these
credits so not only are we
aiming for the students I think
when the last
high school standards were
changed in two thousand seven
there is a strong emphasis on
career or college parents what
we're aiming for with this bill
is to give students flexibility
to go either higher education
college route for career
technical field and we feel that
we've come up and worked well
that finding a bill that does
both but with that madam chair
pass off to Representative lane
and then we have just a half
away from the legislative
education study committee with
us as well.
Thank you madam chair thank you
general so just a couple of just
comments from my perspective why
I think this is helping to move
New Mexico in the right
direction
one is I'm in particularly
interested in the concept of the
two local credits I think that
no one knows their educational
community better than the locals
so this creates a new concept to
where if you think financial
literacy is that important then
then that's where you go maybe
it's maybe it's some kind of a a
trade credit whatever that looks
like for the local districts I
think that change
is important I think it also
help put some.
some new life so to speak into
our high school students and
having some more ownership over
their their own educational
path.
the other thing also.
Is when you look at the you know
on this bill does go down from
twenty four to twenty two but as
we study this the the top ten
states.
That perform educationally only
one of those requires twenty
four credits averages twenty one
and a half so we're still above
that so I think this also
provide some relief I know what
I was like as a fourteen year
old boy in and freshman high
school do now is make the best
choices I think what happens a
lot of times once you fall
behind with our twenty four
Chris system it's hard to feel
like you're ever going to catch
up and so I think this also help
kids actually stay more
dedicated in school after maybe
initially having some this app
so couple of things I think
they're worth noting that I I
believe will help drive our
state forward thank you.
Thank you.
We have a.
Madam chair
Committee presenters I.
would like to introduce a
proposed amendment
House bill one twenty six.
And
We did revert to the
representative because start
with that the number at the
bottom of the page.
And to the bottom of the pages
point two two four five seven of
forty one.
We would get through the
amendment please and describe if
you go on the bill.
Yes we're at the members are and
what the changes are thank you
I've been here
the
the post amendment
on page twelve sixteen.
After that.
Inserts.
A financial literacy course for.
And the second
When we share but it's time to.
And then the second change would
be on page thirteen line three.
After the cynical and be sure to
hello one hand unit financial
literacy unless the student has
completed a financial literacy
course as part of the
mathematics requirement.
So
Get that.
That
chair the purpose of the
amendment
Financial literacy rate at this
point in time is required a lot
do you it is that is required to
school districts offered as an
elective so it's it is available
to students
The bill as I redid the
sensually removes financial
literacy removes that
requirement that it be offered
as an elective.
and in fact
really doesn't require financial
literacy nine eight.
At all.
And that is a concern.
Yes good server number
revisions.
One of the.
I've been attending in
Albuquerque they've had these
kind of school wide list
listening sessions and where
they parents common they talk
about what they would expect
from the school system.
And we're intended.
Of the hundred or more parents
there we divided into groups of
about for each and each group
had to come up and talk about
what it was it was a thought was
important for the schools to be
doing.
And.
Every group the next session set
we need to be teaching financial
literacy act kids don't
understand the money they don't
understand its relationship to
how they live their lives and so
forth and then.
In surveys
is often mentioned as
one of the most in that this is
this.
Give me just one second here.
calling that was done
Us whether or not New Mexico
legislature should pass a law
requiring the personal finance
course eighty nine percent it is
urgent to do so eighty four
percent that is very important.
And fifty and hello a growing
number of states have added
personal finance to the
graduation requirements.
Fifteen states guarantee a one
semester course in personal
finance Representative forty
percent of all high school
students nationwide.
Seven states seven those states
it added in the last eighteen
months.
And other fifteen states require
personal finance we talked as
part of another required course
edges economics there's just
simply here.
As a as it is in the lefties
in our schools since two
thousand and eight only about
eleven eleven thousand now and
that level percent New Mexico
high school students complete
one of these classes and yet
it's incredibly important
Information and educar of an
education for for particularly
high school students
to to learn.
And we're basically taking out
of our schools is not mentioned
I believe Representative Romero
was talking about it being you
could be part of an economic
force or something that I don't
see anything in here that says
financial literacy will we talk
and economic and so we are
taking a critical piece of
education.
of knowledge of life skills
quite frankly we're taking them
out of our requirements for high
school students and
I I think that is a very bad
decision on our part.
madam chair no this is not a
friendly amendment as I
mentioned it's not going to be
addressed specifically in the
requirements it's addressed in
the state social studies
standards under the economic
standards so that all changes
read about other states moving
toward financial literacy one of
the last quotes was another
course like you can on.
Economics is still a requirement
but in the standards so when I
hate when I teach economics I
have a standards walk basically
that's put out by the department
and in those standards it's
directing me as an educator on
the standards I need to touch
upon with my students so we have
questions come up all the time
and education about media
literacy why state as a social
studies teacher that's my job is
to look at newspapers websites
be able to have students be able
to discern.
What sort of media there looking
at what sort of information that
they're consuming because if we
and that's why we wanted to
study this is part of L. E. S.
C. if we started adding all
these requests about what's
important in a no on
methodical way and we would end
up with standards that are fifty
standards which some school
districts like in the bill would
be able to require that.
these are just bare minimum
standards for the state school
districts would have the option
if they sign necessary to
include specifically financial
literacy but since as a state
we've embedded it into our
standards I don't think it's
necessary for this bill has been
thoroughly vetted throughout the
interim thank you.
Okay here is a list of ideas is
you are in favor of you know.
Madam chairwoman members of the
committee my name is Jane Chavis
I wasn't expecting to speak on
behalf of the amendment today
however hi I believe I can I am
a recent high school grad in
graduating twenty twenty one and
I am currently a political
science student at the
university of New Mexico I think
the proposed amendment of
requiring some sort of financial
legislative leaders the course
is very important I know some of
one of the co sponsors mentioned
how economics can sort of serve
as a financial literacy
substitute I took AP
macroeconomics I passed to the
P. yes for macroeconomics and
I still feel as if my financial
literacy is not up to where it
should be I think that we should
take this bill as an opportunity
to include this requirement and
have a standards that I think
financial literacy is incredibly
important and again I just went
through high school pass the
test for this macroeconomics is
not enough to be a financial
literacy class we need some sort
of financial literacy class
that's probably one of the
biggest areas that I wish I
would have had from high school
I do not thank you.
If they.
Yes my name is for the the line
with the Mexico respond to this
and that I point out that
there's a lot of conjecture
about why kids drop out
and the gates foundation it's a
very interesting thing they
asked to drop them it is serving
the palm of.
That is what I was learning
wasn't really relevant to what I
needed to know online this young
man additional elements of the
state of and so this is very
important that we have
we try to make the curriculum
more relevant the students thing
I would point out is the states
there's no more than thirty
states have done this maybe
financial literacy graduation
requirements what they're
finding for example I talked to
and Health poignant let that
happen it's actually a wonderful
anti poverty strategy because
these kids they learn financial
literacy and they bring those
lessons back to their parents
and to the ramp.
We're forty seven and financial
literacy in New Mexico if you
need to emphasize this thank you
very much.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Judy
going to speaking to you on that
right rockers chamber of
commerce and well sometimes a
spontaneous this
is the of people like this and
then are you know we need more
that the greater opportunity
chamber of commerce can support
this legislation out
Representative Matthews.
It has a long standing position
of financial literacy yes
Representative all come on a lot
of education curriculum
absolutely should be a
requirement for graduation just
from the house or.
The public education system why
hospital.
Is there any needs that that so
it's for those reasons and I was
take a look at this very closely
financial literacy is a problem
in the state it should be a
graduation requirement.
Kevin summers would you be
speaking on the amendment.
Yes I can speak on the
amendment.
Okay go ahead.
Madam chair members of the
committee thank you for hearing
me today my name is Kevin
summers and the superintendent
of the Aztec municipal school
district.
As an organization as technical
school district is in full
support of house bill one twenty
six with out that amendment the
reason being if you create
financial literacy as a
requirement the other thing that
you do in consequentially is a
take away some of those degree
programs for students who are
for two or four year degree
program paste so they have to
eat up some of the requirements
to take a financial literacy
course as part of their
mathematics requirements that
could be missing out on AP
courses.
Calculus things of that sort I
don't believe that the bill
necessarily strips financial
literacy away from students but
it now opens the door for
opportunity for students to take
that in lieu of things like
algebra two or calculus
depending on the the program
that our students are going to
be.
Seeking in their future whether
that's a certification basis
whether that's a two year
program or whether that's
entering the look for local
workforce media.
Thank you.
Thank you and he was in
opposition so we will go down to
opposition remind everybody we
we are doing one minute for
public comment so anyone for
opposing the amendment.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
Possibility district one
superintendent schools and harms
and
Much like my colleagues.
Somers last time.
Requiring this DVD graduation
requirements it was an
opportunity for my local school
board dictate what I graduation
March.
Currently as an example the
state requirement graduations
twenty four credits possibles
for schools require twenty six
runs for students graduate.
I believe that my local what
education what's that require
financial literacy.
Not gonna speak for my work but
I would say have a requiring
this as a one off.
And your.
Trying to get down on the
graduation terms in New Mexico
let itself.
Later workforce opportunities
running.
Part of this century.
yes most of this is.
dollars back to Representative.
We.
Flexibility.
That was really.
Extensively.
So we would like to.
We and I want to focus on the
issue.
This isn't just the energy to
the flexibility.
Also read less.
In that you're more than usual
our.
In my personal experience can be
very.
I am the CEO because I am
building pools around.
Alleges.
To get us to and
with it so I think that it's
important to recognize and need
to have that flexibility with
students that is best for them
because that's what was it was
more important to me that
getting that financial literacy
thank you learn online I am just
maybe I.
The exact size of the that is
more wholesalers at the expense
of all others this will be
interesting.
If you're getting.
Okay
Thank you madam chair I could
see
what what well intentioned
appreciate Representative
Matthews amendment that I think
you well it's it's again well
intentioned as as a single
member of the L. E. S. C. as a
voting member just mention it
was vetted through the LCS to
through the interim it was
actually Torrez by the L. E. S.
C. before coming to the to this
platform here in well given the
consideration that we are before
the education department.
ET to his bill it seems like
this is more of an education
related.
Topic that they should be doing
in that verses in the economic
and commerce Committee so I
would with that madam chair
twenty exactly thank you.
I have a.
I would love for prove will of
the amount.
Do you have someone leave the.
Representative Mason
Resented that is yes.
Questions or no.
Or.
To them and then it is not
passed this page and to develop.
Great thank you madam chair and
thank you committee for holding
up a holding the interim process
it's all done into this bill I
think that's super important
because we have a fantastic team
you heard from some
superintendents even a student
here to talk about why the
distinction between requirements
and embedding it into the
content is so important I will
say that the new standards that
I have mentioned are you in to
be implemented next school year
where financial literacy twenty
five financial literacy
standards will be embedded into
the economic standards so that's
forthcoming not something that
has been previously part of the
standards but with that madam
chair will stand for questions.
And so we'll go to debate from
committee on the bill.
Madam chair I'm sorry about
process that we've gone to the
audience laughs at work in some
of the.
Can we start with who is in
favor of the bill.
Thank you
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Matt Paul
schools Mexico we thank the
sponsors for the work of the
entire intro over in determining
the for.
Appreciate the flexibility less
is truly more here larger
schools routinely exceed
graduation requirements on their
campuses and right giving us
more flexibility on our end
we're able to focus more on
information specific program I
just charter schools or provide
other ways we gauge our kids to
help.
There.
Make.
Yes as I have.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee we have president
needs help
out and the meeting were I
don't.
When we think that this
requirement.
Hello.
Requirements.
Thank you.
Actually when I graduate right.
Right.
Senator.
That was
This is.
Reiterate that flexibility
all aspects are very the
Rules
be available generation thank
you anybody else.
Madam two two eight eight
percent popsicles and I do
appreciate all the work that's
gone into this.
Does create more opportunities
for school districts.
About a relative education for
students pursuing a career in
terms of the lever those options
with in high school.
Correct we do support this bill
appreciate all the work that's
gone.
Okay yes the support any
opposition.
Start on the side.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Daniel Macy
I have external affairs chair
New Mexico kids can't the
statewide education
organizations with policy that
allows students to reach their
full potential.
College and career military.
We appreciate the attention of
this bill to drivers by the
pathways to graduation we cannot
support for two primary reasons
moreover receipts out pro two as
a graduation requirement during
these two semesters of full.
Representative.
Forces are.
This press.
Not be accepted into our state
divisive University is currently
require full additionally this
is the courses are no longer
required districts may choose to
stop offering these courses to
all students which will prevent
talk about students from having
access to the resources they
need to reach their.
It may also further white
opportunity gaps between
students districts may choose.
Some schools but not others the
differences in the socio
economic make up more in the
city of serviceable populations
we urge you to vote no on this
bill and seriously considered
unintended consequences.
All.
Chairman of the committee my
eighty fourth twenty point
Mexico teacher here in
education.
Number of the New Mexico we're
against this bill because we
going goes backwards of two
pieces that will help students
with a well rounded education so
that we don't.
moves well CTE and languages
other than English to the
lectern and we simply don't
understand why.
Forty nine of the fifteen
questions universities in the
United States.
Right.
When it was one of those.
Colleges if we don't require
meeting students opportunities
it is sixty percent of jobs that
don't require a college degree
showed that Canada's would
benefit from having some level
of I.
Students will probably
in CTE can give that to them.
Health care we need students to
have those losses right now
we're taking away that CTV in.
As an educator the one I like to
make it is it teaching
volunteers.
And we have a serious crisis
with their teachers.
We should be wanting to expose
as many students as we can to
the teaching profession because
about fifty percent of our
educator workforce fourteen
table to retire soon so we need
to have.
And not only is the role in
supporting research shows that
CTV graduations US department of
education of education did a
study and showed that students
in New Mexico to years of this
eighteen graduate right about
ninety percent it's quite a bit
higher than our state.
So we owe it to our students to
give them a well rounded
education that rose their
possibilities rather than.
Congratulations on being the
teacher of the year as well
Committee might everybody to the
one minute of time Cook please.
Just wanted thank you madam
chair members the committee
always at speaking at all have a
greater of
the chambers of commerce
converses position was very
clear I will say the same things
and there's a lot of this bill
is very the state lines of the
always taking one rather on.
Lack of that financial literacy
requirement because that is not
us
that's always is our goal of.
It's an important one.
And the lack of this requires a
lack of this bill through our
society here in New Mexico is
one of the factors some of our
partners so for that specific
reason.
She legislation.
Yes.
Have
regulations I'm here.
Respectfully I.
This bill would have.
Representative already.
The school
That dollars.
This is what we all need to to
This these courses were no
longer required to use the age
all of this work.
Right exactly.
According to New Mexico chamber
of commerce will do.
Sixty one percent of New Mexico.
Reducing the number of arrests
and required for limit aces
higher level requirements.
We appreciate the conversations
with thousand.
Anybody else.
All right let's go to the
committee Representative yeah
madam chair members of the
committee of I would like to
reiterate some of what other
people spoke in opposition to
the bill I am on a whole very in
favor of many of the changes
however the language
requirements as well as the
algebra two I think is very
important along with the
financial literacy I think you
ideas of this bill should very
much exist but I think it there
needs to be a little bit more
speaking to what we've just
thank you.
Thank you madam chair I wanted
to start by saying I usually
agree with representative Lente
when I saw this bill this
committee that the this place
until I realized it's the
perfect place because now we
have an opportunity to have the
business community engaged with
how people are being educated in
New Mexico and what that
education pipelines and look
like for the business community
in a few years madam chair I am
absolutely concerned about the
loss of the algebra two piece in
here and this and this
flexibility issue because if you
happen to get us settled with a
less than adequate
superintendent or at on skill
board all of a sudden they're
going to take the easy way out
for educating people.
Madam chair we have a major
lawsuit on our hands that was
brought forth very appropriately
out of my part of the state
about people not being educated
and not being done in a fair
manner we're still struggling
with that now.
Part of it is is because I
believe that we've had in
adequate leadership in many
ways.
And I think if we just turn this
over and not require things like
algebra two for SAT exams and
these other things I think we're
dumbing down our our students
and I'd hate to see that madam
chair
I understand the need for
flexibility that's always been
the mantra of the school
districts.
But let's look at what those
results are provided for us.
And if you start looking at some
of the LFC reports when you look
at graduation rates and you look
at things like that it's
alarming.
It is also alarming to me madam
chair that when we're reducing
required graduation units it
will affect those program units
for school funding formula.
Across the state now there's
some districts madam chair as
the gentleman from hospice said
they do more you know they're
not going to take it down to the
lowest level.
But I wonder where they're going
to take it down to the lowest
level I suspect is going to be
in Los hard to fill districts
are to fulfill think about it I
mean it's hard it off madam
chair to get teachers math
teachers eligible to teachers in
places like Gallup in places
like requests in some of these
more rural for school districts
and now these things are being
required.
I just have a lot of heartburn
with this bill I'm glad that the
speaker but this bill in the
commerce committee so we can all
hear what the business community
thinks about what they'd like to
see in education thank you madam
chair your time.
My experts Jessica.
Okay are director writer.
The.
Madam chair and Representative
Lundstrom great point I think it
is a perfect space to actually
begin this legislation in this
committee
Representative you're exactly
right we need more of the
industries involved in
education.
I'm gonna address the algebra
two requirement in particular as
part of what we are asking for
and considering for our students
and their trajectory into post
secondary including the work
force
in fact I'll defer to is
required only up to fourteen
percent of the workforce after
the after students graduate from
high school and more pressing
the statistics and probability
which most students don't take
right now because of the
algebra two requirement
interestingly enough around the
SAT exam the only thing that's
required on the SAT is linear
functions and linear functions
are completely addressed in
algebra one and you can look
that up on the New Mexico
instructional scope of the PED
website we also go beyond
algebra real one and required
geometry in this proposal and
then that four sort of the
flexibility of the school
districts that they're talking
about and I think the
flexibility flexibility that
they're talking about isn't
about meeting the individual
needs it's actually really
beautiful here two sides for
students in the same point in
front of you because they both
require something different.
And that's the most beautiful
thing and and powerful thing
about the students in New Mexico
so while you do want to support
the student who was on a stem
trajectory and look at House
part two and calculus AP
statistics you also want to for
the ability for students to have
financial literacy.
Typical statistics and
probability or even the
construction map.
And all of those are really
valuable in terms of the work
force and broadening the
workforce in New Mexico.
Well I mean I don't agree with
that then at the end of the day
we're dumbing down and it's not
appropriate we need to make sure
these task forces are topped and
in the poor school districts in
the state of New Mexico and I'm
concerned about that because
that's my area of the state
thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
First about just full disclosure
didn't have as is my my.
was it weird interim this week.
But I did not know it is going
to speak.
Talk about his project project
and I just want everybody to
know this is not it is not
expanding those were his.
And I did.
Doing that.
Sept
the second thing I'd like to say
is that
I I look at these kind of
requirements to somebody who
taught at the community college
level.
And we we didn't have as much
structure issue with those so
many specific requirements in
the college level teaching and
we were pretty much left other
than the here's your text book
and here's the callers.
Figured out how to teach
ourselves which was good because
well it's good for me in the
sense that I'd never had a
teaching course and it made me
really think about how you
communicate with people and
hopefully help them learn and
and the piece of this I want to
share
it's just that.
It was it was my experience in
those years of teaching.
That the most important thing.
Was to teach things which to
cover materials teach things
that students could feel would
matter in their lives.
And we need to get that they
were like sponges they would be
selling gauge so involved and I
remember in my time is a course
called introduction to business
where we did cover a fair amount
of financial literacy kinds of
issues.
And they came I'm prepared not
knowing those materials but they
really appreciated learning
those materials I'm using that
Sam.
personally it does about any
algebra two cases I because I
don't think I ever took algebra
two and probably when it passed
it.
It had the right so I know these
things are hard to figure out
and I hi Preciado work to
committee is done.
at the same time though
I'm.
Concern that the that the focus
seems to be.
And I take it from the debate on
the on the I have a question of
of financial literacy.
That.
We we we don't look at education
as a means at least in part as a
preparation for life.
And I get it disconcerting
concerning to me.
And with that I will.
The.
I have a question.
Yeah.
Thank you madam chair would do
best.
For.
The.
But more than what.
Well as of then that.
I was like I was
All the ugly face of.
the levels of on on that.
Well All
a lot of work.
What.
I
I will devote.
Level of.
The
a very.
But.
Local Google.
All of the year.
The.
One.
Joan.
The level of.
Representative and in order.
Yes.
Representative Duncan yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lente yes.
Representative little.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Mason yes.
Representative Baptist.
no.
IShares rob yes.
Madam chair yes.
Madam chair the yess arcade and
in those hard to.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Well.
Have house bill one twenty
seven.
I.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee it's my pleasure
to bring house bill one twenty
seven before this committee and
and I would just like to say is
that it's a fairly simple bill
is it basically.
I admit I teens and I'm sorry it
it basically gives educational
assistance their their minimum
wage right now or they're at
their maximum range wage right
now in statute is twelve
thousand dollars a year we're
raising that to twenty five
thousand dollars a year
we realized this this body in
the last year it was amazing and
what we did for education
raising teacher salaries set to
the levels we did just providing
a lot of different educational
benefits for our state was it
was an enormous piece of work
and we are grateful to all those
who led that charge it was
really very important to
educational systems in New
Mexico the the legislative
education study committee
realized over the summer in the
interim session that we had
really neglected educational
assistance and that we we
realize that their their salary
could be as low as twelve
thousand dollars here in this
bill sets out to change that and
with me today I have the our
expert witness Quinn one minute
are director of the LFC and
Representative Baca who is who
is really or jewel in education
in this house because if anybody
knows this system it's hand side
like to have him say a few words
to.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee
Yes this this bill really sets
out to
really try to address the need
that we have and that is a need
for compensating appropriately
those that work with our most
vulnerable difficult a
populations as far as this
educational systems could be the
classroom assistant kindergarten
preschool but also very
importantly the special
assistant those will work with
our most the fragile and
Involves students you know as we
face waived wage inflation and
we see that we have Starbucks we
have others are being eighteen
nineteen dollars an hour we
really recognize that there is a
need to attract and retain a
staff in the area that will be
serving seeing uh and working
with our schools you know what
you may not understand realizes
that for every certified or
teaching staff member or
principal there's also support
staff member behind the scene so
as of Representative had a set
you know as we've addressed the
others in the past this is one
group that we feel that needs to
be addressed and the as far as
with the compensation that's
separate for you today.
Thank you madam chair.
These days Jennifer questions
are are the HSD do we have one
more person.
Okay this is our hero okay.
Thank you
do we have anybody in favor this
bill.
It was.
At the start of this into the
room.
You madam chair members of the
committee on gender the New
Mexico offers all of the.
Rodgers hearing with all.
The.
Issues the legislature would
wipe on your providing
significant the the teachings
actually the native app on to
get this type of legislation
PTA's the end of the session
operationalize the Sanchez
Gregory noted that this is what
we're going to chip away at
issue addressing these pockets
educators is critical for.
All on one roof
right sizing well education I
saw there are getting into this
area long way to.
Into this was the the I will
career for educational system
structural and optical what
about you so we are strong
support on the house.
Thank you yes on the side of the
room.
This side of the room.
Madam chair members of the
committee meetings act hi
Representative yep.
That's right.
Where we have almost.
More alone.
By the state.
Twenty thousand hello and thank
transaction this bill to the
floor because you weren't I want
to thank.
Recently the sessions and still.
Hello property level wages and I
think that.
I.
This is that the majority of the
work with.
And those kids at did not fare
well.
And as well as a regulated so
the work is becoming twice
right.
The district yes our teachers
are we're understaffed so a lot
of art education.
Use of records for the entire
year yeah I just plans they are
right
orders they are they're doing
work eight we have involved we
had a problem finally and this
is that we are being asked now
are are much more we have heard
that.
This is down having to do all of
this.
Here's under thank you hello
this is mills and that Edward
weird.
Every directors down.
That track.
At that lives up to a.
Our families.
It was on and on.
Very very very special.
Where site expected their
teachers to administrative thank
thank you Sir.
Madam chair of is the state that
is by it is.
activities over the years we
need to pay them more we needed
fire yes I actually.
Here's what I would do is to
actually doing that are you the
the station books are.
Thank you Mr.
Madam chair and representative
my name is Helen Downes and the
senior at Duke University of New
Mexico I stand in support of
this bill I see myself so I you
Mr away checks ninety thirty
dollars an hour and what I do is
not nearly as important as this
educational system for doing the
question of it what they need
and what they are.
Thank you anybody oppose this
bill.
We do have two people on zoom.
I
believe that.
Thank you for giving us the
state's madam chair members of
the committee my name is roughly
yes Philip I am Indian education
director in Cuba Independent
School District and I'm online
with my colleague Sheldon Toledo
director of human resources and
we stand in favor of this bill
because we believe that our EAS
in our school district as well
as across the state really go
above and beyond what is asked
of them especially post pandemic
and just trying to make up for a
lot of the learning loss that we
see we are also small community
with high poverty and we really
want to see our
local younger generations state
here and hopefully go on to be
teachers and we've been able to
provide that to a lot of RTA's
and keep them within our
communities and we like to be
able to pay them something that
they can live off of so we are
in full support of this bill.
Thank you thank you.
Assistance going from at twenty
percent match to a forty percent
match and what what that will
cost which is the full intention
of the LFC I'm excuse me House
Appropriations to put that
package together and we're
working with them now and then.
Thank you thank you for the
answer.
Thank you representative Duncan
hunter thank you I'm in full
support of this are you aware of
any school districts that have
right there wages to come close
to this even.
Madam chair and representative
Dick and yes that a lot of
people make twenty two twenty
three thousand dollars a year it
would be the unusual salary
where someone would be lower
than that and I I do have the
numbers here look at well I turn
it over to Representative Baca
but yeah most people are I'd say
between twenty and twenty five
thousand however one fourth of
all educational assistance right
now make less than twenty
thousand a year.
Chair thank you.
Representative Jim Martinez
Madam chair representative I I
love this idea.
What we're doing I have one
quick question just satisfy my
curiosity.
Forty eight is now considered
half time positions.
Madam chair representative
Martinez known EA
they're like teachers when you
when you have so many days per
year and that so many hours per
day that's considered a full
time position so yes I think
yeah I want to say I'm gonna
turn that over to go in because
I can't remember the numbers
right now I do have written but
I can't remember the name.
Madam chair representative my
thing is that they are full time
employees and educational
assistant licensure licensure
and able to go into the
classroom and typically they're
just a full time employee in a
school district I just like
there are teachers that are part
time teachers are point I there
are educational assistants who
are point five that is true but
for the most part they're
they're all full time employees.
Madam chair representatives.
I guess I'm trying to wrap my
mind around hold.
Always.
Getting a raise to twenty five
thousand dollars.
I mean that's like way below
minimum wages and.
thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Martinez so again
we we've talked about in statute
when it was created twenty years
ago it would set that minimum is
twelve thousand okay now we did
as we saw the increase to
minimum right waits for
educators many of them did you
to rise but in fact
prior to that many of these
employees were.
About eleven fifty two or twelve
dollars an hour there right at
the minimum wage and so
again some districts like for my
district
this will be a small raise our
our user somewhere between
twenty two to twenty five
thousand but it's for other
districts so these are full time
employees it is because of the
as far as our hourly rate and
again of this far as working
that that's the time that the
students are in school which is
most likely anywhere from one
eighty to a hundred and ninety
and so forth so but they are
full time and it was
many of them did receive that
Bob last year when we of the
Legislature enacted the minimum
wage.
Madam chair representative thank
you for that
You know I've known kids.
At.
Very much correct.
And it was always the EPA that
kind of picked up the slack so
I'm.
I guess I'm just kind of shocked
at the compensation level that
you're.
Representative Allison.
In a fortune for this.
Representative Martinez madam
chair I just want to say the
number I was looking for is this
I can Espanola schools a work
schedule would be a hundred and
eighty four days per year at
seven hours a day in Albuquerque
public schools a full time
employee educational system
would be based on a hundred and
eighty three days with six point
five hours per day so a full
time educators educational
assistant can be different hours
and days for different school
districts under the guise of
local control.
Thank.
That is.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm standing by this
I frankly paying people six
dollars.
in our I'm just curious why
having it twenty five thousand
instead of something that
instead of twelve fifty an hour
would come out more in in in the
range of fifteen an hour for
example or something a little
bit more competitive in order
with the thirty three percent
vacancy rate obviously have we
need.
Certainly would want to fill
these positions and thank.
And it would appear to be that
salary is a serious problem
here.
so my question is why aren't we
doing more.
Madam chair Representative
Matthews they're they're
actually all making fifteen
dollars an hour right now we did
that last year's legislation all
school employees get fifteen
dollars an hour it's because you
have to count it by you know
educational days that's what
kind of throws up those numbers
I think
and I want to say we're not
capping it at twenty five
thousand we're beginning at
twenty five thousand so that
means school districts could be
a marker according to their
budgets but right now they will
have to pay under this
legislation twenty five thousand
dollars a year.
Madam chair a lot of people have
already figured that out they've
been calling my office about
that.
Isn't it Madam.
I'm sure just.
I don't quite understand what
that was at twelve fifty an hour
and fifteen minute materials.
The.
This is just and then two years
in the past committee analysis
you're saying that there.
At twenty five thousand per year
the salary is roughly twelve
dollars and fifty cents an hour
I just want to ask which.
Madam chair representative met
these without having in front of
me but I will take a look at it
I wonder if it's a assumed on it
Just set calendar as opposed to
the fifteen dollar minimum wage
salary that's required for the
calendar that set by the some of
the school districts all take a
closer look for you and get some
answers.
Is this the only ASEAN also sort
of the house committee analysis.
Asin analysts okay.
Madam chair I'll take a look.
We we are madam chair we are
talking about paying them at
least twenty five thousand okay
thank you.
Representative Lente thank you
madam chair would pass.
Good.
A critical role.
Representative and in order yes.
Representative at I'm sorry
Representative yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative Lente yes.
Representative little.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Mason yeah.
Representative Matthews yes I
share Serrato yes.
Madam chair yes.
Thank you yes.
Thank you and with that we are
done for the day Representative
Hochman Vigil rolled her bills
and I suspect we will be hearing
it is the.
Will Smith.
