a moment to pull up your
documents out of our shared file
is out just in representative
Ely could raises hand if using
the attendees you could move him
over.
Representative Ely will come
thank you madam vice chair it
bring out Kirsten Johnson as
well she's going to be my
expert.
Yes Sir.
Kirsten Johnson if you would
raise your hand Mr Johnson that
makes a little easier for the
secretary to see you there you
go you're in.
All rights Representative Eli.
These through house bill two
thirty
thank you madam vice chair I am.
I'm learning I as we all are how
to multi task so the what's been
a new experience for me as
trouble to us today and so I
have other monitors going
I really want to turn it over
Christine Johnson right away
what we're really trying to do
is protect the public by making
this recovery funds real estate
recovery funding for
to add to our I think it's
Are property managers to it I
had to think a second property
managers to it take away some of
the restrictions and just make
it easier to really have an
effective fund but I know Mr
Johnson has the details of that
I'm looking at but I think
rather than having to say it and
then heard repeating my talking
points I just as you have the
expertise about assaulting or
destruction.
This.
Hello madam chair nice to see
you again.
And that members of the
committee thank you for having
me here today can you hear me
OK.
Yes loud and clear thank you
right thank you very much so at
this this bill is a very
important consumer protection
issue and the realistic
Commission lack ice and says.
Twenty thousand issues twenty
thousand licensees from brokers
to educators to Sanchez and for
the main part those people are
hard working good people trying
to do a good job for their
customers but we do have some
issues with the and you know
other people who are using their
license for ill and so the real
estate commission our purpose is
to protect people from licensees
so that that's really our charge
and so what we can do at the
commission is we can sanction
people we can require that they
take classes we can revoke a
license we can suspend a license
but we do not have the authority
to force the licensee who is
harm somebody to actually
reimburse them and so that's the
purpose of the real estate
recovery fund and so it's a it's
a wonderful fund set out to
protect the public from
licensees who have committed
fraud against them who have
actively
stolen money the money of other
people and who have committed
willful misrepresentation so
those are the three things that
the recovery fund protects
people from the problem with the
fund was or the act was that it
was very very tricky to actually
succeed at applying to that real
estate recovery fund because it
was onerous on the person who
had been damaged they had to go
through very strict and
Process with several steps that
would involve them having to
actually ascertain whether the
party who would harm them have
any assets whether those assets
could be sold whether those
assets are worth more than the
damage and so it was something
that nobody really was making a
claim against and the maximum
claim amount that you could
request was ten thousand dollars
and you can imagine in the
scheme of real estate ten
thousand dollars isn't a lot of
money in terms of what can
happen with regard to problems
with the house or money that's
been stolen from trust accounts
and that type of thing so the
commission is requesting to
amend the act to increase the
maximum claim amount to fifty
thousand dollars and to make it
less onerous on the harmed party
to apply to that fund and so
we've were requesting to remove
some of the steps that were
previously very very difficult
and instead say that as long as
the harmed party can find a
judgment from a competent court
then we will have a hearing on
the matter and determine whether
the real estate recovery time
could potentially recon
compensate the person who have
been harmed.
Thank you Mr.
representative Ely did you want
to add anything well I mean I am
really trying consistently to
questions that will help people
that are being taken advantage
of and this is in keeping with
my general philosophy.
And so with that madam chair we
will stand questions.
Thank you Representative thank
you miss Johnson at this point
we will go to public comment we
have seventeen people in our
attendees Rowe and if you are
here to speak in opposition
let's start with the opposition
if you are here to speak in
opposition to house bill two
hundred and thirty would you
please click your raise hand
button.
Sh and seeing that we will
switch to support you are here
to speak in support of house
bill two hundred and thirty
please click your right hand
button.
You will have two minutes to
speak with us.
Please be says thank we do have
a timer on screen you should be
able to see that.
We look forward to hearing your
testimony.
Cathy Cole been will be again.
You are here please I'm you
yourself you have two minutes.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm again my name
is Kathy COVID I'm a twenty year
we're twenty year realtor here
in the Albuquerque area and I'm
heavily involved in the real
estate industry at all levels I
speak in favor of house bill two
thirty the proposed amendments
make their recovery fund to be
used at is as it is intended
currently it's way too around
the US and does not protect the
public it's intended to do so I
highly encourage you to pass
this legislation.
Thank you.
Thank you very much appreciated.
Can create Maez you are up
please you yourself you have two
minutes.
You madam chair and members the
committee
thank you first of all for being
willing to serve your
constituents in the state of New
Mexico and some pretty tough
times and never again this is my
first virtual committee
appearance so madam chair if
you'll indulge me there for a
moment by moment but I just want
to make sure that we thank you
for your service.
I just the money again my name's
Kent Cravens on the CEO of the
greater Albuquerque association
of realtors and we've we've got
a great relationship with the
commission in so many ways and
and I'd like to just tell you
that I'm proud to support on
behalf of the association of
some legislation here that would
go a long ways in keeping people
whole through some some tough
negotiations in tough times if
they arise and of congratulate
sponsor Representative Eli thank
you for bringing this forward of
greater Albuquerque association
of realtors stand in support.
Oops thank you Mr Craven's
appreciate you being here.
Mr Steve young.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is and I am CEO of the New
Mexico association of realtors
and for actually all the right
all the reasons everybody has
mentioned I won't go into those
up the association stand in
support of house bill two thirty
thank you.
Thank you Mr and I am good to
hear from the association.
Mr bill Davis.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee I
am a real estate commissioner
from southeast New Mexico
Roswell in particular and I am
just wanting to stand in favor
of this motion for all the
reasons above that have been
mentioned and just want to say
that fifty thousand dollars
would would certainly help.
Additionally we've had cases
where several hundred thousands
of dollars have harmed the
public in general we're just
trying to do what we can to help
the public and protect the
public.
I'm in favor of the motion thank
you.
Thank you Sir.
Thank you for being here miss
Karen brown.
Hi this is Karen brown I'm an
associate broker here in
Albuquerque and I just want to
voice my support for house bill
two thirty also for the same
reasons that everyone else is
mentioned but.
Really I just want it to be it
be less burdensome on folks who
may have faced put a bird is
already getting through the
court system and if we have the
money there it should be
available to them and it in a
much more accessible way than it
is now I just want to voice my
support.
Thank you thank you Mr.
Lewis told.
Okay.
Can you hear me now we can hear
you Sir are you lose all your
broker in Albuquerque the member
they'll quicker keyboard for
almost forty five forty eight
years I was a qualified broker
in nineteen seventy three and I
had to get a bond in order of
their qualifying broker this in
act took place in nineteen
eighty the bonding requirements
was suspended in this was
replaced the bonding
requirements for fraud and theft
you know insurance does not
cover fraud and theft and the so
the original purpose of this
richly get back to something
you'd use for budgeting purposes
is embodied and the amendment
here up to a house bill two
thirty the the him like to say
if you look at the time value of
money inflation ten thousand
dollars in nineteen eighty four
percent annual inflation rate of
two thousand twenty would be
fifty thousand dollars for
pretty close to it simply as
upgrade of that is not even of
the boxes simply say let's bring
it up from what it was back in
nineteen eighty also consumer
courts for more readily
available to consumers for
members of this kind of thing
front of that back in nineteen
eighty also not more difficult
in order to get before the
appropriate court before the
judge and so this is the really
an act meant basically to
reinstate its original intent
and purpose from nineteen eighty
so I strongly support the
revision for House Bill two
thirty thank you.
Thank you Sir appreciate that.
That is the extent of hands
raised in public comments we
have heard from brokers from
realtors from commissioners
let's go to the committee.
Is there anyone on the committee
who has questions for the
sponsor.
Representative Baldonado.
Thank you madam chair I raise my
hand but I was raising my hand
also because you were looking
around on your screen it's
easier than it looks to do this
stuff
thank you thank you madam chair
thank you represent the labor
bringing this bill and and and
all my friends commented on the
bill that they former senator
Cravens and Kathy and bill and
and the guy this is names blue
is names lu Tolga many days I've
spent doing continuing that and
in those office there and in the
northeast heights of Albuquerque
so but I do want to go through
the bill Representative Eli and
and and a lot of these questions
will will fall on the shoulders
of our commissioner this person
Johnson so I did
Is gonna go line by line I
understand we're trying to do
here but I want to I want to
clarify a few things
Representative and and madam
chair
on page five lines five through
nine well it it starts a little
bit earlier but it's it's
attempting to make a definition
of property managers
Mr chair madam chair
specifically I want to talk
about one five two nine and and
and tell me what why why do we
it seems like we carve out
something there and lines five
through nine it reads property
management does not mean
inspections repairs eccentric
sector but it talks about the
cation rental properties what
specifically does that do to the
property management definition
madam chair and representative I
madam chair representative I
will as expected turn it over to
Mr Johnson answer that question.
Johnson.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Eli I forgot to
thank you for bringing this bill
forward by the way so as an
aside please accept our
gratitude for that and
Representative Baldonado I'll do
my best to answer your question
so as we amend this
Act are we realize that property
management wasn't specifically
listed with and the act as
one of the protections so we're
out that the bill analyst
suggested that we at the
definition of property
management in New the definition
came straight out of the rule
book this is the definition and
the and the real estate
commission will book for
property management and then
specific to your question R.
pertain regarding alliance five
through nine property management
does not mean inspections a
property repairs and maintenance
accidental to the sale and
marketing of property as
authorized by the owner that was
that particular part was a car
about so that those people who
are selling real estate who do
things like arrange for repairs
and things like that as part of
the sale process are not
considered property managers so
that was a car that in that
definition in the role and
regarding taking reservations
for our vacation rental
properties I believe they are
the definition excludes those
people from being considered
strictly property managers.
Thank you madam chair members of
I and and and Mr Johnson
So I guess I've always taken a
little bit of exception to that
because the fact that I think
we're talking about VR BO in the
vacation rental type websites
that exist they they take
somebody's money which is what I
do is a property manager thank
they pay bills or whatever and
the and then they take their
feet and then the.
The remainder goes to the owner
Mr chair madam chair and and
Representative and and
commissioner I've always been
curious why we want to carve out
those big big box kind of
operations why aren't they
consider property managers the
state New Mexico I mean they're
doing functionally the same
thing we are maybe on a shorter
term but they're doing the same
thing is that everybody
considered by the commission
commissioner.
Madam chair and Representative
Baldonado I believe the reason
that they as they develop the
definition they Kerr that part
out is because what they do they
consider to be let you know kind
of a kind of a limited service
type of thing as compared to the
other responsibilities that
property managers have such as
the reconciliations and all of
the account management the trust
account management and the
you know detail that that goes
into that type of work that
receiving the rant on behalf
orders and the deposits and all
that kind of thing I can see why
you would say that that part
falls into the vacation rental
you know creek collecting the
rent and and making the
reservation and that type of
thing but I think they thought
the property manager that does
so many more things than that
you know at regarding filling
out the leases and
managing the property that the
maintenance of the property the
condition of the property and
then all of the bookkeeping that
goes involved with that that is
involved with the trust account
management and the balancing of
the books and that type of thing
so I I think they consider that
very limited as compared to all
the detailed things property
managers do
and so I don't I don't recall
any discussion that I've been
part of that the commission
where it was that this has been
discussed but I'm sure if you
wanted to bring that for we
certainly could.
Thank you madam chair
representative and commissioner
and I appreciate that response
because it is I mean you make
sense they they don't do exactly
everything that that we do as of
a property manager that the
places of a home on rent for a
year but they do handle people's
money and I think that's the
that's the crux of everything
right here is that that that
individual that that entity is
is handling other people's money
and I think the the big the over
reaching our over arching thing
that that exists in in our
license law at least within the
realm of property management is
the accounting of money and to
be balanced to the penny and it
just frustrates me that we're
allowing the big guys the the
the sort of the walmarts of the
industry to have a pass on it
when we sit there day in day out
you know trying to balance our
books trying to do what the
commission asks of us
and so I I I hope we can revisit
that at some point with the
commission but I do I do feel
like that warm for missing out
on on some things that could go
wrong maybe weren't dealing with
as much dollars obviously a
vacation rental might generate
two to four thousand dollars
whatever it may be for a few
days but in the same regard it
is it is handling other people's
money I'll move on to on page
ten and of the bill and we talk
about limiting its ten lines ten
through twelve and this this may
be an answer for question for
for the representative is he's
an attorney but it it it just it
simply says a court of competent
jurisdiction madam chair and and
Representative Eli what is what
is a court of competent
jurisdiction it doesn't seem to
be defined seven District Court
is that the real estate
commission what's that court
what will be the realistic madam
chair I'm sorry Madam chair
representative you will be the
real estate commission report
and so I'm assuming but I don't
know this that it's going to
depend on the amount at issue so
it's a small amount it is likely
the New Mexico or I'm not an
expert on real estate law but
I'm assuming that it's a small
amount W. jurisdictional limit.
To that in state court at so
it'll be natural Cork first
so Irish restriction on that
page and currently twenty five
thousand that would be in
District Court if for example
there are issues about
jurisdiction or venue so you
have a resident here in resident
from out of state it could be
filed in federal court so that's
why you don't want to say
District Court you don't want to
do that choose a court of
competent jurisdiction because
the circum the facts can change
depending on what happens that's
all defined by either rural or
K..
Thank you madam chair and
representative obviously the the
Representative lives in the city
because you talk about metro
court but we deal with
magistrate courts must.
Just a but that's basically
equal that districts and and
mentor equal
but we I want to make sure we're
talking about a a court and not
the real estate commission is
that correct Madam chair
representative it says court
each court correct and and chair
representative that the next
line reads of a verified
petition with the commission for
recovery percent of those
statements so my understanding
so what that means to me is that
chair representative that once
this this individual that's been
harmed goes to court and
receives a judgment of some sort
then that petition then goes to
the real estate commission.
They're gonna ask the commission
to to make them whole or to to
give them some some some money
to offset their losses is that
how you read that miss madam
chair Representative and Madam
chair representative I I don't I
mean I think I can answer that
but I'd rather miss Johnson
intrude and then if I if I
understand it I think I do I'm
happy to add to this Johnson's
testimony.
Madam chair representative on
the line typically what would
happen is the harmed party would
once they have a judgment in
hand a what
come to the real estate
commission and petition eight
disbursement from the recovery
fund and then we would have a
hearing on the matter and at
that time it would be the
commission's opportunity to
question the licensee are who is
the debtor so to speak with
regard to the judgment and
ascertain what type of assets
they have and whether or not
they have the money to pay the
judgment unfortunately we don't
have the authority to force them
to pay the judgment but we at
least can evaluate the situation
and see why they're not paying
we do have the ability to
Go forward and sanctions the
licensee or have a hearing on
the matter separate from the
hearing regarding that requested
recovery fund but they would
petition the commission there
would be a hearing and then the
commission will determine
whether or not they feel that
they should issue money to that
person who has been harmed and
in what amounts and that would
depend on how much money the
fund has it's the fund does not
contain enough money for the our
judgment then we would have to
deny the claim if we do have
enough money and we feel like
it's warranted and we could
issue the claim in my time here
at the commission where which is
been eight years we did have one
percent petitioned the Rifaat
recovery fund and this person
had been damaged greatly and it
had taken something many many
many years to get to the point
where he can actually have the
judgment hand and he had gone
through all the the onerous
process to determine that he
qualified and we did issued ten
thousand dollars to that
gentleman I think that was a
year or two ago but in my time
here and there that has been the
only claim and I believe that is
because it was such a very
difficult process to get through
and and Madam chair
representative couple things
aligned at one is the use of the
word verified petition is that
correct usage because that keeps
changing for example right now
in order to file a verified
petition for example I just had
to file the petition
we and the house got to
as the rule chair I filed an
affidavit so on that affidavit
was not no rust doesn't have to
be those rules change depending
on our technology and what's
going on by saying penalties
apply so if you file a petition
and.
Your line are you can both are
subject to both civil and
criminal penalties and I will
tell you what kind of got me
involved in this because it has
as Mr Johnson is talking what
what it rings a bell with you
may know that I I'd go after bad
lawyers that's what I do and we
have a trust fund and frankly is
something I have complained
about nonstop for the past two
decades is how cumbersome that
process is for clients that you
know been ripped off by the way
when you apply to the funds
can't charge fees so it is
nothing to do with me you just
totally pro bono but I've gotten
one client compensator that fund
I promise you I'm no wallflower
it is just the idea of having a
cumbersome process by which
people can recover funds for
nefarious acts is something
every professional organizations
should be doing streamlined
frankly I wish are more
associations do a better job I
really do shop thank you madam
chair the recurring line thank
you commissioner for that answer
The I'm I'm gonna segue off just
because the commissioner
mentioned that the fund at and
and the and the the the dollars
except how much is that fund
right now today you have a
number ninety yes yes madam
chair Representative Baldonado
so currently the fund has I
believe twenty nine thousand and
it we have a statutory
requirement to have a minimum
balance of a hundred and fifty
thousand dollars we discovered
this summer that that fund had
been swept by the legislature I
believe that was an either
twenty eleven our O. line and so
we have twenty nine thousand at
the moment we have a request in
to the budget office to transfer
money from the real estate
commission general fund hundred
twenty thousand dollars to the
real estate recovery fund to
make a call and a hundred fifty
thousand dollars that we have
the requirement to keep.
Madam chairman and commissioner.
What we normally get how does
that fund get.
Filled up I mean is it is it
licensing fees what what is the
money come from the bill to get
the dollars in that fund so the
commission has the authority to
either transfer the money from
the real estate General the real
estate commission on which I
think of as the general fund we
have the authority to transfer
it from that fund for we have
the authority for each
application being whether it's a
new application or renewal fee
to have a ten dollar charge on
it that would go towards the
recovery fund we have not had to
use that assessment ability for
many many years I've I've I
don't even know when the last
time the assessment actually
occurred and the reason is that
the fund is just not very well
known and that once again it was
so difficult to actually achieve
success at making a claim very
few people even make the attempt
so the statute says that that
Fund when it reaches a balance
of over four hundred thousand
dollars we have to put money
back in in the general fund and
and for many years the money was
just sitting there growing and
out we had I think over two
hundred fifty thousand at one
time because that the statute
also allows for the treasure to
invested in it was making
interest and it was growing and
nobody was climbing on it which
is probably how it it was swept
but so we are funding it
currently with that the real
estate General Fund and we don't
intend to have any kind of
assessment issued or on licensee
application fees although we do
have that ability in the act.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and representative and
commissioner so it maybe
anecdotally facetiously on this
point so we we have the real
estate fund with a big balance
and we the legislature's swept
that and and unfortunately that
that money was not used for this
purpose and and hopefully we can
fix that with this bill and make
it easier or the so better
process by which people can can
access that money chair I I hate
to see us
do all these changes and make
all this you know who I to get
this thing you know available
for folks that are aggrieved and
then we have a bad budget year
and and and those that the work
in the money business and the
legislature say there's there's
a couple hundred grand over here
let's just wipe that and so
unfortunate that we've done over
and over we've done it to the
schools and to to all sorts of
commissions and boards so but I
make that point just it to
understand how are we going to
fund this recovery act in in or
the the fund how you've put
money into it next year you know
get it to the people that are
pre so the next P. lines madam
chair and and and then and
Representative commissioner so
we just we strike ten thousand
raise it to fifty that's pretty
clear but the the next section
talks about in this I'm on page
ten line twenty or so we talk
about a maximum amount.
Of thirty thousand gonna strike
that change it to one hundred
thousand are we saying there
Madam chair representative are
we telling us we are we setting
up a situation where one person
could make multiple claims in
one year for fifty thousand each
is that what that reads madam
chair.
Madam chair representative I can
answer that that is very common
insurance language where you can
one person can recovery no more
than fifty thousand dollars but
there are there are several
claims against one licensee are
within a one year period of time
all of those claims and limited
to one hundred thousand we
assess where I read.
So so mentor to be clear that's
that's the the claims against
the licensee not the actual
individual making the claims
that correct manager correct
eight the individual making the
claim an individual could
collect up to fifty thousand
dollars but if you had a bunch
of claimants and I want to refer
to miss Johnston make sure
sentence correctly but if you
have a bunch of claims against
the licensee one licensee the
maximum all of them come
recovery gather is a hundred
thousand so if you've got one
person gets fifty the other
fifties gonna get divided up
that's the way I would
understand but ms Johnson of I
said that incorrectly.
Now met madam chair
representative the not
Representative Eli that is how I
understand it as well and can
give you an example
and I'm fortunate case where a
property manager
just basically stole the money
from all of this customer's
trust accounts and left the
state just disappeared and so we
had I'll probably five or six
complaints of the real estate
commission against this one
licensee who disappeared and
those people could apply to the
recovery fund but we could not
issue any kind of award more
than a hundred thousand dollars
for all of them combined against
that one particular licensee and
if I may Representative
Baldonado you your read our
minds where we we we want to
protect our little funds and
we're very very concerned about
it being swept and I wish there
was a way to to and then this
bill further to protect the
hundred fifty thousand at least
from being swept I don't know
how to do that but you've read
our minds in terms of our wish
list of a way to protect protect
the fund I hope that answers
your question it it did it did
madam chair representative and
Mr and you know I think the
schools would say the same thing
you know I'm we the most in a
school district out slippers and
a couple hundred thousand
whatever it was and it was sort
of a punishment because they
have been so good to set aside
money for for a rainy day and
then here comes the legislature
we can take that one but
the
But I'm I'm troubled in that
because in your scenario madam
chair and commissioner
so I manage properties we have a
hundred twenty or so on on rent
whatever additional our our
trust account of just just
handed the deposit is going to
be.
I don't know hundred fifty
thousand at any given point so
there's hundred twenty people
are we saying in order for those
if the if all hundred twenty
owners are agreed by this one
property manager every single
one of them would have to go to
the magistrate or to the
District Court file a case hire
an attorney spend all this money
to go collect twelve hundred
Bucks that we're looking at in
that regard Madam chair
commissioner.
Madam chair representative not I
I believe that the intent of
this fund is kind of a last
resort for desperate situations
where someone's been damaged you
know hugely although we we
certainly would not
turned away from considering a
claim of twelve hundred dollars
that's a lot of money also but
it's I think would be
unachievable to protects
everybody equally if we had a
hundred and twenty people making
a claim against that the fund
would there's be no way we could
relate reimburse everybody for
that you know that type of money
would probably exceed our
ability this really is an
attempt to try to take care of
the people who have been most
egregiously harmed although we
would consider any claim.
Thank.
Representative me just a at
you're doing the balance right
so you have on the one hand
you're trying to protect members
of the public but you also do
sherry obligation of the fund
itself so you want to have a
solvent Fund you want to use you
want utilized but you also have
an obligation and so what
they're trying to do is say
let's make this process as easy
as possible for people who have
been wrong to come to the fund
but let's provide some
predictability to the claims
made against the funds so that
one licensee doesn't wipe out
the fund so the hope would be to
have enough money in there that
if you had a really bad licensee
and we're trying to claims that
you pay the most you would be
paying on that one licensee in
one year a hundred thousand
dollars you can always say let's
pay a million but they are
having
on and then you still hopefully
still have money left over that
of another licensee did the same
thing only maybe damage one
person that person would be
collects which is never going to
be perfect you're always going
to have kind of a balance
between produce your obligations
to the public and the chair
allegations to the solvency of
the fund and they're trying to
eliminate as many barriers as
possible to satisfy the
obligations for public but
putting some bumpers on how much
can be paid out of Fund as a
result of one bad act.
Thank you and it's if I may add
it and so this is pretty much
the only place where we would
have any ability at all to
reimburse that person has been
harms and so if we could
reimburse them even.
It's more than we have the
ability to do anywhere else as
far as the real estate
commission and we have several
times in these cases that were
so large we have tried to turn
them over to the attorney
general's office or two on the
district attorney's office and
in both cases we were told that
they really don't have the
resources to investigate white
collar crime and you know it it
just kind of went no where all
that we tried to push it forward
to a place where maybe very they
can provide some relief and
another way back there they just
weren't interested in
investigating it so this is
really our our only opportunity
to actually try to reimburse
people and harms.
Thank you madam chair
representative mission and I I I
completely and totally
understand that I mean I I you
know if you if you have it's
it's the it's the one bad apple
runs a whole cart scenario
here's what we're talking about
your as a property manager
myself you know I the cake you
know very very high care trying
to make sure my owners in our
accounted for meetings and in
line but it takes one Joe down
the street run off with a
hundred grand in in our
everybody makes have these
conversations
you know I I guess I just chair
and and Representative
commissioner on that issue I I'm
just wondering if you know we're
at a property manager to this is
wonderful to be able to
actually.
You know delivered some relief
to those folks that are agree
because those amounts are so
small you know that they're
there we're only dealing with a
couple thousand at most they
might have a situation where a
homeowner feels like a property
manager neglected in the home
was you know damage to tens of
twenties of thousand dollars
whatever maybe that's a
different scenario but I think
in the day to day with the the
upstanding of deposits and
things of that nature you know
we have one a few years ago here
in Valencia County that you know
the the property manager died
the sister took over and all
these accounts went all over the
place other property management
and you still to this day
there's a few people that I
never got my deposit back in a
might have been six hundred
Bucks or thousand Bucks and
they're just like people just
forget about it we're not even
bother with it at this point so
and madam chair and
representative on page eleven
weekly strike a bunch of
language from eleven to twelve
we strike several lines of of of
information can you kind of
briefly some of what that does
Madam chair representative
commissioner yeah I I can't
first in all of this Jon Stewart
you have exceeded your.
We try to make it is not yup I I
miss Johnson I said that
correctly.
Madam chair representative Ely
Representative Baldonado yes yes
Sir you have really the the
process was so difficult that
people were right even if you
know let's let's say one of the
people that you are speaking out
Representative Baldonado who had
maybe a smaller claim but they
were bothered enough that they
went to court and they got a
judgment and so they they know
about the recovery funds they
call it after they see what's it
going to take for me to try to
get this reimbursed and then
they start reading these these
numbers fourteen through twenty
five and basically what it was
saying is this poor person has
already been damaged already had
to go to court already gotten a
judgment now has to determine
does the person who harm to me
have a way to pay me if they do
have a way to pay me I think if
they have something to sell how
much is that worth.
Is the worth of what they have
to sell enough to cover the
judgment and they had to provide
that information to that
commission before they can even
apply for any kind of award and
so you know I think a lot of
them take a look at this
language and just sat I am tired
I'm not going to go through this
I don't have a way of
determining what the value of
this person's assets are and I
would probably have to hire an
attorney to do that and that
means I'm gonna get into more
money and so they just give up
and and don't apply for it so
the way we decided to counter
that would be to say all you
have to do now is find a
judgment you know you've gone to
court a court has determined
that this person is you this
money and now we'll have a
hearing at the real estate
commission which would determine
some of these things we would
have the opportunity to ask the
licensee what their assets are
why they aren't paying you know
this type of thing and go
through the process before we
determine our out to make an
award but it just makes the
process easier for the poor
harmed party to access.
It in Madam chair representative
thank commissioner and and I
think we struggle that and then
and lines twenty one twenty two
we added item E. there that says
at the hearing the licensee
shall be permitted to raise all
affirmative defenses so we're
giving that licensee the the
opportunity to sit in front of
the commission is that correct
and and defend what.
Yes been accused and and that's
what that does yes.
Thank you madam chair thank you
commissioner
We see here just one.
I think that was that I wanted
to kind of go through line by
line to see exactly what we're
trying to accomplish I think
madam chair and and
Representative commission I
think we're we're doing a good
thing in this bill my my my
fears is that the the
legislature some point does you
know start celebrating that that
balance it might be sitting
there and start trying to sweep
that thing and I I wish there
was a way to protect that fund
from from those instances
I do I do understand the
commission's mission sometimes I
take a little offense to the
fact that you you know the
commission does come out and and
continually just hammers home
that we're we're here to protect
the people madam chair and and
Representative and commissioner
I get that but licensees are
people as well and many times I
think licensees feel that their
aggrieved by a whole situation
because
of the way maybe a cases handled
whether it's through a of an
NCAA or or through a situation
where there's a complaint and
that I I make this plea publicly
and I know all the folks are
listening that that have heard
this from me a million times
before you know property
managers or people to you know
we I look at my industry as
providing the very basic needs
that people need House a roof
over their head and we're not
out there the the the the vast
majority of us are not out there
trying to swindle someone out of
their depositors or hold back
money or do these things that
are egregious and that goes for
real estate brokers and in
general and I I just hope at
some point the commission and
the commissioner the folks that
that run the commission would
would would understand that that
language is hurtful and harmful
when you when you publish
information saying if your
property manager you better be
aware because we're coming after
you that's that's the way it
sells and that's the way it
feels and that's that's just it
is what it is every with every
industry has its haven't has its
grievances and so I just hope
that you know moving forward we
can continue to have these
conversations we we did Mr the
total mentioned the when he was
a broker back.
Back in the seventies we've been
at it for ever and are you still
listening
the they would direct their
required to to do a bond we try
to bond bill couple years ago
that I felt like could have been
you know very very beneficial in
in some ways maybe this is a
better answer I don't know but
at least we're trying to do
something to to to establish as
funding haven't employees and
and make it easier for people
access that fund so I do
appreciate the the the intent of
the legislation and and the
opportunity that we have to
expand expressed what we're what
we're trying to do and I do
appreciate the the service of
all the commissioners that serve
because it's a thankless job
your own rate like we are and
and here we go in and do our
thing so thank you madam chair
thank you Representative Eli Eli
and thank you commissioner for
answer my questions and madam
chair representative actually
one thing in response to that so
I'm going to refer to paragraph
PED affirmative defenses we can
just talk about that as the.
Property managers are people to
subs subsection our internet we
can make a teacher
Representative.
Thank you for your very.
Thank you Representative thank
you representative Ely and
commissioner Johnson
I don't see any other hands I
had a question myself about.
Essentially about that session
II.
RT managers are people too
section on page twelve and that
would be
this is a hearing for the
commission after judgment has
already been established by the
courts.
So at.
When a licensee shall be
permitted to raise all
affirmative defense is not
talking about defense against
the judgment that pieces already
done is talking about the
recovery peace and my
understanding that correctly.
I'm looking for Mister Johnson
can answers should care let me
look at this.
yeah I would be I we start with
that yes I think so would depend
on the facts but it should be
those affirmative defenses that
are otherwise available so the
judgments been done and you know
they're done they don't get to
go back and read this that's not
the way this works now madam
chair Representative Eli
I believe that it's an
opportunity for the licensee to
come in and present why they're
not paying the judgment but as
realistic commissioners would
have no authority to overturn
any kind of judgment that was
issued by a court it would just
be an opportunity for us to
question the licensee in a
licensee could defend their case
as to why they're not paying the
the judgment explained to us you
know what their situation as and
in many cases I'll be honest and
say that when when something is
gone this far generally the
licensing defaults on hearing
they don't they don't show up
they're usually just checked out
of the process and they're not
involved anymore and and to
Representative Baldonado as
COVID about property managers
are people too I'd certainly
agree and understand that when I
began talking today I said the
commission issues twenty
thousand licenses and of those
twenty thousand people there all
for the main part hard working
people doing a good job for
their customers and we really
have complaints that the
commission in the hundreds every
year the low hundreds as opposed
to the twenty thousand licensees
that are walking around so it's
true the majority of people are
doing the right thing and it's
just that the bad apples as he
said that we're trying to deal
with here what about madam chair
and I want to add something
Representative Baldonado I am
you know I go after a lot of bad
actors I practice but it never
leaves me even bad actors
aren't.
Madam do process they're not
entitled to repeat process but
they're entitled to due process
so they have additional defenses
that happen all already been
litigated that of course that's
what this is in there so I
really like this provision I get
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Eli
thank you commissioner for
really good bills to make the
recovery funds more accessible
to folks who have been harmed
and do what is the will of the
committee do we have a motion.
We would do and I'm here.
Thank you.
Second by Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Madam secretary would you call
the rules.
You madam vice chair.
Representative Baldonado.
Yes.
Representative Dow yes.
Representative Rowe yes.
Representative Gaydos.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martínez yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes Representative bill yes.
Madam chair to get our.
Yes.
Is this yes and go fight win.
Thank you chair by chair members
of the committee thank you
everyone madam secretary would
you read the total.
Madam vice chair all right thank
you representative thank you
commissioners you haven't do
pass.
Thank you everyone.
Excellent everyone can switch
documents at this point we're
moving on to house bill one
hundred fifty five and agency
office if you see the
Representative Sweetser or Dick
St go ahead dissent is already
moved over fabulous.
And mysteries are I see you okay
everybody take a moment and
switch your documents.
Okay Representative said she
would take us through house bill
one fifty five thank you very
much madam chair and committee
members it's good to be in your
committee this afternoon house
bill one fifty five workforce
training residency requirements.
Removes the sunset provision and
makes permanent the reduced
residency requirement under J.
tip job training incentive
program when the training is
provided for high wage jobs
since the Legislature
unanimously approved legislation
in two thousand seventeen
sponsored by representative bill
mccamley in George Dodge to
allow for the reduction of the
residency requirement for high
wage positions.
One hundred seventeen high wage
jobs have been approved of which
twenty three were in rural
communities throughout New
Mexico the two thousand
seventeen bill reduced the one
year residency requirement for
JTF under certain circumstances
and it allowed a one date
residency requirement for high
skill high wage jobs.
As the economic development
departments response in the
fiscal impact report before you
say attraction workforce
development and retention of
talent is vital in diversifying
new Mexico's economy this
provision has been helpful with
attraction of highly skilled
employees and removing the
sunset clause will help continue
the recruitment efforts to
businesses by attracting a
workforce for today's job
openings and those in the future
and madam chair I would like the
committee to know that the
reduced residency requirement
has not been abused.
Of the seven thousand four
hundred ninety two jobs J. tip
is allocated funding to since
inception of this policy the one
day residency option has
accounted for one point three
percent of the jobs created
under J. tip which means the
focus has remained on the longer
one your residence but this
waivers also proved to be a
critical tool that allows New
Mexico companies to recruit
individuals to fill these highly
technical highly specialized
jobs so instead of before
appearing before you every time
in the sense that comes up we
would like to remove the sense
that that obviously has been
helpful but not abuse joining me
today I have a Jason Espinoza
and my co sponsor Meredith Dixon
and I would yell to them if they
had anything to add with your
permission madam chair.
Thank you representative
Representative Dixon.
Madam chairman.
Mr Espinoza.
Madam chair members of the
committee Jason Espinoza here in
my capacity as the register
lobbyist with I New Mexico idea
which is the statewide
association of economic
development organizations.
In this legislation is one of
their priority pieces of
legislation this year
and and just here to help answer
questions.
Thank you madam chair we would
stand for questions.
Thank you Representative thank
you Sanchez Mr Espinoza will go
to attendees if you are here to
speak in opposition to house
bill one fifty five opposition
please click you raise hand
button and we will call you in.
Seeing none if you are here to
speak in support of house bill
one fifty five if you are here
to speak in support.
Please click you raise hand but.
And we will start with Mister
Eric Montgomery.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name's Eric
Montgomery on with the our I'm
the vice president for business
development of the Misia valley
economic development alliance.
A ten year veteran of economic
development and Dona Ana County
I'm speaking in favor of this
bill because of the impact
positive impact it's had on job
growth within Dona Ana County
this tool when it was first
enacted.
Not only helped us attract
several companies including one
in Santa Theresa
but also has been a pivotal
marketing tool we are the only
state in the nation that
currently has the ability to say
we recognize that for rural
state and have been since
nineteen ten census and we
recognize that
your ability to provide highly
trained technical talent was in
New Mexico can be strained and
we don't want to hold you back
on your ability to locate in New
Mexico because of workforce
issues this provision allows us
to overcome that conversation
and we strongly urge you to
support.
Support the removal of the
sunset clause thank you.
Thank you Sir appreciate that.
Saying no other public testimony
we can go to the committee
committee members if you have
questions please click your
right hand but.
And J..
Representative Martínez thank
you madam chair thank you
Representative Sweetser an index
and I appreciate this bill
Representative Sweetser is this
so is this the same bill that we
had was it last year a couple
years ago or is it slightly
different I remember you working
and need to.
but I can't recall what the
substance of that bill was thank
you madam chair and thank you
representative that was the high
wage jobs tax credits so this is
is simply revisiting a five year
sunset clause that was actually
put in
I guess in my first year and in
the session but I did not work
on this bill at that time.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and can you just expelled about
why and and I'm sorry I miss is
in your opening but what why are
we revisiting the sunset.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you representative basically I
think that it's been proven to
be a nice tool but not an abuse
pool and so instead of rolling
the sense that in appearing
again in another five years we
thought it would be cleaner to
remove the sense that this body
always can reimpose the sentence
that should there be some
concerns further down the road
but at this point in time I
think we were just trying to
make it a little bit cleaner to
have companies it or rather
individuals in the area that
wanted to take advantage of it
with participating companies
know that it was available and
would be going away in in the
four years or three years are
held for long the next census
allowed and and I would defer to
my.
The chairman expert if they had
anything in addition to that I
think we're just trying to clean
it up and have us not appear
before you on a regular basis.
Thank you very very well.
Anything to add Representative
Dixon.
Well it is no I think
that madam chair and
representative Martinez what
Representative Sweetser has
highlighted is that this is
proven to be a very successful
pool and you know we've seen in
the data that it has not been
abused and so I'm continuing
this with this
Exception the best credit up
will allow our businesses to
recruit more companies and
provide some certainty for them
thank you.
Thank you for that explanation
both of you Preciado that's it
Madam.
Thanks
chair Maestas.
Thank you madam chair
representative Sweetser index
and.
Of the bill.
It's so simple.
To read but but but kind of cool
much more complicated than that
but madam chair a Representative
featured Representative X. and
so on page three.
Where it removes the sunset is
that sunset does that five year
window only apply to paragraph
three or the or the entire.
The entire section of wall.
Because I noticed the section
law was put in.
Thank you eighty three.
So just paragraphs see on the
top of page three that.
There were limited in the sunset
on.
Yes Mr chair Mister madam chair
Mr chair I would ask Mr Espinoza
to confirm that but I believe
that's correct.
Madam chair of the chairman
masses that is correct it's only
to the specific one year
residency requirement.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Sweetser mistrust
and also the
And then on page five that's I
think that's the.
That nails it is that of.
Is that of residence
requirements so.
This serves its purpose I mean
we put the sunsets to evaluate
it and we either get rid of it
or or could or continue with
that but there's no reason to
put another sunset on on the on
the back end but I suppose
theoretically we could but
that's a good idea it's a good
idea always so by all means
Great great catch in the
statute.
And
And I stand support thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you madam chair I move a
do pass.
Thank you representative
question before you take that
motion real quick of the
sponsors are Mr Espinoza you
have mentioned that one hundred
seventeen jobs have been
provided during the time that
this has been in effect has been
equally spread out over the five
year period or has it been
trending upward I'm just
interested in seeing if this is
increasing in use or is just
pretty much the same all the
time.
Interesting question madam chair
and I will defer to Mister
Espinoza.
Madam chair members the
committee
my understand we we asked a
requested data from the economic
Development Department it seems
to be fairly flat and its usage
I am happy to share that
information with you as well.
Thank you very much so those are
all my questions we have an
impasse motion as their second.
Also.
Thank you Representative Gaydos
madam secretary what to call the
roll.
Thank you madam vice chair.
Representative Baldonado.
Yes.
Representative Dow yes.
Representative will yes.
It was yes Representative
Johnson yes.
Representative Martinez this.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes Representative Serrato.
Yes.
Madam chair to get our.
Yes and chairman my Estes yes.
We have another ten yes votes.
The past excellent Senator yes
you do pass great example of a
sunset being used and abandoned
when the legislation proves
successful.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee members we greatly
appreciate your this afternoon
thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman you have
announced plans.
Thank you madam chair members so
so we'll put up the schedule
here in the next couple hours
for for bills on Wednesday if we
can get to all of them will roll
that fourth one part of Friday.
But
there's some heavy policy lives
up House Bill two thirty five
Representative Han.
Data has some opposition so we
at the request of the sponsor we
bump that to Wednesday and then
Representative Roybal Caballero
was unavailable today soul here
Her bills Wednesday and Friday
one is public bank one is.
Stallone of Bill rights and then
on Friday the
The extension of the minimum
wage thank you madam chair.
Thank you thank you committee we
are adjourned sequence to.
