on who's gonna speak. You all
can make those decisions. Uh, we
are gonna have, uh, there's, we
always have a uh a minute.
Of uh of uh commentary and uh we
will be keeping time.
Uh, we will have a minute on
opposition or uh we'll have 10
people for opposition that are
here in the room, 10 people in
favor that are in the room. We
have about 25 people outside the
doors, so we have told them as
well because we don't wanna
limit anybody from being able to
come in, but we have said that 4
people for opposition or people
uh in favor from outside can
come in and then we will do um
the same.
On Zoom, uh, it'll be 5 and 5.
And I think between that.
Amount of people we will
definitely have at least a
sample of what the room and what
uh the public thinks, and then
we will go on to um to the
members. So I wanted to make
sure that uh we were clear on
the rules, um, I appreciate
everybody's being here today,
um, and I would like us to be
able to follow decorum, the um.
Uh, we will be holding the mic
for people here, uh, they, they
will be letting people up from
outside, uh, so I appreciate
that you're working a little
extra hard today, uh, on our
behalf, um, but those are the
ground rules, so once again,
thank you all for being here and
um I'm gonna have Patrick.
Uh, do the role?
Representative Armstrong.
Here, Representative De la Cruz,
here, Representative Hernandez.
Representative L Lente here.
Representative Mason.
Here, Representative Matthews
here. Representative Murphy
here.
Representative Parajon.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair, and Madam
Chair. Madam Chair, you have a
quorum. Thank you.
Representatives, if you'd like
to start by start your
presentation, please. um.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you committee for hearing House
Bill 11.
Originally called Paid Family
and Medical Leave Act, um,
before I begin, um, the
presentation, Madam Chair. I'd
like to point out that we have a
house commerce and economic
development
yesterday.
Thank you, uh, it's being passed
out now if you wanna go ahead
and read the uh.
The number at the bottom,
please, and um we did get it in
the 24 hour notice, and I
appreciate that, thank you. Oh,
thank you, Madam Chair. The, um,
202 number is 230.
488.8.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, my
remarks will focus on the
committee sub.
There are multiple com
components to this bill and one
point I'd like to make, um, from
the start is we are now calling
this the welcome child and
family wellness leave Act.
And it does
Build on the work we've been
doing for the last 5 years.
But I'm proud to say that it is
a program that is unique to the
state.
And it is unique to our
wonderful, um, residents, and
I'm very proud of the fact that
we've worked hard to develop a
program that will work for us
here in New Mexico.
The components of the bill are
we establish the welcome child
and family wellness leave Act.
We create a family wellness
leave fund.
Um, we are launching the Welcome
child Fund.
And um it's important to note
that the administration of both
funds and the rules related
thereto will be developed by the
New Mexico Department of
Workforce Solutions.
There is, and as there was in
the original bill, uh, creation
of a temporary advisory
committee to support workforce
solutions as they move forward
on their rule rulemaking and
other policies related to both
of these funds.
The family wellness fund is very
similar to the paid family and
medical leave funds in that it
incorporates the um the premium
component in a similar manner,
it covers um medical leave, safe
leave, military exit exigency
leave, bereavement leave, and
foster.
I think I've covered all of
them, Madam Chair. Um, the fund,
but it is much less expensive
than what we had originally
proposed.
Largely, I would note due to the
fact that we're creating the
welcome child Fund, which my
colleague represented Sarado
will explain to you, but.
Because that piece is pulled out
with um and funded in a
different manner, Madam Chair,
we are able to keep the premiums
down for both the employer and
the employee, so the fund is
proposing an initial premium of.
0.2% for employees and 0.15% for
employers it it continues the
exemption that we had in the
original bill, madam Chair, of
not requiring employers with
fewer than 5 employees to pay
premiums, and it maintains um
the actuarial study that many um
members of the business
community really wanted to make
sure that we, we were right on
in terms of solvency and so on,
Madam Chair.
The wellness um family wellness
leave is um summarized as
follows.
It for 6 weeks of family
wellness leave is provided for
the um.
Items that I mentioned earlier,
Madam Chair, exigency leave safe
leave, bereavement leave, and
foster to welcome a foster child
into the household, um, and all
of the same procedural
safeguards in terms of applying,
needing to validate the reasons
for your leave and so on are
contained in this bill, Madam
Chair, uh, and with that, I will
ask um that my colleagues
representative Sarado discussed
the Welcome Child Fund.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you colleagues on the committee.
I also want to introduce our
expert. We have Tracy McDaniel
with the Southwest Women's Law
Center, but we also have uh
Secretary Nair here also who can
answer any questions, uh, just
from her perspective as a
Secretary of Workforce
Solutions, uh, so I'm very
excited about the uh welcome
child fund component of this
bill primarily because it came
out of a lot of conversations
that led in this committee,
Chairwoman, you have been uh
essential in ensuring that we
look at this from a tri
perspective that the
Employers and employees all come
together to build a stronger,
healthier workforce for our
state, and I think everyone has
been part of these conversations
in many ways. What this bill
does is it creates a $3000
refund provided to one of the
child's parents each month for 3
months immediately following the
birth or adoption of a child.
Jaw protection is provided for
both parents who received the
welcome child benefit, uh, the
12 weeks of welcome child leave
or grad job protection is
provided for the parents, 12
weeks of welcome child leave is
granted to each parent, which
need to be taken within one year
of the birth or adoption of a
child, uh, and they are required
to notify their employer and
provide documentation when leave
will be taken and when they
return to work. This is vital
when we're looking at our early
childhood education and our
development for these kids.
That 0 to 3 months, it is near
impossible to find any child
here in that time. In fact, with
my own children, I had someone
come in who would hand me my
child, I'd breastfeed, and then
I get back to work and they take
care of them. It was almost in
any situation. This fund is
vital for that care component.
With that, I'm going to hand it
to our other co-sponsor,
chairwoman uh Patrice, thank
you, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, and thank you to uh
the sponsors. So I also am for
you because this effort began in
2019, at least that's when I
represented.
On behalf of our hardworking
families who have been asking
for these benefits. Since then,
that was our time and before our
time.
And this legislation for many
years, I too am very you today.
I welcome having a vibrant.
Robust discussion and having the
ability to answer your questions
and look forward to you passing
this bill out of this committee.
For the families of New Mexico.
Thank you. And with that, Madam
Chair, we stand for.
Thank you. Um, is anybody here
opposed to?
I'd like to actually get a count
of how many.
If we could, can we count?
Ready? Um.
We will start with uh 10 people.
OK, OK, OK, guys, OK, so, I
think we've got 10 lined up.
Hold on, hold on.
Please.
All right.
I need everybody to quiet down,
please.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Patsy
Romero. I'm president, CEO of
Santa Maria El Mirador. I
provide intermediate care for
individuals with intellectual
disabilities in Rio Reba County
and Santa Fe County.
We currently have
2/200 employees who meet the
responsibility of direct care
staff.
The employer cost in H bill.
Uh, House Bill 11 is a small
amount of money, but it doesn't
factor in the real cost for
Medicaid providers like myself
to cover this unfounded mandate.
When I have a staff on leave. I
have to cover their position.
How do I cover it with overtime
pay.
And I have to pay time and a
half for that employee.
Staff working overtime are
exhausted.
They cannot provide quality
care.
I
Madam chair and members of the
committee. My name is Vince
Moffett. I'm the largest private
employer in Farmington, New
Mexico, owning multiple
businesses from 2 to 750
employees. I've dedicated my
career to growing businesses to
provide essential jobs in New
Mexico. I'm also the immediate
past chair of New Mexico Home
Health and Hospice Association
and currently chair of the Four
Corners Economic Development
Group and the Pharmacy Chamber
of Commerce, representing over
700 businesses. The vast
majorities oppose HB 11 due to
the challenges.
You'll create, particularly in
regards to staffing.
The largest business based in
home health provides Medicaid
patients in Salmon County,
McKinley, Sandoval, and Cibala.
Counties with care. I support
paid leave and offering some of
my businesses, but HB 11
threatens my ability to operate,
especially as we still recover
financially from COVID-19.
Home health cannot function
without staff and workforce
shortages are already critical.
If a nurse or caregiver is
unavailable, patients do not get
care. I already pay high
staffing agency costs for the 16
week contract.
Madam Chair and committee
members, thank you for this
opportunity. I'm Ray Barnes. I'm
a lifelong New Mexican and a
concerned citizen.
I urge you to vote no against
House Bill 11. The family paid
medical leave tax.
This tax will, will do more harm
than good to working in New
Mexicos for the business, it'll
just be money.
Uh, they'll simply just raise
their prices. The prices we all
then pay.
So this tax would be a double
dose on the workers of New
Mexico.
Not only will it take money out
of our pockets, but it will also
reduce the incentive to get back
to work after a difficult time.
The net effect will be to siphon
$22 million each year out of
workers' pockets to pay for the
administration of yet another
government department.
The proud people of New Mexico
don't want charity. We want real
opportunities. We want a good
paying job. We want growing a
growing economy. House Bill 11
offers neither but threatens
both. I beg you on behalf of the
people of New Mexico and my 4
grandsons who are here in New
Mexico to vote no on House Bill
11. Thank you.
No, no.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Terry Cole. I'm the
president CEO for the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce.
I'm also representing the New
Mexico chamber and the McKinley
Gallup Chamber of Commerce. I
want to start by acknowledging
the obvious hard work put in uh
the committee sub that reflects
some of our long-standing
concerns. Respectfully, however,
we oppose this legislation. This
bill still imposes a tax
increase on employers and on
every worker in the state.
po s ing new taxes is
discouraging, and it's
unnecessary. It's disappointing
that this bill is being
considered without a proper
fiscal analysis. It could be
underwater from the get-go.
I've testified before that a
narrowly tailored bill, one that
focuses solely on maternal and
paternal leave would be
supported by most businesses. We
implore you to consider that
option. Respectfully, please
vote no. Thank you.
Hello, thank you, Madam Chair
and committees of the member. My
name is Shay and Jim, and I'm
speaking on behalf of Amigo in
Gallup, New Mexico, um.
There are pros, but the cons
significantly outweigh the pros
of HB 11. I myself would be
affected directly.
And $5 doesn't seem that much,
but if you think about it and in
a year, $100 is $120 is a lot.
Um, the tax increases might
sound small when analyzing and
small, the impact is significant
in my mind, the tax increase
would take away the extra gas
money I need to get to work to
pay taxes. I live on the Navas
Um, the tax increases might
sound small when analyzing and
small, the impact is significant
in my mind, the tax increase
would take away the extra gas
money I need to get to work to
pay taxes. I live on the
Navares. I live on the Nava
reservation, the nearest town is
30 miles from home.
I travel 300+ miles in one week.
Limiting my gas to $5 is not
ideal. The deduction would put
more stress on me as a consumer.
I need every penny I rightfully
earned on my paycheck.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Carlos Sontag,
president and CEO of the New
Mexico Business Coalition. We're
strongly opposed to this
legislation, and what I hope you
understand is we've had 219,000
emails in opposition have come
in the last 3 weeks to this
measure. There have been
Over 7300.
Social media posts. People do
not want this. Employees and
employers when they understand
that this is a tax in a time of
inflation, they don't want it.
And you talk about
Uh, businesses not having to pay
the employee when they're out.
But they're gonna have high
costs.
They've got to replace that
labor. And what are they gonna
do, hire a temp?
Are they gonna hire somebody and
then have to release them, and
they're
Unemployment insurance rates go
up.
Or are they gonna pay overtime
to the other employees. Somehow
they've got to cover this. And
these costs go back to the
consumer. I ask you, please.
Thank you. Thank you.
Madam Chairwoman, committee
members. My name is Tom
Patterson.
I serve as president-elect of
the New Mexico Cattle Growers
Association. We oppose amended
HB 11.
As rebranded and amended now to
have 6 different categories of
leave. It still isn't fair to
the 8500 agricultural employees
in New Mexico who would pay into
the program but never receive a
nickel, any benefit.
From it because they work less
than 150 days a year.
Nor does HB 11 understand how
production agriculture works.
When a farm or ranch job needs
to be done, it needs to be done.
Even if someone is absent, the
work cannot be put on hold or
crops go bad, including our
chili and animals suffer.
HB 11 ignores that. It assumes
that qualified labor is always
available to fill in for an
absent employee in rural New
Mexico, it isn't. Even if we
could find substitute employees.
Madam Chair.
My name is Fernando Lea. I'm
Reeur for 35 years, serving your
serving New Mexico. This bill
will kill many restaurants. It's
so easy to say 12 weeks. 12
weeks that we need to hire
somebody that we cannot hire at
this time.
He have to hire somebody for 3
months. We're gonna take a month
and a half to find a person,
another 2 weeks to train it, and
by that time, the person that is
taking the 12 weeks, we're gonna
come back. It's something that
will kill not only restaurants
but any business in New Mexico
is going to be affected and the
ones that we are going to be
affected is the people that the
good intention of these ladies
is to help them, they're going
to hurt them.
Please, I ask you to say no to
this bill, HB 11. This will hurt
everybody in New Mexico. I love
New Mexico. It's our city. It's
our state, it's what we, thank
you for being here and I know
everybody have a good intention,
but unfortunately many times no
what is.
Madam,
11 as a member of the working
class, this bill would do more
harm to us than good.
We work extremely hard for our
money that we make as a
mechanic, my my pay fluctuates
up and down from the work that I
do. And with this bill,
It would not only take a toll on
us, it would take a toll on
small businesses also.
A lot of places that have been
in business for generations,
we'll have to start closing
because they can't afford.
To do it because
The workers are out.
And they're having to cover for
them.
And in small towns like where
I'm from, we're still trying to
recover from COVID.
Thank you. Madam, hello, Madam
Chairman of the committee. My
name is Kobe Bennett. I am an
apprentice. I'm imposing this
bill's spent.
And it's making me. Once I
complete my internship.
Related to money. I am also
worried about how this bill may
lead to in this career.
As a flat rate technician, there
may be days when nothing on
those days, I am left.
Oh, thank you. Um, hello, my
black dog shredding. It's a
paper shredding Mexico. I'm
opposed to this bill because I
am considered a small business,
um.
I'm not opposed to taking care
of families. I actually grew up
in northern New Mexico. That was
part of our tradition. We take
care of our family members. I
just believe that, you know,
when we have to set up a
business, we are required to do
a feasibility study. I don't
think that there should be a
blanket policy that blanketed
across small businesses
throughout New Mexico, I think
that you all should be required
to better understand each
business across the state of New
Mexico, and what we have to
offer, and then understand the
implications that this policy
will have on small businesses
like mine.
I, you know, I have drivers, I
have facility operators, um, I
can't afford to have a driver
out for 12 weeks at a time. That
would force me to have to hire
someone else. Um, and then I'm
not sure what I would do then.
Do I have to hire them or fire
them. Like I think there's just
a lot that needs to be
considered for small businesses,
and the better understanding um
with with all of these
businesses like Ask us, give us
a choice.
Hi, my name is Carrie Young, and
I represent Boxcar Bar and
Restaurant in Santa Fe. Our
owner planted an incredible
churn of time. She's in labor
and currently, um, giving birth
as we speak, we are very
family-oriented vibe.
Uh, we are strongly opposed to
HB 11 and the committee
substitute. As a small business
operating on razor thin margins,
we've struggled significantly
since COVID-19, particularly in
finding and retaining quality
staff.
The sponsors claim that the bill
will help with staffing
shortages is simply not grounded
in reality. Instead, it will
create additional burdens for
our existing employees who will
have to cover shifts when
someone is out, the time and
training required to temporarily
fill a position in a restaurant
makes us unrealistic option for
us. Additionally, the
administrative burden this bill
places on small businesses like
ours will be immense. We would
like to be responsible for
collecting and remitting an
additional payroll tax from
employees and manage
ever-changing schedules.
through the intermittent leave
option.
Thank you.
New Mexico counties Mark Allen
from Mexico County's general
council, Mexico County opposes
this bill, the substitute bill
does not change reality. This is
a Cadillac program that the
counties cannot afford based on
the LFC and legitimate, we would
be the poorest state in the
union to attempt this endeavor,
yet we would be offering some of
the most generous benefits of
other states. For example, the
safe leave and the and the
associate association leave is
not offered by California
Delaware, Maryland,
Massachusetts, New Hamps.
York and also there's no
To opt out, you have to provide
the same rights and benefits,
yet in the preemption provision
on page 33, local governments
and the state is precluded from
having any orbits resolution or
bill that mirrors this act. It
provides the same rights and
benefits. The reduction in the
payroll tax is like a teaser
introductory credit card rate.
It won't last.
Come 2030
WST.
Chair and committee, thank you
for uh taking the time to listen
to us. I'm Chris Altman. I'm the
director of operations with
Second Street Brewery.
Um, our
issue with this and the and the
replacement is uh the
inflammation, inflammation and
the administration of uh this
program. It will affect us
negatively, we'll be using our
resources, um, not running our
businesses, but just doing this,
uh, and that for workspace, um.
Having employees take extended
leave would mean hiring
temporary, uh, then they would
be laid off and we'd be on the
hook for their unemployment as
well as our unemployment
insurance premiums going up.
Um
Well, I think this bill is well
meaning, I think it is an
unnecessary burden on families
and small businesses and the
changes that have been made for
this bill is just a kick the can
down the road strategy that does
not benefit anybody. So I
respectfully I'm asking you to
defeat this proposal and not add
to the income burden of
families, employees, and small
businesses. So you're that was
our last in person.
OK, and we got the 4 from
outside.
Alrighty, can we go to Zoom,
please?
Stephanie, tell us.
Hello, can you hear me?
Yes.
Yes, hello, thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunities
to speak. I am the principal and
CEO of Antonio Consulting. We
provide comprehensive training
and education in fraud risk
management and occupational
fraud prevention. Um, we
champion paid family medical
leave. It's a strategic
investment for reducing
turnover, boosting productivity,
and fostering employee loyalty.
It collectively enhances
business stability and
competitiveness while reducing
liabilities and expenses. I'm a
certified fraud examiner. I view
this bill as a vital safeguard
against fraud, supporting a
shift from an eye to a we
economy where caring for the
community translates into the
healthier, more resilient
society. As stewards of economic
development, I urge you to
consider the broad benefits of
paid family medical leave,
supporting this policy will not
only help families like mine,
but it will strengthen our
economic landscape. Please give
HB 11, a do pass to foster a
more inclusive, sustainable.
Yeah, just to clarify, we're
still on opposition, uh, so
that'll be.
A big G.
He went away. Sorry. Um.
Stephen Miral.
Hello, can you hear me?
Yes.
Thank you, I'm the owner of a
marketing consultant company
here in the Four Corners region.
Um, I served Chamber of
Commerce's Economic development,
and many small businesses,
although I speak for myself
today. I oppose HB 11 and ask
you to do as well. In reading
through the existing document
provided to New Mexicans.
I strongly disagree with the
ability or I disagree with this
bill to be passed.
Uh, the current villainous
writing does not provide any
solutions for actually providing
temporary workers and giving
employers the ability to fill in
the revenue gaps.
Whenever this is passed. So I
ask that we oppose this HB 11
bill and its inability to bring
in the necessary revenue for
small business in New Mexico.
Thank you.
Jodie Hendrix.
Hello, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, I'm Jodie
Hendricks, and I am the
executive director with New
Mexico Family Action Movement,
and I urge you to vote no on
House Bill 11, no matter what
it's being called. Uh, this is a
massive government mandate that
could cost New Mexico families
and businesses over $400 million
whether they can afford it or
not. This bill forces both
employees and employers to pay
into a state fund managed by the
same agency that overpaid $250
million.
in unemployment benefits just a
few years ago. So can we really
trust the government to handle
this responsibly for hardworking
New Mexicans and extra tax on
every paycheck on top of
inflation and skyrocketing costs
is just too much. And for small
businesses, which already
operate on thin margins. This
could be the breaking point.
House Bill 11 isn't about
helping families. It's about
government overreach, taking
more control over our paychecks
and businesses. New Mexicans
deserve.
Real solutions, not another
expensive one size fits all
mandate, so please vote no on
House Bill 11 and stand with New
Mexico families and small
businesses.
Andre straddling.
Andra
Christina Gill
Christina Gill.
Mariner.
Afternoon.
Madam chair members of the
committee, I ask you to oppose
House Bill 11.
I'm really concerned about the
impact to workers.
Um
Group Homes for Developmentally
disabled in Carlsbad, and I
already have a 27% vacancy in my
direct care positions with this
bill, I don't even know how I'm
going to cover people now that
you want to pay to have off. I'm
concerned about the definition
of healthcare provider that
includes the word certified.
Does that include certified
nursing assistants and certified
medication aids. Also, the
welcome Child Benefit, I would
believe is discriminate
discriminates against older
workers who pay into the fund
because they're beyond child
rearing age. And
on page 7, line 19 through 21,
it gives the department the
authority to collect fees. What
is that? How much is that gonna
cost me? I already can't staff
my facilities, and I can't
afford more unfunded mandates
because I am a Medicaid only
provider. Thank you.
Carol Wright
That.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Carol White, CEO of
the New Mexico Restaurant
Association, and I want to
express our opposition to House
Bill 11, particularly the
committee substitute that has
been put forward. It's essential
to examine the financial
implications of this bill poses
on our state and its citizens.
The proposed changes in the
substitute lower the tax rate,
while simultaneously adding new
benefits. The Welcome child
refund, which is $9000 for new
parents. On top of a 12 week
benefit.
It's simply not sustainable with
the with the taxes collected,
increasing the tax in the next
few years would be necessary to
make up the fund shortfall,
which will make it the largest
tax increase on working New
Mexicans. New Mexicans are
already facing economic
challenges at a time when our
state is enjoying a surplus of
billions of dollars, and it's
both unfair and imprudent to
create a new tax that will
impact our workforce. I urge you
to consider alternative.
solutions that do not this
burden.
Jeremiah
Thank you, uh, Jeremiah Ritchie
speaking on behalf of the Mexico
Mutual. Uh, we think the
legislation should draw a clear
line between family medical
leave and workers' compensation
claims by excluding work-related
injuries from paid family
medical leave. The work comp
system is a comprehensive
established and effective system
for dealing with workplace
injuries. The committee
substitute would allow for
double recovery of benefits from
workers' compensation and family
leave in some cases.
And create perverse incentives
harmful to both workers and
employers.
Any overlap between the two
programs threatens to undermine
the legislative designs of one
or both, and creates unnecessary
burdens throughout both systems.
New language on coordination of
benefits will not be effective
to empower the Secretary to
resolve these issues because
there's no statutory direction
for the secretary on how to
reconcile or coordinate
benefits.
And the resulting rules will be
subject to expensive legal
challenges with uncertain
results.
We urge you to vote no on HB 11.
Thank you.
All righty. Uh, now we're gonna
do, uh, in favor of the bill,
let's wait wait before everybody
jumps up, let's um very safely
try to get to the middle of the
room. There's gonna be, yeah.
Yeah, well, you know what, but.
And we also wanted to count
those in the hall too.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Osambaumi, advocacy
director for AARP New Mexico we
represent nearly 240,000 members
statewide. First, I'd like to
thank the sponsors for their
dedication and hard work, to
arrive at a version of the bill
that attempts to strike a
balance from New Mexicans and
businesses. But first, I want to
bring your attention to New
Mexico's family caregivers who
are often unrecognized in our
state, 270,000 unpaid family
caregivers provide 250 million
hours of unpaid family.
Care. Many of them experienced
emotional and financial strain
caused by trying to balance
caregiving responsibilities and
work. Not only do family
caregivers help their older
parents or spouses and
grandparents, they manage
everyday tasks from uh
administering medications,
mills, bathing, transportation,
handling financial and legal
matters as well. This essential
support enables their loved ones
to age in place, to live
independently in their homes,
uh, reducing costly hospital
visits and long stays.
In nursing homes. We ask you to
urge uh to pass this bill. Thank
you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Reinhard Lorenz with
First I Films Inc. a film
production company in
Albuquerque and as a local small
business, we are part of the New
Mexico film industry that has
brought millions in revenue to
the state and employs hundreds
of New Mexicans, um, we welcome
Hospital 11 and the paid family
leave.
So we could um offer it to our
film workers, offering paid
leave to build trust and loyalty
for them and for larger
productions, payments into the
program would be minimal
compared to workers' comp
already in place.
And businesses with fewer than 5
employees or 66% of New Mexico
businesses and a business like
myself would not pay a dollar
into the program while enjoying
its benefits, please. Good
afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name's Awea Starkash, and I'm a
resident of Rio Rancho and a
public policy director at Spa
who this majority. Small
businesses in the state do in
fact support HB 11, when
businesses actually understand
how the program works, they
support this bill. As an
example, a rural pecan farmer in
southern New Mexico asked me.
to speak on her behalf. Her
name's Kristen Worthington,
owner of Worthington Farms in
Massa Park. She says, I employ
workers and support HB 11. I
have owned Worthington Farms
since 2019, and I make
innovative products and as a
small business farmer, this
would benefit my bottom line,
not harm it. I could use the
dollars I would for come time to
hire temporary workers and for
$4 worth of every $1000 in
wages, this investment is worth
the return. I encourage
lawmakers to pass this bill.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Lance
Senna, policy director for the
Center for Civic Policy and a
4-time cancer patient. As I was
laying in the ICU from
complications to my transplant.
What was most pressing to me was
being able to survive in order
to come before this committee to
share what I experienced and
what I saw fighting for my
fellow patients.
Just 4 months ago, I was barely
walking the halls of my
transplant hospital, talking
with fellow New Mexicans who did
not have access to PFML when
they could barely stand and had
not eaten in days, I saw them
sitting at their tables and
hospital beds working.
Right now, cancer patients
across New Mexico are finding
out that they're being denied
their clinical trials, Medicare
and Medicaid from children with
complex medical issues to babies
fighting leukemia. They too are
learning that they're being
denied their cures and care
because cuts to federal funding.
We must be doing more for those
facing our darkest hours. We
should not be taking away the
urgently needed time to go
through treatment and seek care.
With that, I urge your support
of 9 weeks and HB 11.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. John.
Uh, I want to start by thanking
very much the sponsors for their
long and arduous work on this
bill. I know this has been years
in the making and to get to a
point that we feel that this
bill can move forward is
essential, and we, we very much
think their time for working on
this. Um, as a labor
organizations throughout the
state and the public and private
sector. We believe very strongly
that all workers should deserve
a fair wage, fair benefits, fair
treatment, um,
And that is why a bill like this
is so essential. Uh, you, a
number of our members do receive
uh benefits that are equal or
even better than some that are
being proposed here. But why
should only our members get to
benefit from this. All workers
deserve these kinds of benefits
and rights. Also, working, uh,
with uh public employers, we can
tell you that we understand, uh,
the need to fill vacancies and
we think that this bill will do
that as well. Thank you very
much.
afternoon, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Andres
Esquivel. I'm the campaigns
manager for the New Mexico Dream
Team, uh, several weeks ago, my
mom got diagnosed with arthritis
in her lower spine and has been
prediabetic for some years now.
PFML would have given me the
ability to take time off of work
to be able to go help my family
while she gets better, plus
would help many New Mexicans in
case of their own medical
emergency, giving birth, etc.
Um, what makes it all better is
just like uh my colleague before
me, it wouldn't, it wouldn't
hinder small businesses, like my
father's auto repair business
and many other immigrant-owned
businesses with a very small
contribution of 0.4%, that is $4
out of 1000.
Um, we strongly urge this
committee to vote yes for a due
pass of HBLL. My name is Bernat
Hardy. I'm Hamish Preble and
Dana. I am a paid lobbyist here
with Enemy of a boat, but I'm
also a mom and a caretaker. We
have, we are here in full
support of HB 11 in my life, I
have been adversely affected by
pan no access to PFMLA, um, in
2006, and it had no paid family
medical leave. Um, I had, I was
essentially fired from my job
because I had to, I went into
labor. I
worked into a lot of health
insurance, uh, soon after that,
my mom was diagnosed with stage
4 cancer. Um, I, eventually my
mom passed away, but 8 months,
only 8 when my son was only 8
months. Um, we were left
destitute and homeless. I share
my story because family should
not be left in poverty.
Due to an unforeseen medical
tragedy.
Thank you for listening. Please
support HB 11. I'm Deborah
Condit. I'm the owner of Books
on the Bosque, which is an
independent bookstore on the
west side of Albuquerque, and I
stand in strong support of this
bill. and 9 of the most amazing,
well read, well qualified
employees at my store. If
there's any business, you should
be standing up here to oppose
this bill if it's, it's if it's
its detrimental as everyone
says, it's a bookstore owner.
There's a reason why people are
not lining up at the door to
open a bookstore.
Profit margins are very, very
slim, and anything that happens
here in Santa Fe really affects
my business, but I support this
bill. I, I cannot afford when my
employees take off, uh, for them
to be paid for their time off.
So this is a good tool, a good
benefit for me as a small
business owner to have this
provision for my employees. So I
stand as strong. My name is Isa
Villen Naranjo, and I'm a
legislative fellow with the
Quality New Mexico. We stand
here in support of HB 11, New
Mexicans have always created
families in a number of ways in
each of these families is valid.
We are grateful for the very
clear but broad definition of
family in this bill because
regardless of what people may
think, any other definition
would exclude most elderly need
paid family and medical leave as
queer and trans people. We need
to know that we
can take time necessary to help
our families, valid non-c cookie
cutter families recover from
gender affirming surgeries and
recover from catastrophic
accidents, just like everybody
else. With that, we
chair, members of the committee.
My name is Maheshitta of the
American Heart Association. I
think this bill is going to help
the most neglected.
You know, in our families, in
our state.
New Mexico
The highest rates of heart
disease, diabetes, and stroke.
And when these families and and.
These diseases affect mostly
people of color.
And they don't have the means to
take paid family leave right
now, and so they have to choose
between their.
You know, work
And help or salary or
No
And so, you know, this is going
to affect a lot of families in
New Mexico, especially give them
an opportunity to take.
sick.
So we strongly support this bill
and, and we urge you to think
about those.
You know, thousands of people
who are not here, who are not
represented.
And
Thank you, thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee.
My name is Alma Castro and I'm a
proud small business owner here
in Santa Fe, where I also serve
as District one city, city
councilor. My over thirty-year
family owned business, and so
many small businesses really
need you to vote yes on HB 11.
Like so many others, we pour
everything we have into keeping
it running. But when loved ones
need care or when I get sick or
someone in my family gets sick,
there is no time to step away
without a sacrifice of our
livelihood. I know that
firsthand how difficult it can
be.
to balance running a business,
caring for family, and all the
other things we are as leaders
in our community without paid
medical leave, I have to make
impossible choices. I have to
show up at work and ask family
members to show up when they're
not feeling well or having to
deal with a sick family member
or a pregnancy. All of these
struggles I see as an employer
but also as a worker. We have to
choose between a paycheck and
taking care of our loved ones.
Paid family leave isn't just
about workers.
But it is about small businesses
like mine that can thrive. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I'm
Alyssa Kenny Geyer. I'm a proud.
Your previous speaker here in
support of um House Bill 11. I
served in the Oregon
legislature, uh, for many years,
during which we uh debated a
very similar bill and passed it
in 2019. The benefits started
getting paid out in 2023. I've
been following that program and
it's been very successful. I
want to draw your attention to
an email I sent you with several
links both about the program.
But also testimony from several
people. One was the Republican
co-chief sponsors,
Representative Bonham and
Senator Knope, the rural
organizing project, the Oregon
State Firefighters Council, A, I
want to read a little excerpt
from the Main Street Alliance
that uh had a membership of over
4000 Oregon small businesses
generally lack the capital and
the scale to provide earned.
Thank you. I'm so sorry.
Madam Chairing committee, my
name is Jess Clark, director of
the statewide organization. Over
half of people living in New
Mexico have experienced sexual
violence, yet only 2/3 of those
individuals have not sought help
or support.
Under the safely portion of this
bill, an employee can apply for
compensation if they or a family
member or a victim of domestic
violence, stalking, sexual
assault, or abuse. We know that
those who causing and under our
current system, survive and
getting help.
In addition to protecting
survivors. Research shows that
paid family medical leave is a
protective factor in and of
itself against sexual violence
occurring in the first place.
When life events arise,
survivors can become vulnerable
to financial employment, housing
instability, as survivors and
those in service. Uh, good
afternoon, Madam Chair. I come
before you, um, as this
Mexicans. Obviously, it does not
benefit federal workers, but all
our in the region. And I also
want to, um, say that one of the
five counties.
that voted not to oppose this
bill, uh, with New Mexico
counties. We believe along with
Santa Fe County, Taos County,
Bertollio County and Sandoval
County, who represent the
majority of the population of
the state that the workers of
New Mexico, and we thank the
sponsors of HB 11. David
Galloway.
Sorry, I accidentally had my
hand out. I was trying to speak
in opposition. My fault, I will
lower it, you can move on.
Tim Gibbs
Tim Gibbs.
Tim Gibbs.
Hi there. Can you hear me OK?
Yes.
I, my name's Tim Gibbs. I'm the,
the president of Four Corners
Economic Development. I, I would
like to speak against this bill.
Uh, do I have the opportunity?
Susannah
Susannah
We'll go to the next person in
favor of.
Scott
Uh hi, so I had my hand up to
speak in opposition and also be
an opportunity later.
Connie Lou
I am an OBGYN living in rural
western New Mexico. Working age
individuals in rural areas are
47% more likely to die than
their urban counterparts. These
are people and their health and
thus their ability to work that
I work to protect.
These are patients that are not
interested in gaming a system.
They want to work but cannot do
so when they are sick. I have
patients who go back to work far
sooner than they should after
surgery, after having a baby,
after a prolonged illness. I
have a young patient whose
boyfriend couldn't be there for
the birth of his daughter by
urgent C-section because he was
told he would lose his retail
job at a large chain if he took
leave to be at the hospital.
The current bill balances the
need to protect workers and to
protect employers, especially
small businesses who will not
need to pay into the fund, but
we'll still benefit. We have a
clinic, Gal Community Health,
which is one of GA's fastest
growing small businesses. Their
executive director, Doctor
Wangler, wishes me to share that
they have added more than 50
living wage for better jobs for
the local economy in the last
two years and I found that
treating employees with just
measures like this is not just
good for the employees, but also
contributes to a very low
turnover and turnover rate.
high retention rate.
Meliman, the US Department of
Labor, and UNM Bureau of
Business and Economic Research
have determined that the bill
that this fund is solvent based
on current parameters. Please
support this bill, which is not
just the right thing for the
community and for workers, but
also for the health of our
economy and for rural
economists.
Meredith Z.
Hi
I'm a working parent of 2 and a
member of the Santa Fe Family
Leadership Council, and I
support this bill. My current
employer in New Mexico has for
many years now offered 12 weeks
of paid family leave, which I
took when my young children were
born. It is a policy that has
made me look favor favorably on
my employer and encourage others
to work for them too. In my
case, paid family medical leave
was a very effective retention
policy. I remained in the
workforce and continued to work
for my current employer. Allowed
me time to re
from birth, and enough time to
arrange childcare so I could
return to work, thereby saving
my employer time and money
seeking a replacement for me and
training someone new to cover
someone with a decade of
experience in my position. My
position was covered with
overtime, my employer still
saved time and money. Thank you.
Francine
Hello, good afternoon, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. Thank you so much for
having me here today. My name is
Francine Campos and I'm an owner
of Leading Success Business
Services, a business consulting
firm here in New Mexico. I also
serve as the director of Human
Resources at Sky, a local uh
aerospace company and the
professional development
director of New Mexico as well
as HR, Maine, and the Women in
Business Program at Hispano
Chamber of Commerce, um, with
years of experience in human
resources and business
leadership. I understand the
challenges of running a business
while
supporting our employees. That's
why I strongly support House
Bill 11, a, a smart,
cost-effective way to retain
talent and strengthen financial
stability here in New Mexico.
I want to remind people there's
no financial burden to the
smallest businesses. 66% of New
Mexico businesses have fewer
than 5 employees that don't pay
in, yet they'll still receive
the benefits.
And employers don't have to pay
wages during the leave. The fund
will cover compensation and job
protection only applies after
180 days of employment. And
there's also benefits for
employment. No one should choose
or employees, no one should
choose their health over their
paycheck. This will allow
employees to recover.
That is all men I'm sure.
Alrighty, thank you. We're gonna
go on to the committee.
First we have um
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank
you, uh, presenters. Thank you
audience, those in the, in the
room and then realizing that
this is a very implicitive, I
mean, I recognize that many of
you are invested in this in some
way.
Former fashion
I appreciate the continuation of
the discussion on this matter
from last and over the past
couple of years at this point,
we've learned a whole lot about
it and I have educated myself
myself more about it.
And uh I voted in favor of this.
Proposal last year and less than
24 hours, I tried to learn even
more in regards to your
substitute.
And so I wanna go, but
As a preface to, to the
questions that I'm going to ask
around this table today. We're
here to provide perspective uh
in regards to the communities
that sent us to Santa Fe.
on the entire state of New
Mexico.
Uh, I know what I know from
House District 65, that is a
Viariba County and parts of San
Juan County.
Uh, largely rural, uh, largely
Native American New Mexico.
Uh, with several employment
opportunities that are provided
by provided by state government,
federal government, and tribal
government.
2024.
This United 25, we are now faced
with some of the changes that
has or has begun to make.
This includes matters of
inflation, which I know many of
us feel today, cases, loss of
the labor force because of mass
deportations.
I think of those that are in
agriculture, large.
of people those administration
changes.
I also think about the loss of
employment due to the shutdown
of many of those federal
programs in, in a domino effect
tribal programs.
Because of those agencies or
departments or programs that are
not anymore.
Provided funded funding, and I
think about those in my
communities that now have to go
and look for another job.
That provide them the benefits
that the federal government or
the tribal government or
whatever government provided
them.
Now that they don't have that
anymore.
And I bring that up because as
it relates to this matter.
Statistics show that the lack of
This type of benefit impacts.
People of color
Women
marginalized communities the
most.
And that's why I'm very invested
in this initiative in regards to
how it impacts.
And so my questions would be,
a district like mine.
How would the substitute the
House Bill 11.
impact
My
Madam Chair, is it OK if we
break it up into how with a
pregnancy or an adoption would
start with the family wellness.
We'll begin from there, um.
Madam Chair and
This bill is very much modeled,
at least the wellness and once
someone qualifies having worked
for at least 6 to 12 months,
they are then um eligible and a
number of other types of leaves
that we've spoken about before,
that benefits your constituents
and frankly, my constituents and
frankly, my constituents in
every a program like this when
they become ill.
Um, I and I had access to
something like a a short term
disability plan and really
that's a very low price, um,
Madam Chair and um to all
workers in the states now, so
your employees who work in your
district, madam chair and, and
Mister Chair will have access
to.
Very reasonably priced what
Very reasonably priced actually
what some might deem a short
term disability plan with some
other benefits attached to it,
such as a safe leave and I don't
want to minimize that, but
that's a huge win for every
working person, Madam Chair and
Mr. Chair in the state.
If I may add to that, the cost
in this new version of the bill
is significantly lower for the
family wellness fund itself.
So employers, private employers
in your district and all of our
districts would be paying $1.50
per $1000. Uh if you're looking
at a 100 $100,000 payroll,
that's $12.50 a month to cover
that entire payroll.
For an individual employee if
they're on so the cost is
significantly lower from what it
was before for the family
wellness aspect.
In terms of the welcoming new
new child um bill or aspect of
this bill, this to me is really
exciting because it ensures that
the early childhood funds are
able to support and how we
support as we said in in our
amendment that we are able to
support this would ensure that
both parents have 12 weeks of
job protection to bond with
their child and care for their
child in that time off.
It also ensures that one parent
has access to $3000 per month to
pay for additional childcare
that may be necessary. That 3000
per month lasts 3 months. And so
that would be the difference
that what it and how much an
individual made. This just
ensures that we know that uh the
cost for child care is high
across the country. We've taken
steps in this legislature to
control for that, but that $3000
a month for those 1st 3 months
will ensure that when you really
can't find daycares at that age
that you're able to.
Uh
Thank you, representatives for
that, for that conversation. So,
Please expand then for my
benefit. I heard Ma mention that
this is the Cadillac a Chevrolet
budget or something to the same
effect.
How does this, how is this
substitute?
Now
Um, Madam Chair and
that's extraordinary welcome
child fun will be funded through
appropriations of the state
through the ECECD budget
placeholder in our budget.
You know, what is the message
that we're sending, Madam Chair,
with the state funding it.
The state is committed is.
It takes
Takes away from the employer to
support that piece of the
program and the state is
committed to it showing that
it's willing to support our
collect young families move
forward.
The other part of the um the the
bill from a couple years ago 9%
was the amount that we madam,
for the employee.
Because we have taken the preg
pregnancy piece off the the
bonding piece off, we are now
able to lower the cost
significantly to a point asking
that employees contribute 0.2%
of their wage pension. That's
like $1 a week pay and lastly I
that a person may draw fullness
leave to 6 weeks, which had
previously been 9 weeks with the
possibility, Madam Chair, of, of
going to 12 weeks if certain
things could be met.
So for this, the suggestion that
this is a Cadillac plan is, is
really, really misplaced at this
point, but there are plans
across the country paid through
this premium process, not
through the state supporting any
portion of it wherein the
premiums are paid by the funding
is offered, as is 12 weeks of
medical leave and these other
types of leaves that we are have
very listen to what the concerns
are of of the business community
and others, and we have crafted
a plan that I think.
the needs of our citizens while
at the same time providing an
economic Mister Chair, Madam
Chair.
Thank you for those answers. So,
uh, remind me then in the
substitute, you might mention of
the ECEC.
Mister Chair, if you give me a
moment, I can tell you.
The estimate that we um.
Expect to collect is Madam
Chair.
Let's go to the employers and we
had a they're gonna be impacted,
right?
Uh
He made mention it's, it's a
tax. You help me understand.
Of the substitute again.
Uh, impacts, defines the attacks
or Madam Chair and um.
Gerante
The, um, as I said, the premium
that will be levied, um, that
will be paid by the employer on
each $1000 of wages per cent.
Um
And as I mentioned earlier.
That if it's a minimum wage
worker that's 75 cents a if it's
an average wage worker that
would be $1.77 a week.
Um
So as you can see we've worked
very hard to bring the cost and
I hope that answers your
question, um, Madam chairing.
It, it does help me. So then
would you consider then?
This a cheaper option or
That's also, madam Chair and Mr.
Chair, an excellent question
right now if you're a small
employer or maybe even a middle
sized employer um in New Mexico,
you can't afford to offer a plan
like this to your employees and
what the state structure, Madam
Chair, and, um, Mr. Chair, that
allows small employers to
compete with the, with the large
employers in the state.
And I would suggest to you and
I would suggest to you it also
has a potential for drawing
workers in the state.
Which has been an issue for to
work for them because there will
be a benefit package that
employees will find desirable
and as a great place to live and
work,
let's let's take into account
then, um, that's the cost.
But help me understand it,
suppose this passes through and
then it becomes a reality.
What's then the process of
someone that wants to it? Is it
a matter of
Hey, I do walk me through that.
Thank you, Madam Chair and um
Chante.
There is an administrative
process that he administered by
the workforce Solutions and to
your specific question, no one
can just not call call in and
say I'm gone for 6 weeks. There
is a certification process, um,
a healthcare provider if it's
medical leave, we'll have to
provide the necessary
documentation, the um workforce
solutions, um there are certain
timelines that have to be, as I
said, you have to prove the
need, it has to fall within the
criteria of the statute.
regulations and um through that
process, you're validating just
as if you had a healthcare
insurance policy. You're
validating your claims. If I had
a disability,
you don't write in and say I'm
ready to collect my money
documentation show proof that
you are.
Madam Chair, uh, Mr. Chair as
well, you know, I, I think it's
all someone who's having a baby
or I know I will be providing
care in this time. This isn't a
benefit where people take time
off to to, you know, whatever,
go on vacation. This is time
people are taking to bathe
people, wipe people, you know,
take temperatures, they're doing
serious work. I remember when I
was a kid and my dad got shot,
we had to change his bandage
wounds as a kid. These are
because my mom didn't have the
time to off to take. So these
are the real efforts that people
will have to take. I do.
have from another state, you
know, the documentation that
that my mom had a felt when I
had a baby, and she had to
explain the amount of time she
was taking. Why she, what she
was going to be doing and the
support she was going to be
providing. These are examples
that we've seen across the state
or across the country of the
different types that that they
only need. And then she had a
doctor sign off that that yes,
we expect her to be taking doing
this work. So the doctor
wouldn't sign off that
everyone's doing the same job.
It's that there this person's
designated.
Thank you.
Got it. So it's not somebody
just calling.
Madam
Chair, no, in fact, if it's
involving an adoption or birth
of a child, um, it is incumbent
on the employee to tell their
employer 90 days before they
expect to take the time off, so
about 3 months, and if it's, uh,
with an injury within reason,
uh, asking them uh 20 days
ahead. Um.
got a lot of these expand me,
uh, expand with me in regards to
how this impacts and, and is
there parity in regards to how
it applies to the state.
Um, Madam Chair and Mr. Chair,
this, um, bill includes all
public entities, including the
state, of course, local
governments um.
So again this I think is very
beneficial to local governments
because many, although not all,
the larger ones even Los Alamos
for such a similar plan, but the
small counties, I would be um
hard pressed to find one that
could offer such an a program to
their employees at such a low
cost, um, so, you know, I think
they should be looking at it as
something that's extremely
beneficial, and I would point
out to some of that feedback,
Mr. Chair and Madam Chair.
May have been based on
understand. I I would like to
think that the premiums are much
lower and that the state is
picking up a significant part of
the cost for to they would get
behind this because well, strong
families.
Support the state, of course,
and are very important for the
state, but they're communities
and so I think.
Having um the state and local
governments involved is, is a
plus, not a negative, and they
may be basing some of their
comments on information that's
old and chair and Mr.
Madam Chair and Mr. Chair,
tribal communities can opt in to
participate in them too, but if
they choose to, they may
participate on on the same level
that other government
Having um the state and local
governments involved is, is a
plus, not a negative, and they
may be basing some of their
comments on information that's
old and chair and Mr.
Madam Chair and Mr. Chair,
tribal communities can opt in to
participate in them too, but if
they choose to, they may
participate on on the same level
that any other government.
um, and that is in regards to
those um
Business is located on tribal
lands that.
I'm thinking about like the
Teslas of the world, right?
Chair, I'm gonna have to look
that up. I'm not sure I, um.
That's Madam Chair
Representative, I'm just
looking.
Um, Madam Chair and
representative of what we heard
from Secretary Neres, it would
depend on ownership of the
actual business.
Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you presenters.
So I just heard follow up in,
following up with the question.
It depends on ownership of the
business on tribal land. So does
it depend?
If you are from the tribal
nation and have a business.
Off of tribal land.
Are they exempt?
Um
Yeah, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Armstrong, uh,
Serita and I are secretary of
Workforce Solutions, um, as you
proposition on this bill, we're
not here in. Um, I think whether
some uh whether that I
understand that we would
probably need to.
Thank you for that. So we don't
really know the answer, so
there's still questions on that.
So thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, can you tell me if this
specific bill has been vetted
through the interim.
this specific bill.
Madam Chair of the committee
substitute. Yes, ma'am, uh.
Yes and no.
Yeah, if, if you're looking at
the family wellness leave piece,
I would say that it has been
vetted through actually multiple
interims if you must know the
truth, Madam Chair, in terms of
the structure, the only
differences are the number of
weeks, which are shorter.
And the premiums which are
lower, that's essentially the
change in terms of the family
wellness fund, in terms of
creating a welcome child fun
that chair and um.
Madam Leader, thank you so much,
um, Madam Chair and Madam Chair,
and, you know, just in previous
bills, we've heard opposition so
many times about things that
have not been vetted through the
interim.
So I just want to bring that to
um everyone's attention.
I also want to bring to your
attention, asking, has this bill
been sent uh and is it due to go
to appropriations.
Um, Madam Chi, to my knowledge,
no, I'm not the speaker, but to
my knowledge, no. OK, just so
everyone knows I will be
requesting that this go through
the uh process of appropriations
because there is an
appropriation attached to this
bill, and it should be going
through the appropriations um.
process.
It also, uh, with that in mind.
Uh, just so for everyone's
knowledge, the governor can line
item veto sections of this bill.
Because there's an appropriation
attached. So I just want to
bring that to people's
attention.
So, um, Mr. Madam Chair, and
Madam Chair, uh, madam chairs
actually.
Yes, um, I was, um, curious to
know, um, I believe, uh, Mr.
Chairman, uh, said that try
tribal entities are exempt, is
that correct?
Madam Chair, I think what I said
is tribes may, but madam chairs
and Madam Chair, uh, in the bill
are they exempt from this bill?
Madam Chair and I don't see an
exemption, but I'm happy to
look. What I do know is they so
I guess the inverse of that is
they're not required to be in
the program, and if you want to
call that an exemption, Madam
Chair and leader, you may do so.
I'm not sure that we use that
terminology. OK, thank you for
that. I was, I, I think in our,
our analysis that they, the
terminology is there that they
are exempt, so, um, Madam Chair
and Madame Chairs, um,
We have a 50% workforce
participation in the state of
New Mexico.
57% workforce participation.
In the state of New Mexico.
Just let that sink in.
Um, during the interim.
We heard about, uh, I think it
was in commerce and economic, I
don't know the name of the
committee, but we, it was Madam
Chair, I believe you were the
chairwoman of that, and we heard
from a gentleman, uh, named
Russell Hernandez.
Russell Hernandez owns Salud and
Massa. He's also the mayor of
Massa.
Um, and he spoke against.
Paid family medical leave in
general, any shape, way, shape
or form.
Uh, just because, uh, it's going
to put him out of business.
Small business owner restaurant
in Massa.
Um
I have another lady.
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, and Madam
Chairs, Ruth Porta.
And Leo Porta
was a veteran.
And has been on 2 tours in Iraq.
They own a Spanish immersion.
Early childhood education.
Center in Albuquerque.
This will force classroom
closure.
Parents will miss works, work
days.
Uh, putting them in danger of
losing their jobs because the
childcare center.
Can't stay open because they
can't find the workforce, Madam
Chair and Madame Chas.
Um
Businesses
That offer, Madam Chair, this.
Particular if if they offer a
paid family medical leave.
Similar to this.
In the bill, they can ask for an
exemption, is that correct?
Thank you, Madam Leader, yes,
that's correct.
OK, and Madam Chair and Madame
Chas.
What does that?
What does that exemption look
like?
Um, and how does that 3000 per
month.
Form into that exemption.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, uh, representative. So that
$3000 a month is significantly
lower than what the highest
would have been under a lot of
other versions of these bills,
you have it as a, as a
percentage. This is lower than
that, so it's, it would be more
affordable for many employers,
and it also ensures that they
can come back to the jobs that
they're in.
And this is a critical piece of
this, to be honest, because when
my childcare had multiple
people, they were out for and so
instead of being out or like
early pick up for like 12 weeks,
Madam Chair, Madam Leader, we
were out for I believe 4 or 5,
no, it was longer, it was 2.5
years. I apologize. It was 2.5
years, Madam Chair, Madam
Leader, because right now people
are right now they're needing
these, these exceptions
workforce go down. So from that
perspective, that's where that
those funds work in because it
would, it's a different fund and
it would be up to the secretary
what it would have been.
So, Madam Chair, Madam chairs,
that didn't really answer my
question. My question is, how
does it fit into the exemption
part if an employer.
Wants to
Apply for the exemption if
that's still allowable. And if
they are not paying $3000 a
month.
Plus
The, the, the Payne family
medical leave part a portion of
it, family leave.
Will they be able to be exempt
or how is that going to be?
Weighed for an exemption.
And who makes that decision?
Pardon me.
Um, Madam Chair, an employer may
see if they have something
called a substan.
how that might be split.
So, let's say I keep referring
to it as a a short term
disability, but ours is short
term disability plus if they
have a program that would allow
similar benefits to to to the uh
wage replacement would they
would submit a proposal
pregnancy piece in the child,
the um welcome child piece?
And then on the wellness piece,
you know, do they have a similar
program from that perspective,
we do have um and I,
I imagine she can't commit to
one thing or another, because I
would point out it to this uh
madam Chair, that would be a
very appropriate given the two
kind of different focuses and.
approaches of the two different
funds, Madam Chair and madam.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Madam
Chairs, so, uh, can you tell me,
madam Chair, and Madam Chair,
who's on this advice?
Madam Chair, Madam Leader, it's
on page 34, section 16
employees, we've worked on that,
uh, makeup for many examples
that they preferred and this was
a thank you for that. And who
picks those? Uh, is it a
governor appointee or who, who
makes that decision, Madam
Chair, a leader, it's the uh
secretary of Workforce
Solutions. OK, so the, the power
is in the Secretary of Workforce
solution to pick those.
Um, I would, uh.
Also the powers and the
secretary of Workforce solution
to raise the amount if the fund
and when the fund, in my
opinion, uh, goes uh bankrupt.
And, and so it's giving the
secretary of Workforce Solutions
a lot of power, which uh nothing
against the Secretary of
Workforce Solutions.
But the secretary workforce
solutions changes.
With
Elections.
And so, just so everyone
understands that's the power is
in the election.
portion of it.
Um, I would also.
Just bring a little uh reserve.
To the fact that we don't, Madam
Chair and Madam Chairs really
know how the rules are going to
be made.
We leave things up to
rulemaking, and we've seen very
negative things come out of
rulemaking.
Um, the EV mandate.
The uh environmental things
depending on who the governor
is.
Rulemaking can change. And so
that's a little, um, interesting
for me and, and gives me.
A great reserve.
Um, Madam Chair and Madame
Chairs.
Um, I think I'm either
misunderstood or misheard.
But in the $3000 per month paid
to the.
Um
The family
That is to one or the other, not
to both.
Parents, is that correct, Ma'am,
uh, leader, yes, that's correct.
OK, thank you for that.
Um, and, and, Madam Chair, and,
and Madam chairs, the um
I understand it's paid for
through the ECDCE.
Um, I just want to also bring to
everyone's attention that we
subsidize childcare in the state
of New Mexico right now already.
And so
Not that I'm against the 3000.
But to say that they can't
afford childcare.
I think is a misnomer because we
can't afford childcare. We've
invested a lot of time, energy,
effort and money into ECDCE and
into the childcare providers in
the state of New Mexico. So I, I
think, um.
That was
I'm not sure
That that it's a good thing that
we're doing this through ECDCE
once again, Madam Chair, Madam
chairs, this needs to go through
appropriations. The, uh, Madam
Chair, Madam Chairs, the IRS has
come out with a um
A statement
That this is a tax.
This is a tax.
And so I just want to make sure
that everyone is aware of that.
I already asked that question.
So, thank you, Madam Chair. I
just want to um bring up one
more.
Well, a couple more.
Um, in rural New Mexico as uh as
Mr. Chairman talked about, uh,
the area that they represent.
Um
I represent rural New Mexico.
I have the largest house
district in the state.
Go from Los Lunas to hatch from
Mountain Air to Arizona.
Um
In rural counties.
Currently
Um, they have personnel policies
that adhere to the federal.
FMLA.
Um, they will be subject to this
bill if if this bill passes.
Uh, rural counties have limited
workforce.
Um, we don't have any temp
agencies in rural New Mexico.
Everyone that wants to be
working is working.
That is, is able to work, they
are working.
This is going to cause vacancies
in
Um, offices,
For
Procurement officers.
For our heavy equipment
operators.
And they will go unfilled.
And so for rural New Mexico,
this is a real challenge.
The other
Part of my um
Statement, Madam Chair, madam
chairs, is that.
Businesses in New Mexico.
are having a hard time feeling
the jobs that they have
available now.
With a 57% workforce
participation rate in the state
of New Mexico.
And companies that do a good job
already.
Of providing
Some sort of paid family medical
leave.
Having to adhere to this new
law.
And this new tax.
This is gonna be burdensome,
Madam Chair and Madame Chairs.
a lot of people in New Mexico.
It takes away the ability for
employers.
To make decisions.
With their employees.
In most employers make it a
non-issue.
We love our employees. We want
to support our employees.
This is creating an adverse
effect on many employers on many
employees.
Mandating and the government
running something we cannot run.
Anything well.
There is not an agency in this
building that has a reverted
funds, hasn't used funds
correctly, hasn't gotten pro
projects off the ground.
And to mandate to take that away
from employers.
Who want to make decisions when
they're employee comes up with
ALS.
Who want to give them a year
payroll, a year paycheck.
And say, go and be with your
family.
The more taxes.
That we implement and the more
mandates that we put on
employers and employees takes
away the ability for employers
to help make those decisions as
a group.
With the people that they care
about that are doing a fantastic
job.
Or their company where everyone
makes a fair profit and we take
care of our employees. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you presenters.
I like the other members that
have already spoke.
I represent most of you know
where it's at, but maybe the
audience doesn't.
I represent the heart of the
South Valley, and I call it the
heart of the South Valley
because the lines of demarcation
are to the north central Avenue
and to the south, I-25.
And in that geographic span, my
district lies and this area
people reside.
It is an area where the worker
County reside.
My neighbors
They are the carpet layers and
that list goes on and on. I also
refer to it as the barrio.
And so I am mindful, and I am
mindful also of many small
businesses.
And in saying that, I have been
paying an awful lot of attention
to this.
Bill in the past, and I have
supported in the past.
But I particularly appreciate
this bill.
Because I think it makes some
significant, significant changes
that I think are.
And so I and I, I'd like a
little, I know that some of it
was already answered.
Uh, and the question by
Representative Lente, but let me
start here.
How does this bill alleviate or
differ.
Or in alleviating concerns about
costs that workers and employers
contribute to the fund.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. So by separating
the two funds out, it creates a
lot less cost for the employers
and the employees who are, who
are contributing to the family
wellness aspect of it.
They contribute to that, they
pull from that for 6 up to 6
weeks if necessary.
Per rolling.
Uh, for the employees for
minimum wage employees, and it
ends and again for employers, if
your payroll is $100,000 that's
$1250 a month. If your payroll
is $200,000 it's $25 a month.
It's significantly lower than
where we had had it before
because we heard so many
concerns.
So
Let's continue a little bit
along that line.
If I am
An employee. Give me a scenario.
If I am a minimum wage worker,
which a lot of my cons, what
does that mean to them a week?
What does that mean to them a
month and then a year.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, I
appreciate you asking that
question. So that would be
around $4 a month, around 40 or
450 depending on the month, but
it's, it's not just a tax that
goes into a general fund. It is
a premium on an insurance plan
that says that when you need to
take time off, you can. We heard
some public testimony there was
somebody that had to miss the
birth of their child because
they had to go and be in a in a
service job in a in a in a in a
store.
I, I, I would ask my, I ask
myself and why I bring this bill
forward is the idea that does it
benefit that family and does it
benefit our state, Madam Chair,
Mr. Leader, to have that person
not there for the birth of their
child. For me personally, I
argue no. So I believe that for
those individual workers,
they're paying $4.50 to be able
to, Madam Chair, Mr. Leader, Mr.
Chair.
What does that mean to the
employer? I, I'm assuming they
pay much more than the employer.
So how does that work out?
Madam Chair, uh, Mr. Chair,
that's $3 a month.
So the, the
The employer, the small business
actually pays less than the
employee. Thank you, Madam
Chair, thank you, Mr. Chair,
yes.
Business 3 bucks a month.
Madam Chair, uh, Mr. Chair, yes,
that's the case, yes.
And how does that compare to the
previous bill that we'd heard.
Madam Chair, Mr.
So that would have been double
that, that would have been no
sorry, it's more employer in the
past this morning on my way.
Santa Fe
I was lucky I was able to go
home last night.
Uh
I got a call from a friend who's
a business owner.
And
He was in opposition to this
bill, and he said to me, Art, he
goes, these guys.
Cause they're mostly guys that
work for him.
Uh, these guys are going to call
up and they're going to say I'm
not going to work today because
I'm on paid family leave now.
You need to just put me down for
that.
I would like you to say one more
time, and I know you already
did, but I think it matters.
That we understand can someone
simply pick up the phone, Madam
Chair, and see I'm not showing
up today. Walk me through that,
please.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. There's so we
said one aspect of it, which is
if it involves a pregnancy or an
adoption, they need to give
their employer 3 months' notice
before they take the leave.
And then if they're taking it
for the family wellness leave,
they have to give 20 days not as
reasonable, there's an accident
or something serious happens
that might be shortened.
I say that, but I also want to
point that inside the bill there
are mechanisms that require the
the Department of Workforce
solutions to notify the employer
that they have received a claim
and that the claim and then
within 20 days we're receiving
that claim. then 10 days before
department will notify the
employer again that this person
will be taking leave in 10 days.
If the employer says, you know,
Madam Chair, Mr. Leader, this
guy says he has a broken leg,
but I see him, you know, running
the track every day, they can,
they can write and appeal that.
Process 15 days after they've
received that initial notice
that it's been approved.
So they have time to appeal,
Madam Chair, Mister Leader, if
someone is acting in bad form,
and if that person is acting in
bad form, Mr. Chair, uh, Madam
Chair, um, then they're able to
then that person is not allowed
to access the funds for 3 years.
I'm sure, is it possible for me
to handwrite myself a note and
take it over to the secretary's
office and tell her I'm
qualified?
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, no,
absolutely not. You have to have
documentation, and it depends on
a little bit of it, but mostly
from a healthcare provider and
they have to be certified. If it
is a case of domestic abuse a
police report, there's an
exigency is similar, you have to
show that somebody is being
deployed for active duty. So
there are, there are mechanisms
in their Madam Chair, Mr. Lee,
Mr. Chair, that, uh, that would
provide for that.
Presenters were looking at for.
9 weeks
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, it's 12
weeks of, of job protection if I
uh.
have a child that's
ill and I qualify.
Madam Chair, um.
Representative.
6 weeks, madam. I, I heard
earlier and I've heard it
through email and through
voicemail.
But this is a tax.
This is a tax.
Well, Madam Chair, I got a
honking big tax bill because I
gotta pay for my car insurance.
I got to pay like $2600 a year
for my car.
It is
A benefit to New Mexicans and
nationally.
If we have insured motorists.
And so
Contrast for me.
The difference between
A tax
That
We as government can use for a
wide array of things versus this
thing.
Is it a tax or isn't it a tax?
um, Madam Chair and
Representative, thank you for
that question. I mean I think
you really hit on the
difference, um, when we're taxed
a general tax.
It goes into the file of the
legislature.
This is a I call it from which
those who paid the premium can
draw, so I, I appreciate the
distinction, Madam Chair and
representative that you're
alluding to. I, I really have
taken issue when people have
referred to it as a tax because
in fact it's paying for a
benefit program that is as
distinguished from our general
property taxes, or is a tax, but
it covers of services and so on,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam, I'm taking a little bit
of time, but it, it helps me
understand because I have to go
back and talk to my
constituents. I have to go back
and talk to my small business
owners, and I want to make sure
that I understand and that I can
explain well.
So you said there are 2 funds
that are created.
Is that correct, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair and Representative,
yes.
And Madam Chair, once these
funds are dedicated and.
Deposited where they need to be
for the benefit of this
particular program.
What happens if the well dries
up?
Uh
Depends on which plan.
So the, the, the child welcome
child plan or program, Madam
Chair and representative is paid
through appropriations, so we in
the legislature have the ability
to make whatever adjustments we
choose, legislators decide
theoretically we could lower the
benefit or we could increase our
appropriation are the two
options that come to mind
immediately, madam Chair, with
regard to the other program,
there is a methodology we have
to follow solvency, you know, we
will be doing annual.
Reviews going forward to ensure
that we are are drawing in
adequate premiums to to um pay
for those who are eligible to
draw on, on, on the benefits,
and if I may, Madam Chair, and
Representative.
I do not believe there is a
state um who has had such a
program where there has been an
insolvency issue except for
perhaps Washington state and um
they are resolving that through
additional premiums and
infusions of cash, so but other
than that one state, there has
not been an issue of insolvency
and we're confident that we have
protocols in place, Madam Chair
and Representative to ensure
that we're on top of solvency
and we will act, I'm sure the
secretary will.
Very conservatively and in terms
of addressing those issues,
Madam Chair and Mr. Chair, just
to clarify some of that too, uh,
should the secretary feel that
we can raise or lower the rate,
they are limited to do it by
0.1%, which is still split again
between the employer and the
employee on the family wellness
fund, um, in addition, they have
to ensure that the fund has 140%
in it of what they paid out the
year before to make sure that it
stays solvent for the next year.
So we have mechanisms that are
always checking to make sure
that it's solved.
Madam Chair, that, that was
concerned.
That we have an amount that
we're targeting now.
He the
Minor amount that employee and
that next year you show up and
say, oh, we need access to this
benefit.
That
You're telling me that that is
not a likely scenario. Is that
correct, Madam Chair and Mr.
Chair, that's correct, and there
are, there are limitations and
safeguards to make sure that
someone doesn't look back at
their books and suddenly it's
it's wildly higher. I'll also
point to you that in this bill,
we have a two-year
implementation period and by
January of next year, 2026, we
have an actuarial that is
required to be done on the
family wellness, uh, uh, fund to
make sure that what we proposed
here is solved.
Thank you, Ma. I just have one
more question. So,
The
Issue of of seasonal workers.
Sometimes there are they.
Will they qualify to pay into
the fund.
Madam Chair and a
representative, yes, they do,
um, and if they've worked.
For the last 6 months of the
have to have contributed in and
then if they have, they are
eligible to draw.
they qualify.
So that gets a little dicey for
them, for the employee because
the reality is that
Many are not going. What about
employers?
That that higher seasonal
workers.
Do they also have had to have
had that seasonal worker for 6
months at least.
Madam Chair, uh, Mr. Chair, I, I
think so they would not be
subject to the job protection,
for example, because uh they
would not have had that employee
that long, they would be putting
into the fund at that, you know,
$1.75.
So manager, by and large, it
looks like.
Good, bad or indifferent. Many
of the seasonal workers will
not, will not qualify or
benefit, generally speaking,
because they're not going to be
with one particular employer,
most of that 6 months.
I can't say that's exactly
correct, because if the employee
may be working different job
state they may attribute it for
6 months, and if they are, what
that means, Madam Chair, is.
They may not be eligible for the
job protection piece because
they may not have been with a
particular employee employer for
6 months, but they would be
eligible for benefits should
they qualify, meaning they have
a medical condition or a family
member has a medical condition,
etc. so they may be able to draw
benefits depending on the
particular circumstances, Madam
Chair
I understand that because I know
they're paying into the fund.
However, for the, the varied
employers that they go from say
farm to farm.
or cropped a crop or something
along those lines. The employer
themselves though, it's gonna
vary, it's gonna vacillate for
them because it is, it isn't a
single individual. They may be
there a month, they may be there
2.
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, I, so
let's use an example, for
example, if someone is comes to
the state or is in the state and
works from maybe the ski season,
they work seasonal jobs in the
south, they work, they work the
chili farms up here in the north
and over that time they worked,
uh, 6 months about.
Over the 12 month period.
And they, uh, and a family
member gets sick.
Then they are able to uh get
received from the family
wellness fund that they've been
putting into for the for 6
weeks, up to 6 weeks, um, but
they're not guaranteed a job,
uh, from that perspective since
they do go to different jobs,
they might miss a part of the
season and then go back into it
the following one if they can
fit it in, but they would still
be able to pull out what they
put into it, Madam Chair, Mr.
Chair.
Manager, I'm, I'm done with the
questions just a brief comment.
I, I see this because members of
the community that work
somewhere.
There is a lot
Of fear, and I think we saw that
it's fear of the unknown
because.
We don't really have this now.
And so
Our human nature always goes to
that far corner of the worst
scenario.
The worst scenario that we see
is, oh my God have any workers
at all.
I have to close up my restaurant
right now.
I get that.
But
I honestly believe that that is
not going to be the.
Most people want to be there,
granted.
I've been a manager. I've had
many, many employees of
minority.
And it is that minority of.
Of a bad actor.
That makes us think the very
worst.
As
Famous president once said, we
have nothing to fear but fear
itself. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Hey
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair women, madam chairs.
Having trouble
Uh
First of all, uh, Madam Chair.
Adam chairs, uh,
Virgil state have
And I, I'm sure you do think
this is such, you know, is a
great piece of legislation.
I'm not
Sure, but uh like I, I, I do not
like the state mandating or our
employees.
And to me, what we're doing as a
state is mandating a tax without
an option.
To take it or not take it.
And if this
It's such a good thing for
everyone.
Why not let our residents decide
whether
Decide yes or no,
I won't in,
not all employers will be
obligated to pay in 66%
approximately, well, that's the
number of employers who so just
one, just clarifying point,
Madam Chair and Representative.
Um
Insurance programs rely on
reliable premiums.
And if you can't predict, Madam
Chair and Representative, who's
going to participate, how many
very difficult to understand the
solvency of the fund, whether or
not sufficient funds can be
raised to support it's um.
You know, it sounds wonderful to
be able to say let's just let
them opt in, but opting in means
we can't.
rely on a reliable source, and
lastly, utilization tends to be
higher, Madam Chair and
Representative, when people opt
in because they're anticipating
a surgery or an illness, and so
they'll be drawing more so
solvency is yet again a a
problem, Madam Chair and
Representative, when one is
considering a.
Thank you Madam chairs. Yeah,
what is our current statute on
leaving the
what is it? Um, what it is a,
uh, well.
It's a maximum of 8, days a
year, one earns.
One hour for every.
Is all on the
Providing the leaves of this,
this is.
Employer
But
madam, cheers. Madam.
It, uh
How many states have this paper,
I believe.
And up, Madam Chair and
Representative 13 plus the
District of Columb
we don't apparently.
27% of the American workers
have.
Access to paid about 1 quarter
of the United States has.
Access to this.
They uh
So, you know, it's
I don't think anybody is a.
some sort of paid family leave.
It's how we get uh
That
How did
Why did we come up with the opt
in or out.
If I may be excused, Madam
Chair, I have to present to
Senate Judiciary, um, our, our
paid our public safety package,
so I apologize.
Madam Chair and Representative,
uh, sorry, you just asked what
was the opt out provisions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. So it's
kind of it's two pieces, one, we
wanted to exempt as many
businesses that are very, very
small, of course, and then 2, it
was also that, um, that's that's
how much again to keep the fund
solvent to make sure that we
can.
Uh, Madam Chair.
Adam.
Uh
I did a little a little
research, Madam Chair of the.
It only find
The numbers for the opt out vein
is 1425.
Oregon
Why all the other states.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I'm gonna,
um, part of it is that New
Mexico has a really strong or a
really large small business
community, and so that's part of
the reason why I'll hand it also
to um uh Tracy McGinnis.
Um
Madam Chair and Representative,
um.
The the states that have uh had
a high.
Minimum.
Madam chair, Madam question on
the floor.
They
I have a small business. I work
at.
5
people, does that mean that I
was actually thinking about that
self-employed, um, I part of it
is that uh there is a different
calculation for a self-employed
individual, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, uh, where the
self-employed individual pays
the same rate, just pay also. So
again, it's how you're.
If I as the owner and my wife
and my son brought a,
um, you know, if they're W2
employees, if they're getting a
paycheck if they're um subject
to unemployment insurance again,
if you have your employer, but
they would.
Whoa
Um.
But
Thank you, uh, Representative.
Yes, they would have to uh
1,500%, that is correct, yes.
Or not
So, Madam Chair, who would issue
The out of state employer.
Well, they have to comply with
it. Yes, and in fact we've seen
Madam Chair and Representative
Na seen a dramatic drop, and
these are states and we've just
not seen a huge drop in hiring
in those states um and those
that participation of the
businesses, um, and Madam Chairs
represented $1.50 on 1000.
That's
Not in, not mmonte.
What about uh
Working out of state employee.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you. I own a business and all of
my employees are from, I would
not have to pay a premium on
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
uh, so they can uh to pay that,
uh, what I will say is that in
speaking to my experience as
well, having taken leave, um, I
will say that it is
significantly less cost, uh, to
have to pay this premium, um.
Really, really true effort that
I've seen small businesses give.
So for example, I was talking to
a small business, so 3 months
off, and they gave them $3000
for that period. Had they had
to, they would have paid
significantly less. So, um, it
and I see I don't have my
benefits that that the people in
California do because uh we
don't have any kind of fund that
they can pay into they can
support. I just want to that a
little bit, Madam Chan
that are offering the.
That
Service different
Parts of the oil patch.
contracts, the traveling nurses
and uh
Madame Chair and Representative,
we already have, um, which I
would argue is significantly uh
this is more of a specific we
and I've not heard from any of
the highest uh populations are
at the heart disease, um, while
that ethnicity, uh, it's also
just a thing that happens, it's
Uh, madam chair, chair.
The least likely was the people.
Uh, the lowest usage.
number
Um, we, we commission
It though.
But it all
figures in
represented, I missed the first
part of that question.
Madame Chair and Representative,
uh, like many insurance claims
in a given year that may be the
case, but over the lifetime of a
worker, um, I would anticipate
they would need to take maybe
not, but a fraction of that
because.
I think
Thank you, ma'am Chair
Representatives representatives,
um.
I have, uh, I'm the owner of a
small business and um I've heard
owners.
And they're very, very, um,
Madam Chair, presenters I've,
I've also um
Have received quite a few
communications concerns.
And I'm wondering, Madam Chair
and presenters, if you can talk
where you were, where you ended
up as a result of those
interactions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
going to try to keep this tight.
I think the biggest, there's two
key differences, um, that came
out of the discussions, um, you
know, there's a, there's an old
saying that was a consideration,
uh, to also was reducing the
amount to 1,500%. Um, we wanted
to make it more amenable, talk a
lot about when we're in our
private conference, get on my
academic high horse and I can
show you 50,000, um, you know,
we try to make the definitions
in here to make sure that we
made sure that it was a
Rolling 12 months so that if for
example you utilize the benefit
December 31st, you didn't have
access to it again on January
2nd. You had to wait a whole
year until you could even apply
again.
Even the definition of family
member, we uh mimicked what we
have we already passed in the
healthy workplaces piece, so
those.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, um.
Uh
The majority of my concerns, and
I'm not gonna repeat all that
we've heard in here.
Echo, and that is
And so I want to talk about that
a little bit, Madam Chair, and
presenters. I want to talk a
little bit about the cost.
Um, because I see the cost
different than you do.
Uh, financial costs, that's what
I'm talking about. And then um
and then the I think the easiest
way to hit those topics is
probably as we go through the
bill, so could, and I'll just
start on page 3.
Um, lines 6 through 9 an
employee.
Uh, they also wouldn't be
excluded anyways because.
Adam share representative, uh,
so they're considered federal
workers.
Due to this actor for some.
Due to some federal action.
Let's jump to page.
10, and this is where I'd like
to talk a little bit about the
cost.
Perhaps in actually reflected on
page 10 and 11.
B from lines 12, I'm jumping
2/10% of an.
There's a jump in Jamium.
Now, it seems like calculation,
one's a percentage and one you.
That, that to me, Madam Chair,
and representatives anticipates
rates going up fairly
substantially within 3 years.
Um, and I'm not correct in that,
Madam Chair and representative.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, so, um, I, I'm
glad you brought this part up
because I think it's a really
important after 2030, should
then that new rate for this one
for 5 100% for employees, should
that, let's say drops to 0.3,
the employee would then pay 55%
of that, and that's just to make
it consistent that employees
always pay 0.2, and you'll see
similar language on on page 45%
of whatever you for the
explanation that, that I
understand that now, um.
I guess, I guess I would remark,
I've never seen.
Any sort of well and certainly
not a madam chair and
representative government
program costs less.
Um
Next question, um, is on page 12
and
This goes to uh Representative
Dela Cruz's the standards by
which and I note under G, at
least as it relates to
while we're on this line, I'll
ask the question.
Um, page 12, line 22. This is
about an employer that has a, a,
a plan that's
Perhaps substantially similar.
And
I have a large employer in my
district, Madam Cherry
Representative.
And I would like to, they're
very curious because like my
company, they do their plan on
medical leave is greater than 12
weeks.
The maternity leave, parental
leave and leave for care of
families is expressed in hours
instead of weeks, but it's
basically 4 weeks.
So the question is, would would
that plan be,
you know, I've had would this
fit, um, you know, I, I, I do
think that having those
representatives and
Madam Chair, representatives,
presenters, you can see why
companies would be
Um, a little uneasy about, about
this coming in and perhaps
competing with their plans.
You can actually, Madam Chair
and representatives, I think you
can see where
Some of their employees might be
uncomfort or uneasy about it
because that was part of sort of
the equation in the employment
negotiation, right? Benefit, I
can just see a lot of havoc, um.
Kind of being created as a
result of that.
Um
I want to talk about costs a
little bit and um
The
The representation or my
understanding is is that Madam
Chair and representatives and
presenters.
Is that when we're talking about
costs in this room, it seems
like we're talking about the
premium costs. I've heard, I've
heard $1.50 per 1000 but, but
Madam Chair and representative
as a business owner.
That pales in comparison to the
cost because you have a lot of
small business and I would
maintain, um, well, we'll make
that point in a minute, but I
would, I would say that.
That
These businesses do not have HR
departments.
Um
I have 22 employees and one of
my um employees' time is devoted
to HR. So, um, and many of the
big companies have complete
departments and.
But the cost of implementation
and tracking and, and, in
particular in my, in my
business, which is we have
highly skilled, highly technical
people.
You can't just throw up an
advertisement, Madam Chair and
representative saying I need a
new geophysicist.
Or I need to do, you know, I
mean, the, the odds of
attracting that sort of talent
for 90 days is simply not
practical.
And so
If I was to do that, um, Madam
Chair and representatives, I
would probably have to find
somebody, bring them in from out
of state, pay them a much higher
wage than my full-time employee.
So when I talk about costs from
a small business standpoint,
it's not the premium that
worries me.
It's all the other costs that
are associated with it.
And I, and
That is
A much bigger cost and I think
that the people are really
factoring.
Um
Madam Chair, uh, representatives
presenters, um.
This is my other concern and
this and, and when I talked I
talked a minute or a minute
about financial costs. What will
prevent or and perhaps you all
looked at this and and
considered this.
But aren't you, aren't you
really doesn't this bill an
incentive for 5 employee
companies become 4, my, my
expert reminded me that he
actually changed that by the
request of the team, and they,
and that was too of that, uh,
you were asking won't this, you
know, Madam Chair and rep and
Representative, I would argue,
and I would also argue that
again
Madam Chair Representative and
presenters, um, I appreciate
that the, uh, but I, I.
I think that my concern run runs
very, very similar to that, you
know, we, we have a large
segment of workers that are
gonna be paying into this that
we'll never see it.
Um, we have, um,
And whether you want to talk
about temporary farm, want to
talk about just the 955s
through.
And um
Well, and I think everybody
wants this type of of uh of
coverage largely best left to
the.
Situation that Leader Armstrong
described and that's uh not
necessarily negotiation but
discussion between the employer
and employee because I have
those sorts of discussions all
the time.
And not every, you could have a
more complicated pregnancy that
requires more time.
The rate in the state.
With the
Absolute value, um, I think this
is an area of there. I'm gonna
conclude very quickly. Um,
I promise, um, I wanted to go
back and this had to do with the
the question I thought I was
gonna ask previously and I'll
direct.
Uh, lines 21.
through 24.
And this, I, they actually went
to maybe um about.
It seems like there's different
types of standards as to require
that are required as to um
What an applicant ask for.
And in this particular case, say
if and I'm paraphrasing here,
you only have to provide a
signed statement from the
applicant.
I am I misreading that, Madam
Chair, uh, Representative, I, I
would say yes, uh, safely, uh,
would require a police report, a
court document
or a signed statement from a
victim or an attorney.
Um, a family member that just
supports them and for this
claim.
It says or or the applicant
would you read that the same way
of the applicant, yeah, and then
you me I'm sure representative.
So I would argue that they would
need that, but again, it's going
to substantiate it, and
I'll I'll finish the statement,
Madam Chair representatives and
presenters, thank you very much
for the information.
Um, I guess my, my concern once
again goes back to what Leader
Armstrong says, and that is, is
that it seems like this body,
and by this body, I mean the
legislature.
is sending an awful lot of its
constitutional power over to the
executive, um, and we have seen
at least at the federal
government.
What, how that pendulum has now
swung, right?
Um, and perhaps some others,
perhaps not far enough.
But I think it's just a very
dangerous thing for
Whether it's this committee or
this body of legis legislature,
not to have, not to maintain its
oversight and the ability to be
very precise in the language
that you very much, Madam Chair.
I appreciate your indulgence.
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Matthews.
you know, I have a an amendment
I.
I, I have some questions.
That's, yeah, stand up, OK.
Right.
Um, do you want us to pass out
the the amendment.
And I don't think
I, uh, whichever you.
I think that the what the
amendments are and and Madam
Chair, uh, I probably should go
ahead then, as we discussed.
The amendment was drafted and
could not use the committee
I missed
Before we go there, if we're
gonna go, I, I think just as as
a committee sub has not been.
I, I guess I'm thinking that
OK, so what's being recommended
to me is that you talk about it,
uh, we're gonna have our
analysts look at it, um, and
then we need to decide
discussing the sub to do an
amendment on the sub as of right
now, the sub has not you can
talk in general terms, um, and
Um, my first question actuarial
5-year fitness plan.
Madame Chair and representative,
so we this version of this bill
required the legislature, um, so
this version of this bill
welcome child parts in
particular, but it would be
required. Thank you, Madam
Chair, I, but I did some.
Conversations with uh actuary
and I said, what do you do when
you're?
Trying to start it from an
actuarial standpoint, what's
that process?
And I was
Study would do a 5 year whether
or not the con has that been
done on either.
The
Thank you, Madam Chair I'm gonna
hand it to Madam Chair
Representative, I'm gonna hand
it to conduct an actuarial
analysis of HB 11, um, the
concepts of HB and it was a 10
year population level data and
our who you said.
The the name of the company
Actuarial Risk Management
and they have conducted these.
Have existing programs,
including Colorado and states
that are considering them like
Michigan and um mad I'm sure
that
that actually,
that has been.
I would be happy to share it
with you and maybe
it should be shared with all the
members of the committee.
But that's up to up to them.
Uh, a, a new piece of is.
This a mother or a father.
So that's a great question. So
we can see it now, um, they
primarily default 4 to 5 and up.
Um, and those younger infants
have not in the same amount
Um, and those younger infants
have not in the same
some of the some of the thoughts
was that this is partially to
support, um, that, that effort,
um, I've heard it, you know, in
passing in other places too, I
believe in LFC there might have
been some the uh the that that
fund, but I'm not gonna speak to
that. That's those weren't my
conversations. When we initially
began discussing this, we
started, um, looking at minimum
wage workers, um, but as we
often talk about a lot of
families are living paycheck to
paycheck and in between places,
so we increased it to 3.
100 $0 per month. That's that
was what it was before. That's
around $900 a week, so it's like
30 between the 2000 that was for
uh for the maximum wage you
could have earned.
We are among New Mexico's
there's 11 or 12 states that
have existing pay and they are
all in the top 25, a lump sum
payment, $9000.
Family having a child, Madam
Chair, uh, representative, this
is why we came in and said this
is a uniquely New Mexico
solution in that, uh, New Mexico
has, uh, you know, multiple
funds that we are accruing
interest, we anticipate, I
believe, uh, LFC is projected by
2039 that the in the the funds
that we have those those
reserves that we have will
outpace how much we're uh
receiving in our seeing, we are
actually benefiting from that
and we want to make sure that
those dollars are being put to
use for the
Relations that are going to be
coming into the state. So that's
where that idea comes from, but
New Mexico is unique in our
ability to, to have those funds
and that's what we're we're
managing them and what we've
already, I'm, I'm curious.
Um, I can imagine that.
Family
could also benefit from a uh uh
a stipend like that is it was
there any thought given?
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair,
thank you representative for
that question. You know, I think
again in the same way that we're
tempering how much we're
utilizing at the same time, uh,
we want to be pragmatic and how
much is uh how much comes out of
that fund as well, understanding
that it's going to be used for
these populations, so again, you
know, in the future we want to
expand that beyond that, you
know, that's a different
conversation, but at this point,
it makes it's a population that
we can measure very well, people
that have worked with in the
past 6 months or the past 6
months of the most recent 12
months, it's a population we can
measure and keep up with.
And that also helps with the
reports that we're anticipating
from the representative, um, is
the money coming from the fund.
Madam Chair, Representative, it
would, uh, it's.
through appropriations through
ECCD.
OK.
And Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, um.
You have some projections as to
how much say in the how much the
total of representatives. So
just to be clear, uh, the
benefits will begin January 1st,
2028 for both the family
wellness and the Wealth Child
Fund, so that would be the year,
um, the, uh, we anticipate, and
I believe it's in the fiscal
impact report.
That it would be something like
193.5 million in benefits for
that, um, I think there's still
a discussion point of that, the
actuarial that um Millerman put
together for Southwest Women's
Law Center, um, anticipate had
an estimate about, about the
same as what the uh FIR shows.
So I believe we're in in
continuing conversation with the
Which is not knowing the balance
of my question was.
Madam Chair, Representative, if
Madam Chair and Representative,
the distribution, that's one of
the funds that contributes to
the $9 billion right now, and
they get a a fraction of that.
There's also additional funding
that goes into ECCD. So I'm
happy to pull those numbers up
for you, but again in
conversations with uh LFC and
with others, we felt that this
was a reasonable amount to
request from Madam Chair,
representatives, I, I was just
trying to get a sense of just
the sense of roughly how I
believe it's it's, it's a
greater get very of it, it's
greater than $500 million right
now at this moment.
Um, there's also legislation
that's pending that would
increase. Um, all right.
I'm wondering just so I'm
absolutely has nothing to do
with the baby bond, Madam Chair
and Representative, no, it's a
very different concept, um, this
is to welcome a child and for
that child.
Madam Chair, uh, if any
consideration was given to
providing healthcare and
retirement benefits to
childcare. Madam Chair, I don't
see those as competing interests
on this, for example, um, again
the budget request additional
funds once this fund, once the
um welcome child is there, um,
that would be an adjustment
there as well, but again, I
don't see a man of here.
Um
These 3001.
Of the child
Curious about who figures out.
We
And why would it just be talked
about that a little bit. I
didn't understand that. However,
filling out a claim for this
actionable in a bank account,
those funds, um, so we wanted to
tie the amount to the child, um,
the way it would be decided is
again, you know, um.
Should they cope, have to lay
that claim, uh, you know,
alternative. The goal is not to.
Madam Chair Representative,
could you, I don't understand
the question.
Madam Chair and represented the
check will be made or whatever
the, the, the payment will go to
the refund will go to one you
all haven't decided how that
when they apply for the fund,
um, their application will be
reviewed by the department, for
example, in my household, it may
be my my my my husband and I,
that might make some we're
enabling uh those family who has
a bank account, you know, all
these aspects as well.
All right. Um, if we could, uh,
Madam Chair, turned to pay and
it's at the bottom of 23,
section 8, which is
Are each of these
Yeah, uh, are each one for the
same period.
Offered Madam Chap
representative, thank you for
the question. They are up to
that amount of time.
So if you are requesting leave
for one of these, you may get
approved you, you may be
requesting, uh, you know.
Getting back to work after uh a
hand injury and the
recommendation of um all of
those individuals that that is
up to.
couldn't
Uh, apply and be entitled to,
Madam Chair and Representative
is able to utilize up to 2, for
example, you have a.
Very, uh, exciting year or
dramatic year, depending on each
or something like that, but you
cannot compound. OK, Madam
Chair, I, I saw you get to snack
all of these up and do that
and that should be OK, it's page
17 line highlighted page 17 line
1 under no circumstances shall
an applicant beable for more
than a total of 12 weeks of well
child and family wellness leave.
It also stipulates also that for
the wellness family well family,
the family wellness.
So, uh, one more question says
foster leave in accordance with
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, I'm just conferring
with the Secretary of Mayor,
give me one moment.
Madame Chair and Representative,
the final rule would be by DWS,
um, and so that's why it would
be under their rules and the
rules and the documentation that
Um, um,
In the uh comments that we got
online.
Said that the bill allowed for.
And my question is, is
Give me, Madam Chair and
Representative, I have been
working with.
Yeah, on page 16, so we do have
that, that might be other
issues, um, uh, adjudication
process that specific
and um other
issues to clarify, it is not our
intention that they should be
used concurrently, um, and in
fact if it if it shows intent in
that, but, uh, you know, we
also, uh, also be receiving
filed and we also clarify that
if they are eligible for FMLA at
the federal level, from an
And that's representative I can
cut in, we believe that the
language as it exists on page 34
should satisfy that we are, we
are committed to ensuring that
it resolves that issue, so if
they continue to bring this up
as an issue, we will continue to
work with them to make that very
clear.
Uh, man of it was one other
state program,
so and so and but it guarantees
job protection for up to 12
weeks, um, they have 50 or more
employees, um, you would have to
take that unpaid 12 year paid,
you know, 6 week leave that
you're taking with the family
wellness fund or the or the um
welcome child.
So you'd have to take those
concurrently, so you're not
suddenly getting 6 months off or
or job protection.
So that
And as for the other benefits,
again, we do stipulate in here
that you cannot receive
unemployment insurance at the
same time that you're.
Um, how many, uh.
I'm gonna hand it over to
Secretary Nayer, um, she can
give more information.
Um, thank you, um, Madam Chair
Representative Matthews, uh, I
think our estimate was 219, and
I also need to note that the
governor's.
Really clear her position on the
early childhood trust fund.
I'm sure, I'm sorry, I didn't
catch the.
Uh, Madam Chair and uh
Representative Matthews, I
28
So there's the initial year, uh,
there's really the technological
part of the process, and then,
you know, sort of their uh
How long would it take? I think
it would probably take the full
amount of time that they would
have, which would be about 2 to
The chair, uh, Representative
Matthews, we face the same
struggles of hiring that every
business in this.
Yeah, so the chair
representative Matthews, yes to
meeting 25. $2 million of which
required to run the program and
And
And I just also wanted to to uh
uh.
I
This is these testimony, yeah,
some share of those employees. I
believe they outsource the call
center and some of the outreach
um in other states, they, they
ended up with it almost the
exact administrative costs per.
And Madame Chair and
Representative Administrative
costs when they're done in with
again, I would leave it at the
discretion of the department,
to you Possible questions.
Um, how can the program?
Yeah
Uh, who may pay into the program
for qualifying event and then.
Madame Chair and
representatives, um, they are
buying, they, they have an
option in to be in it if they
choose, um, it will be two ties
their insurance plan they have
a, you know, an illness data
saying folks.
Uh, work just for that amount of
where
I would like sponsors have the
amendment, please.
is the time when I should
correct that.
Madam Char if it's OK, we we
like to have it with us so we
can kind of man
we want to make sure that
everybody's on the same.
Uh, Madam Chair, let me first
correct page numbers to the um
sub.
As I say, it was just a drafting
rule and if you'd read the 2.
Uh, so
Um, well, first we need to move
to the
discussion over that, that's
what's being discussed, um, um.
I here um Madam Chair, I'm, I'm
fine with whatever the powers
would be, say.
Um, OK, so I will explain the
amendment.
Um
The man my things.
First of all
Um
And this in a second, but the
first thing the amendment does
is carve out.
What we define as community
side.
Um, and there's, it's, it's
listed here, but essentially
these are are childcare,
healthcare facilities, hospice
care.
Um
Group homes,
The employees.
Under the amendment portion.
And be covered by the program
will explain after I finished
explaining the rest of the
amendment, why that is.
OK.
The second part of the exempt
worker.
And the tent not impose a tax.
On either the worker or the
Uh, on those people.
Or qualify I'm sorry you are
not, are not going to qualify to
use the services.
And so
And have seasonal workers who
work less than 6 months.
The requirement under the bill
is they have to work at least 6
months in a 12 year period, a 12
year in a 12 um
Workers who are in the country
pursuant um and then we just as
a clarification, uh, because,
um.
It make warm 1099 or not.
Uh, employees.
And are not um
They should not be, they may
want to qualify themselves as
independent as a sole
proprietors or something, but
who is hiring them for
temporary.
a lot of talk today about long
term care.
There are, but.
We had a number of people who
provide um.
The goal is, as I said, to
basically carve out 32,000.
There is no cover the acquired
of employers result, and I'll
just give you.
In a second, but what that means
is that all of these disability
or whatever.
Their services will be reduced
and the only way to protect
them, just in the personal care
service area, 3200.
So this is, I'm sorry, $7.50.
The that sense.
The reimbursed loss, $3.55 just
I
All righty.
We can get everybody
Back in their seats and I
appreciate uh the the
flexibility of being able to
take the pause, um.
So Representative Matthews, once
again you have uh made us uh
work a little harder to
understand, you know, what, how
we're gonna proceed, uh, we did
have.
Conflicting information, but we
actually got.
Council service down here, uh,
and procedurally how to move
forward. And so, um, what I was
told if we want to act on the
sub.
First
Then
If we want to move and act on
the amendment that's so, um, I
want to make sure whichever way
this goes, it's done correctly
and so that's what the
disruption was about and so now
we've got correct information
representative Matthews, I I
didn't, I apologize for, uh,
maybe not having think we are on
track now and um we still I
think have.
And, um, to be able to move. So,
uh, were you done with your?
Um,
OK.
Then I'm gonna go to the next
um.
All right, thank you, madam.
Uh
Oh.
Um, I just have a couple of
things that I want to bring up,
um.
Original questions have been
answered.
Um
Um
2
If you times that by 9000.
Um
How does this fun, how is this
fund gonna question
How does this fun, how is this
fund gonna
right now saying that the fund
now at ECC, so that is part of
that. The second did we
anticipated that both mothers,
they would take 8000 claims on
that front.
To for again, both mother and
father, um, so we anticipate
it's gonna be less than that.
However, I will point out that
in the FIR for that, and their
estimate is at 192 million
annually. That's why it's that
dollars
Um
That's all the way to the end.
That's,
OK, with the twins, um, would
that be?
work for us for a while and then
all of a sudden they stop
because cliff of benefits.
Um
And I hit that cliff of benefits
faster.
And lose those additional
benefits.
Madam Chair and Representative,
this is why we had it as a
measured amount, um, it is
considered, it is, but again,
Um, which may or may not happen.
But what happens when they, I
mean,
We're essentially man.
Um, or if they, um, I'm worried
that
What I'm worried about is uh.
workforce with.
I need this
Uh
Yeah, um, for those 12 weeks.
Um, what kind of programs do we
have that will prevent
fraudulent claims from out of
state workers, you know, all.
To whomever
Thank you for that. So, um,
Can someone.
and sue.
Yes,
so if the employees.
Uh, can they sue?
proceeding rule on the appeal
judiciary.
Somebody else, I mean, is there?
Financial, I mean.
are very last question. Um, were
actuarial
If I remember correctly, so what
happened next year or whatever
that utilize so we feel pretty
confident these number lies
similar data to the original
bill and and very importantly,
3, we also have a structure
that.
And and they mentioned the FIR
that typically the uptake in the
initial years is in and so for
that reason, for a 5 o'clock
term, it won't go broke.
In 2 years, um, you know, that,
that immediate of DWS to adjust
it or, but again, the, the
objective here is not to create
Um
But I appreciate your Thank you
um.
I had several questions, but I'm
gonna narrow it down, um,
because I know it is getting
late in the evening, um, what I
discuss this is, is, um, where
is the money coming from? and
are you all gonna attempt to
take it from Madam Chair
representative.
Already.
Um
I, so.
I appreciate.
The, the work that's been done
from last year to this year.
Um, I run a nonprofit and I have
5 employees.
And so I've had to do this math
before, but I'm gonna ask you to
do it again.
I have 5 employees.
Our payroll is about 200,000.
Tell me how much I as a
business.
Madam Chair Representative, uh,
that's, I'm sorry to say that I
I was laughing that I was saying
to you, so Madam Chair
committee, uh, it's about $25 a
month for.
So with 5 employees, um, based
on that, I'm gonna refer to um.
The committee
Um, I think there's been lots of
healthy conversation.
Um, I know the commit the desire
of the committee is.
You have a second?
Representative Armstrong.
Representative Dela Cruz.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente, yes.
Representative Mason.
Yes.
Representative Matthews.
Yes
Representative Murphy, yes.
Representative Parajon.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, final tally is
11 votes, adoption of the
committee sub for HBO.
All right, so.
Well
You, you did go through all the
amendments that needed to be.
So
Uh, we can.
If the committee would like to
move the amendment.
That's what we
Madam Chair, would you like me
to, of course, yeah, Madam
Chair, uh, uh, representative,
uh, unfortunately is not
friendly, um, primarily, I think
the, the concerns presented are
category specific jobs as being,
um, there's also an exemption to
to redoubling it, um, and then,
uh, and I think those are the
big ones. I, I also want to see
whatever the fun the first that
came forward seemed happy to
continue the conversation, uh.
Biggest problem
Is
Madam representative, I was
trying to be brief.
Um, but that ever works when you
go fast. Uh, it was one of the
concerns I would anticipate that
that is already, they already
are able to, um, Madam Chair and
representatives there and again
I would, I would love to
continue.
But this time it's an unfriendly
amendment, Madam, um.
Madam Chair Representative,
again, I want to look at
continue to look at for all the
reasons I've listed, um.
And again,
I get a little wary of offended
um on the flight in that
perspective, so for that, but I
appreciate we are going to take
a vote, um Madam Chair, um, uh,
just a rule on amendments and,
uh, I'm concerned that we didn't
receive this even though I like
your amendments.
If I don't speak up and say
something now for.
This amendment, um,
You know, we would gather.
So I would suggest.
And bring back the correct
amount.
So I have a motion to table.
Um, that's non-debatable motion.
Yes.
OK, Patrick to take a role.
So we're
The vote is
That's
Representative Armstrong.
Representative De la Cruz.
Yesterable, Representative
Hernandez.
Representative Lente, the table.
Representative Mason.
Not the table
Representative Matthews.
Noted table
Representative Murphy. No the
table.
Representative Parajan.
Representative Cerrado, Madam
Vice Chair.
Madam Chair.
And I'm sure the table, the
table tally is 6 votes, yes,
I'm sorry.
Um, so the
The bill the amendment is
tabled, so, uh, Chair de la
Cruz, what motion.
I'm sorry, I.
I do not
And I do pass on the substitute
of I have a, do I have a second?
Subsequent motion to table,
Madam Chair.
Alright.
Representative Armstrong?
Yes to table.
Representative Representative
Hernandez.
Representative Lente, not a
table.
Representative Mason? Yes.
Representative Matthews.
He has the table, and can I
explain?
Representative Murphy.
Uh, yes.
Representative Para.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair
No.
Madam Chair,
the tabling motion, uh final
tally is 5 votes, yes, 6 votes
no.
OK, so the motion did not carry,
so we were back onto.
We're almost out of paper
motion. I'm, I'm, I'm confused.
So, uh, chair Dela Cruz, would
you repeat the motion, I know it
was hard to.
Excuse me.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
No to how
I voted Du pass.
I do, I do not pass on.
I do not pass House Bill 11.
But I do pass
The committee substitute
hospitals 11.
Thank you, Madam Chata. Thank
you, Representatives
representative, so we're gonna
have um.
the vice chair, make the motion.
Madam Chair.
I
Thank you, I think that is
correct now if we.
And actually, before we take the
role, I know that half the room
is gonna be happy with the
outcome in the other half is
not. I'm gonna ask that we we
um.
Uh, remember decorum?
And um there will be no.
Representative Armstrong.
No, and I'd like to explain my
vote.
Representative De la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative,
yes.
Representative Mason.
Oh.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy? No.
Representative Parajon.
Yes.
Representative Serato.
Madam Vice Chair.
Yes, Madam Chair, yes.
Madam Chair, the final tally is
6 votes, yes, 5 votes no.
Armstrong to explain her vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
just would like to say that, um,
the largest tax increase in the
state of New Mexico is gonna
harm New Mexico families and um.
If, uh, we.
Have a rule in the house uh in
in the committee to not have
anything without 24 hour rule,
um, I would have brought a
substitute bill, um, as well. So
we'll see you guys on the floor.
Thank you, ma'am Chair.
Uh, Representative Matthews,
thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
there's a number of reasons.
not taking care and we were not
properly protecting people at
this age, which is part of the
reason why I was focused on
trying to correct that, not to
be having to constitute.
Thank you. Thank you.
And chair of the final tally for
6 votes, yes, 5 votes, no.
