the state all.
Representative and in order to
hear.
Representative Duncan.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative let.
Representative.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Mason.
Representative Matthews here.
Representative Serrato.
Senator visors.
Madam chair that is here and
we've got a quorum
I want to get started as quickly
as possible we can get HB forty
four Representative Matthews.
Thank you madam chair.
Members of the committee.
Representative Matthews you
would start by introducing your
witnesses and then if you go
back to access that you.
Thank you very much madam chair
members of the committee I
witnesses are very hard who is
the.
sorry director of government
relations of the federal home
loan bank of Dallas okay
director.
He's direct he's director of
the.
err Kerr director of government
and industry relations federal
home loan bank of Dallas and my
other expert is Brandt more from
Santa Fe who is a this.
An attorney.
And just give me one moment.
Sorry I had too much time now my
papers all the medicine that
would I don't know where it is
what bill.
Okay of this bill I we set it
for this committee comission
that it would be a good a bill
to start with something really
simple.
This is simply a is is not such
a simple bill but it also is not
that complex and
the point is the federal home
loan banks our federal banks and
this is all about of loans that
they make to insurers and credit
unions and banks and with that
I'm going to allow Mr Hart to
explain in more detail.
Thank you Mr.
Yes thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative members
of the committee on air car with
the federal home loan bank of
Dallas we are a government
sponsored enterprise created by
Congress in the nineteen
thirties similar to Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac what the federal
home loan banks do there are
eleven of us across the country
we lend money to community banks
credit unions and very
importantly to insurance
companies what a bank or credit
union will use federal home loan
bank loans for typically is to
make home loans into their
communities to borrow large sums
from us and then to make
individual home loans Ag loans
business loans and insurance
company they of course don't
make home loans or or consumer
loans directly but they will
borrow money from their federal
home loan bank and then they
will use that to purchase
mortgage backed securities or
treasury securities mortgage
backed securities of course
indirectly support housing by
creating demand for those
mortgage backed securities and
they will also occasionally
borrow money from us in order to
pay policy holder claims in the
event of I need to pay out large
sums of it this is now the crux
of the bill is this when we land
money federal home loan bank
lends money to a bank or credit
union and let's say that bank or
credit union fails we have
collateral pledge to us from
that bank or credit union and
under federal statute we always
have access to the collateral
that is pledge to us so if
necessary we can step in and
collect the collateral that is
due to us not a penny more but
what has been pledged in support
of what they have borrowed and
we are made whole and as a
government sponsored enterprise
with the federal regulator our
regulator requires us to be
secured with collateral at all
times and that arrangement works
very well however if.
We lend to an insurance company
because insurers are regulated
at the state level we do not
have that federal coverage or
protection our collateral so
what can happen is out an
insurance company that gets into
trouble our receiver will step
in and they can place a
temporary state or hold on all
of the assets of the failed or
failing insurance company and
the US.
Either delay or deny the federal
home loan bank access to its
collateral.
That does not work with our
business model we unfortunately
have to charge in insurance
companies slightly higher rates
on the loans that we make to
them because of this difference
between our loans to to
community banks and credit
unions and insurance companies
so this we consider it a
technical fix it's passed in
twenty three other states and we
believe that it is good public
policy for policy holders
insurance companies and New
Mexicans.
and that with that we will stand
for questions.
Thank you Representative.
Do we have anybody in the
audience of in favor of this
bill.
Due to the time of if you could
just be brief I would really
appreciate it thank you so much
thank you madam chair members.
This that is not.
That.
from.
All the.
Thank you Sir.
Representative in the Canadian
bankers association New Mexico
of the stands for this bill
because it protects the state.
Financial.
Anybody else in favor of this
bill.
Anybody opposed.
Comments from the committee.
Chairwoman of the past.
Thank.
Yeah.
Motion and a second.
We call the roll.
And you want to yes.
Representative.
madam chair.
to questions.
We.
Why is that.
but less pleasant.
Thank you the description for it
is to all of the banks have this
protection that you're asking
for.
So the the eleven federal home
loan banks spread around the
country to do business and
distinct geographic regions and
each of those eleven federal
home loan banks is working state
by state to accomplish this
legislative goal and we're in
the midst of that with twenty
three states invest it thus far
okay.
Why do you need my question I
mean you're private into the
right.
We are private entity but
created by Congress as a
government sponsored enterprise
we operate without taxpayer
support but we we have this
federal charter dating back to
nineteen thirty two.
Thank you Mr any other
questions.
I just want to also make mention
that this is being broadcast
through soon representative and
there was nobody at base or item
on student so just to let you
all know that that is in place
so we have a motion for to pass
in the second
can you take the role.
So if you get.
Representative is ending on it
yes.
nothing yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente yes.
Representative little yes.
Representative Lundstrom yes.
Representative Martinez yes.
Mason yeah.
Percent of mapping yes.
Vice chair set up yes.
Madam chair yes.
For the did you read the total.
Of our total yes votes
and no and no votes.
We have to pass thank you very
much madam chair members of the
committee.
And I just want to make sure
that.
From here on out that we go
through the chair.
Representative are the start
this morning.
We're trying to look I just want
to yes thank you thank you
congratulations on your bill our
next bill.
HB one fourteen.
We can get through all these
bills just that quick will be
right on track.
Thank
Representative will you
introduce yourself and your your
with with this.
Thank you very much madam chair
thank you very much madam chair
Committee I'm Representative
Kathleen Cates and my expert
witness here is John Baker the
political director for the.
We're twelfth sorry I'm here to
present a house bill one
fourteen I just want to read a
little bit of the summaries to
see understand is an existing
program H. B. fourteen created
in appropriations to support
registered apprenticeship
programs pursuant to the
apprenticeship assistant act to
assist apprenticeship programs
that will develop skilled
craftsman and occupations
recognized by the bureau and the
council to accommodate the
social and economic needs of the
adult citizens and of New Mexico
and to enhance the economic
development of the state the
workforce solutions department
is responsible for
administrating the rules and
regulations to carry out the
provisions of this act.
This particular act this
particular program is the we're
asking this is simple
appropriations bill offer an
increase funding
Currently we are
we're asking to increase funding
and state oversight for registry
registered apprenticeship
programs that have demonstrated
results for both workforce
development in adult learning
that provides a purpose with the
job structure wage increases
systematic opportunities for men
toward hands on learning and
accompanied related technical
instructions.
I'll tell you that we have a we
have that we have for many
decades now have had this
apprenticeship program it is
access through workforce
solutions for state funded
infrastructure projects this is
a year of a Norma's amount of
infrastructure investments we
are hoping and we want to make
sure that we have the skilled
workforce to be able to do that
I increase funds currently the.
Act it is currently funded which
provides less than five dollars
a believe it's four dollars and
forty nine cents per hour of the
apprentice towards what is
usually costs about twenty
dollars an hour for supervising
junior partnership work so this
is a small offset but very
necessary for the investments
that they're making into this
workforce I know that as
legislator we are looking for
workforce investments and
infrastructure I'd like to turn
it over to my experts witness to
be able to provide you with a
little bit more information and
then I will turn it back madam
chair four of questions thanks.
Madam chair members of the
committee and again for the
record my name is John Baker the
political affairs director for
local for twelve that's plumber
pipefitters union
so the registered apprenticeship
since twenty fifteen if you look
at the dollar amount that goes
across the line it looks very
similar in the way that it was
funded
But there's been a large
increase in demand so we're
serving almost double the number
of apprentices then we were in
twenty fifteen so although the
funding looks like it
streamlined its actually
practically cut in half
and these programs are very very
important of late the
representative said to our
infrastructure and our skilled
and skilled workforce and
according to the US Department
of commerce for every dollar
that is invested into
apprenticeship every public
dollar invested into
apprenticeship there is a twenty
eight dollar public benefit
return
and so I I ask you to support it
thank you.
Thank you madam chair we are
ready for questions.
Do we have anybody in the
audience in favor of the bill.
New job with you New Mexico.
This.
The ability to.
secretary of the you know we're
we're the
New Mexico.
We are building we have a lot of
projects out there and one thing
we are the lack of it you'll
leave your.
Roger.
Anything we can use always very.
Our program is I not only needed
to build a budget good if that
the.
we.
Thank you.
X..
Yeah you madam chair my name is
stopped up and members of the my
name is Gail with the
international brotherhood of
electrical workers in New Mexico
Our members of our members we
were built for
of the bill one one board and we
up.
A request that we get up.
After.
Thank you.
Yep you madam chair members of
the committee members waters
your next Representative
transport this investment
appropriation was rushed in this
thank you.
Madam chair members of the
committee to aspen as a
registered lobbyist.
Associated General Fund tractors
the chemical contractors
association
of America association and the
New Mexico chapter of the
electrical contractors
association this data structure
or shorter.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee Carl where we just
and seated builders and
contractors we have the.
The staff recommendation program
in the state and we stand strong
support one fourteen we.
The gold standard of training it
is the best way for workforce
development to happen in order
for the state to be able to not
only support the current
programs that are in place but
also help grow apprenticeship in
general for all different kinds
of occupations it is in
desperate need that they need
more funding and help to support
that so it seems on thank you
very much thank you Secretary
madam chair leading street in
Iran the secretary of the
department of workforce
solutions thank you to sponsors
are reading this bill on we are
absolutely ready and happy and
we're closely with neighbors and
all the other related posts
here.
Thank you we also support on the
side of the room.
It is support on this side of
the room.
Thank you madam chair members
committee on business matters.
Last year increased
by one percent
in order to keep that.
This is a new industry this type
of money to offset the college
tuition.
Minimum wage I absolutely stand
channels.
Thank you.
Madam chair of the committee
chair large stable veterans are
well known for twelve.
Is bill one fourteen.
That is a large range to look at
eight of US
one thousand.
Jobs.
Or
that doesn't even other skills
US construction workers CDC
lines here in Mexico jeans Water
and just one one billion dollars
two hundred nineteen the and I
have to mention.
Yes the one.
Not just domestically what we.
Thank you anybody else in
support.
Morning Mr afternoon Bryant on
the New Mexico building trades
state funds for this piece of
legislation thank the sponsors
in New Mexico.
I really liked it your friends
for being.
thank you very much thank you.
Anybody else.
Okay we'll go to the committee
all opposition okay and if there
is any opposition.
Is there any opposition.
With that we go to the committee
please any questions.
Mr Mr Representative thank you
madam chair Representative K.
you and I spoke a couple of days
going you're going to give you
some information about where
this was going to be used you
know as a part of the rural
parts of the state were you able
to give me that information on
where that is being used.
I thank you madam chair and and
Committee representative Duncan
this is a program that's run
through workforce.
Solutions and so it it it covers
all the rural and urban into
places throughout the state it's
any program that is receiving
state funds for infrastructure
is either is providing
apprenticeship opportunities or
their pain into the
apprenticeship program and so
this is an entire state and it's
only.
Overseen by workforce solutions
so that is another way to access
it which is I believe what you
were asking representative and
chair what I was just wondering
if you could give me specifics
you know just is that how much
Alamogordo is getting for
example if if I know it's not a
fun down there but how many of
these guys are are accessing
that down in the rural parts of
the state that's what I was
wondering thank you very much
madam chair and Committee I'll
need to turn this over to my
expert witness I also think
we're for solution may be able
to provide some of that
information as well.
Thank you madam chair
representative Duncan so and
different programs have
different locations
based on the need
and the work available in that
area so for example local for
twelve we have a training center
in Farmington we have one in Los
crucis and we have one that is
currently in Los Alamos getting
ready to expand into Espanola
and so like.
It depends on Doug different
programs there's forty five
different registered programs
and.
Again department of workforce
solution would say this one's
located here this one's located
there but it doesn't necessarily
mean that that the only people
being served so for example here
very shortly local for twelve
will be doing mobile training
and we will be going out to
rural communities with a thirty
eight foot Winnebago training
and tribal and rural communities
so we're all finding those ways
to serve our our state.
Thank you madam chair I I could
think of maybe another idea for
that thirty when I think of all.
Senator Martinez.
Madam chair thank you
Representative Kate's.
What happens if this isn't
funded.
So it current I I would thank
you very much madam chair and
and committee representative
Martinez and currently it is a
funded it is a very low amount
and although individuals that
are participating in providing
the training the oversight the
supervision and opportunity
that's the big thing opportunity
for these apprentice they are
spending approximately twenty
seven twenty dollars an hour in
should be they were being
reimbursed just under five
dollars an hour winds are pretty
should numbers started going out
there reimbursement rate went
below three dollars an hour so
when it is not funded eventually
we are concerned that the.
Add business practices of
offering Services funded will
will actually decrease the our
opportunities and
apprenticeships at and I will of
turn this over to my expert
witness as well.
And thank you madam chair and
representative so eight we just
will be able to serve as many
apprentices that.
Want to be apprentices
currently just looking at my
program and I'm sure other
programs in here can tell you is
that the amount that they've
grown
at a high need for these jobs
and the skill and.
My.
Every single facility I have is
absolute at capacity and without
funding without assistance in
funding we won't be able to
serve more apprentices than we
serve now which will restrict to
the work force that you all have
to keep this building heated and
cooled and let and the hospitals
that are currently being built
we just won't have the capacity
to train that staff.
Madam chair representative cage
show currently is there a line
item in workforces budget for
this.
Is it returned is a
nonrecurring.
Madam chair committee it is a
recurring ask yes it is and and
I the.
I would be more comfortable for
for solutions answer this
question.
This.
Madam chair do you mind
secretary thank you.
Madam chair Representative
Martinez thank you so the money
has been coming through to our
department from H. B. two it's
been an inter fund transfer from
the workers comp administration
I'm not sure the origin of FY
that is the case but that's
where we've been getting the
money and it's it's sort of I
sort of like a one of those
volunteer plants that pops up
every year but it's not really a
perennial so it has to be really
be done each year thank you.
Thank you very much.
Madam chair just one question
how much money is there for
administrative so they're
they're getting go.
Okay what we Fund.
Will apply for.
But what is the funding action
we work if I higher if I hire
somebody in as an apprentice and
I pay them to the the way that
applied to this fund to a real
person.
So madam chair committee
Representative Martinez this is
a program this in existence and
that is for investments and
infrastructure building that are
refusing state dollars so you
the program has to have a
journeymen that actually
provides the supervision to make
them qualified as you know in
the apprenticeship program this
it and so and then yes the than
they they plied to that through
workforce solutions the
reimbursement I will you'll
those as well to my expert
witness.
Madam chair representative
Martinez so
There are.
It's a braided funding mechanism
that finds
our partnership programs right
as you heard Representative
Kate's talk about the amount
that we put in right and then
there's the amount that comes in
from the apprenticeship
assistance act so when my
funding program gets a check it
says a a funding on it right so
we know that that's the
mechanism that it's coming from
from and from what
we understand in our study of
that funding mechanism that
particular fund in the one that
we are requesting in this bill
is funded by general
appropriation it's general funds
it's it's taxpayer money it's
not.
Industry paying it's taxpayer
money.
Just a clarifying question madam
chair so the.
Every apprentice would go
through this program is working
on a state project.
State funded.
Madam chair representative so
and not necessarily
they are state funded
apprentices
and they could be working on so
for example you an MH some of
them are working on Facebook
so I think that we're getting a
little confused with the so the
the P. what fund.
A. P. what fund is for public
works projects right
and that money says they're
working on public works projects
the partnership assistants Act
funding is for.
A registered apprenticeship
programs these programs don't
just have to be construction and
building trades they can be
health care they can be
retail anybody who wants to
start a registered
apprenticeship program with.
Department of workforce
solutions can access this
particular fund.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Lester thank you
very much here I.
Make a comment thank you very
much I wanted to explain to the
committee of the workforce
solutions budget this is going
to be considered under other
funds so if you look at the
budget and you look at the
different sheet is gonna say
other funds.
What they're asking for for my
interpretation is that they
would like to increase that with
the general fund appropriation
within that line item.
This money issues statewide.
Issues by every Association that
provides apprenticeship support.
My understanding from what I
read here's what you're asking
for additional amount that would
match other funds inside that
differentiate the workforce
solutions budget.
That's what you're doing thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Mason.
The one.
The question the question.
Register for this purpose but in
the bill it doesn't side with.
This program is just as a
premise programs are difference.
Thank you very much madam chair
Committee representative I the
the bill is stating that it's
the apprenticeship
appropriations act in in in that
act you're right is not stated
in this bill but it does refer
to that act an act clearly
states a registry a registered
Apprenticeship program or.
And that was the I would.
Those are the questions I had
was whether.
Whether that so.
That that I just.
Representative Lujan.
Thank you madam chair would do
best.
Session the second.
I was.
Representative and in order yes.
Representative don't get yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente yes.
Representative little yes.
Yes.
Martinez yes Representative
makes.
Representative Matthews yes.
Measures of of yes.
Madam chair yes.
Yes.
Yes I do yes thank you very much
if you.
Next we're gonna hear HB night.
Madam chair we requested.
Yeah.
Well let's see that.
You guys have taken a lot of
times it is.
Okay.
Because we get to the right
choose.
As we should.
Other questions.
I told.
I I.
And.
Yes Representative nitrates
thank you for your two hundred
and seventy.
Two hundred and forty seven
forty seven.
Thank you for the correction.
If you would introduce yourself
and your witnesses please thank
you madam chair
hello I'm Greg Nibert
representative from district
fifty nine and to my right is
Jack for a long time expert on
all things dealing with the
uniforms
you for long.
And to my left is Paula Tackett
Also is a senior member of the
New Mexico delegation on the
uniform law commission and a
former
Of the Legislative Council
Service and had to keep L.
parking lines from time.
So madam chair were here before
you with a.
With a very large bill.
I have frankly
is lengthy but that's because
uniformed commercial code is
likely.
Uniform commercial code is the
bedrock of commercial
transactions that affect every
business in the state and
frankly every business and all
our nation and that's why
there's a need for a uniform
act.
New Mexico probably has adopted
we're the number one or number
two in the nation in adopting
uniform Max.
And this would be the
cornerstone of I think the U.
Elsie's
Tax that it.
Look at that as being the pride
and joy if you would of the acts
of produced over the years.
What this bill does.
It brings New Mexico up into the
twenty first century because
most of the changes that are
made.
Our dealing with electronic
transactions.
Act that we move from paper to
electronic forms of moving money
around.
Contracting with one another and
what have you and so do you you
will see spent many years and.
Grafting this document that's in
front of you.
It spent many years
debating that and that debates
are largely with law professors
and and other people who are
interested in in the uniform
acts around because they're
pretty rigorous process and and
The staff I can certainly talk
about the process if you have
questions there and then both Mr
Burke and myself can stand for
questions for any technical.
Lesson that you have if I can
remember that far back in my
days of taking secure
transactions in dealing with the
uniform law commission so unless
you want me to read the bill.
Or go through specific items I
will note that the there are a
few new sections that were
required of that but most of it
or just amendments that tweaking
language to take care of the of
those electronic transfers.
So with that unless you want me
to go in more detail I'd be
happy to stand for questions.
Given the late hour.
Well we definitely would have
wanted to do page by page but I
think we will pass on that Hey
Well let me ask is is there
anybody in support of this bill.
Posted this bill.
The next question has anybody
right.
The committee does anybody have
any questions.
Representative Austin.
I said.
It.
This is the ability to call the
roll.
Representative and in order to
get.
Representative W. yes
Representative Hernandez.
Percent of that that yes.
A little yes Representative
Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez yes
Representative.
Yes Representative Matthews yes
by share set up of yes madam
chair yes after the eleven.
Representative you have a do
pass thank you madam chair for
to a similar debate in the
judiciary.
But I did still there uniform
commercial code out of there.
This.
It's.
Yeah.
Yes right okay HB sixty two to.
Around.
Thank.
Madam chair up HB sixty two is a
bill all explain in a moment
back to the left of me is
alright pal who represents the
used car dealers.
The independent car dealers and
to the right of need is retired
house judiciary chairman and my
buddy L. part who I want to come
and set up here in the hot seat
with the it represents a new car
dealers.
when I was an auto theft
detective there's
there's a
There's a crime that's called
curbstone that's what this bill
addresses is curved stunning
there's two different ways to
curbstone.
The first way is I'm not a
dealer.
And the dealers of help for you
have to become a dealer if you
sell five or more cars by D. and
B. and we're not changing that.
I am not a dealer but I go do
you and I've by your car and I
say I don't want you to fill in
the name or the dollar amount.
But I'll take your title bill of
sale and then I go to a third
party and I sell it.
And I put their name in as it
was sold to them.
So the transaction of me being
in the middle is not C..
So we lost not only the fees for
DMV.
But this is the worst one
because.
we also circumvented the of
women law.
With the AG's office.
The next one is I am a car
dealer.
My place of business that I
wished is my residence.
And I take the car and I park it
out on the corner street on a
street corner and advertise it
for sale.
And this way I avoid
having a storefront and my
operation cost is a lost less
and it's unfair to the other
dealers.
So those are the two ways you
can curbstone.
And madam chair do you have
anything you want.
with that will stay open all
right I should tell you two
years ago this bill passed
exactly in this form all the way
to Senate Judiciary where it was
on the calendar and never got
her.
With that will stand for
questions.
Level
You.
Opposition.
This bill.
Anybody in support of the bill
of.
All right through the.
Walking through the.
Jeez we support this bill what
are maintenance.
You this is the quality of the
vehicle to see.
What is the eleven for.
It is so
What you want with your long
life that utilizes a list of the
calls on it so
The
consumer protection we were
here so we support this bill.
A much.
Anybody else in support.
Committee.
Senator is.
Really toward about this bill
have great respect for
Representative Rehm is expert
witness able to a lot of money.
Teachers so.
Madam chair and representative
fourteen minutes he's got a back
up.
It's all managers and if I can
get under the table.
Any other.
Representative
I did have a question
Representative Rehm I understand
it I like the idea what happens
to not doing.
What's what's the issue.
Madam chair in Representative
Lundstrom it's a misdemeanor
charge but also it is a DMV
violation and they can
assess civil penalties as well.
Thank you.
Representative and.
Yeah Representative Mason of
this that are like a bottomless
Environment and.
Madam chair and representative
Mason now you can sell up to
what you can sell for cars when
you so I into your time then you
got to be from a dealer.
After the register sellers.
Madam chair and representative
Mason that is exactly correct
and that's the first curve
seventeen I described.
Representative as director.
I'm just kind of curious how
ramp it or where is this issue
rampant in the state.
Thank
you madam chair and
Representative Serrato it is and
I'm gonna let the them commented
on that.
Madam chair and Committee
Representative Serrato again I'm
mark Powell from the Mexico
independent dealers association
black market auto sales are
crisis in New Mexico because
they often lead to ghost cars
we've heard a lot about ghost
guns but there are thousands and
thousands of vehicles driving
around New Mexico that are not
registered and not titled in the
people who are driving them.
and the source of most of these
ghost vehicles are these the
black market sellers we have a
new term Sir.
we we spend so much time
explaining curbstone and we
thought we just call it what it
is which is black market sales
so we hope that any small
incremental steps that we can
take will assist but it is not a
minor problem and in addition to
sort of the danger to the public
to the buyers the state also
does not get its proper taxes
road taxes Senators.
Does that answer the question
madam chair I had one more and
how does this affect online
dealers and all the the market
as online as well.
Well we did the the sorry madam
chair committee have
Representative Serrato we just
did the UCC and a lot of the
National
online car sellers if you'll
forgive the pun drive a big
truck through the UCC of
vehicles sold in New Mexico by
unlicensed we call them national
black market car sellers none of
the vehicles sold have the
fifteen day five hundred mile
they do not have the required
six percent prior damage
inspection that's required of
every single dealer New Mexico
so
Unfortunately I don't think they
count although I there's already
a three hundred dollar fine per
vehicle so we couldn't I. T.
internet general to go after
them perhaps.
Representative Lujan.
Thank you madam chair on the
point of the question though
Representative Serrato so you're
talking about the kind of waters
in the rules and those of the
chronic dealerships that have a
presence online what about those
that are on Craig's list of
Facebook how would you affect
those people.
Madam chair Committee and
representative Lente up.
Anyone who sells more than four
vehicles will be affected by
this no matter how they're
advertising it whether with
flyers posted the the
advertising strategy doesn't
really affect the legality or
illegality this.
Thanks for the better job of
follow up to that so I farm and
ranch really and I know play
with the people in the state I
are actually being in and they
go to vehicles quickly pick up
trucks for instance and I see a
lot of them what's the amendment
on the farm or the ranch these
are maybe for for ten months
whatever brought up whatever
they put on the cell.
So would we be impact than those
at producers or rural
communities.
Disproportionately because you
want to try to take these off.
The groups that Madam chair
representative Lente no I'll
allow him to comment that I want
to go back to your previous
question this legislation is
written so that if a auto theft
detective or DMV investigator
even up came up to an individual
onset yeah I'd like to see the
title.
Get out of the vehicle I'm
buying in the bill sale is not
filled out.
Meaning the first way that I
described purpose stoning where
I bought the vehicle but asked
that they not complete the
paperwork.
That is the violation.
At that point they see that it
is a violation.
And we wrote it that way
specifically to address those
the first style of curbstone.
Okay thank you and then one last
question chair thank you for the
opportunity to so we we learned
a lesson in regards to the I
guess the new model of how to
sell cars and yes would be one
of those were the two most of it
online and and and looking at it
FIR right now where their
presence online then made them
say okay we're gonna get rocked
by going into the what was the
nation's of the the tribal
entities in our state what is
that continue to.
Reduce their presence outside of
any tribal lands for for those
that may be coming down the pipe
regards to however the model is
is is.
Which is.
Thank you very much madam chair
and representative of thanks for
the question this doesn't have
anything to do with that that
the issue between two yes well
and the publicist really a
franchise Act issue this is
meant to deal with the black
market dealers yes love is not a
black market dealer this is.
This was not a black market
dealer and it's so it wouldn't
have any it would not have an
adverse impact upon the
the work around the Tesla came
up with or the investments that
those native American
communities have made in the
distribution and sale of
vehicles through yes.
That thank you match of the day
and I just yeah I I I understand
where you're coming from and and
to representative about this
point by two zero two excuse me
I don't know how read that this
is and how big of an issue this
is to try to fight crime or
fight people wrestling with four
cars a year but in my mind I I
would hate to limit the
opportunity for those that are
situations where they have that
opportunity to be able to make
those vehicles work for them or
their operations for them to
reduce themselves stable because
we gotta keep it through a
dealership that they get a trade
in value as we we local currency
other valued at the be able to
receive on their own so that
being said and you should not
Representative Representative
Matthews.
I.
Thank you.
this new technology is
challenging for me.
Representative in
Aperture is why the number four
was chosen as okay.
Madam chair committee
Representative Matthews the
current law.
limits a a non registered dealer
to for car sales this this bill
does not change the current
state of the law in terms of the
number of sales that make you
considered a dealer versus AA in
individual solar it's already
the limit for an individual
seller is already for in the.
laws it's currently written.
Thank you for that answer I
have.
This is for the waste any kind
of data that.
Madam chair
Committee and Representative
Matthews I don't think so it's
just been that way as far as I
know since nineteen seventy
eight when the bill was it
wasn't one sixty six was passed
for seventy.
And madam chair and
Representative Matthews
so back in the seventies when I
was police officer it was that
way them to.
Each year in general thank you
for the answer one other
question
the penalty is a misdemeanor I
believe you testified and I'm
and also there's possible civil
remedies but I'm wondering
How much focus we should expect
law enforcement to put on this
given that it's a fairly minor.
penalty and
are you anticipating that what
what kind of dent in this
problem are you anticipating
passage of a misdemeanor bill
like this would actually make.
Talk about this okay madam chair
here with.
Madam chair representative
Matthews.
We believe that the law is sort
of getting passage of this laws
the middle point and what needs
to be done
we believe that
there will need to be education
of sheriffs police chiefs the
state police about the role that
coast vehicles play in crime in
New Mexico so up at the moment I
think the amount of attention
that will be paid is
approximately zero
Albuquerque.
Again forty eight hundred
tickets last year for not but
vehicles that are not registered
and titled and registered with
only seventeen traffic officers
so clearly up there is not he
had an understanding among law
enforcement of the role the
ghost vehicles in black markets
sales in our overall crime
problem to cheap easy way to
help again denting the crime
problem overall because if you
forget the pond a ghost vehicle
that's not registered or titled
is sort of the perfect.
We have called for cross.
Pandemic thank you for that for
that answer this question
Representative Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you madam chair I just one
quick question so let's say
somebody for instance by cars
it's the mobile older vehicles
once all the fact that your
what's the process to do that
like how easy is it to.
Get licensed to do that.
Madam chair Representative
Hernandez it's actually I think
too we see that.
Madam chair representative
Hernandez the requirement the
state to become a dealer is a
pre licensing education class a
fifty dollar application fee
fairly significant requirements
in terms of an approved location
to sell your vehicles from and
then proper business insurance.
Thank you for that so it's it's
wants to do that there's a past
septic it's actually pretty
easy.
At my questions thank you madam
chair.
Representative Lundstrom.
You have.
But I hold that for just a
minute Representative medicine
of the.
The I.
That are not by your part B. I
read through the money that.
Work on it.
All of the state.
It is of all.
Registrable as well for us and
Madam chair representative may
send.
For vehicles without being
licensed.
If someone wants to fix up and
make it a career versus fixing
up one every quarter and selling
it the then they need to go to
the licensing process I
registered.
Thank you.
That's what's that on.
of legal for whatever as long as
I think on the spot and then I
and
only up to four vehicles per
year Sir.
Correct right I.
What.
Madam chair representative maybe
Mason that's an excellent
question.
But madam chair and
representative Mason DMV
computer database can slide
those people who were selling
fiber more.
Really.
These
are not the problem.
Madam chair and representative
basin you're right we're going
after a different group really
thank.
Thank you any other questions
from the committee.
We have a motion for two passed.
The second please take the real.
Representative ending on it.
Representative don't get yes.
Representative Hernandez yes.
Representative what that no Sir.
Representative little no.
Representative Lundstrom yes.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative basically yes.
Representative Matthews.
Yes.
Shares about the no.
Madam chair yeah.
Surely S. or six.
I.
Yes.
Okay that is yes thank you madam
chair thank.
All right.
With that we will transfer
meeting I hope you to start by
date at one thirty promptly
we're also yes.
Well.
At
emphasis.
If.
Out of.
