Here.
Making this is here
Representative Jane E. Powdrell
Culbert.
Representative Serrato is
excused.
Natalie Figueroa.
Here.
My sister
is here.
Chairman well but I just just.
Chairman Antonio Maestas is here
Chairman we have a quorum thank
you very much and thank everyone
for attending we have a quorum a
little we will not be conducting
business this afternoon but I
think it is a going through
introductions and of and also
orientation so what we do
introductions first this is a
tremendous Committee I'm I'm
just thrilled and proud to be
part of it we have on the
democratic side Representative
leadership team of the the
leader the whip the akak is
chair we have the ranking
minority member in the entire.
Legislative body we have a
veterans
Rebecca Dow and Representative
Fajardo and we have
Representative on this welcome
Representative are our newest
and only new member but why
don't I just go down the line
just introduce up your district
and then and then maybe a little
rock your economic philosophy
will each take a minute or two
Rebecca Dow welcomes.
Thank you thank you so much and
I'm actually in the committee
room so they're going to mute
there we go is that better okay
state representative Rebecca Dow
I'm from grant Hidalgo in Sierra
County down south and it has
been a privilege to serve on the
commerce committee happy to be
back again and looking forward
to common sense governance and
good bills that grow the economy
of New Mexico.
Thank you Representative
Fajardo.
Thank you I'm state
representative harder
representative Lente county
district seven I am honored to
be on this committee once again
I have a small business in a
small business owner and so I
understand that the bills that
come through affects people like
me affect people that have small
businesses and we want to think
about the New Mexico so it's
challenging sometimes and
sometimes we disagree sometimes
we agree that it's always a
great time a great committee
thank you.
Thank you Representative
Gallegos thank you during a goes
I represent district fifty two
down in southern New Mexico I
run a nonprofit I know what it's
like to have to pay the light
bill I know what it's like to
look for many out in the
community I know what it's like
to ask for money out in the
community as a nonprofit so I
definitely am always very
What always receptive and always
wanted to be part of the
business community so this was
that important committee for me
to be on so glad to be on it
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you and we'll us skip skip
are.
We'll skip a reserve but not
just for now and save them for
cleanup Representative Johnson.
Representative Johnson was the
stepped away Representative
Martinez Representative Johnson
there your yes I am sorry came
here I am thank you Mr chair and
that colleagues good to see
everyone by Representative
Doreen Wonda Johnson I represent
house district I McKinley and
San Juan county said northwest
New Mexico and I am located in a
rural community and at the you
know economic development is
very important to me we are
surrounded by were known for and
venture capital of the world
native American jewelry capital
of the world and and the most
patriotic town in America so
that's where I am proud to
represent thank you.
Thank you and you can also save
tons of money on polling by just
asking folks walking down the
street.
Senator Martinez.
Thank you Mr chairman and vice
chairman and members have
in Medina state representative
district eleven which is a core
of downtown Albuquerque in parts
of the near north valley this is
one of my favorite committees as
Representative Fargo said we
don't always agree but it's a
committee made up of people who
come from different walks of
life with different levels of
expertise in different sort of
business and commercial
activities and I always walk
away learning more knowing more
than what I when you walking
into a particular meeting so
really excited for what's to
come this session Mr chair under
your leadership and and by
Representative us the ship
and I look forward to all of the
the dinners that representative
and I'm this as the rookie and
this committee will be buying us
over the next thirty days.
Thank you Representative by your
Figueroa.
Thank you Mr chair.
Hi Natalie Figueroa I represent
house district thirty in the
north these types of Albuquerque
and I am particularly fascinated
with that magic listening where
education meets economic growth
with our workforce pipeline and
with making sure the best and
brightest minds in New Mexico
state in New Mexico this is a
fascinating Committee and the
diversity of topics that we
discussed is always mind blowing
so I look forward to another
great session.
Thank you and I'll go next up
on twenty Maestas I represent
house district sixteen which is
a Bernalillo county Albuquerque
at the west mesa and it hugs the
Rio Grande that from central on
the south two one Tania on the
north.
so historic community out there
on the west side and everything
west of us is just massive
massive potential growth not
only for City of Albuquerque but
the state of New Mexico and so
my constituents up kind of bread
and butter community that just
once jobs on the west side
Elyria eliminating stress on the
on the bridges because there are
are are gonna be nobody just to
my district because it would
also go through the beautiful
north valley so it's a beautiful
place to Representative and it's
a personally I'm a small
business owner I chill ice I'm a
lawyer have a small law practice
that does personal injury law
car accidents and things of that
nature
and not just give me a great a
great insight into just managing
a business and and the bills
that need to be paid and the and
the things that that affect that
particular market might law
practices taken many turns
throughout the years and doing
personally do so it's great to
be here
My I'm trying to think my claim
to fame but nothing comes to
mind but I did study up at a
great economics department at
the university of Washington
which will play great football
here in the near future now
we're gonna go to our our newest
member replacing the honorable
Alonzo Baldonado I just want in
on this from Rio Rancho is our
newest member he is going to be
a full fledged voting member
this year I made arrangements
for that we're pleased to have
you Representative will you tell
us a bit about yourself for a
lot about yourself and your and
maybe your economic philosophy
thank you for thank you chairman
my name is Jeff Representative
Josh Hernandez are you
representative districts sixty
which is the southern part of
Rio Rancho where most of the
business our happens I'm a.
Coming into my second year as
being a representative
really I my district is where
all of the gross or a lot of the
growth is happening in Rio
Rancho
we have a hospital
retail centers we have southern
Boulevard
You know I.
My district what's up with
Representative Powdrell Culbert
to really have the economic hub
of Rio Rancho they in my
district they have just
announced about a thousand
households along with that is
going to be retail sectors
industrial
and.
It should be a lot of growth as
as chairman by assist was saying
for the west side.
I am philosophy is a my parents
are a small business owner there
almost acts
fifty years now I believe
Hernandez concrete pumping so I
grew up watching you know
watching my parents built their
business and have seen the
struggles and that the budget
and
really the kind of ingrained
that small business you know
being the backbone of our of our
economy here.
into into me from a young age so
I'm here to you know grow New
Mexico and really help the small
businesses as we go along sh
thank you Mr chairman now it's a
pleasure to have you thank you
Representative so we'll now go
to the folks who make it all
happen we're blessed with a
tremendous staff great great
economic minds.
What we start with the the
minority analyst
introduce yourself and.
Tells little bit about yourself.
In my screen could only see
folks whose cameras on so I'm
not sure who's in the.
The panelists without their
camera on.
I don't believe that we have any
of the minority analyst joining
us today I see and then of what
we go to the major analysts
the major analyst for the
Canadian missiles.
Yes that would be me thank you
Mr chairman thank you members of
the committee my name is very
late all I am the Democrat
majority channels Committee I've
done this work for.
Years now Mr chairman so so I've
seen all kinds of things through
my other work you do.
By you and in your consideration
of the bills are proposed to be
here.
Thanks a million she's been here
longer than I think all but two
of the actual members so.
Truly is this the soul of the
committee missiles of thank you
for your work and then
And then also the majority
analysts when we start with the.
Dante Watson.
Stir chair then vice chair women
and members of the commerce
committee this is the best
committee I am super excited to
be back here on the commerce
committee it's a think tank and
I learned so many things and
have the opportunity to engage
with all all of the members of
the committee to delve into the
topics as you mention my name is
to bonded Kurt Watson born and
raised in Albuquerque New Mexico
which involved in all the stuff
high school on the west side and
then went to the university of
New Mexico where I obtained a
degree in economics and
international studies and I was
that kind of kind of work like
Walmart I I.
When for one thing into not
without a lot of more of the
things that I also I've got a
business degree and certificate
in national security and now
currently taking classes for the
master in public policy program.
You had mentioned what is your
favorite Act canonic principal
supplying to then.
For me and I would like to I
woke myself all the members if
you're open to discussing
regression models let's talk and
see how we could incorporate
those into some of the analysis.
prior I served at the economic
development department at the
City of Albuquerque and worked
on international trade and I
also have worked prior sessions.
On this committee and also for
the house leadership looking for
to the session and working with
everybody here today.
Thank you Mr Watson Janelle.
No I'm to know the status great
to be back this will be my third
year serving this committee as
an analyst I and regionally from
Las Vegas New Mexico go karts
Roberts in cards
UNM graduate right now I'm at a
small business owner in
Albuquerque over ten years now
almost almost ten years now and
small business consultant I'm
looking forward to it to the
discussions and to really good
sessions.
Thank you and just a reminder to
everyone all roads lead to Vegas
so the cardinals won the state
title this year troubles.
We're joined also let's go back
to our minority analyst
welcome and tell us about
yourself and now and thank you
for all you do.
If you could on mute yourself
Alex.
All right I will go back to the
minority on this tournament but
anyway thanks everybody for
sharing that a couple of.
A couple of things about the
committee decorum and then the
committee itself and we could
open up yes Alex are you with
this.
I saw that your mute button
went.
Was taken off can you introduce
yourself are you able to.
Just interrupt when you can so
let me just go over the let me
just talk about the committee
that we'll talk about the quorum
and then and then wrap it up but
and then we can open up to the
to the will of the committee but
we want to do a it's very
difficult on June during the
patient with each other
it's very difficult to amend the
finer points of bills on soon as
we learned last year so let's
try to come up with amendments
before hand
you know obviously want to give
the sponsor a heads up you want
to give the committee avid heads
up what we're gonna do the best
we can sometimes that doesn't
always work out
so there's no that thing under
handed or nobody's ambition
anybody we're just up you know I
I love taking out pencil and
eraser and doing corrections of
bills on the fly that that's
almost impossible be as soon so
we'll just take it day by day
and step by step I would ask
that folks during the committee
to the extent that they can have
their cameras on obviously when
you're talking have the camera
on obviously if you're eating or
have stepped away that's fine
turn the camera off
We are when there's public
comment we definitely want to be
engaged try to stab your
electronic devices during public
comment.
We want to.
Get a report back from from
Representative Dow on being in
the room because one of when
you're in those when you're in
the actual committee room you
you you can't jump to other
committees and and present other
bills and things of that nature
of the problem this we can get a
second laptop because one laptop
to do the zoom and one laptop to
read the documents and and
things of that nature so it is a
tricky.
Tricky but I think that we can
take advantage of our
communication in terms of emails
and texts
lobbyists and and members of the
community and advocates and
whoever else staff executive
branch members are welcome to
sit in the committee room two of
that community experience room
three seventeen as is a
centrally a panelist sergeant in
arms there and so theoretically
someone could stand in the well
of the committee and present
their ideas about bills to the
committee just like under
you know pre and post COVID
times we want lobbyists who
represent clients don't just say
the name of the plan but maybe
to say a quick sentence about
with a client representative not
everybody watching the zoom
knows the names of all these
companies and and entities
throughout New Mexico
You know we'll see how it goes I
think we can get through this
this session of bills without
having to do a lightning round
but you never know those last
two three days if there's some
compelling bills that we may
have to you know go through like
I built in our take up or down
votes but I don't anticipate
that at this time.
obviously tabling motions take
precedent but they don't cut off
debate.
And
and that's kind of a bit about
the decorum what we've asked the
committee analyst to.
To us excuse me to to ponder
when they analyze these bills is
that one does this bill create
markets that's what we
definitely want to do simple of
the liquor.
Changes to the liquor control
act last year do we do we create
markets create markets create
economic growth new economic
commented properties some books
in my home town how this
economic analysis that kind of
from the.
Thirteen century that that of
that the economy does not grow
old and that businesses just
move around and nothing grows
that nothing could be further
than the truth of the pie can
grow and it's up to this
committee to come up with good
policy to grow that pie what are
the unintended consequences of a
bill the unintended consequences
on small business the unintended
consequences that that bill may
have on investment potential in
the state.
Does this jeopardize
predictability you know
businesses and markets and
investors want predictability
they want stability
and what that bill jeopardize
predictability does this bill
compromise governmental
commitments that are made by by
state government to spur
investment are dispersed
particularly business decisions
does this bill
wash markets or or eliminate
markets
does this a great choice for the
consumers just go fashion
economic principles that course
you have.
Because everybody has the Bible
but this is the the this the
second Bible and that's Adam
Smith's.
Adam Smith's book the you know
the wealth of nations which was
written in seventeen seventy six
and got overshadowed by some
other events that happened that
same year but I'm when I just
thank everybody for the work
that that we're about to and
bacon I will let up the
committee analysts just analyze
the bills as the numbers come
in.
And then and then we'll try
we'll get a tentative calendar
for the analyst and then we'll
publish the goldenrod you know
day in advance hopefully maybe
two to meetings in advance we're
gonna be Monday Wednesday Friday
afternoons I don't anticipate
any Saturday or Sunday meetings.
A quick housekeeping if I may
house bill fifty five was taken
out of our committee and sent to
shucks sent to labor I believe
so we do not have house bill
fifty five in our committee we
have house bill sixty seven
house bill seventy two house
bill seventy five house bill
eighty house bill one hundred to
house bill one hundred four
House memorial line and then
today we got a couple of them
one for sure is house bill one
hundred thirty four
so we will start maybe with two
or three or four bills on
Wednesday and then more goes on
Friday
And then get through our our get
through our agenda next week and
then await the Senate bills that
that last week
It would have any any questions
or comments.
About anything.
Madam buster anything.
Hi I have a question
are we going to have as is that
going to be our standing meeting
ID that we log on to for R. as
in meetings are we gonna get
emails.
Once chairman has updated our
very first and hearing with
those I will have a standing as
soon that will be sent out vice
chair has Figueroa has also
passed that I resend the at the
link ten minutes prior to each
meeting to ensure that it
doesn't kind of get buried in
everybody's emails
I'm open to anything that that
would help everyone make sure
that they're here and
absolutely agree committee.
Thank you thank you for giving
us forgive me I I I was very
remiss there's a couple of folks
that need introduce themselves
Alex can you do you have audio.
By chance the minority analyst.
Now we'll go to our new W.
secretary that I mentioned
earlier miss anyone Toyota has a
vast array of life experience
educational and professional
experience and is a tremendous
asset to this committee this
month by would you mind up
telling us about yourself and
what brought to this committee.
My name's amendment
I have been in New Mexico since
nineteen eighty five I left
briefly to Colorado and decided
I had to come home.
In two thousand seven I've been
here ever since
I currently work at the
university of New Mexico as you
administrator
I finished my bachelor's just
recently three years ago and I'm
currently an MBA student.
And I'm looking forward to doing
this I haven't done this for
twenty years I was here in
nineteen ninety nine.
So I'm sure things have
definitely involved it changed
and I'm excited to try this
committee.
Thank you very much welcome and
Miss Alex agents and
Mr Alex agents and forgive me
they up is here does not up
audio on is on as soon I don't
usually talking committee but
they do whisper in our ears and
educate us tremendously during
the course of the meeting so if
you have audio for on Wednesday
we'll have you introduce
yourself and welcome the
minority Alice does a report
that the members of our party
read so the the the Republicans
right that Democrats do not have
access to it and then the
minority analysts do the same
for that manual for the manual
for the major forgive me the
majority analysts do the same
for the majority party as you
all know if folks are watching
this these hearings for the very
first time we don't we for each
other by party but rather
members of the majority members
of the minority
And that any other questions or
comments from the members.
Lastly we'll go to room three
seventeen so for those folks who
are dying to go to a movie
theater and have that experience
or just do something you know
three comment room three
seventeen is our normal
committee meeting room and so
that room will be I have a
Have a monitor available there
on the front table so you can
sit in that room and testify to
the committee from that room
which is choose we'll see after
a meeting or two if folks take
us up on that there's room
attendance in that room that
theoretically could funnel
people in and out
and then we have technical
assistance that we see manning
room three seventeen could have
that to technical assistance
introduce themselves and that's
this is yes the audio but give
us your name is a little bit
about yourself or your what are
your jobs on this as rural
attendance or a as I. T. folks.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
marina and I'm one of the street
a rural attendance we don't have
any I. T. people here
specifically they've gotten us
all taken care of so I think we
have a pretty seamless operation
here in room three seventeen but
we're I think we're redefining
what our positions are this year
because of all the changes and
so I'm one of three there's
Jason and Chris and we're
rotating and different duties
and we're here to help in any
way we can.
Thank you.
Thank you and the other gentle
lady to your right.
Introduce yourself yes my name
is K. R. Paul Haller and I also
am a commit Committee attendant
I am based basically and all
rural three fifteen and I'm here
to observe to
all make certain that we will
not have any problems in three
fifteen.
Thank you Sir.
All right fantastic committee
members anything else before we
wrap up for today.
All right thanks everybody lets
up.
Just be sure to our.
Again we'll do a calendar for
Wednesday and Friday here in the
next hour and then a tentative
calendar for Monday to give us
time and
this is try to be on top of the
rules before hand and have
robust thorough hearings when I
think everybody and look forward
to this these next twenty five
days or so.
a I'll take a motion to adjourn
with no opposition thank you
everybody at.
But.
