Share.
This year.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Johnson.
Here.
Representative Culbert.
Yes.
Tell you.
Johnson.
Estes thank you and I I'm here
president so we have a quorum.
let's get started we have a
welcome Representative Chandler
Representative Roybal Caballero
do you need anybody else.
Should we let anyone else any of
your experts in Mr chair thank
you for that question yes Sir
there's a Tracy McDaniel
Terraplane Massey there's one
more that I'm sure they can
share with you Mr chair.
Mr.
Johnson is also a Texan me that
she's trying to get in if you
could also asked that she be let
in wonderful thank you
Representative thank you so give
us a second will let these folks
in the room to sit in the
virtual.
Well of the chamber.
One of the committee room.
Where the hot spot is
representative yes I'm getting
better at it than you off.
We have a.
Folks home we have forty two
attendees we welcome everyone.
is that the virtual.
Committee chamber will care from
the Sanchez with regards to.
The amendments and then we'll
we'll do public comment not as
extensive as last week but we do
want to hear from the public the
chairman who was.
Maybe eleven Wonda Johnson right
okay.
Representative Chandler anyone
else needs needs to be let in
all right let me see
miss McDaniel is there anyone I
think we have everyone we need
chairman thank you.
I'm thank testing then I will
why don't you give us the
amendment and what else so we're
on the same.
Yes Sir the amendment we're
proposing is point two one nine
four nine five point two.
So four nine five point two of
members of the committee.
Can we move for discussion
purposes I entertain that motion
so.
Thank you Representative
Martinez and I'll second that so
so for discussion purposes we
have a.
A native four nine five point
two house bill thirty eight with
the amendment on the table with
us Representative Chandler of
please proceed welcome.
Very much.
I'm sorry to interrupt but was
still not in already we will get
her in a meeting thank you so
much Representative.
You should do you wish me to
wait Mr chair.
With a quick second thank you of
course.
President.
What Representative Johnson and
I Representative Chandler please
for seated up get chair
presentation with your experts
however you wish to do it thank
you thank you so much Mr chair
we really appreciate the time
you spent with us last week
reviewing our bill and you
offered a number of very good
suggestions and many of which we
adopted and our incorporated in
the amendment that you are that
you have before you I will defer
to terribly Massey to explain
what the amendment does if I may
Mr chair.
Thank you welcome this message.
Good enough on mute yourself
miss messy enough explain the
amendment.
We'll give her a second to on
mute herself.
So that is are we able to on
mute miss Massey from our
position.
But they have to do it
individually.
All right so yeah which you'll
get a new here in a second.
Trying to reach her by phone Mr
chairman.
Here we go welcome Massey please
so good explained the amendment.
This isn't miss Massey this is
the staff attorney to southwest
women's Law Center sometimes I
my screen says that I'm terribly
Massey.
but in introduce yourself and
welcome hello thank you I'm not
scheduled to speak at this point
though you hi Mr chair so
We'll work on getting chair lean
to the.
To the
Thank you is she in the attendee
room under a different name or
she in the in the in the in the
same office as you.
She possibly could be in the
attendee reminder her on again
under terribly Massey already
we'll give it a stir chairman
there's a terribly Massey whose
hand is raised it looks like she
would come over okay wonderful
then bring in that early messy
as well.
Mr Chairman can you hear me now
we sure can welcome and that is.
That
Thank you to the committee
members
Senator Sanchez Representative
Chandler and and also to win the
I think when I picked out there
for a moment ago.
No I'm.
To explain the amendments the
amendments that we are looking
at we're proposals from the
major analysts and most of these
amendments or cleanup language
which and hence the purpose of
the bill so we're thankful for
those changes I would say from
item one through
Ten our.
mostly cleanup languages and
then item eleven we are on page
one that said on that number on
page twenty three a line
fourteen and fifteen we are
recommended that we insert some
language which is the new items
CD which is that the
administrative penalties
collected by the department
pursuant to subsection a and B.
of this section shall be
deposited into the fund so
that's the one stimulate
a little bit more substantive as
opposed to being cleaned up and
then the last one it is number
twelve.
And here we are proposing that
we strike section twelve in its
entirety.
Mr Chairman at the first hearing
it was pointed out to us to look
at the school language this
section twelve it is basically
the private right of action
this is the way it was red and
it was in addition to an
administrative appeal process
for denial of the claim
the claim which was outlined in
section ten of the proposed bill
so what we're proposing is that
we just literally remove section
twelve.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
Chandler thank you Mr chair that
is our presentation on the
amendment and we're open to your
guidance as to how you would
like to proceed Mr chair all
right fantastic will a we will
take action on the amendment now
what we go to members of the
public
And for those up.
See how do we do this let's try
Let's just go general comments
because I know folks may like
the amendment not like the bill
and vice versa so folks who wish
to speak just got and raise your
hand within the.
Within the zone we have a forty
nine attendees so far we have
five six seven folks who want to
speak.
So what introduce yourself who
you represent and your thoughts
on
On the possibility of a.
Amending thirty eight and taking
action on thirty eight as
amended.
Mr bill Lee welcome but in on
mute yourself.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee
Representative Chandler thank
you for bringing this
legislation this is bill Lee
presidency over Gallup McKinley
county chamber of commerce and
Mr Chairman representative
we stand opposed to the
legislation and I know that the
business community is working
with Representative to look at
some possible exemptions for
small businesses in this
language and we would love to
see that come to fruition but as
the bill stands currently we are
closed thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee.
Thank you Sir and then we have a
Mr Robb lack followed by Roger
Greer.
What will.
Give us a second Mister black.
A welcome but an unusually self.
Mr Chairman can you hear me we
sure can't thank you thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee into the bill Sanchez
I want to start off by saying
how much I appreciate the
engagement that we've had with
the bill Sanchez they have in
fact Representative Chandler and
I and our and and our membership
started discussions around this
back in April and may
of last year so we appreciate
her willingness to engage with
us and frankly incorporate many
of the the suggestions we had
throughout the year so we
continue to work with her on a
variety of of issues
As Mr Lee said there are some
areas where we we hope we can
get continue.
Collaboration and work on this
bill frankly we would love to
get to a support position I
think we've come a long way in
the process of these
discussions.
And we look forward to
continuing working.
With the Representative with the
the bill Sanchez but again it's
it's something that we really
appreciate the engagement and
look for the continuing that
discussion going forward thank
you.
Thank you Mr Greer followed by
miss thank.
What in on mute yourself.
Mr chair.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Raju career
and I'm here's the volunteer
state president with a a RP New
Mexico.
A. R. P. New Mexico's board of
house bill thirty eight.
This bill is one of A. R. P. New
Mexico's main priorities in
twenty twenty one you would like
to thank the sponsors for
bringing it forward thank you.
Thank you miss followed by miss
Welch.
Miss quite a John meet yourself.
Thank you shot I was my
apologies.
Chairman my station committee
members I'm so we have thank
representing a UW New Mexico.
As an organization we do support
the paid family and medical
leave act at some point most New
Mexico workers will need to take
time away from work because of
these care giving
responsibilities.
Personally I had to such
situations in my life
fortunately I was partially
covered however.
The fate the paid family and
medical leave or make it
possible for about forty percent
of those currently not covered.
To take family leave and keep
their jobs.
Time at home with newborns have
shown to improve.
Sorry.
Decrease in tandem post neonatal
mortality rates.
It allows ill or injured adults
time to recover.
Yes family members time to care
for sick relatives sometimes for
choosing hospital readmissions
and health costs.
And it does help employers by
retaining workers and reducing
the high cost of turnover.
A comprehensive review from the
cost of turnover can range from
sixteen to two hundred percent
of an employee's annual
compensation making such
unnecessary turnover very costly
for employers.
Delayed implementation allows
the funding to build for minimal
economic impact.
J. U. W. continues to support
passing paid family and medical
leave act to ensure Economic
Security for New Mexican workers
in communities.
I do have
references for.
Many of the things information I
quoted if you would like I can
send those forward.
Thank you Sir.
Thank you miss Welch followed by
Jacob Vigil.
Good afternoon Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Stephanie Welch and I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty and we
support this bill as it has
already been said all of us at
some point experiences serious
health conditions or extended
care giving responsibilities and
face difficult choices between
our families well being our
financial security and our jobs
this is true regardless of the
size of our employer federal
leave protections do not apply
to most employers in New Mexico
and even the covered workers
they provide only on paid leave
the state program would help
ensure that we can take the time
we need to meet health and
family needs it would support
workers economic security
promote racial and gender
equity.
Create a more level playing
field for businesses of all
sizes and strengthen our economy
we urge you to pass it thank
you.
Thank you and let's do this of
members of the public
Since folks the next few names
are
Our proponents why don't the
folks were neutral or want to
comment on the amendments or who
are against thirty eight if you
could take your pants down and
that way you guys can go last.
So those were neutral or wish to
talk about the amendments or who
were against thirty eight when
you put your hands down and
we'll hear from the supporters
of the bill and then we'll go to
the of the opponents and another
folks Mr Vigil followed by.
Actually.
Hello.
Good afternoon Mr chair of
members of the committee on
Jacob Vigil from New Mexico
voices for children we we are in
support of this bill we and we
long have been and just want to
emphasize the the impact of such
a policy on children's health
and well being so we know that.
Especially with the pandemic the
loss of income and and Economic
Security has really impacted
kids we know that with paid
family sickly R. P. paid family
medical leave
children and families that have
access to that higher rates of
immunization and well child
check ups
they are a lot of research shows
that infant mortality is lower
among those who have have access
to this policy so it's just in
terms of allowing parents to
bond with their young children
their intense in those critical
earliest years and this is just
something that that makes a lot
of sense for child well being
and for health and as part of a
robust recovery for New Mexico
so with that New Mexico voices
for children stand and support
thank you.
Thank you Mr blue followed by a
missed a shot Environment.
Yes thank you Mr chairman I want
to acknowledge the bill it is
important piece of guaranteeing
equity in the workplace as
majority of workers this bill
affects our women and
particularly black indigenous
women of color and so that's the
fundamental truth but others
have been wheels peak towards
that more eloquently than I will
but I want to my perspective as
a business owner.
And that's that this the budget
this model brings to this the
ability of payroll costs because
benefits universal and portable
if an employee of mine has a
qualifying events the payroll
costs are not impacted because
Trust Fund disperses those wages
and so it's from the power of
scale on cooperation and we can
guarantee all workers and
security that we can't find
individually.
I think it's fair that no
individual person or small
business has the capacity to
save for these expenses but
collaboratively we can achieve
that freedom for all workers and
so it's a perfect case for
public private partnership to
guarantees freedom has been lost
and reinforces our state shared
morals and values with about an
annual cost of a hundred fifty
dollars per employee for
workplace I think it policy is
simple should be very simple and
for workers and employers alike
the payroll contribution for
this is negligible that the
benefits it provides will be
remembered for a lifetime I
think it's the thirty eight
levels the playing field for
small businesses who can't
afford the kind of budget large
employers are bringing to say
and so gives us a better chance
of recruiting employees by
offering.
Similar business our budget
excuse me so I urge your support
of this common sense measure
ensuring every work as a freedom
to care for themselves and their
families no matter their
employer I appreciate your time.
Thank you Sir Schardin Berman
followed by Erica Davis call.
Hello and good afternoon Mister
check.
Are you cut off agency just
after Mr chair.
Hi I'm gonna let you know are
you ready okay yes sorry about
that.
A good afternoon Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Sharon Berman and I'm a civic
engagement and policy manager at
New Mexico First and I'm also a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico New Mexico first.
We support house bill thirty
eight and thank Representative
Chandler Roybal Caballero and
set auto for bringing this
important legislation forward.
Over seven hundred people from
around the state have
participated in activities
related to the health town hall
we convened in the summer they
agreed that access to care is
critically important when people
are able to take paid medical
leave and be there to support
their family members the
vulnerable fat family members
have more access in terms of
coordinating care follow up and
treatment plans and more.
Others have already identified
the solutions in the bill that
have economic development
implications for workers and
employers alike and we heartily
support those as well.
At our town halls of we have
heard strong commitment around
fairness and access when it
comes to health services the
rate from family and medical
leave act as an important
strategy for access and fairness
when it comes to health care.
just a quick story at one town
hall participant told the story
about taking time off from work
to a company his grandfather to
visit his cardiologists in the
past the doctor hadn't been able
to communicate to the
grandfather the importance of
taking his heart medicine and
when the grandfather the
grandson was able to go take a
time off work to go with his
grandfather it was a win win for
everybody so being able to find
cultural and linguistic support
was vital in this case that was
just one of many examples we
heard we urge you to support
house bill thirty eight thank
you.
Thank you the state followed by
John Lipschutz.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I hope you all are
well this Monday and powering
through dozens of it all and my
name is Erica Davis crime and I
am a founding member of the New
Mexico Black central organizing
committee and I am the co chair
of the coalition for choice and
I work hand in hand proudly with
respect to Mexico women and
families.
This is HB thirty eight is the
intersectional issue with this
is where reproductive justice
needs racial justice and equity
and as we know here in New
Mexico we have so many
statistics that keep us that
barriers from
Honoring our families knowing
that we have so many
intergenerational homes where.
You cut off after homes.
Intergenerational homes.
Can you hear me we can you cut
off after energy okay sorry so
we know that there's a lot of
intergenerational homes here in
our state for black and
indigenous and let the militants
panic families and we also know
that women are
disproportionately impacted by
the current pandemic that we're
living in and to have this this
right and to be able to have
this type of support in work and
that has to be concerned of.
Hitting your family against the
need to provide for the family
is something that no one should
have to consider at this time so
I definitely I'm proud to say
that the New Mexico Black
central organizing committee in
respect to Mexico and families
Stand in favor of this bill and
ask that you all do the same to
support our families to help us
get through this really
difficult and uniquely hard time
thanks so much sorry about the
break up.
Thank you Mr Lipschutz welcome
followed by Nate banks.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee John Lipschutz
with The New Mexico federation
of labor we very much would like
to thank all the sponsors of
this legislation the New Mexico
federation of labor represents I
tens of thousands of workers
throughout the state many of
which have the opportunity to
collectively bargain rights that
allow them to have a certain
amount of time of Lee whether
it's sick leave or family and
medical leave however we realize
that there should be a right
afforded to all workers not just
those who I have been able to
collectively bargain those
rights are so for that reason
and plenty of others as well
that have been stated we stand
in strong support of this
measure thank you very much.
Thank you.
Mister banks for by Carla
Cooper.
Yes.
We'll bring back Mr banks in
America if you could
allow Mr Carla Cooper welcome
but and I need yourself thank
you Mr chair I really appreciate
the committee in your work in I
just wanted to send on behalf of
the center for civic policy in
support of this bill thank you.
Thank you and I walk about Mr
banks so good and on mute
yourself.
Yes Sir I was saying I didn't
mean to raise my hand at this
time thank you thank you Sir and
now we have a.
The New Mexico working families.
Part of the.
What introduce yourself Sir
sorry sorry Mr chairman wrong
zoom account my name is Judy
Matthews I am here with New
Mexico working families party
sorry for the free advertising
logo on the screen we are here
in strong support of HB thirty
eight we can workers deserve
this longer term
budget it's it's very important
as stated before by many other
people who are directly affected
by this and organizations who
have large memberships like our
own so thank you Mr chair for
indulging by incorrect zoom
account and we urge support
today.
Not at all thank you very much
anyone else was to speak in
favor of house bill thirty
eight.
Why don't folks I want to raise
your hands what do iterations
within the zone.
To make any other comments
regarding thirty eight the
amendment.
I wouldn't raise your hands for
neutrality opposition or any
further public comments miss
miss Sarah press Gerald welcome.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
reserve the committee service
Gerald senior vice president of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce we want to thank the
sponsor for the continued
conversation around businesses
needs this is an important bill
we know how critical it is to
get it right we're hoping to
continue working on negotiating
an exemption for small
businesses.
Right of action collective
bargaining we look for
supporting a bill that can
hopefully contains provisions
very slow thank you.
Thank you Mr Espinoza followed
by the sun tag.
Chairman members of the
committee Representative
Chandler Jason Espinoza and
state director with the national
federation of independent
business at first I just think
the sponsor for for me to meet
with me and other members of the
business community to continue
the conversation I'm had to
approve improve the bill.
Just from the quick
presentation of the amendments I
believe from from my
understanding that the private
right of action a part was
removed and so we do appreciate
that if that was if I understood
that correctly.
One of my other just concerns
about the amendment regarding
the self employed individuals is
how the change would change it
for me annual earnings instead
of the net earnings I just
concern over that looking at or
self employed individuals.
That that would then mean any
income but not less of our of of
the small business owners
expenses would be subject to the
employer contribution which I
think for small self employed
individuals as point nine
percent which would mean
effectively that this would be
somewhat akin to a point nine
percent increase on the gross
receipts tax because it would be
all on all income from self
employed individual some just
I'm sure it's a little bit
concerned about that change as
well and then additionally just
in general one of things that we
do continue to advocate for in
this is a given small businesses
ability to manage their staff if
they do have one staff member
agency missing I it does cost us
concerns compared to a larger
business so we would like to see
sort of establishment of a
public private partnership
whereby the state as a partner
in this I would reimburse or
give financial assistance to the
small businesses who need to
hire additional people to cover
an employee that's gone for FMLA
or the paid family medical leave
to assist them in this changes
so we look forward to continuing
the discussion on this bill with
the Sanchez thank you.
Thank you Sir miss Carla Suntech
welcome thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee on Karl
Fund had with the New Mexico
business coalition and
I appreciate the work that's
been done I haven't seen the
amendment but I'm not sure if it
covers all of the different
conflicts that were listed in
the FIR
but those are of some concern to
us.
I want to point out that you
know a lot of our business
members do already addressed
this with their employees so we
don't oppose the concept of
providing for employees and we
understand the passion for it
but I just want to share a
couple of observations and
concerns one is I don't know if
you have fixed the fact that
it's a little bit unfair to some
employees who.
Will receive a lower benefit and
what they're earning or the
percentage that they're paying
and well others will earn a
greater benefit I think that
should be addressed
secondly the committee structure
that you've got really doesn't
account for.
The way that it does for
everybody else's ventures you've
got a chamber and two small
business development center
people but you have no business
owners and I think they would
add value to the conversation.
I also think that may be causing
problems with that don't address
Boller employers.
Mostly those employers that are
hiring people words their first
job or part time or its use of
all.
Things really need to be
addressed because otherwise it
makes the overall solution a
little bit lopsided thank you
for your time and consideration.
Thank you very much and what
else was to address the
committee regarding raise your
virtual hand.
At this time.
For a so we have fifty four
attendees maybe.
Who knows how many more just
watching on the regular what
webcast and then twenty two
panelists inside the committee
room.
So anyway we will go out to
members of the committee.
Representative Chandler do you
want to have a.
What you listen to yes thank you
so much for the opportunity I
wanted to think the commoners
both those in favour and those
offering constructive comments
there were many and I do want to
reiterate something that rob
black said early in the
conversation we are continuing
to work with with rob and others
that he's brought together to
discuss changes for example
there we have been discussing
employer size we have not yet
been able to come to a
conclusion but we are in earnest
attempting to resolve that
question was with the business
community and will continue to
do that as as bill proceeds
further and I think rob knows is
I've said I spent a lot of time
we spend a lot of time talking
and I am definitely interested
and listening and trying to
resolve that issue as as as the
bill proceeds and thank you for
the opportunity Mr Mr chair
there will be some other items
will be working with problem but
that was one that we've had some
very good conversations on and
we are open to trying to work
with the with the business
community on.
No thank you and I appreciate
that
mistrial represent Roybal
Caballero Andrea any comments at
this time before we go to the
committee
yes Mr chair just briefly I just
want to thank Representative
Chandler and the team for their
work all in improving the war
the the bill
as many of you know from my
building on this committee I
have really strong arm support
always of small businesses but
more importantly I think in this
case we really need to recognize
that there is an imperative for
in house bill thirty eight not
only to help our hard working
families but recognize that are
small businesses are also have a
very strong competitive
advantage in the sense that by
doing by passing house bill
thirty eight they have the
ability to recruit retain.
Healthy and productive workforce
which I think is a win win for
everyone involved so the whole
objective is to make sure that
everyone is situated that we
have aren't we protect our
workforce which is really the
imperative on that we have and
that we provide long term care
when it applies and I think
that's really very very
important and I do want to thank
Mr black because Mr black and
others from the business
community have been very open
throughout the years in on
wanting to find a way to move
things forward and then in
particular I do want to thank Mr
Ashley Vale who always has
wonderful comments and
statements to make as a small
businessman I think you really
get that and his voice is very
strong in this discussion and in
other discussions as they relate
to paid sick leave and raising
the minimum wage so I want to
say thank you to everyone
involved thank you Mr chair.
Thank you will not go to members
of the committee
Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative Chandler and
color for
Messaging somebody suggested to.
I am trying to understand part
of the I'm forgiving I.
Even increase the contribution
for the self employed
individuals in the population
earning.
Most.
In the number entered by the
budget for the self employed
our.
The
findings to.
Thank you for that question Mr
chair and representative down
I'd ask ms Massey we did have a
little bit of trouble hearing
you Representative but I'm
hoping that ms Massey did hear
your question.
Mr chair members of the
committee just Representative
though I think I did here
most of your question
It was a little.
I could hear you very well but I
believe you were asking about
the
the language that Mr Espinoza
brought up is that correct.
Thank Mr Chairman representative
miss Massey yes I'm wanting to
understand if if I read the
amendment current that we are
the contribution is going to be
based on their gross earnings
and their benefits are going to
be based on their necks.
Mr chairman members of the
committee we were trying to.
Thank the language consistent.
Our it was pointed to out to
west that the terms we were
using were being mixed up and so
we were trying to clean up that
language so so we I apologize if
that is not what was
achieve.
So but so we're looking at
number.
Twelve we were really just look
looking at number nine we were
really lucky our
board for self employed
individuals as you know they are
not paid by weekly usually as
you know regular employees so we
were trying to look at what that
is similar to if the salary of
an employed person we for the
fifty two weeks duration in the
year we were basically looking
at that for a self employed
individual how much they take
home
because of the way that that you
know they maybe make you more
like one month verses another
month we were trying to just
look at it from a proportional
perspective we were trying to
dictate and the actual statute
how it should be counted we were
hoping are we would want the
department of workforce
solutions to determine how to
count that and their
administrative regulations that
they will be putting together to
enact this law.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative thank you
miss Massey I I think I
understand what your intent was
but I'm not sure that the
amendments accomplish that I my
concern is on the end of at the
contribute contributing based on
your map your gross income take
a restaurant who has a four
percent profit margin there are
there gross.
Contribution of self employment
shop.
Your growth or maybe maybe car
car repair orders that that does
all car sales would be a better
example of a small self employed
person who has large gross
because they're buying an engine
dropped in a vehicle repairing
the vehicle and that but the but
the profit is only on the
service contribution I'm I'm
just I think in amendment parts
section ten you're not creating
a cheating that it might
explained it to me I may not be
understanding but it seems like
you're the contribution is gonna
be based on their gross that's
where my concern is at but you
bring up another point where I
think we have mixed terms that
are still existing here.
Mines on the fact that the self
employed person is going to
contribute based on their gross
and they're going to benefit
based on their net.
Am I reading it wrong.
If I may um Mr chair and
Representative the amendment
proposes to change on page
thirteen
Strike out net income per week
line seventeen and include self
employed individuals net income
per week and that is about upon
which the calculation for the
benefit would be based okay I
think I think we can agree to
that I believe in yes okay okay
thank you very much so but on
the next page Mr chair and
representative you're raising an
issue about line ten on page
fourteen where we use gross the
gross income terminology and
you're pointing to what may be
perceived as a
an inconsistency now I would
point out to you that the
section where we're talking
about gross income is a
documentation section I believe
it doesn't dictate the benefits
that are
You know required but I do see
your point Representative and I
think we probably need to look
and I look to tear lean
I mean miss Massey sorry.
Mr chair for guidance on that it
might not have I eliminated what
I think the representative can
concern is Mr chairman and miss
madam Representative and miss
Massey yes they were going with
that.
Mr Chairman
Representative Dow and
Representative Chandler the way
we have it.
We were trying to replace gross
with next.
That's what we are trying to do
and number ten.
So we'll go ahead and
If it's alright look at this
further and make sure that the
I'm gonna go ahead and stop
because it
just it by something Mr chair
and Representative if you look
at what are amendment says it
says strike earned gross income
that's number ten and insert in
lieu thereof net income so
I believe it's addressed Mr
chairman and madam madam
raptors.
Mr chair Mr chair representative
thank you I appreciate you
hearing me out on this because
I'm looking at page seven line
thirteen I think that's where
you need to be looking I I did
based on their earnings is not
the problem I think we're
talking about is the nine
percent tax deduction that
according to the second
amendment it does the opposite
that if it's a.
At rate page seven nine thirteen
okay.
It leads net and replaces it
with annual earnings and so
they're Butchofsky they're being
taxed the nine percent.
On grocer and they're getting a
benefit on that so if there any
tax on gross and they get the
benefit on gross or if they're
only going to get the benefit on
that should they only be taxed
on that.
Okay.
All right.
I think yeah I hear you thank
you very much for that ma'am.
thank you.
Caroling you need to look at
miss Massey do need to look at
that a little more carefully I
think it's
I wish she of the representative
is referring to the I think
items three and four I think are
item three unarmed proposed
amendment if I'm if I'm being
correct about that.
Yes if you look at.
Mr chair members of the
committee of.
Representative Chandler if we
look at number two page seven
line thirteen before that we're
inserting annual becomes annual
net.
The amendment amendment number
three eight seven nine fourteen
we're striking annual earnings
and we're inserting and low
income so it's going to become
of section and the sex of.
Read paragraph three of
subsection a of this section
nine tenths percent of the
individuals annual net income as
designated by the self employed
individuals.
Okay thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative for that
clarification maybe it's okay I
was reading as replacing and
you're reading it but what
you're saying is you're adding
the word in front of the
existing working on striking
anything okay thank you thank
you Mr chairman I mean it keep
listening to comment but right
off the bat I really appreciate
the changes I think the number
of employees is extremely
critical extremely critical
especially when this is across
the board regardless of industry
that have been open and our the
writing like a box corporations
who happens to be but have been
made extremely healthy during
COVID as compared to the small
mom and pop down the street that
don't know how they're making it
the next month the next month
next month I appreciate the
delay but it assumes that we are
in memory and I've seen forecast
that this could take a decade to
recover so.
I'm I just I'm gonna be very
hesitant to pass this bill out
of commerce works our job to
make sure that people can have
viable businesses and our
regulatory environment doesn't
take away the opportunity for
employment for the very people
that we're targeting I'm also
very concerned about these
unfunded mandates when we the
state of New Mexico continue to
provide contracts to third
parties and say please find
period care for people with
disabilities please working
needs nursing homes and and care
for our seniors a CNA do home
health to invest this do
building for seniors that are
low income and that that are not
mobile and we are contracts that
we're getting them to do
services on behalf of our bundle
populations do not adequately
fund this any other employee
mandate or even the minimum wage
that we're imposing and we can
not I I do not think it's fair
and I do not think it's just
about to say that we are helping
on one hand helping the employee
when their business is
unsustainable and their
businesses shut their doors and
in as a result of that we have
less assistance for our low
income at risk vulnerable
seniors or even our infants and
toddlers in child care centers
we don't adequately fund these
mandates that we do contracts of
people on behalf of we thank
these businesses just simply
will not be sustainable so those
are the things I'm considering
but I definitely think this
committee ought to get it right
because it's going to the floor
after us thank you Mr chairman.
No.
Thank you representative of.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
and just for the folks keeping
score at home this would go to a
house judiciary after us thank
you Representative Powdrell
Culbert thank you Mr chairman
and thank you Representative Dow
facilities some of the major
concerns.
That I also have by I also am
concerned when you look at on
average I think it's about two
fifty a year that would come out
of an individual's.
And.
I don't know Representative as
to whether or not you could tell
me on I have rich water those
individuals paying us for is
there
unemployment compensation.
And I bring that up because it
if there is that's coming out of
their checks this is just
additional money and I really
don't think what we're.
Asking for if this is the
legislation.
Was to pass.
We'll cover it down the road.
You know would would be coming
back in another.
Two years asking for an increase
in the overall Stanage so can
you address those issues for me.
Mr chair of Representative I
believe the question was how
much is an individual paying
into unemployment compensation
that is the individual employee
and I not sure I understand what
the second question is but
perhaps we could try to address
the first one that might
illuminate us as to what the
second one was I believe a
women's group rate again is just
person on our team to answer
that question Mr chair
representative.
Mr chair and and Chandler thank
you.
Representative cricket
unemployment insurance is paid
solely by the employer it is not
paid at all by the employees of
the employee pays nothing into
the unemployment insurance fund.
Okay answer that question that
answers that question very
clearly but we're going to ask
for for the employer to
contribute.
We look at the environment that
we're in now we're talking about
small businesses.
How much is the cost going to go
up.
So we did do some Fund cut
calculations based on median
wage received by employees hours
put into the economy and by
employment growth that we expect
also population growth in the
fund should as it's what should
work out for the next five years
without a minus balance
especially implementing the Fund
a year out.
Does that help and I certainly
can provide to you the
calculations that we went
through yeah I'd like to see
those because there's I just
don't believe that is going to
share it what that's being
asked.
It's going to be able to take
care of the individuals and Mr
Chairman I'm a supporter.
Of this.
But I think the timing when we
look at small companies who are
being asked to pay this because
we're if.
Has been this long yes put him
in a precarious situation
because in one hand we've got
legislation.
That same let's give the small
businesses more money to get up
on their get back on their feet
and and back in business on the
other hand we said we're going
to give it to on the one hand
and take it out on the other.
Of the others so I just have
some real issues with the way is
crafted.
Right now and the time we I
think the timing is a big issue
for small business community and
when you really look around New
Mexico's back long is our small
business community so thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
Johnson.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
representatives for bringing
this bill forward I just want to
echo a couple of my colleague
sentiments regarding this small
business exemptions I wanted to
know if you would have this
information before the next
committee your work your
timeline with Mr black I believe
that my community has
I specific
request and you know as all
communities my community was hit
hard with the pandemic and we
haven't even begun to get back
on our feet so we don't oppose
the principle of this bill that
we support.
Paid family and medical leave
for our community and our
families we just have that one
particular question that's it Mr
chair thank you.
Mr chair up should not shell I
answer that question please okay
Representative Mr chair thank
you very much for that question
it's an excellent one we
are committed to working towards
a number that are that we were
proposed a number we went back
with another number and what's
driving our proposals and our
discussions is how do we make
the fund to pencil out because
remember
is the what we're talking about
doing is allowing certain a
certain size business you know
with a certain number of
employees not have to contribute
the employer piece of the
contribution that's that's what
we have been discussing and that
of course affects how much money
the fund accumulates over time
so we're trying to get to that
magical number that will allow
us some small businesses did not
have to contribute to the fund
but also
so that the fund is the
statement does that make sense
Mr chair and madam
representative.
Yes thank you thank you for your
explanation yes and we are
working to try to do that we
truly are and actually we're
waiting at this point to hear
back from our our our counter
negotiators as to what they
think they might be able to do
so that that's where we are
meant Mr chairman and madam
representative.
Mr chair if I may have just.
Yes and thank you Mr Chairman
representative striking that
balance is absolutely important.
With this bill because as we all
know in this committee and over
and over again we've sent small
businesses are the drivers of
our overall economy and so the
more that we can accommodate.
Striking that balance the more
important it is for everyone
involved because we want to make
sure that employees the
workforce in general has have
the
budget.
And in place but at the same
time we need small businesses to
be able to as I said earlier
recruit and retain and still be
able to stay above board in
their businesses because
ultimately Mr chair the
objective is to grow the small
businesses because the more
small businesses grow in our
local communities and our small
neighborhoods the more we
continue to retain employment
across the board and more
importantly the more we're able
to retain healthy and productive
employment because everyone
wants to hold on to their jobs
and everyone wants to be able to
take care of their family and
everyone wants to come back to
their work no one wants to be
left out in this in this
situation so ultimately that's
the objective so thanks to
appreciate that question
Representative and we're
particularly
Cognisant of the adverse effects
that COVID had in our small
rural and tribal communities
around the state so that's.
Particular importance pool all
of us in this thank you.
Representative Johnson.
Thank you that that's all I have
thank you Mr chair thank you
members of.
Anybody has any other questions
comments please raise your hand
I just have a few thank you
Representative Chandler of
Senator COMITTA for.
For a.
For rolling this over you know
meeting with the folks doing the
best you can under the under the
zoom circumstances and and and
you know going through line by
line and seeing where where the
bill could be improved.
This
this is gonna take a massive
governmental commitment massive
governmental commitment to
develop this.
You know this program
administratively as wealth as
well as across the board it's
it's I think folks are and an
agreement just needs to happen
and we need to join the rest of.
The vast majority the western
world in and and doing this it's
it's good for our economy it's
good for our business in the
long term to have healthier
citizens healthier relationships
with newborns healthier time
with our with our loved ones in
the in the twilight of their
life any emergencies that may
come up from time to time.
But they are.
But but you know in terms of but
this is gonna happen is gonna
have to be creating a new
division within the department
workforce solutions FTEs
in addition to just the nuts and
bolts of the of the bill before
us so.
You know because of that but
here's my question and I'm just
doing the math is very L. up
very very elementary but.
So let's say somebody works
forty hours you know I think
folks are gonna be working
longer effective let's say
somebody works forty years say
they work from twenty five to
sixty five they work forty years
let's say
We'll Canada's fifty two weeks a
year let's let's assume they get
paid for two weeks vacation
time.
So they're working two thousand
eighty weeks in that lifetime.
Two thousand eighty weeks in a
lifetime.
And they're getting FTEs.
Three times to to.
Three times in a lifetime to to
do this to take twelve weeks off
so twelve weeks off times three
is thirty six.
So they're essentially taking
off from work
One point seven.
Percent of the time of those
forty years.
Those thirty six weeks make up
one point seven percent of the
time.
I'm assuming I think the kids
will be in the front end but the
take take care seniors will be
on the back and or take frankly
thinking or your own health
issues will be on the back and.
so.
You know I'm not taking into
consideration the rise in
someone's income and all that
stuff.
What if they're contributing
point nine if if if the workers
contributing point I the
employers contributing point
four.
If the workers are contributing
point nine.
And they're not working one
point seven percent of the time
how does the math Dr how how
does this program.
Pay for itself and I think and
that's where the governmental
commitment comes in.
With the federal unemployment
you know the the federal
government helps us out
tremendously with
You know we last year we put
fifty million dollars of
taxpayer dollars into a.
In twelve state employee
retirement account I I thought
that was bad public policy but
but we felt it was the right
thing to do and we made that
commitment
I don't see why we couldn't put
fifty million dollars into this.
Up you know.
Into this fund to get it jump
started but but it doesn't seem
like there's that commitment
anyway back to my initial
question give me the math how
does this math work out over the
course of someone's life time it
someone could take
Representative Mr chair I can
all right just talk about it
from a broad brush and thank you
the person who really knows mask
to answer the question because I
went to law school because I
didn't know math.
Sort of the fall back.
Mr chair I think one of the
flaws in your premise that jump
to me Mr chair is not everyone's
going to use the program so
that's what that's one point so
for example I'm that person I
started working at twenty five
and while I'm not quite sixty
five but I'm close to that
person I never took any kind of
that kind of I never took twelve
weeks off I maybe took a week
off a year I want to work
constantly work more than forty
hours a week there are lots of
people like me who will not be
using this program so that that
was my initial reaction when
you're talking Mr chair but now
maybe the person who actually
knows how to speak to a elements
right thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative Chandler that's a
great way to talk about it not
everybody's going to have and to
me I'm looking at it from year
to year all right so I want to
say everybody who's working this
year how many people are going
to have a claim this year will
we have collected enough funds
this year to pay out the claims
that we have this year and that
is my goals the ballots that
fund across year to year I'm not
looking at it gaining it over a
lifetime of somebody's career.
But certainly we want this to be
available for my children and my
grandchildren if my children
ever decide have grand children
that is something that is not
taken into account so when I
look at this I said what are the
total claims that we could
expect per year is certainly
what are the claims that we have
seen in California in Washington
in the other states that have
done this and what we've found
in the research I've done is
that when the fund get started
not everybody takes takes
The uptake is a hundred percent
the other thing is when people
take advantage of this as a
benefit most people don't take
the full twelve weeks and in
fact I think the numbers out of
California of Washington in New
Jersey which are the ones I
relied on we're showing about
eighty percent so most people
don't take the full twelve weeks
they take about nine weeks on
average per claim.
So the answer is is that.
Maybe in twenty years or thirty
years when my great grand
children take advantage of a
fund like this it might be more
acceptable to take the full
twelve weeks I certainly would
have loved to have been able to
take twelve weeks off when I had
my children I only took six
weeks off for the birth of each
of my children
I can see that is a huge benefit
going forward and I think that
that's why we wrote in the bill
to say we have to have an
actuarial unit who manages the
fund over time so that twenty
years down the line the fund is
still viable no matter what what
we look at is how many claims my
base estimate was typically in
New Mexico we see twenty four
thousand births per year that's
what we see in the past I bump
that up a little bit high I said
let's make that a little bit
higher and I said how many
disability claims that we see in
New Mexico that's about five
thousand more five six thousand
more so let me start my numbers
at about thirty thousand claims
a year and the way the fund is
situated is it could pay out for
about eleven point four weeks of
for the people we have now if we
started taking the funds in for
this year.
Does that answer your question
and give you this feeling that
the numbers are solid.
Thank you no thank you thank you
Representative Chandler thank
you a mystery it know what
that's a good point the year to
year that's a good point because
you can't I in our so security
system all that stuff it's a
year to year US and proceed the
point I
I think up I think in a in a in
a citizen legislature ideas like
this need to move forward.
I think up.
I think we definitely need to
come up with the not the bolts
on the on the administrative
side pry in the interim.
And then you know put this in
the books as soon as we can I
think
There's just tremendous things
are in the business community as
a result of the economic crisis
and hopefully in a couple years
that will subside and and that
we're growing at a at a good
five percent clip over the over
the next decade but that's yet
to be seen but anyway there is
an amendment
There's amendment sitting on the
table at does anyone not.
The amendment Mr chairman thank
you for the motion to adopt the
amendment a second by
Representative Martínez on the
amendment what I'm going to take
the role of on the amendment.
We're taking on amendment point
two one nine four nine five
point two and this is to adopt
the amendment for house bill
thirty eight.
Correct correct thank you thank
you.
No.
Representative.
It
yes the amendment.
Representative Representative
lost yes.
Representative Thomson.
Yes.
Representative Martínez.
Yes.
Representative.
What.
No.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Dow.
Representative that was a note.
Yes on the amendment thank you.
Chair Figueroa.
Yes on the amendment.
Chairman Maestas yes and so you
have an amended bill
Representative Chandler
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Of.
Representative Johnson.
Your hand your an additional up
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr chairman would do
as as Amanda.
The second.
We have a motion for a due pass
as amended by Representative
Margo ocean by Representative
Martínez a second by
Representative cerrado we have a
a substitute motion to table by
Representative Powdrell Culbert
there is no more debate please
call the roll on the tabling
motion.
The table yes.
Representative Dow.
Yes the table.
Representative will.
Representative please unmute
yourself.
Yes.
As noted table.
Representative Johnson.
Nope to table.
President of Martinez.
No.
Representative Culbert yes the
table.
Representative.
No stable.
Madam chair Figueroa.
The table.
And as a no so that that motion
has failed sixty four will now
go back to the do passed motion
as amended.
you can call the will if passed
to pass as amended.
Representative.
No.
Representative Dow.
One of my text.
Representative I have a.
Yes.
Yes.
Representative Johnson yes.
Representative Martínez.
Yes.
Don't Culbert no.
Representative Serrato yes.
Madam chair to get on.
Yes.
Does.
Yes Representative Dow to
explain herbal.
Our test the motion has been
that that the motion or the a
motion to to pass has.
Has as one of you have a to pass
Representative Chandler as
Amanda Representative Dow to
explain her bill thank you Mr
chairman and and thank you
representatives for the bill at
the end of the bill are.
I'm very concerned that we are
not employees I think there are
regular maintenance.
Before the next committee to no
small business and the number of
employees.
I would like to help with the
amendments that you're open to
around five.
Thank you Representative Dow and
I
As I mentioned before I I
applaud the that you have a the
defense motion is passed you
have a due pass as a matter
Representative Chandler
Representative Roybal Caballero
we want to thank you we are I
think something of this huge
magnitude I think it be
reasonable to trap some
exemptions at this time for
small businesses and then they
could be facing at a later date
but definitely work with the
the work with all the
stakeholders on the way to
Judiciary and we thank you very
much.
Thank you so much for your
attention and excellent
suggestions thank you thank you
Mr chairman thank you members of
the committee and your
suggestions will be taken to
heart and will work on thank
you.
All right well we go ahead let
in our Representative is L..
And then once she's then we'll
we'll get our experts and what
thank you for the experts on
thirty eight.
On.
Representative a candy is L. as
one of the attendees we want to.
Bring on of the committee room.
I'm gonna go to our house bill
one ninety nine.
Okay I'm on now Mr chairman
thank you and welcome
Representative Ezzeil who would
you like us to bring in with you
from the virtual lock the we
have on Mr chairman I think the
request is made that Mr Jeff
true join me on this and who is
with us.
And now I can't remember who
will sit Mister tree would like
to there's been a change and I'm
not sure who it was.
Mr true who should we invite
into the Mr Richard Ehrhardt and
miss Mary Barbour okay.
In the room.
Okay.
If you could let in Mr F. hard
T. as is hand up.
Barber is going right hand so we
could provide your name all
right.
And I don't see Mr right so yeah
and encouraging her texture of
together in the as an attendee
and then we'll bring her into
the committee room.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
Chairman committee members I
appreciate your time today I am
presenting house house committee
substitute for house bill one
ninety nine and this is relating
to our growth forgiving reserve
result.
Members of the committee for
discussion purposes.
Okay.
We have a motion.
Thank you Representative
Powdrell Culbert so we have a
motion to to adopt House
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill one ninety nine.
The number at the bottom is four
seven five point two four seven
five point to the clean version
of the bill and so that this is
what we'll be discussing this
afternoon thank you
Representative Ezzeil take it
away Mr chairman thank you very
much this is relating to horse
racing and it's amending the
horse racing Act where we can
find for advance deposit
wagering.
Mr chairman members of the
committee on page one it does
have the definition of advance
deposit wagering and it's a form
of mutual Weitering where an
individual can deposit money in
an account with one of our
authorized licensee in the state
in New Mexico and use the
account balance to pay for Karia
mutuel wagering.
By Ellie communicating with a
license wagering provided
through electronic means Mr
chairman members of the
committee we know what we are
facing right now using
electronic means that's all this
will do Mr Chairman.
A few facts about what why I'm
carrying this particular bill.
The New Mexico horse racing
industry contributes over eight
hundred and twenty eight million
dollars to New Mexico's economic
output it also supports close to
thirteen thousand jobs in our
state at the five tracks and
casinos.
As far as the contributions made
by the horse racing industry
it's over seventy million
dollars in direct gaming and
wagering taxes and that's huge
Mr chairman.
Members of the committee the it
during two thousand and twenty
we saw the devastating effects
that COVID did have on this
industry.
These.
Jobs that I just mentioned
earlier.
They are either out of state or
they're gone totally.
Right now as we speak today
there is no live horse racing in
the state of New Mexico because
of the COVID issue.
Mr Chairman.
If there is a person that lives
in Farmington New Mexico and
happens to have a horse running
as the part that person.
Cannot it cannot make a wager on
their own our and Liz they are
physically at the track.
Mr Chairman if my our.
I have horses run in.
I am contributing greatly to the
good economy of the state of New
Mexico.
Right now I don't have any
horses running in New Mexico.
My trainer has taken my horses
out of state so hopefully they
can.
Do some good there but I am
still not allowed to bet on
them.
That will benefit New Mexico
horsemen.
Whenever I say our man it is
parameters it is owners it is
breeders it is all the people
that do work with the industry.
Mr Chairman.
I also I hope everybody can hear
me okay.
My computer is messed up my
audio is not working real good I
want to point out to the
committee that this does not
create a new form of gaming and
it does not violate the two
thousand and fifteen tribal
compact.
Joining me today is Mr Jeff to
the general manager of the all
American Ruidoso downs Mr
Richard Ehrhardt the executive
director of the New Mexico
horsemen's association and miss
Mary Barbour.
Who is the executive director of
the New Mexico horse breeders
association Mr chairman members
of the committee at this time I
would like to turn it over to Mr
true and the other two
participants so they can tell
you.
Their thoughts on this thank you
very much.
Welcome Mr true to see what if
you could just mention the names
of the other participants do
before you start your remarks
will look from and the attendee
list Mr Chairman it will be
Richard Eyre hard the New Mexico
horsemen's association executive
director Jim miss Mary Barbour.
Directive executive director.
Of the New Mexico horse breeders
association I see Mr Earhart if
you could let let Mr art into
the Mr chairman I will not see
miss Barbara I will texture
right now.
She wasn't sure what time she
needed to be on she was doing
paperwork because right now.
Babies are hitting the ground
sure thing thank you Mr true
welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee if I
could now Mr chairman
share my screen for the power
point presentation that I'll
breeze through.
A more let's let's give it a
shot.
Okay.
Give it a shot is right.
Jeff I am going to see on the
first second Mary Barbour is and
the participant area she has her
hand raised thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you and will that bar miss
barber in right now and and
wonder if I can see your power
point presentation Mr to thank
you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members and Representative
Weisel.
I'm trying not to reiterate
things that already been spoken
or said.
But briefly the our three
contributions to New Mexico.
As Representative Weisel said
there's more than eight hundred
thousand dollars eight hundred
million dollars economic output
annually at the five tracks in
racinos and this was a twenty
sixteen study done by the
university of New Mexico.
We know that our racing is a big
driver of the agricultural
economy through the use of land
for the production of horses the
use of land for the production
of feed for those horses the
training in the operation of
these racing enterprises.
We do contribute quite a bit of
money in direct
proceeds to the state Fund as
well as G. R. T. taxes locally.
This iconic industry from read
also down specifically where I
have where I work we have three
ninety minute live telecast on
national television and and that
brings a lot of notoriety to the
state as well read also we run
the richest to roll our race in
the world there is no other two
year old races were three
million dollars also someone
partner is a big part of the
annual Kentucky Derby wrote
road to the Kentucky Derby we're
in horses have to qualify to
that the greatest.
If we look at the things that
are facing New Mexico or
stretching right now I need to
point out that person is.
That is the money that that
horses earn when they win races
the money that's paid to the
owners of those horses to
provide for their upkeep their
training their well being that's
what drives this business.
Purses are driven from.
Wagering and in New Mexico and
other states that have relating
to gaming.
Revenue from the casino also
supplements those persons.
Since we closed on March
fifteenth there is no money
being generated at the casinos
because we're not allowed to
have in this least in the racing
that was done in twenty twenty
there is either no customers or
very limited customers we've
been generating any revenue.
Further because we haven't been
allowed to have customers at the
racetracks we have zero contact
with those customers we we we
can't use the digital channels
the normal commerce is using to
supplement or replace income
that's lost through on site
attendance.
The anomaly in New Mexico is
that we have out of state
advance deposit wagering
operators.
Currently taking wagers from New
Mexico residents one non New
Mexico racing.
They've been doing so for more
than twenty years.
So again.
ADW wagering is happening albeit
in a great state.
And the racing industry nor this
nor the the estate itself
realizing any of the income or
any of the revenue distribution
from that activity.
So what is vast deposit wagering
as I mentioned eighty W. was
developed around the same time
that the internet was in the
late nineties early two
thousands companies started
understanding what the internet
can do.
And this this key commerce part
of horseracing fit very well
with the with the internet as a
developed so much so that thirty
seven states currently allow for
AT WH and and virtually all
racing countries around the
world do as well.
The W. is a closed loop account
based system.
Which allows people to open an
account on a qualified system a
license system.
A vendor if you will to the
racetracks they hold an account.
The customer deposits cash.
Into that is not
Is a bunch of COVID and use your
computer.
Persons use what's the
technology platform to access
the funds place wagers.
Our race months in forgiving Mr
to represent budget covered if
you go to your computer please.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you for the platform
enables people to look at past
performance information C.
current data such as cool totals
or wagering pay offs in the
enable people to watch live
streaming video and look at past
performance information to make
qualified wagers those wagers
are debited from the account any
winnings are credited to the
account.
Keep in mind that these are all
cash wagers there is no credit
there is no
twenty money going on here
you've got to put cash in and
it's cash out.
All those all the money that's
handled through this platform is
co mingled with the money that's
wagered on site or through TV's
so impairments waste in.
The single pool we will for
example everyone everyone wages
into the same when pool and then
depending on the number of
wagers.
The waiters are paid out
proportionately to the number of
winning dollars.
I'm not in it is deposit
wagering is also the most
transparent the most traceable
the most auditable we string
type wagering channel if you
will every wager that we may.
Has a time stamp has a
transaction ID we know where it
came from and who it came from
and when a person signs up for
these A. W. accounts we use
current and modern KEYC services
know your customer services
these are the things that banks
do to manage anti money
laundering policies these are
the things that people do to
make sure that there's no
illegal money being involved in
parimutuel so KYC is a very
important part of this in
advance deposit wagering is a
minister.
elemental fundamental piece of
what her mutual wagering is in
America certainly in the in the
global economy.
At I will create maybe a couple
of questions by going here.
To say that.
We believe and it's fairly
understood that eighty W. as we
propose it does not contain any
provisions.
That conflict with the travel
compact.
I've got on the screen now a
quote from an attorney who was
involved in the negotiations of
the twenty fifteen travel
compact in New Mexico.
She stated that she did not
believe there is any conflict.
The compact itself says
specifically.
Mutuel wagering on our racing is
non tribal gaming and so this is
simply an extension of
parimutuel wagering on our
racing using obviously modern
technology as we're doing today.
I'll go one step further with
that and show that in twenty
sixteen in a court case the
court observed.
mutualistic parimutuel and it
applies to eighty W..
Eighty W. only aids the existing
practice the provincial wagering
on our racing does not create a
new form of internet gaming.
I think that's a fairly logical
way to to look at this.
We allow mutual will be benefit
in the state
parimutuel wagering and and
horse racing and so we believe
that especially now in this
COVID shut down in the in the
world that we live in today the
twenty first century that horse
racing should be allowed and
enabled to provide its content
to its customer base through
technology availability and with
that I'll return to
Representative Weisel.
Thank you and are you good and
remove your.
Screen we appreciate that
presentation representative is
I'll.
Mr chairman I appreciate Mr true
sitting in on this if miss
barber or of richer Erhart is
available for comments at this
time if I would like to speak.
The flea thank you for the
reminder miss merry barber is in
the attendee if you could please
move over into the.
Into the committee will.
And Mr Richard R. hardy has a
purple R. E. next to his name if
you could let them into the room
as well.
Miss barber welcome.
What would you like to consider
the committee.
Miss merry barber you're you're
in the committee room.
Welcome.
And we can to hear you you're
mute as is off but check your
Use me check your of volume on
your computer.
We cannot hear you.
The supercenters we still can't
hear you well let's see if Mr
Erhard is in the room with us if
you could let in.
Mr Richard are hard from the
attendee room please.
He's toward the bottom on my
screen with a purple R. E.
Earhart spelled E. R. H. A. R.
D..
Mr Barbour could raise your
hand.
All this barbers here with us Mr
Erhardt is E. raise your hand.
Okay wonderful when you raise
your hand everyone up it if you
jump to the top of the list and
there's a pretty hefty attending
this so thank you Mr art welcome
Give us a second Mr hard what on
this barber what you let's see
if we can hear you now.
What we can thank you welcome.
Thank you I get afternoon tea on
the money just isn't committee
members my name is Mary Barbour
and I am the executive director
of the New Mexico work readers
Association.
Very grateful for the
opportunity to speak to you
today and I think we need to let
me know that the New Mexico our
readers are fully in support of
this bill A. D. W. bell I
believe our industry is pretty
much United on this so we just
so appreciate your consideration
this thank you very much.
Thank you thanks for joining us
Mr Hart welcome.
But in on mute yourself.
Thank you.
Yes Sir Mr chairman of thank you
very much for this opportunity
members of the committee
but it was Richard harden the
executive director of the New
Mexico horsemen's association we
reckon we've Representative
nearly four thousand traders and
owners of end of New Mexico
racing and as miss barber has
indicated are of membership is
in full force of the eighty W.
bill and we would urge your
support of this bill as well
thank you very much for your
time and your consideration.
Thank you anything else before
we go to members of the public
agency Representative as a Mr
chairman thank you very much as.
Mr true has pointed out of this
is what we're trying to do here.
Right now I do W. is legal in
thirty two states but only two
states don't allow it and that's
Minnesota in New Mexico they
cannot bet on their own horses
Mr chairman members of the
committee currently we have a D.
W. companies that are operating
in the state of New Mexico.
And there's no regulation on
those companies.
They also are utilizing live New
Mexico horse races to generate
revenue for themselves with
minimal returns to our state
the straight track operators and
the purse funds Mr Chairman is
time that New Mexico came into
the twenty first century and
this is the mechanism that we
can use to help not only.
Our industry but those citizens
here that are interested in
horse racing thank you very much
we staff for questions thank you
so much and
One of the reasons I put this
bill on was to see you and
speaker Egolf together in the
virtual zoom representative so
we will make that happen the
four of the journey is over with
this bill so let's hear from our
proponents of the bill would
raise your hand.
And then what we'll do is we'll
allow you to speak and I'll also
say your name you use yourself
and adjust the committee is
about six folks we'll go with
the supporters of the bill first
Mr Tony Blair welcomed followed
by Lynette bald one Mr more
welcome.
Going on mute yourself and
address the committee.
Yes.
Tony lam owner trainer.
Here in New Mexico and and I am
in very much support of this
bill and I appreciate all your
your input.
Your attention to listen to me
thank you.
Mrs Annette Baldwin followed by
Paul Jensen.
Hello welcome my name is Lynette
Baldwin I live in Lincoln County
I've been training resources
since I was eighteen years old
it's my passion it's what I know
this last year has really as
it's taking a toll on all people
in New Mexico and we as our men
have really taken a hard hit
right now we have no way to earn
a living unless we journey out
of state and the longer things
stay the same the more people
will leave and it'll be a
trickle down effect for lost
revenue for the state of New
Mexico right now until we get
back online and when we get back
online this bill will help us
tremendously there.
It's just too much money there
with everybody staying at home
and using their smartphones to.
Everything did not utilize it to
help the horsemen and to put
money back into the state the
way for the state to make money
without spending any money.
It'll benefit
a large amount of people like
myself who do not want to leave
the state in New Mexico who
would like to continue making a
living at what we do and what we
love and taking care of our
forces so I'm like I'm sure
every other horsemen that's a
licensed owner trainer employed
in any way in the we're choosing
industry support this bill
wholeheartedly thank you.
Thank you respond Paul Jensen
followed by Mister drew Center.
All.
Hello this is Paul Jensen I'm
at.
Veterinary our surgeon.
I have a our hospital in Dona
ana county close to the some
part racetrack.
Are you build a state of the art
surgery in hospital for horses
and twenty thirteen.
What one of the challenges we
have in New Mexico is tracking
educated and qualified
veterinary doctors and other
medical personnel to take care
of these questions and we have.
Started several programs in the
out of our hospitals to train
high school students in
accelerated programs to train
technical students we find three
hundred hours of training for
veterinary externship all of
this.
We we cannot and do not charge
for we also provide one year
internships for the veterinary
for veterinarians after they
graduate from that school who
who are going into the the our
it's medicine field
so one of the difficulties of
getting young professionals back
to New Mexico.
We we we've been trying to
address this just in in the.
In a small business manner that
we can.
That we can promote.
And.
Our second challenge now is is
the impact of this.
Comment.
Issues have on our economy.
It has devastated our economy it
is devastated not only the
horses and horse owners but all
of the businesses that support
the horses and the owners and
there would be a direct benefit
to our lives in our in our road
to recovery from economic.
If we pass this bill there would
be a direct secondary effect to.
Industry supporting businesses.
Such as veterinarians Farm speed
companies.
Jockeys exercise person
many secondary businesses
support this industry so in in
behalf of horse manure in these
support businesses we strongly
support house bill one ninety
nine.
As a step to our economic
recovery but also as a step to
getting.
Just be is this technological
world thank you very much.
Thank you Sir do setor followed
by Mr Jason Thompson.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Audrey
Center I'm not registered
lobbyists for the public service
letter sent late rate Santa
Clara and okay when gate on
behalf of my clients I want to
say that my clients are neutral
on the bill in the past our we
have had concerns about previous
iterations of this bill after
reviewing that further my
clients do not see that this
bill would in any way violate
the provisions of the compact
related to revenue sharing so
just to help the the committee
from previous statements over
the years just want to say that
my clients are neutral and do
not see a violation of the
revenue sharing components of
the compact related to this
legislation thank you.
Very helpful comments Mr center
thank you for being here Mister
Jim Thompson Thompson followed
by Dr thank you Roybal.
Mr Chairman can you hear me we
sure can.
Thank you Mr chairman thank
members of the committee for
allowing me to to address you
today.
And I'd like to thank the
sponsor also for bringing this
bill forward and other
proponents and all those
involved in the discussion and
bring this year for a today I am
the registered lobbyists for the
New Mexico horsemen's
association as you've heard it's
a where the substation
represents the owners and
trainers and many employees that
contribute to the horse racing
industry in the state and we
stand in full support of this
bill
and for a few reasons.
At one we all know that this
pandemic has partially impacted
the racing engines industry just
like many other industries in
the state and the last year
and one of the primary reasons
that this bill is important is
that it will help to boast to
bolster this industry and it
will help provide the
opportunity and monitor a
mechanism that's necessary to
keep this industry viable in New
Mexico and keep it attractive to
consumers.
Also importantly this bill is
about being able to market in
New Mexico product eighty W.
will aid in the practice of
marketing that product and also
importantly help capture the
dollars that are made from this
product and keep those dollars
here in New Mexico as was stated
in the introduction of those
dollars are currently not us it
staying in New Mexico.
And also modernizing this
business model help maintain and
improve the contributions the
racing industry makes to the
agricultural sector of the New
Mexico on and the overall
tourism and entertainment
economy New Mexico and this will
also sustain the livelihood and
well being of the many New
Mexicans they keep this industry
running
so thank you again for at
bringing this bill forward and
that thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Dr Roybal and then learning
goals.
Okay we'll.
Welcome good can you hear me we
sure can good afternoon chairman
masters and members of the
committee thank you for the work
you're doing on behalf of the
state economic development
there's no no cause more worthy
and thank you for allowing me to
speak this afternoon I'm a
native New Mexican The physician
physician and advocate for the
course racing community today I
come to speak in favor of house
bill one ninety nine sponsored
by speaker you got off and
Representative is out as a
constituent and racehorse owner
I believe that there's never
been a better time to lead an
effort to amend the racing our
act in providing advanced.
Deposit wagering New Mexico
horse racing is a leader in the
industry nationally with over
two million out of state
spectators drawn to our state to
to watch races at one of our
five race tracks of course COVID
nineteen has decimated our state
as well as the horse racing
community which has been
particularly hurt by the
pandemic however house bill one
ninety nine would enhance not
only.
Horse racing but would also
enhance the new New Mexico state
Financial deficiencies we need
to increase our competitive this
well addressing our financial
distress and how House Bill when
ninety nine will do that we're
definitely behind the eight ball
on this and we need to modernize
as other states have been doing
this since nineteen ninety nine
the other thirty two states as
have been mentioned earlier so
we are completely disadvantaged
at this point and I would ask
you to please go with the
proposed amendment which would
amplify not only the state's
revenue but given our race an
opportunity to rebound and I
believe that advance deposit
wagering is one of the only
solutions to expand racing and
horse breeding sectors within
the state while stimulating our
local and state economies and so
again I think you all committee
members for all you're doing and
I ask for your vote on house
bill one ninety nine thank you
so much.
Thank you Sir Larry Nichols
followed by Brian one that are
going.
Yes.
Good afternoon.
The chairman of the house
committee commerce and economic
development committee.
For the record I'm Larry Nichols
president of don't accounting.
A resident of New Mexico for
forty five years and I have
maintained a racing and breeding
business and the next for the
past forty two years.
In the wake of the pandemic
thank you cultural industry in
particular the race our industry
and the facilities that support
those will play a critical role
in developing and implementing
strategies would stabilize and
restore economic viability to
New Mexico communities.
It is often said that related to
the pandemic that New Mexico
businesses will be okay once
they get back to normal.
I submit to this committee that
economic development improvement
isn't going to return to pre
pandemic normalcy.
Is going to take rebooting and
although of returning.
The pandemic is changing the way
business is conducted.
New programs are needed to equip
the horse racing industry with
the tools it needs to confront
the current economic hardship
being experienced by the
existing policies or
regulations.
House bill one ninety nine is
innovative legislation which
would allow the means of
implementing economic recovery
the advance deposit wagering.
For the horse racing industry.
It is participation by
individuals and small business
which has empowered the
beginning stages of economic
recovery.
Other states some agencies have
strong innovation in utilizing
advanced deposit wagering to
maintain business operations
rather than closing shop and
losing viable economic industry.
New Mexico horsemen and that
agricultural industry at large
are going to continue to cope
with the pandemic through
collaboration preparation and
communication thank you economic
development moving forward no
matter the circumstances.
The house commerce and economic.
Committee house built one nine
nine support and approval is
critical.
This is an opportunity to
curtail the downward spiral
resource industries brought on
by the pandemic.
Your approval of this
legislation is desperately
needed.
Thank you Mr chairman for
allowing these comments to be
read into the record I yield the
floor back to the chairman
committee.
Thank you gentlemen Brian one
are gone followed by Jason
Weaks.
Mr chair and Committee program
are drawn here owner breeder
residing in Santa Fe County I am
in favor of eighty to you bill I
think it is time that we
New Mexico help ourselves we
know what this pandemic is done
not only to our state but to the
whole nation and the world we
have a great opportunity here to
help kickstart ourselves up into
a great the
recovery if if we.
You know help help ourselves you
know we we cry ourselves and in
being
Business in New Mexico and and
know how that's affected us in
the pandemic I think this is
another way to help ourselves
you know keep our money here
what is our money have to be so
you know sent out a statewide
with the spend money outside of
the state what can we keep that
money here and keep those
dollars here I'm in favor of the
eighty W. bill and hope you guys
will pass thank you.
Thank you Mr weeks welcome.
Mr chair members the committee
Jason Weaks on behalf of
Albuquerque downs racetrack and
casino we rest today to voice
neutrality to this legislation
at present we have some concerns
about some of the provisions in
the bill and how it might affect
our operations however we have
reached out to Representative
needed ease L. she's assured us
that we will talk about those
concerns as the bill moves
forward and and want to thank
her for being open to hearing
our concerns and also thank you
for bringing this legislation
forward.
Mr Chairman I think you
mentioned this but please when
you say we who is we.
We as the Albuquerque downs
racetrack and casino
in particular.
Thank you Sir I think you
mentioned that I just I was
flipping through the pages I see
no other public comment anyone
else from the public was to
address the committee at this
time we have a twenty five folks
as attendees and I'm sure a
great many more watching on the
webcast.
now we'll go to members of the
committee
And keep in mind we're dealing
with a Committee sub for
discussion Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
He one moment we'll forgive you
Representative forgive me
Representative up for
interrupting you there's one
more person wishes to address
the committee of miss Jessica
Johnson.
Now.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I
apologize.
Was waiting for a call for
opposition
thank you for the opportunity to
provide testimony today my name
is Jessica Johnson I'm the chief
government affairs officer with
animal protection voters went
great respect to the sponsors of
the bill and to the individuals
who make a living using
resources we oppose house bill
one ninety nine because we have
serious concerns about the
state's horse racing industry
and whether an industry that has
been plagued by corruption and
has been responsible for the
suffering and death of many
hundreds of courses can be
regulated effectively terrible
injuries and deaths to worsens
in racing have been at the
concern of the public for many
years and have been the subject
of investigative reporting and
federal raids related to drug
cartel activity additionally
unfortunately when our
organization has raised concerns
about the inhumane treatment of
animals at public hearing these
concerns have been met with
strong resistance to fax
transparency and accountability
by some members of the industry
and the state racing commission
so we are concerned that despite
efforts from regulators animal
cruelty corruption and abuse of
drugs and medication issues will
continue to plague the industry
and we urge the committee to
consider how expanding gambling
opportunity at the race tracks
will only perpetuate a volatile
industry with a long history of
cruelty suffering and illicit
activity in New Mexico thank you
so much.
Thank you know thank you for
jumping on the.
On on the other hand raising has
been Johnson of I I build to a
it was a leader folks to be off
those who wish to speak in
opposition or have concerns
about the bill please raise your
hand now and we'll go to of the
nest Evans followed by guy
Clark.
I actually this is N. F. Evans I
was actually for it was just not
recognizing me I understand
please a state your name and
address the committee.
Hi my name is Vanessa Evans and
I am a race horse owner breeder
and my husband is Justin Evans
race first trainer here in New
Mexico thank you so much for
hearing us today.
I think that's the advance
deposit wagers bill could be
tremendous for New Mexico as you
know our main eat breathe and
sleep.
Our racing we want nothing but
the best for animals in our
industry we have numerous
employees.
All around the state of New
Mexico that we take care of and
the jobs that we provide our
tremendous and we I can't I
can't express enough how much we
love our animals and if we could
help ourselves with the A. W.
eighty W. bill it would be great
right now to gamble on your
resources you have to be at a
racetrack in New Mexico there
are no New Mexico race tracks
open now so we have to look to
the future to save racing and.
We can gamble on out of state
courses by allowing this bill we
can gamble on courses and keep
our New Mexico money in New
Mexico to benefit all of the
residents of New Mexico and are
you again I appreciate your time
and the.
Hope that this bill makes.
Thank you Representative Mr guy
Clark welcome.
I think you're chairman my
manage this committee members
I'm doctor guy Clark chairman
stop predatory gambling New
Mexico.
We are strongly opposed to house
bill one ninety nine of the
house bill one ninety nine is
really an online gambling bill
this is a bill to legalize
online gambling gambling in New
Mexico kind of sneaky the tracks
promoted a very similar built
ten years ago but didn't hide
the fact that it was an online
gambling bill us bill one ninety
nine never mentions online
gambling but only mentions we're
entering through electronic
means course electronic means is
a euphemism for online gambling
this is will be a major
expansion of gambling in New
Mexico if it passes that's not a
major expansion of the tracks
but it's a major expansions
cell phones and laptops and.
In.
Desktops all across the state
and so it so it's very the
expansion in reach.
Chairman managed as committee
members online gambling has
recently been legalized in six
states in this country and has
been legalized over ten years
the U. K. Senator university in
governmental studies have
determined that online gambling
is the most addictive form of
gambling you can be sure that if
this passes the tracks will not
stop that just online gambling
on horse racing you know there
are other bill house bill one or
one that would have allowed
Basically casino style gambling
on the internet so that should
really be in game they're
working for but even more
troubling than what I've already
mentioned is the in all
institutions in the UK
especially since she's been
there for awhile
teens and pre teens have been
targeted by a gambling promoters
with advertising promotions
social media encouraging them to
gamble if you just take a look
at their ads in the cartoons you
can tell who the target
audiences although the gambling
industry claims to have security
measures in place to prevent
teens from gambling the team's
gavel in the U. K. in the
hundreds of thousands of the
effect of the use the circuit
tester I'll just read a couple
of the couch from U. K.
according to the UK's gambling
Commission study four hundred
fifty thousand U. K. children
aged eleven to sixteen bit
regularly on the internet more
than those who have taken drugs
smoked or drank alcohol member
they're small should be
safeguards against this
according to the London Daily
Mail researchers about more than
half of sixteen year old should
you care dabbling apps on their
smartphones two years before
they are legally allowed to
place bets chairman Mr chair
community members and less we
want to go down the same track
to teen and preteen online
gambling addiction we need to
prevent the legalization of any
form of are you get a shot
predatory gambling in New
Mexico.
Yes this committee to vote for
gambling three kids and against
house bill one ninety nine.
Chairman committee thank you
very much for letting me take
your time.
Thank you Mr Clark anyone else
will get Willis take a breather
anyone else in the attendee room
was to address the committee.
From any angle on please raise
your.
Virtual hand.
Before I go to Representative
Powdrell Culbert that the term
online is not used in statute
thank in our criminal laws.
Soliciting a minor solicitation
of a minor by electronic device
so.
I don't believe anyone hiding
anything it's.
Page one page on you know wait
during through electronic means
so but I but I have your Senator
clock thank you Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you Mr chairman would do
fast on house bill so bill one
ninety nine.
I think that's a problem.
Second.
Mr chair you're needed right
now.
All thank you Representative
Ferrary so I I wasn't hearing
well as but what I thought I
heard was a do not pass on house
bill one ninety nine and a do
pass on house commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill one
ninety nine made by
Representative Powdrell Culbert
there was a second by home.
A second by Representative
Baldonado before I take that
motion there's further
discussion Representative
Gallegos are are.
Representative Powdrell cover
you do wish to success is that
what you heard Mr chairman thank
thank thank you Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
just for clarification Mr Clark
mentioned
that are mobile wagering.
Is there it is it's internet
gaming is it permitted under the
compacts.
I was confused by that when Mr
Clarke said that so if I could
just get clarification on that
thank you Representative acts
and your experts wish to.
Comment on that Representative
is all I I can take a stab at it
well after you're done.
Mr chairman if I'm understanding
Representative guy yeah because
right could you repeat your
question one more time.
Here thank Mr chairman and and
Representative I was just trying
to clarify with Mr Clark
mentioned about mobile wagering
is is internet gaming permitted
under the compacts.
Mr chairman of I'm going to
look.
Further to.
Our analyst on the committee.
Maybe that Mr true would you
like to take a stab at that I
know that that particular bill
was heard this morning.
Mr Chairman representative is
out of our line please.
So that is I understand the
question is mobile wagering I
came.
And.
The way I look at this Google is
a channel internet is a channel
what's being done over those
channels is the subject of
regulations and in our case in
this case of the bill we're
asking burger mutuel wagering on
live and simulcast forces period
full stop Mr Clarke's reference
to I believe the earlier bill
has no reference to I came I
mean.
The the previous bill he was
mentioning is only about on
site.
Gaming that may be conducted by
another state organization.
But to take it one step further
Google and and online or mobile
laptop whatever device you're
using all of those devices are
considered to be online.
We've established it has been
established in other court cases
that I gaming is not online.
Getting through their mutual
means on our roads those two
things are different and the the
federal unlawful internet gaming
regulatory act enforcement act
thank you rather a further
delineated the parimutuel
betting on horse racing is not I
came we have in our racing the
only federally protected
Interstate wagering conduct this
all out.
So the the the situation we have
in New Mexico where by some
companies are taking New Mexico
resident wagers on out of state
constant is a direct impact from
the.
Interstate Commerce act and the
federal interstate worse racing
Act we say you know if it's
legal or unaddressed in both
states that can be done so we've
restricted in state but we can't
restrict that state out of state
wagering without this bill so I
know that's been a long winded
answers that mobile wagering is
not I came.
Okay and thank you Mr chairman
so.
And and and Mr chew on I guess
if you would just further
explained I think I've got it
but so are there currently any
tribes are a race tracks doing
sports wagering on mobile
devices.
Mr Chairman.
It goes there are some tribes
that are conducting sports
wagering.
On site.
Whether they have mobile
wagering within their facility
or not I do not know.
I will say that
maybe I'm reaching a bit here
but it's my opinion that the
sports betting this going on and
tribal casinos right now is on
all despite the fact there have
been several legal opinions to
the contrary but there is no off
premise what we would determine
internet or mobile wagering on
sports wagering.
Outside the confines of any
facility that I'm aware.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Mr chair right at that does
clarify it for me
you know I I ate we have so
someone park racetrack in the
southern part of the state and I
know that they have been shut
down since endemic started and
so many of my constituents work
there is an economic engine for
our our area so I I do
appreciate it you know we're
working to to get some type of
momentum to to open up again
because people in southern New
Mexico are hurting and
specifically a large majority of
my constituents so I look
forward to hearing more of your
or input so thank you.
Thank you representative.
Thank you representative of
members of the committee before
we picked up just a couple
comments
Just look at the and and kind of
getting back to Representative
Gallegos is a.
Question is you know you have
the gambling statute in our
criminal code which is.
chapter thirty you know chapter
thirty up.
Article thirty rather article
thirty.
And the game sections nineteen
sections nineteen then you have
are
then you have a horse racing Act
which is mmhm which is chapter
sixty.
After sixty article one eighty
and it was done I was re reading
back in two thousand seven as a
chapter thirty nine.
Keeping score at home but it
also says and it says repealed
effective July first twenty
twenty two so it it as a fifteen
year sunset and I as I read it
it's not just the commission but
the horse racing Act itself can
somebody clarify that for me.
We need to extend this.
Next year Mr.
You can enlighten me on that yes
Sir Mr chairman and and
Representative he's out the the
racing commission routinely
comes up for sunset but and and
that commission deals with those
sunset issues when they come up
I don't believe it's incumbent
upon this committee to act on
that nor do I believe that this
bill will be.
Hello.
I believe this bill that we're
talking about addresses the the
the things that the racing
commission will address with
that sunset comes up again.
Know that something's.
Or or requires any additional
work outside the normal sunset
processes founded no thank you
for that Representative result
Mr true yeah we're gonna make
sure we we do that during the
thirty day hopefully in person
I'm sure will be in person the
but it
But it's a shame it's a shame
the
The compacts are are the the
the.
The wording in the compacts as
it relates to
Electronic wagering or internet
gaming is very
Is not there.
The.
The compacts mention article
three gaming but don't mention
sports betting so when the
Supreme Court allowed sports
betting and deemed the New
Jersey law unconstitutional
because the compacts allow the
class three gaming when the ink
was dry.
Tribes in New Mexico could do
could do sports betting
so that so my point is is that
the things weren't a negotiated.
You know it depending on on
horses was not negotiated in the
two thousand fifteen compact
sports betting was not
contemplated during the
negotiations of the two thousand
fifteen compact but I think in
the coming months and years of
we we we did talk about whether
we need to remedy that where
whether we can come to some
creative solutions were all of
us benefit because it's in
everyone's interests communities
tribes and and not Townsend with
the horse racing tracks that.
that we increase tourism
increase these markets I think
we could come to some amenable
agreements to allow up sports
betting to allow off track
betting nationally I think of
and to enhance the the the
purses and the.
And the economy of these some of
these horse races I know that
there's some concerns with
gambling no question about it
gambling as a social cost not as
high as alcohol by any means
certainly not as high as
cigarettes but there is a social
cost with regards to the
addictive qualities of gambling
gambling addicts.
Are normally gravitate towards
the horse racing track it was
mostly the slot machines because
you could pull the plot machine
once every an autumn play the
slots were once every forty five
seconds I suppose on a horse
racing is one twenty so that
dopamine addicts get.
I get they may they may get a
little bit when when they're
coming around that.
The last turn but it's it's not
as addictive as as other forms
of gambling for whatever that's
worth but it is part of our
culture.
And we need to we definitely
need to keep an eye on the.
On the horses and is
participating in the industry
but but it is an industry in law
and and we need to make it as
beneficial as possible so.
Certainly don't want the.
I don't want the horse racing
industry to continue having a
long face Representative
we would last year if we're done
this last year we could of ram
we go around a horse racing also
have long.
And and it is actuals that way
so exactly with that
there is a motion and a second
call the roll.
On the committee substitute.
Yes.
Representative Dow.
Yes.
Yes.
Grant.
Representative
yes Representative.
Yes Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative.
Hopefully join us here in a
minute.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative.
Madam chair.
Yes ma'am thank you and chairman
my Estes yes and so
Representative BIZZARRO let the
speaker know you have a do pass
on the committee substitute for
house bill one hundred ninety
nine.
Mr chairman committee members
thank you very much and here in
about four days as soon as I get
the pictures of my new baby when
it hits the ground I will break
it around to to each one of you
to show you thank you so much
for the consideration of this
and we look forward to going
forward.
Thank you very much and members
of we'll be hearing
House Bill to fifty five on
Wednesday we'll try to squeeze
another bill on.
On Wednesday it's gonna be good
private relatively long hearing
so get your amendments to the
bill drafters tonight so we get
into the and and CCM to the
analysts and with that we are
adjourned thank you very much.
