Representative Armstrong.
Representative De la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente,
Representative Mason, here,
Representative Matthews.
Representative Murphy, here,
Representative Parajon.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair.
Here, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, you have a quarrel.
Very good. All right, um, Madam
Leader, if you'd like to start
your presentation.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, um,
House Bill 174, uh, insures fair
reimbursement rates for the
fewer than 60 community-based
pharmacies in the state, many of
which are all are the only
health care providers in rural
areas.
These pharmacies deliver a
central frontline healthcare
services.
In 2024, House Bill 165 required
Medicaid to reimburse
community-based pharmacies.
Uh, for a medication cost plus a
dispensing fee. House bill 174,
which is in front of you today,
extends the same principle to
the plan under the healthcare
purchasing Act, covering state
employees, teachers, and
retirees below cost
reimbursements threaten the
financial survival of these
pharmacies, making it harder for
them to serve their communities.
House Bill 174 provides a fair
reimbursement needed to be to.
Keep them operating and
delivering a vital care, and
with me, Madam Chair, today is
my expert witness Ash Ashley
Sefarth.
And she'd like to say a few
words.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Ashley Seafarth. I am
the owner of Care Drug in
Bloomfield and Aztec and
Bloomfield, we are now the only
pharmacy and healthcare provider
with no other doctor whatsoever
in our town. So we do provide
that vital healthcare, the
reimbursements under the current
legislation, uh, the current
healthcare purchasing Act is
absolutely killing the pharmacy.
Right now as it sits, we're
30,000 in the hole with just the
ingredient cost alone under
these payers. We can no longer
operate like this and we're
putting thousands of our state
workers at risk of vital access
to pharmacy care at this point
across the state.
This bill will simply make it
where we get fair reimbursement
within these contracts.
Thank you.
Is that the end of your
presentation? Yes, ma'am, we
stand for questions. Thank you.
All righty, do we have anybody
um here in favor of this bill.
if you'd like to line up and we
can get our attendant to hold
the mic and give you one minute,
yeah.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, good evening. I was
gonna say good afternoon, good
evening. John Thompson, I'm a
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Pharmacy Business
Council, as Doctor Sefarth
indicated, there is
approximately 55, uh,
community-based pharmacies in
New Mexico, and 2000, there were
125. So that goes to show you
the compaction of, of these
vital care, uh, operators in
rural New Mexico. Uh, Madam
Chair, this, this bill applies
to a very small subset of
pharmacies in a very small
subset of, uh,
plans in New Mexico.
Madam Chairman, this is a break.
This is not a bill that, that
generates profit. It just simply
allows these folks to be
reimbursed for the drugs that
they distribute to people out of
their pharmacies and is vital
for them to continue to operate
and we would ask that you
support this bill and thank you
for the time.
Thank you. Next.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Lex Garcia. I'm a
pharmacist and I'm also the
executive director of the New
Mexico Pharmacists Association.
Um, we're here in strong support
of HB 174 because it's not just
a healthcare issue, it's also an
economic one. Pharmacies are
critical small businesses, yet
unsustainable reimbursement
models are forcing their
closures everywhere throughout
the state. This is eliminating
jobs and it's creating pharmacy
deserts across our state. Uh, we
even said that the major chains
are shutting down due to low
reimbursements. So how can our
small businesses and our
independence?
Even try to survive. HB 174
ensures that pharmacies are
fairly reimbursed for the actual
cost and that they do get the
dispensing fee services. This
keeps their business open, open
for the communities that they
serve. I urge your support to
protect jobs, local economies,
and access.
My name is Kirk Irby. I'm from
Artesia, and
Uh, I have inherited my dad's
pharmacy, Lowell's Pharmacy, and
uh I have
Essentially nothing else to, to,
to add. I all, all of these are
very factual in my pharmacy just
as well as it is in Ashley's, so
I would like to support this
bill.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee Columbio with the New
Mexico Healthcare Authority. Um,
we are neutral on this
legislation, but we do want to
make a point of, of flagging um
for any bills that do create a
new mandates or reimbursement
requirements that there is a
fiscal impact. And so in our
fiscal impact report on the
state health benefits plan, we
do note that this would have
about a $1 million
impact on the fund. Um, however,
we are supportive of the uh
overall.
Um, effort here to try to
support our community
pharmacists. So we think the
sponsor for the legislation.
Thank you.
Anybody else here in favor?
Let's go to Zoom.
All right, anybody in opposition
of this bill?
Go to Zoom.
OK, let's go to the committee.
Uh, representative Matthews.
No, you're on the list.
Did you not want to be on this,
um, well.
Um, I would move it do pass, but
I don't have any questions.
Well, I think we've got.
Uh, representative Cerrado.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Leader. Um, I had a quick
question for you just on page 2,
section CB. It says located in
the state or near the state
border, and I didn't understand
what that meant near the state
border, if not within the state.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the question. That
the community pharmacy list is
actually specified within um the
Medicaid managed care, so
they're the ones that set that
criteria, um, that was asked in
the previous legislator as well.
What that does is it helps
provide the independent
pharmacies that are right on the
border, um, within a certain
areas my understanding, um, to
people in New Mexico who don't
have access to a pharmacy within
a certain range.
And so if they have access to a
state.
A pharmacy right across the
border.
For example, Clovis Pharmacy
takes care of a lot of Texas
people.
So that that's kind of where
that has come from, that is not
a definition that we did. That
is a definition that was set by
Medicaid in previous
legislators.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, uh, leader. So that,
that means that you're just
doing this to ensure that it
complies with Medicaid, as fully
as possible.
OK
Yes, Madam Chair and
Representative. Thank you.
That's my only question.
Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representatives for
bringing this forward.
Uh
Only one question I had.
I support this bill.
I
Was there a reason we didn't
make it work and come into
effect, emergency clause or
something where it become
effect.
Madam Chair Representative, I
wish we could, we were told that
that's not capable because of
the contracts that are in place
right now, do not renew until
the first of the year. So as
much as I would love to take
that on.
That's what we were instructed.
Thank you.
Uh, uh, only other things
though.
Is the statement, you know that
uh.
We talk about trying to take
care of our small business in
all areas of.
And up here and very seldom do
we get a chance to actually
help.
All business, so I'm in full
support and.
You need a second, I'll.
Not quite yet, but when we get
there, we will go to you. Thank
you, uh, Representative Parajon.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh
I'm, I'm in really broad support
of this because I know the
importance of the community
pharmacies. I grateful that the
Board of Pharmacy is able to,
um, bill, I had one question
that we were looking at here on
the FIR where it says that uh.
Because Medicaid already
provides the, the professional
dispensing fee to the community
pharmacies, they are required to
increase the provisions of the
rate under the bill, um, and
they're not, they don't have to
increase the provisions, but it
also says that oversight is not
under Medicaid's purview and
would therefore not impact
administrative costs, but I'm
looking at.
Um, the top of that same page
and it looks like there is an
administrative fee, so if you
could explain like.
Is um
Is is there
For the human services
department.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, and representatives, so the
healthcare authority.
HSD only sets the reimbursement
per the standards based on CMS
guidelines, they do have to
submit that it's a.
Nadak plus a certain dispensing
fee, so that cannot change
unless it's submitted to act to
CMS.
So the actual administration
burden on them is nothing right
now because there's been no
changes we're we're adopting the
exact same, um, reimbursement
model that they're already
doing.
So it is my understanding, Madam
Chair Representative, that.
I think they've put 0 down as an
administration because it's
already set and there's no
burden on them as of right now.
Um, Madam Chair and leader,
sorry, what we were looking at
what is actually not, not, not
HCA but the New Mexico Public
Schools Insurance Authority.
Um, reports that they, they do
have.
Madam Chair, can you point me to
where that's at in the? Is it in
the FIR?
Uh, Madam Chair and a leader,
yes, it's in the FIR.
Uh, page 2, it starts on page 2
and it goes into page 2, it's
talking about at the very
bottom, it talks about.
Uh yes, madam Chair
Representative, so where they're
coming up with that is
essentially because it's a cost
sharing.
System between the state and the
current employees.
And so that cost share system
will take on the increase in the
fees to the 55 pharmacies in the
state or what's designated under
that list under Medicaid, and so
they've estimated that it's
going to cost every employee and
retire retiree $1 per month.
to take on this burden.
Because it is a cost share
between the two.
Thank you, Madam Chair and.
Thank you. Um, if there's no
more questions, I have a a
couple of questions. Um, my
understanding is there's about
80 community um.
Pharmacies throughout the state,
is that correct?
Um, Madam Chair, there is 55.
OK, so I guess, well, the next
question I was going to ask is,
do we know how many have closed,
so if there it used to be 80 and
we're now down to 55 that that
that'll tell me and um.
When we talk about the impact to
local economies, especially in
the rural areas when, uh, one of
these types of pharmacies
closes. Did you talk about, um,
how some of the impact it has on
the residents.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
I actually had a pharmacy close
in Socorro.
Uh, New Mexico and so now we
have one choice.
Which is a larger, um,
commercial type pharmacy.
Um, and a lot of times the
customer service is just not as
as good as it could be a lot of
times we have to drive to Los
Lunas, um, and, and the impact
is.
All of those employees lost
their jobs when that pharmacy
closed, all of, uh, anybody who
wants to um provide, go to that
local pharmacy or uh services.
has no no choices now, and so.
And the grocery receipts tax in
the, in the town actually will
go down as well so um it it
really is about.
Fairness, and it really is about
supporting local businesses in
the state of New Mexico to, to
keep, keep those on the ground.
Thank you. All righty. Um, is
there any other questions? I
think we had a motion by
Representative Matthews and uh
Representative Mason, you wanted
to make a second, OK, Patrick to
take the role.
Representative Armstrong? Yes.
Representative de la Cruz, yes,
Representative Fernandez.
Representative Valente.
Representative Mason,
Representative Matthews. Yes.
Representative Murphy, yes.
Representative Parejon.
Yes. Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair, Yes, Madam
Chair.
Yes. Madam Chair, final tally is
11 votes, yes, 0 votes no.
Alright, you got to do.
Thank you.
Good afternoon Representative
Kates.
Um
Are you, are you ready? I am.
Thank you, Chair, and thank you
members, um, I, I am here to
present House Bill 40, um, I
wanna kind of go over what this
is, as in many of you may not
live in this world of
disabilities, so this is for a
universal adult changing
stations, so this is a table
that's hydraulic, um, let me
start off with this if you are
an individual who lives your
life in a chair.
You may want to, um, try to live
in places with low humidity.
Understand it when you're
sitting in that chair in a humid
area that there are all kinds of
increased um medical issues that
can occur, so Arizona and New
Mexico are the wonderful states
in which um we have opportunity
to be able to have comfort for
individuals in a chair.
Um, also, there is a CMS rule,
which is the center of Medicaid,
so federal rules since 2014
saying individuals with
disabilities that are getting uh
community, um,
That are being provided services
must be in the community up to
80% of the time. This becomes
especially difficult if you're
an individual who may need an
adult changing table to make
sure that your uh bathroom needs
are met, so understand that this
becomes uh we are not very well
compliant with this because you
don't have access to them uh
every place.
Um, this, uh, my expert witness
here to my my left is um the CEO
and president of Atalante and um
she has been working with the
national program called
Traveling with dignity.
So understand that if you're in
a.
Sorry.
If you are a person who is in a
chair with your family and you
may need to be changed.
You're either not going to go.
Or you're gonna have to be laid
down on a bathroom floor.
Or you're gonna have to be laid
down on the floorboard of your
van.
This is not.
Dignified and this is not enough
for the our citizens, um, who
are traveling in our beautiful
state.
So, um, what are adult changing
tables or hydraulic, so
understand that when you're in a
chair, you may have to slide,
you may have to have the table
that's close to you.
You put yourself and the people
who are with you at risk if they
have to lift you out of the
chair and put you on something
to understand your caretakers
can be at risk as well
physically. So the hydraulic
chair is very the hydraulic
table is very important to the
safety of this.
So
Hydraulic tables I have, I've
run a programs, Medicaid
programs for people with
disabilities. I've had them
installed in facilities before
they can be as uh as as little
as $8000 and the very, very
high, we haven't seen any, but
you know, we know prices are
always traveling, so we say they
could be as much as 25,000.
Usually it's between 8 and 18 is
the cost of the table. So with
this program is, is that the
traveling with dignity.
is actually gonna be under
destination for grant with the
New Mexico Tourism Department
and we would like to be able to
create a map for that you could
go to the Department of Tourism
and where you can see all the
accessible places in our
beautiful state so that you can
plan your vacation or your trip
and know that you'll be safe and
be able to to travel with
dignity, um, this bill will be
funded through capital outlay,
we are.
are going to go to every
representative and senator and
asked them if they would um
contribute through their capital
outlay for $25,000 and then um
we can provide the Department of
Tourism, how many beds that they
could install within the first
year, they've already agreed
that they can absorb any
administrative costs in their
current budget and then we can
get this program started and
start being able to map.
Um, I introduced you my expert
witness, I wanna also let you
know that my co-sponsors is a
minority whip Alan Martinez as
well as a representative Eleanor
Chavez. I would like a brief
statement from my expert witness
and then we will rest.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for this
opportunity this evening.
HB 40 need in our public spaces,
the availability of adult
changing tables.
As a state, I believe we pride
ourselves in striving for
inclusitivity, individuals,
regardless of this bill helps
address that issue
as representatives explained.
Not only is this bill the right
thing to do for members of our
community, but travelers with
disabilities also contribute to
the economy. There is a
significant business case for
this bill.
In 2024, travelers with
disability to the US commit.
Um
To the US economy.
Traveling with another person or
a companion that can be as high
as almost 100 billion. So we
want to make sure that New
Mexico is accessible members of
our community, but for.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you me just to just to to
go on top of this is that this
is, this is why I believe that
we are before you is because it
is an economic driver,
understand that individuals who
live their life in a chair and
may require this table.
Most likely will not be
traveling by themselves, so they
are traveling in groups of 2 and
6 for a whole family events, so
this becomes an economic driver
as we have such a unique
environment here in our great
state and we're ready for
questions, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative.
Um, I also see that you've got
an amendment. Would you like to,
um, when we get somebody to move
that amendment for discussion.
Right. Would you like to to talk
to us about that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This is
a a cleanup amendment and to
make sure that we understand
that we are in this, we have the
same compliance as the federal
ADA laws when it comes to
historic buildings and so we are
asking us, so that's with this
amendment covers. I can give you
our, the number is 0.230357.1.
Does anybody have any questions
on the amendment?
OK, do we want to, um.
Vote on the amendment.
Yeah
Move the amendment.
We need to move to adopt the
amendment. I'm sorry, to adopt
the amendment. There we go.
OK, there we go.
All righty.
And if you're done with your
presentation, we'll go ahead and
go to the audience to see if
anyone is in favor of this bill.
Ready, we can get you to line
up. Madam Chair and members of
the committee, my name is Sky
Devore and I'm a registered
lobbyist for ALS New Mexico, and
we support HP 40. Thank you all
for your thoughtful
consideration.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. I'm
Jim Copeland, executive director
of the Association of
Developmental Disabilities,
Community Providers we represent
31 providers around the state of
New Mexico and we stand in
support of House Bill 40. Thank
you.
We go to Zoom?
Marisol
Um,
Madam Chairman and members of
the committee, my name is um
Rosie, and this film not only
affects people that are in a
wheelchair. It also affects, um,
elderly.
People and veterans. My
grandparents are, are very
active people, but they won't
always be, um,
Um,
and if this bill doesn't get
passed, they won't be able to go
many places, but when this bill
gets passed, they will be able
to
Be more active to um
Have a more active lifestyle,
thank you for your time.
OK, um,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Adalita
and I'm 12 years old. I'm part
of a group called Radical
Brownies, and I'm a, I'm a
supporter of the Bill HB 40. If
this bill gets passed, it will
affect a lot of people in New
Mexico, including my friend
Francisco. He uses a wheelchair
and whenever he needs to use the
bathroom. It took a lot longer
for me than me and my sister
would take to use the restroom,
so
It, so it took longer for us to
do assignments together and
sometimes you would miss a
little bit of lunch or recess.
This bill would make it so.
So he could use the bathroom
more efficiently and safely,
even when he's traveling. I hope
you will support people like
Francisco because there are so
many others out there. Thank you
for your time.
Thank you. Alrighty.
Tomasita
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Tomasita and I am a
mother to uh currently 11 year
old son who has um uh
chromosomal microdeletion and
cerebral palsy, which has caused
global developmental delays,
which has made him wheelchair
bound.
And he is the typical loving
child that wants to be out in
the community and I vowed as a
mother to give him the best
opportunities of life, um.
Uh, former caregiver, I know
Maslow's hierarchy pyramid, the
concepts of friendship,
community, love, and a sense of
belonging is amongst the top 3
pillars for the foundation of a
person to thrive. I
I also have a neighbor who does
um assisted living and I've
noticed some of the challenges
that we endure, they also to
endure as her her daughters
cannot take her out into the
community because of the
limitations of these tables. So,
As a mother, I've
I can testify in regards to
investing into the state because
we have gone out of state,
Disney World is my son's
favorite place because it's easy
accessible. It is
challenging for traveling so far
and I know the older and bigger
and taller he gets, it's gonna
be harder. So, um, it would be
great to have the same
accessibilities here in our
state, being the state that
Albuquerque International
Balloon Fiesta, I know.
The first wheelchair accessible
hot air balloon was invented and
many people actually have it as
their bucket list, um,
And I feel like these tables
will actually put us on the
radar for all these groups of
wheelchair accessible, um,
changing spaces friendly and um
yes, so I, I appreciate your
consideration in supporting
House Bill 40. Thank you.
Alrighty, do we have anybody on
the committee?
Oh, we didn't do opposition.
After that, I didn't think we
could have opposition, OK, with
there, is there anybody uh to
speak in opposition.
On Zoom.
Um, representative.
Mason. Thank you.
Ah
Uh
up saying, I do not oppose this
bill, but
Some of the things that I
thought were gonna be out in
here.
are still in here.
What my Madamer representative.
Didn't you stay?
This is gonna be paid by Capital
Outlay.
Yes, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you Representative. Our
goal is to have enough money for
112 beds in every legislator
chips in, uh, that's more than 3
or 4 tables per county and so
that we can all have accessible
states, uh, space around the
state. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So it's a.
Or not a sure.
As all things capital outlay,
Madam Chair.
Uh, Adam Chair Representative, I
noticed that the physical impact
report.
Or
Well it's about
It shows about $4 million over
the next two years.
So thank you Madam Chair. Thank
you Representative so this bill
does not mandate that uh that
all buildings that fall within
the criteria must have a table
by X amount of date. What it
does, it gives a criteria of
having 2500 people or more to go
through the building, it has to
have a criteria of being able to
have one existing uh family or
gender neutral, uh, bathroom,
um, it has um.
Uh, the historical building
criteria as well, and if it
meets its criteria, whatever
budget if this legislature only
provides for 3 beds for the
Department of Tourism and that's
3 beds in which they can decide
are gonna be the 1st 3 beds that
they put in. This is not
obligate the state to put in any
beds at this time.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair.
In the bill.
A
Uh, page 2 line 19 by July 1st,
2032.
Each covered facility shall
install it and maintain.
So that's pretty much mandating
that.
That many
I'm sorry, Madam Chair, and
Representative, can you give me
the line number again?
I think it's July 1st, 2032
covered facility.
install and maintain at least
one.
Universal adult changing station
that is universally acceptable
to all genders.
When the
The facility is open to the
public, so.
Yes, madam chair and yes,
representative, so I'm very
sorry I will correct myself on
this. It's 7 years, we have 7
budget cycles as we ramp this
up, but this first year, the
budget is only based on what
capital outlay is being
provided.
But it does mandate certain
number and it doesn't limit the
number of these really that are
mandated in the next. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you
representative. It, well, our
buildings are always changing,
and it does create a criteria
that needs to be made, so if we
have a state.
Uh building currently that does
not have a gender neutral
restroom or is not in a
renovation, it requires the
table to be installed if they're
going to renovate the restroom
anyways, now is the time to put
in that that table, um, but.
It does not.
Uh
It does not require within this
year that's why there's not an
appropriations for the funding
for that is only based on
capital outlay at this time.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair. Oh, I, I realized that,
but it's, it is.
We will have to fund it in the
next 7 years.
So I mean we're spending the
money today.
Well, I look, I don't hear on
the the physical impact report,
Madam Chair, thank you.
Oh, says the bill's definition
covered facilities.
Conclude 15 to 50 restrooms and
museums and or or or.
Historic sites going 34 and 87
at state parks.
10 and 20 at the state
fairgrounds.
You know, it, uh
Total statewide cost.
There is
Somewhere between 13 and 65
million. That's quite a.
But of
But the range there.
Uh, representative, I'll finish
my questionnaire.
Uh, you know, it.
87 public buildings at 34 or 35
state parks, the bill's
definition.
That with an estimated cost of
20.5 and so.
Go the high end
But we're at $90 million at
there.
And they expenditure in the.
That right represented thank
you, madam chair and thank you,
representative, no, I disagree
with the first analysis, but I
will say that these are all
public spaces paid by taxpayers,
correct? and.
That means taxpayers who are in
chairs that cannot access them
currently, so we are making sure
that we as a state are staying
ADA compliant and making sure
that
All of our citizens get access
to our public spaces as well as
we believe with the 7 years we
can ramp up and be able to make
an economic impact as well.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Chair, and like I said at the
onset, I'm not against this to
me the scope.
It is a little too
I'd rather say, let's
Representative
I would feel more comfortable
with.
4 million and if that's.
You know, I don't think all
representative, Madam Chair,
that all 87 buildings.
In our 35 state parks, they
don't all.
We need a
Requirement, you know, you had a
requirement, 2500 that's 10
people a day if they're open 250
if they're open.
300 days less, you know, which
is a very low.
participation rate for the
bottom end of the scale of of.
venues that will require one.
And I would, I would rather see.
You know, up the 2500 in a year
is not very many people.
Going to the facility.
for this, but I, I agree, Madam
Chair Representative.
I, I don't know how to put it,
but.
Like
I feel more comfortable doing
our major ones, so.
And here
Or 10 largest state parks.
You know, or
And our biggest venue.
Madam Chair Representative.
As I told the representative,
Madam chair.
Your witness when we were
talking in the halls.
That uh I read somewhere about
mobile.
That struck me as a.
As a neat idea.
to the state fair.
Something that could be moved
between venues.
The state fair is what? What did
it say there 10 to 20.
And you know, how many days a
year is the state fair actually?
They
they like.
I, I think that's all my
question statements I still.
have a little problem with the
scope, but I really liked the
idea.
Thank you, Representative
Strato.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you representative for the
spill. I have a few questions.
Um, so how long does one of
these units last?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Go ahead, my expert witness
can answer Madam Chair, members
of the committee, thank you for
the question. Um, they're
relatively new. I don't have a
time frame in terms of how long.
They last, but um from the
states where they've installed
them.
Um, several years, but that's
one of the manufacturers and and
find more about.
Oh
So thank you Madam Chair and
thank you Representative. I, I
just have personal experience
having them installed, so
they're stainless steel, usually
they're they're they're metal
and it obviously depends upon
how much use they get depending
on how, but they are.
I mean,
Very sturdy, um, low maintenance
that have complied, I've used
like a community development
block grants, which, you know,
HUD needs you to have things
that are permanent and will last
to improve the building before
they'll fund them and so that's
they do deem them that way, you
can't use a temporary table for
this. Thank you, Madam Chair,
thank you representative. I
asked that specifically because
that was we know capital Outlet
is supposed to be used for, you
know, in infrastructure that
will last 10 years plus. And I
know
a lot of the great projects
we're going to, it's computers
for schools or what have you,
uh, don't really fit that. So
I'm glad to hear that. Um, do
you have an estimate with your
amendment, which is how it
affects the bill. Do you have an
estimate how many?
Um, buildings were no longer be
required to install these with
your amendment removing
historic.
Locations
Thank you, Madam chair and thank
you, representative. We did not
remove the historic we matched
our historic building um.
Definition to the uh to the
national, one of our many issues
with the fur is there putting
restrooms, multiple restrooms
and buildings and and we're
asking for one for building that
has an existing gender neutral.
I would like to defer to my um
expert witness as she can
clarify how the scope has been
narrowed in the amendment as
well.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee,
um, part of the amendment limits
to a premise so we fairgrounds
which has over 100, um, also
with the state parks, I wanna
comment on that in their fur
family restroom. We are only
talking about those state parks
and that family restroom, not
all 81 buildings that they refer
to, so our amendment helps limit
that.
I don't have an exact number,
but certainly brings down the
scope, um, in terms of need to
have an existing family or
gender neutral restroom, we're
not asking for installation,
is that because those are also
larger facilities that enable
that to happen.
Is that why so if there's
already an existing
construction the retrofit um to
add a uh an adult changing table
could be.
less, um, in terms of the work.
Typically we need about 85
square feet, um, for a family
restroom, so that exists, um, we
have the ability to install a
universal changing table.
That makes a lot of sense, Madam
Chair and Representative expert,
just to be clear, when you said
that, um, the it would apply to
facilities that have um a family
changing rooms or or gender
neutral restrooms, um, that
would not be all of the family
ones it would just be one on
each site, is that correct? OK.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee representative, yes,
that is correct. Thank you and
just thank you that's those are
my questions. I just had one
note, it does make me a little
bonkers to representative when I
see a, uh, FIR that says it
could be 3 million, it could be
18 million, could be more, and
it, it's a little wonky. It's
all the different agencies say
they could be 10,000, 14,000,
150,000, 250,000. So it seems
like there's a lot of range
there. Um, so thank you for
that.
Thank you. Are there any other
questions from the committee?
I might have missed it, but I,
so these were handed out on all
of our desks and when you look
at this, this, how much is the
cost of this bed?
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative, as we see
it also is in in the the cost is
also in installation, I have to
jackhammer through marble, which
I won't cause it says it has to
have a bathroom renovation of
50,000 or more, but they can be
as uh they can still be
hydraulic and still permanently
installed as little as 8000, and
we found them for 18,000 we
budgeted for 25,000 because we
know what is gonna happen every
second of the day, the prices go
up and.
Also it accommodates or if
there's any special installation
for a specific building, so we
actually overestimated by
25,000, but they're usually
between 8 and 18.
OK.
And just out of curiosity on a
bed like this, what would be the
weight?
Um, limitation.
Madam Chair, typically 400
pounds.
All righty. And um
What would be the minimum, uh,
square footage that that one
would need to be able to install
this.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, the drawings that
I've seen are 85 square feet.
All righty, um, and I guess I
have just.
One of the clarifying question
on the actual bill on page 2,
line 9.
Your definition of public
building means a building owned
by the state that is open to the
public.
So when we talk about say the
mall or something like that,
those are not included, is that
correct?
That is correct.
This is gonna be through our
tourism department and it's for
public spaces. OK, all right,
that's all the questions I have,
uh, what is the desire of the
committee.
We would do as.
As amended, as amended, as
amended.
Representative Armstrong,
Representative De la Cruz, yes,
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Len, yes.
Representative Mason
I'd like to explain my vote.
Representative Matthews.
Yes.
Representative Murphy, yes.
Representative Parejon.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair? Yes.
Madam chair, yes, Madam Chair,
final tally 10 votes, yes, 01
vote, no.
OK. Uh, before we go to the
outcome representative.
Mason, please explain your vote.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
As I stated, I like the concept.
All those things we talked about
though I do not see in the bill
itself.
So hopefully this is by the time
it hits the floor you'll have.
All this stuff
In the actual writing that.
Of a it's, I, I like things in
front of me that say not that
we're gonna try to do this, but
I, I just want to say that I
agree with your concept and
hopefully by the time it.
It's the floor we'll have some
definitions.
narrowing of the scope in
writing.
To the bill thank you very much.
Thank you for bringing.
You've got an amended. All
righty.
HB 346 is next.
Already representatives, um,
we're ready for House Bill 346.
Thank you Madam Chairwoman. I'll
start off with tag teaming this
with Representative Roche Romero
well has been here with us, uh,
that will introduce themselves
when it's their time to speak,
but to provide a little context
is back in 2019, I was the uh
main sponsor on the uh.
And manufacturing act.
And uh in doing so was proud to
do so, worked with the
administration and all the
departments to make sure that
this was a piece of legislation
that provided zero to no
unintended consequences, but at
the same time recognizing that
time goes on and bad actors do
come forth, uh, we have some
issues and I know that uh
earlier on in this session.
Well, actually let me take a
step back that in in responding
to some of those bad actors back
in 2021, I had also House Bill
88 that responded to many of
those issues to try to crack
down on those bad actors, but as
it would be that uh in 2021
recalled that was a virtual
session and so that being said,
here we are now, um.
As I made mention before that
earlier on in this session, uh,
when we were talking about the
uh marijuana regulation and
enforcement uh.
Uh, I did get a phone call from
Larry Barker and as I mention
that sometimes that's always the
case of political death for
somebody that gets a call like
that, but for me it was in
regards to to this matter
specifically and that he brought
to my attention many of the
issues that are going on today
in regards to a lot of the
imports that are being brought
into our state, um.
That packaging, um, creating
illnesses in many are public.
Mexico citizens and so forth. So
that being said, um, it is my
responsibility as the.
As the founder of if you want to
say the founder of this piece of
legislation to bring some type
of teeth in regards to how we
enforce and create safe spaces
for this type of industry to
take place in New Mexico and
with that I would.
Thank you, Madam Chair, part of
the inception of legalizing
cannabis. Unfortunately, what
we're seeing within the
synthetic, um, hemp market is a
uh a product that's trying to be
like cannabis and unfortunately
it's not regulated. We don't
know what's in it, and it's can
be very, very harmful to the
health and safety of New Mexico
residents, um, what we're trying
to do here is ban that, um, ban
that practice, um, we know that
there's not any, or at least
today, there's no manufacturers
of these products in our state
today.
However,
um, our neighbors to the north,
we know for sure, um, allow this
practice and are selling these
products completely unregulated
on the Internet, perhaps to
children, um, and are certainly
in shops um and stores today
completely unregulated around
the state. Um, what we're trying
to do is tamp down on that, not
confuse consumers about what
products are legal, illegal, and
make sure that this is forbidden
practice. This has been in front
of many committees. I don't know
if this one in particular a.
version of this bill, um, over
the years that has not yet
passed, um, so we're hopeful
that this year is the year that
we can get this done again to
improve health and safety, um,
and ensure that the public knows
that this practice is, is not
allowed um in the state of New
Mexico.
Um, and with our experts.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
committee, my name is John
Roderick. I'm the deputy cabinet
secretary at New Mexico
Environment Department.
One of the many things we do is.
Regulate certain portions of
public health.
With the cannabis and hemp being
a portion of that.
I have with me.
our bureau chief Jonathan
Gerhardt.
Uh, who is bureau chief of the
hemp and cannabis Bureau.
India are
Deep technical expert on this
subject.
We appreciate this coming before
you appreciate your hearing us
out on this very important
issue, uh, because of the issue.
And with that
I'll turn it back to our
sponsors or to Mr. Gerhar.
Madam Chair, committee members,
thank you for your time and
service to our state. NED has
proposed these revisions to
improve the safety and accurate
presentation of hemp finished
products being sold on retail
shelves throughout New Mexico.
Currently, hemp-finished
products.
Such as CBD tinctures or CBD
infused edible products
manufactured out of state and
sold in New Mexico are not
subject to the same standards as
New Mexico manufacturers.
Requiring all hemp products to
meet New Mexico standards will
help ensure out of state
products are equally safe for
New Mexicans. Consumers are
properly informed and will level
the playing field between
in-state and out of state
manufacturers. This bill allows
enemy to remove unsafe hemp
products from sale and assess
penalties for manufacturers,
distributors, and retailers that
violate the Act and adopted
rules.
The bill addresses the immediate
and growing concern of
semi-synthetic and synthetic
cannabinoids, which I'll refer
to as synthetics moving forward,
being manufactured and sold via
what many call a, a loophole in
the 2018 farm bill by banning
them and manufacturing
operations here in New Mexico
and on retail shelves in New
Mexico. All 50 states have
reports of adverse health
effects as a result of consuming
synthetics, these health effects
include intoxication, agitation,
hypertension, and hypertension
cough, abnormal heart rate,
paranoia, anxiety, memory loss,
confusion, breathing
difficulties, seizures, and
death.
Between January 1st, 2021 in
February 28, 2022. The National
Poison Control Cents received
2,362 exposure cases from Delta
8 alone.
To put that into perspective,
um, a recent Colorado law.
Named over 30 cannabinoids, uh,
outside of, in addition to this
delta 8, 41% of those cases were
in patients under 18 years of
old, uh, of age.
82% of these cases were
unintentional exposures.
70% required healthcare
evaluation and 8% of these cases
resulted in hospitalization.
Of those hospitalized and um
requiring healthcare, 45% were
pediatric patients. Regulatory
safety groups, including the US
Food and Drug Administration, US
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention and the United
States, uh, pharmacopeia have
issued statements of concerns or
warnings concerning the
consumption of synthetics. Some
cannabinoids such as delta 8 may
be found naturally in hemp but
are often in negligible amounts
and it's generally thought to
not be economically feasible.
to extract them naturally in
order to create quantities for
commercial use that are
economically feasible,
manufacturers use toxic
chemicals to create the desired
cannabinoid using chemical
synthesis in a process that is
similar to manufacturing
pharmaceuticals. The use of
these chemicals pose a
significant risk to worker and
inspector safety and raise
serious consumer health
concerns. The production of
synthetics results in a creation
of isomers, chemicals and
impurities that are unknown or
unidentified
and non-naturally occurring in
cannabis or the hemp plant. Many
of these substances have not
been studied for safety,
efficacy, or toxicity, meaning
we do not have reliable
information related to long and
short-term health effects,
including if they cause liver
damage, cancer after repeated
use.
If they negatively interact with
other medications or if they
cause birth defects or
miscarriage of consumed while
pregnant. Analytical
laboratories lack standardized
methods to properly isolate and
identify these isomers chemicals
and impurities that are created
during the manufacturing process
to create these synthetics,
scientifically valid analytical
methods developed through
clinical investigations are
necessary to ensure the isomers
chemicals and impurities created
by chemical synthesis.
are completely removed or exist
at established levels for their
condition of use. Several
definitions were added as well,
um, and updated to clarify and
standardize with industry
standards in other states in
this bill, specifically the
definition of hemp finish
products was updated to clarify.
That the EIB is to adopt rules
to enable enemy to regulate hemp
products that are intended for
human ingestion or inhalation.
Currently, the act could be
interpreted to require the EIB
to adopt rules regulating.
Uh, hemp products including
textiles and building materials
such as hempcrete which are
outside NMED's expertise.
Finally, if this bill is
adopted, and NED plans to
include provisions and rules
adopted pursuant to the Act to
ensure hemp products from
outside New Mexico are
manufactured by licensed
manufacturers, meet minimum
safety standards, including THC
levels, our laboratory tested to
confirm safety are properly
labeled and are accurately
presented to the public.
Thank you.
Thank you.
That Madam Chair we stand for
questions. OK, and I do note
that you have a an amendment.
Trying to get a committee so um.
So I think just disregard that,
and I think at this point.
We don't want to confuse the
committee. OK.
No me. All right.
That's the end of the
presentation then.
Yes, ma'am, we stand for. All
righty. Uh, is there anybody
here, um?
In favor of this bill, you'd
like to come up to the front
end.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, Robert Romero,
registered lobbyist for Ultra
Health, the licensed to cannabis
company. We, uh, for the reasons
stated, we support this bill.
Um, good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Scott
Scanlon register lobbyists for
Sss also a cannabis company,
Delta 8 is a serious problem in
the United States and and states
are beginning to address the
problem head on, much like this
legislation, uh, the state of
California, for example, the
governor issued an executive
order basically banning Delta 8
in the in in the state in that
state, so this is a real
problem, it's a real.
problem with youth and just like
youth vaping is a problem. This
is also a real problem to
support the bill. Thank you.
Uh, anybody on Zoom?
Kevin RLD.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, the
sponsors of the bill and the
experts who testified have done
an excellent job of explaining
the problem that's here and why
we need this bill. Regulation
and licensing department and our
cannabis control division stand
in strong support of Housebo
346. Uh, if we don't do
something to address the, the
problem here. We have untested,
unsafe products that are
available to our children, we
need to to pass this authority
and to be able to get along, you
know.
On the books that will allow us
to address these issues. Right
now the cannabis control
division doesn't have the the
proper authority Environment
department doesn't have the
proper authority. This bill
solves that problem and we're in
support of it. Thank you.
Matt Kennicott.
Uh, good evening.
Good evening, uh, Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
uh, my name is Matt Kennicott.
I'm with the plugg of cannabis
Industry Association group
representing small cannabis
businesses. I'm also a micro
licensee and Socorro, New
Mexico. Um, we definitely stand
in strong support of this bill.
These products come into the
state unregulated and unsafe
while most of us cannabis
licensees are working very hard
to stay compliant. So we're very
happy to see this come in to, to
help provide.
protect consumer safety. Thank
you.
Ben Lewinger.
Madam Chair, committee members,
Ben Lowinger, the executive
director of the New Mexico
Cannabis Chamber of Commerce. We
thank the sponsors for bringing
this bill and stand in strong
support. The 2018 Federal Farm
Bill redefined hemp to have up
to 0.3% THC content. This
created a loophole with the
unintended consequence of
allowing intoxicating
hemp-derived THC products to be
sold at smoke shops and gas
stations across the state, as
well as mine, where there is no
real age verification, meaning
that young people under 21 are
able to make purchases and have
these
products delivered to their
home. Hemp derived THC products
do not face this names stringent
testing requirements that we
have in our regulated cannabis
market and because of the way
these products are produced,
they can have dangerously high
concentrations of pesticides and
heavy metals. As of today, 34
other states have taken action
to ban or somehow address delta
8 and other hemp-derived THC
analogs, with many other states
having similar conversations as
we are today.
Well, we expect the federal
government to revisit the farm
bill this year. Some of the
congressional proposals that
have made public would sadly
make this problem worse. I know
that we had some of our members
on the House floor today, uh, to
be clear, I love our members,
our members of Congress are the
best in the country, however, in
the interest of public safety,
we cannot afford to wait for
Congress to close this loophole.
I urge the committee to pass
House Bill 246. Thank you.
Bob Boylan
Good evening, Madam Chair and
committee members. Um, we stand
in strong support of the bill.
Um, we've been a licensed hemp
manufacturer here in the state
of New Mexico for over half a
decade, have never been involved
with synthetic or semi-synthetic
and believe that we need to talk
about the full spectrum benefits
of the plant and stand and
support of the laws, it's being
written.
Chad.
Reporting in progress. Thank
you. Um, this is, my name is
Chad Lozano. I'm the host of AS
Chad Grassy Logic, longtime
advocate for cannabis here in
New Mexico, especially on the
medical cannabis side for over a
decade now. I'm actually against
this bill because I believe this
is taking a step backwards, as
I'm not a big fan of HHC Delta
or those products in the way
that they're made. I feel that
this attacks cannabis and the
progress that we've made. And
everything I've heard, it seems
more of a fear from corporate
companies getting their
Money dug into than anything
else that this bills be brought
up than anything. Um, I'm
fearful that this will also
attack cannabis in the future.
Right now, there's still a huge
stigma on cannabis and
especially hemp. I feel we
should regulate these products
more than just straight out
banning them, especially the
process that's made through it.
Um, thank you so much and uh
hope to hear the votes.
And, and just to clarify, uh, we
are on those, uh, in favor of
the bill right now.
We've got one more.
G. Lopez
Hi, my name is Gerardo Lopez,
and I actually agree with Chad
Lozano's statement where I feel
like if we just regulate these
products a little bit better
without it having to be the
states uh.
Work to do so because it's like
more of a federal thing. It
could be beneficial. Thank you.
Anybody else?
It works.
All righty.
Uh, anybody here in opposition
of the bill.
All righty, you'd line up.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Alan
Conaroff.
Um, and I am one of the owners
of the heart of hemp, the only
manufacturer of Delta 8 products
in the state of New Mexico.
Um
We are regulated by the farm
bill and
Licensed by the New Mexico
Environmental Department. We are
inspected by the environmental
department and quickly uh remedy
any complaints that they have.
All our products are third party
tested, and
Uh, we published our COA's on
the website through a QR code
which is on our packaging.
Senior citizens, veterans, and
others need the much milder, er,
milder delta 8 products with
only 0.03% THC rather than the
much stronger psychoactive
components found in the
dispensaries.
This product has been around
since 2018. I don't understand
why it is now an emergency to
shut it down.
We are the baby in the bathwater
that will be thrown out with
this pill.
And there's a one minute time
limit.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee for
letting me speak today. My name
is Adam Hooks. I'm an employee
of Heart of Hemp, and I'm all
for a better education and
regulation of hemp derived
cannabis products, but the
information in House Bill 346
falsely equates naturally
derived cannabinoids with
synthetic, often unpredictable
substances like K2 spice. Delta
8 is a valid and safe product
that some consumers prefer to
Delta 9, AKA regular THC because
it has less intense anxiety
producing properties, as well as
superior pain relief. Not to
mention that there are regular
cannabis companies all around
New Mexico selling regular THC
products with a semi-synthetic
hemp derived cannabinoids added
to them, such as delta THC and
CBN to add a more specific
effect to their product.
The company I work for regulates
our Delta 8 products to the same
high standards as the legal New
Mexico cannabis industry,
including third party testing,
childproof packaging, and
clearly stating no sales to any
persons under the age of 21.
When a minor in New Mexico is
served alcohol illegally. We
don't ban Anheuser-Busch, we go
after the person who sold that
alcohol to the minor.
So in conclusion,
Absolutely, yes, to safer
regulations of hemp products,
but no to the miseducated House
Bill 346. Thank you.
Madam Chair
We need a smarter approach to
hemp regulations instead of
rushing to ban Delta THC, we
should be advocating for
responsible regulations that
ensure safety, quality, and
transparency as we do at heart
of hemp and high res Delta 8
Company, along with the cannabis
industry, banning it outright
would hurt consumers, encourage
illegal markets, and eliminate
inaccessible beneficial
alternative to many people.
We set a high industry standard
promote consumer safety and
allow innovation in the hemp
space. The answer isn't
prohibition, it's smarter
regulations. Let's work together
to create a safe legal and well
regulated future for Delta 8 in
the state of New Mexico, reject
House Bill 346.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and Representatives.
My name is Barbara Goncharoff,
and I'm a partner of a licensed
hemp manufacturing company in
Albuquerque. Our company follows
all safety labeling and testing
standards for all our products,
including Delta 8 and other
Hamp-derived cannabinoids. We
create alternative products for
people who cannot tolerate the
much stronger psychoactive
effects of cannabis. Please
don't hurt those of us who are
following all the regulations
and making safe and needed
products. This movement to
He derived cannabinoids is
largely driven by multi-million
dollar cannabis companies from
out of state, moving into our
state that has always valued
small businesses. They want to
destroy the competition when
there is need for both
industries to exist, rather than
an outright ban, please craft
hemp policy that safely keeps
the market open, creates and
sustains valuable businesses and
jobs in New Mexico. Thank you
for your good evening, Madam
Chair, um.
My name is Eddie and I'm a small
business owner over here in New
Mexico, I um, I own smoke shops
here, me and my family, and we
do this to provide for our
families with this bill being
passed, this kid like.
This could devastate us and ruin
our business in general and um I
feel like another thing that I'd
like to bring up is um the fact
that I'm hearing that about
people under 21 purchasing stuff
like this and getting hurt by
it, but I would like to, I would
like to say that no matter what.
Uh, with this being banned or
with this uh bill being passed,
the, the kids will still find a
way to do it. It's the street
market, it's dispensaries. I
mean, I completely disagree with
it just being only delta. Thank
you. Hello, Madam Chair.
is it?
I'm late and.
And the committee
I'm a small business owner too,
and it's a really nice bill, but
an outright ban would hurt lots
of lots of lots of businesses.
As I've looked and I researched
within the past 4 years, there's
never been an outright death
from Delta 8 or injury unless
there's another substance inside
of it.
Thank you.
Madam Chairwoman and members of
the committee. My name is Ian
Shaw, co-founder of the Heart of
Hemp.
As a young native New Mexico
business owner in the hemp
industry, I'm deeply concerned
about how spill 346.
This bill is only about public
safety as a guy, ultimately this
is a power grab by cannabis
conglomerates using
misinformation to push small
business competition out of the
market.
For my family, hemp-derived
products are more than a
business. They are life changing
medicine. My uncle has a central
tremors and only our delta HTHC
vapes and gummies stop his
uncontrollable shaking.
It has completely changed his
life.
ITHC cannabis makes him too high
and paranoid and doesn't help
his shaking as well.
House Bill 346 would strip
access to these vital products
and harm countless New Mexicans.
We need science-based
regulations, not monopoly driven
bands. I urge you to stand with
small businesses and those who
rely on hemp reject House Bill
346 regulate don't prohibit.
Thank you
Uh, good evening, Madam
Chairwoman and members of the
committee. My name is Jeffrey
Goncharoff. I'm also one of the
co-founders of the Heart of Hemp
and quite frankly, this bill
would devastate our company and
put us out of business.
Um
At its core, we feel that this
bill.
is not about public safety, it's
about eliminating competition to
benefit corporate cannabis
monopolies.
This bill as written will
devastate the New Mexico hemp
industry. Smoke shop owners, and
even worse, the livelihoods. It
is not based on legitimate
science.
Evidence, but rather outdated
scare tactics straight out of
the reefer madness era.
It completely ignores the voices
of industry experts, small
business owners, and most
importantly, New Mexico
consumers who rely on these
products as a less intoxicating
alternative to traditional
cannabis.
Instead of an outright ban, we
need smart, science-based
regulations that prioritize
consumer safety without
destroying an entire industry.
Please don't let misinformation
and corporate greed dictate
policy in New Mexico. I urge you
to.
Um, reject this bill. Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Matt Moos.
I'm a registered lobbyist with
the heart of hemp.
Um, as you heard from all the
previous testimony, this bill
will effectively kill this one
small business in New Mexico,
and it'll also cause severe harm
to all the smoke shops around in
Mexico as Delta Aid and other
products are part of their
business model, um, for those
reasons, I do ask you to vote
against this bill and work with
us on regulations through the.
Can we go to Zoom
Upton
Yes, uh, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, my name is Upton
Ethelbaugh, a Native American
branding and packaging designer
specializing in the hemp
industry here in New Mexico.
I strongly support House Bill
346's focus on safety,
transparency, and consumer
protection, particularly around
labeling third party testing and
preventing sales to minors.
However, I urge you to
reconsider provisions that could
ban delta 8 THC and other
hemp-derived cannabinoids.
These are naturally occurring
compounds that can be extracted
through safe, regulated
processes and should not be
conflated with synthetic drugs
like K2 or Spice.
Prohibition misclassification or
restrictive enforcement when
harm not only local
manufacturers, but also lead to
job losses and a reduction in
revenue for secondary and
adjacent markets like mine, all
well, limiting consumer choice.
I encourage the committee to
adopt clear evidence-based
regulations that uphold consumer
safety while supporting New
Mexico's legitimate hemp
economy. Thank you for your time
and consideration.
Alrighty, we can go to members
of the committee.
Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, I'm confused.
Uh, I, who regulates he, is it
the environment department or is
it RLD?
Madam Chair Representative, the
New Mexico Environment
Department currently regulates
hemp after it's harvested.
Thank you for that answer. And
Madam Chair, representatives,
isn't hemp.
If it gets too much THC, isn't
it called cannabis?
Or what's it called if it has
too much THC in it, Madam Chair
Representative, based on the
definition of, of cannabis and
hemp, it, it is determined at
the plant level before the
processing begins in New Mexico.
So anything grown at 0.3% or
less THC. Delta 9 is hemp,
anything.
Thank you, um, Madam Chair and
Representative.
That's what I thought, and so.
What happens in the regulatory
environment.
When
The hemp
has too much THC in it and has
to be.
Destroyed
If, from what I understand, it
has to be destroyed if the THC
level gets too high. Is that
true? And what happens to it,
Madam Chair Representative,
currently right now our
regulations in New Mexico only
address Delta 9, which is the
most well-known naturally
occurring cannabinoid in hemp or
cannabis. And if we
Have a finished product that is
above the allowed HC we would
allow them to rework that
product to become below the
legal limit or it would be
destroyed.
OK, thank you for that. That's
what I remember from the bill
the previous bill.
And so in the.
Fiscal impact report.
Um
There's confusion, it sounds
like under significant issues.
Um, RLD analysis notes cannabis
control division will need to
coordinate with EIB to ensure
the new hemp finished product
and rulemaking.
So
What are you actually trying to
do and who is going to be.
The person or the entity.
That regulates.
this or will there be two
different agencies regulating.
And if so, how are they going
to, going to communicate.
Madam Chair and representatives,
so first to clarify,
Right now NMED has jurisdiction
over the manufacturing piece.
With regard to him finished
products.
But nobody has jurisdiction over
the retail.
Of those products, which is what
we're doing with this.
With this rulemaking is to
provide us that ability.
Um
Product that has to be
destroyed, of course, if it's in
the field, they determine it's
too high, then that becomes an
issue for cannabis, uh, and also
for Department of Ag who has a
piece of that.
Once, uh, and here's where the
problem came in and we've
coordinated very closely with uh
the cannabis Bureau with RLD,
uh, with, uh.
Everybody regarding this trying
to figure out what's the best
way to to deal with this issue.
The
The products that we're talking
about these synthetics, which
are, they're not naturally
occurring.
Right, they're having to be made
utilizing chemicals and other
processes, which is where the,
the issue becomes.
Um, they're not those types are
not being manufactured to our
knowledge here in New Mexico,
but they're being imported into
New Mexico from out of state, as
a matter of fact, the state of
Colorado, their law allows them
to make.
The synthetic cannabinoid
products, but they can't sell
them in Colorado, they have to
ship them out of state.
Because there's an issue, they
recognize the problem with them,
OK?
And so what we are endeavoring
to do here is to be able to
control the access of this to
the public, specifically the
kids right now these products
can be bought in smoke shops,
that's true.
But they can be bought
inconvenience stores.
And there's no requirement to,
there's no age limits, nothing
on these products and the
The potential impact of somebody
being injured by one of these
products, it's been basically
remanufactured using chemical
processes that aren't known.
Um, you know, you've heard it,
the discussion about high
pesticide amounts in these
things. There's not really any
control on it.
The urgency here is that it's,
there's no acceptable number of
people or, or kids that can be
injured by this stuff, right? We
need to get a handle on this.
And figure out how to control
it.
Up front
And then work from
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, and
representatives. Was this uh
legislation vetted uh during the
interim.
Uh, Madam Chair, um,
representative, it wasn't vetted
through the interim, however,
versions of this bill have been
um iterated in the past, I
believe, 4 years uh since
cannabis was regulated, um, and
since um hemp has been in the
open market as well, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. So, uh, thank you,
Madam Chair, so this bill we
want to do away with any of the
synthetic.
Or at least regulate it.
Is that correct?
Madam Cha represented the, the
intended to ban.
Chemically made synthetics and
semi-synthetics.
Um, there is no in this bill,
there is no specific reference
to the, the product that's been
brought up here, the TH8. If it
is naturally.
Derived without chemical
processes and stuff.
It would not fall under this.
We're looking for things that
require chemical processing in
order to get them to these
levels.
Thank you for that answer and
and Madam Chair and
Representative and Sir.
Do these products, so they're
not regulated, they're being
brought in from out of out of
state.
And how do these say a
convenience store received these
in their, how do they sell them
in their store? And, and it does
not have, you have to be 21 to
purchase.
Correct, Madam Chair, uh,
representative, there's no
regulation surrounding the sale
at a retail level right now, so
we're seeing everything from
online stores, making them
available, convenience stores
across the state, making them
available different forms,
whether it be a gas station or.
Even just a holistic healing
sort of place there, it's kind
of all over, it runs the game.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
Representatives.
So, uh, once it's regulated, who
will be the policing or do the
policing of these products that
are in the gas stations or
convenience stores now.
And how do you get rid of them?
Madam Chair and Representative.
With this regulation that would
fall to the New Mexico
Environment department would be
our inspectors going in.
Uh, and
Inspecting these premises, um,
there's also a a requirement in
this for these retail outlets to
register with us.
So that we can, we can track and
record what's going on.
To be quite honest, the intent
is the hope is that if this
regulate if this legislation
passes that we begin to notify
some of the larger chain stores
that potentially carry this and
let them know that that this is
about to be illegal and they
need to remove it. We believe
that probably 70 to 80% of them
if they have this product will
take it off the shelves, and
then we will be inspecting the
others.
And what are the, thank you,
Madam Chair and and sir, and
what are the fines for having uh
uh if this bill passes, what,
what is the fine?
Madam Chair Representative, we
have a maximum penalty of $1000
per violation.
As proposed in this legislation.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. So, uh, per
violation means per package in
the.
What is per violation? What does
that mean? representative. So
for example, if you
Um, possessed a semi-synthetic
or what we're calling synthetics
here, that would be $1000 fine
if you were manufacturing it in
the back of the facility, that
would be a separate violation,
another $1000 penalty.
So a occurrence just means per
violation as we would adopt
rules for.
Thank you, Madam Chair. You
know, I, I'm on the bill with uh
another representative here or
regulating some of the cannabis
stuff where we found holes. So
one of the problems was.
The fines
Let's just pay our fine and keep
selling it.
So $1000 it's not minimal, but.
A lot of places that that
wouldn't really mean much, and
they may just keep selling it.
I'm Chair Representative.
Another thing that we often do
with the Environment department.
The rule, I believe, is we would
go to district court for an
injunction, so that's our
progression of enforcement when
we face these things in our food
program, current hemp and
cannabis.
Thank you for that. I'm um
I'm not a big regulator, first
of all, Madam Chair.
Not a big fan of regulations,
but I understand that rules have
to be made.
Um
For the people who are actually
willing to follow.
And
I'm concerned that
I think it would be better off
if you bedded this during the
interim just so that more people
can be. I mean, I have a million
questions.
Because I'm not familiar with
the industry.
Um, I'm concerned about
rulemaking.
I can talk about that all day
long, where we
Have a have a law, and then we
go into rulemaking and it
expands it so far.
That it's not the intent of the
legislation. So that's a concern
to me. I would rather it just be
spelled out.
What the fines are, whatever it
is, but rulemaking always
concerns me.
Um, I'll listen to the rest of
the um testimony, but thank you
so much for your answers.
Thank you. Uh,
Representative Parajan.
Thank you so much. Thank you
secretary and, um, I have a few
questions because like Leader
Armstrong, I'm, I'm still trying
to understand how this product
Delta 8 is made and so I just
wanna confirm that uh my
understanding of how it it's
synthesized because it's it's
synthetic.
It, it comes from hemp.
Which
Then turns into CBD.
Which from there through a
chemical process.
Of adding
Chemicals, it is that, is that
correct, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair Representative, that
is correct.
I would note that
We've been, there's been some
discussion about I don't have
It before me, um, but I have
talked to one of the approved
labs in New Mexico. And they
have confirmed that in over 500
samples of harvested hemp, they
have not found from hemp
harvested in New Mexico.
So when we talk about these
products are a result of a
loophole.
Um, it is coming from hemp. It
is coming from CBD, but from the
Hampton harvested in New Mexico,
again, 500 samples from one lab,
they have not found delta.
So Madame Chair and uh.
bureau chief, so it, it.
It, it's not coming from CBD or
they are synthesized is coming
from CBD.
To, to be completely clear. It
does not have to. It can be
fully synthesized from just
chemicals, but most often what
we are seeing is they are taking
what we call a CBD isolate,
which is as close to 100% CBD as
can be. And um
Combining that with chemicals.
And, and
Through a process of cooling,
um, and, and I mentioned in my
notes, but it's a very, it's a
very dangerous process. Madam
chair and uh bureau chief that.
Uh, so there are many ways to
make this product, it sounds and
is the danger in.
The in Delta 8 itself.
Or is contaminants that can be
produced. A representative,
that's a great question. And we
are not here to
Argue the pure delta 8.
Directly extracted, the concern
is in the chemicals and the
process and the unknown
byproducts, um, we've conversed
with multiple labs or
laboratories use something
called and I, I don't mean to
insult anybody's intelligence,
but a chromatograph to identify.
Um, different cannabinoids and
substances in these products,
and they've seen up to 32
unidentified substances in
products that are already on
retail shelves.
Meaning they cannot identify 32
substances that accompany that
delta 8 in that. And um experts
is, is that similar to something
that you would see like for
instance in in a cannabis
product.
Madam.
The natural that has been an
argument or a question that has
been asked, so again, another
great question. Um, the
unidentified in a naturally
extracted cannabis or hemp
product would be mostly fats,
lipids, and waxes that are
naturally, again, naturally
occurring in the plant.
That are not, which is very
different from this and creating
new and uns.
Man and experts, is there any
safe way to make this product to
make Delta 8
again, another great question.
There is.
Um, but it's right now, and I
mentioned it in my talking
points, it seems to be cost
prohibitive economically, um
unfeasible infeasible, not
feasible. Um, I have an example
that somebody shared with me, it
would take 121,000 pounds of
hemp.
Flower.
To create 2.2 pounds of natural
delta 8.
Again, there's probably some
representatives here that might
like to argue with that, but
this has come from a nationally
known source. So the answer to
your question is there are safe
ways to do this.
Via natural extraction. Also, I
mentioned in my talking points
earlier that this is very
similar to what we see in the
pharmaceutical industry. But as
you know, that's a heavily
regulated with very tight
manufacturing requirements, very
specific testing requirements
that if substances are created
as the result of creating a
pharmaceutical, they have to be
either fully removed from the
product and proven to be
removed, or they have to be
fully studied, vetted, and
explained.
Um, at what level they're safe
that contaminant is safe in that
particular pharmaceutical.
Uh, Madam Chair and expert, so
what, what is that?
Source that you said about the
that you identified for the cost
prohibitive calculation.
Madam Chair, Representative,
that came from the president, I
believe, and CEO of Proverti
Labs.
And they produce this product,
Delta 8 madam? No, Madam Chair,
representative, excuse me, um,
they are a lab that has been
doing cannabis testing for
almost 2 decades.
Are they one of the 3rd, um,
party, there was a a gentleman
who spoke um.
In the testimony against who
said that they are products go
through third party testing.
Madam Chair and expert so is is
a company like Pro Verde Labs
doing third party testing.
Madam Chair Representative Pro
Verdi would be an example of
that third party that the issue
is, again, they are able to
distinguishly produced, but the
concern that we have for the
public is those unknowns that
are unidentifiable.
We also know that some of those
unidentified.
Byproducts
Present as delta 8 using current
laboratory methods.
And um.
Chemistry professor
I do feel like I'm in a little
bit of a chemistry class here,
uh, Madam Chair and experts, so
I guess my question is like.
Why, why outright currently the
way that the bill is written as
we understand it's banning.
Um, Delta 8 completely and um,
you know, I I think we can,
we're we're barely able to get
our hands around the vape
industry or the even some
aspects of the cannabis industry
and in testing what's in there,
so, um, you know why is that the
reasoning why to make Madam
Chair and representatives. Madam
Chair Representative.
We're a lot of us know Delta 8,
right? There's been a lot of
talk about Delta, but I
mentioned in my talking points
when we started, the state of
California has identified 30 or
30.
Individual or groups of these
synthetically or semi. So it's
really easy for us to focus in
on delta 8, but
Manufacturers are creating
substances that are not
naturally occurring, and those
are also on our shelves for
consumers and adolescents in New
Mexico with, with no age. Um,
again,
We're not against.
The natural cannabinoids, and
natural extraction of these.
We would also not even be
against the
Yet to be
Developed
Synthetic processes that can do,
as I mentioned earlier, remove
those unknowns or identify those
unknowns and be able to
Um, quantify them in an amount
for either inhaling or
ingesting. The, the issue is we
are not aware in our studies
leading up to
And it's been quite a while.
It's not just like a couple of
months. We are not aware of any
economically feasible. I did
mention Pro Verity Labs a moment
ago that that has been doing
cannabis and hemp testing for
over 2 decades. They are able to
remove these impurities. But
again, it's very madam chair and
and if a company were doing the
non-synthetic, there is a way to
directly, so if if they were
doing it through the natural
way.
Madam Chair Representative.
Thank you, Representative
Matthews.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I really feel like I'm out of my
generation here.
I'm in the wrong generation.
Um
You know, we just drank too
much.
It's, it's pretty simple.
Uh
But, but, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
presenters, let me see, let me
see if I can kinda.
Figure out some things here. So,
Let me ask you
If um if we pass your bill.
And you do your regulation.
Would that prohibit anyone in
New Mexico.
From buying
Delta 8 online.
Madam Chair Representative, if
it was synthetically produced or
semi-synthetic, they would not
be able to possess that.
So Madam Chair.
Presenters, so what you're what
you're you're trying to ban.
Delta 8 entirely and make it
illegal to possess.
It can I call it a drug or or or
what is it? Madam,
it's not Delta 8. It is a
A group of chemically derived.
Products
That can be naturally occurring
in small amounts. What we are
doing is we are public health in
New Mexico.
By making sure that our
manufacturer and, and the safety
of workers and, and
And our inspectors, making sure
that these products
are not brought into the state
that I believe we've
highlighted.
Well, these products have a long
way to go to be proven safe
products.
So what the bill would do is it
would, our manufacturers that
are permitted in the future
would not be able products into
their operation to incorporate
them into another and.
Sorry, go ahead and it would
also
Not allow those products from,
it was mentioned earlier from
Colorado to be on our
Retail shelves that they do not
allow on their own retail shops.
Um, thank you and Madam Chair
this does kind of remind me of
our.
Um
And uh anyway, let me try a
couple more questions. So, um,
and you would, you would.
Prohibit the import.
Of
I can't call it
Delta 8, right? I, I have to
call it uh.
The the synthetic, the synthetic
product, OK?
So you would
Make it illegal to import that
into the state of New Mexico and
if someone did,
Then
There would be some kind of
penalty, is that the?
Structure the enforcement
structure you're looking at.
Madam Chair Representative, I,
I'd like to just read from the
bill if I could. It says that
manufacturers shall not receive,
possess, offer, advertise,
market, or sell products
containing.
Semi-synthetics or synthetic
cannabinoids. So that seems,
that same statement,
manufacturers or hemp retailers.
As presented in the bill would
not be able to receive, possess,
offer advertise, market, or sell
these products. Is Madam Chair,
um.
I understand
I understand that, but how are
you going to enforce it?
Madam Chair Representative, we
have our
Enforcement teams like this, and
we mentioned earlier, we do have
a $1000 per occurrence.
And as I mentioned earlier, if
we need to do what we call a
progressive enforcement would be
district court against the
Violators
I don't even like to use that
word, but
Madam Chair, uh, uh.
I'm looking at your, at the
fiscal impact report.
And it says that House Bill 346
proposes to amend the hemp
manufacturing Act.
Authorizing the New Mexico
Environment Department to
regulate the sale of
hemp-finished products.
So is hemp finished products.
Is there a definition for that?
Madam Chair Representative,
there is a definition for that,
and I'd be glad to read it to
you if you'd like. Um, but what
I want to make sure that we
understand is we're talking a
lot about just the
semi-synthetic syn synthetics
and banning them. This bill also
Includes an important
Um, expansion of the
jurisdiction of the environment.
Hemp hemp finished products,
which I'd be glad to read the
definition to you no more.
Um, you, you heard some of our
manufacturers here.
Testify, um, share that they
Follow our rules, they're
regulated by us.
People that are bringing hemp
finished products into New
Mexico, have no regulation
whatsoever currently.
So in addition to everything
we're talking about, about the
semi-synthetics and synthetics,
there are natural products on
the shelves in New Mexico right
now that are unregulated by us
and could contain
Uh, I believe Representative
Lente had a call recently about
some products from out of state
that completely failed
pesticides.
Um, testing.
Without the environment
department having the ability to
adopt rules through the
environmental Improvement Board
and regulate those products,
those products will continue to
be on the show. And Madam Chair,
uh, if I could read the rest of
this.
So it would regulate the sale of
hemp finished products.
It also authorizes the
environment, environmental
improvement board.
To promulgate rules regarding
the manufacturing, sale and
distribution of hemp.
Let's see, um.
Projects
And and he finished products.
The bill also excludes hemp seed
products.
From the hemp manufacturing Act.
Prohibits semi-synthetic and
synthetic.
Hannabinoids and makes technical
changes to the act as well, so
my question is looking at all
the, I mean, there's quite a few
things here.
I am I reading that correctly?
Madam Chair Representative, you
are reading that correct. And
that's why I didn't want us to
get lost in just one topic,
although it's a big topic for
tonight, um.
You are correct. It, it does
cover a lot of um.
Necessary Madam Chair, um.
Presenter
What would still with the sale
of hemp products.
With the sale of hemp in some
form or fashion still be legal
in the state?
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
it would. And what would that
be, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair Representative, it
would be very close to what it
is today for our many. We do
need to make some labeling to
modernize our ladies.
But what this
Bill and this legislation would
do all of the manufacturers
importing products into our
state to that same I've been
held to since 2019.
So Madam Chair.
Presenter I'd like to
Go back to my original question
about how you enforce this. I
mean, how many people is it
gonna take?
Or you all to regulate all these
products.
And get your.
And figure out how many $1000
fines and other kinds of things
you're gonna do.
Madam Chair Representative.
We currently have a staff of 3
and to do this work, um, as
Deputy Secretary Roderick
mentioned.
We believe that a lot, a
majority of this work facilities
and, and uh the department is
also, am I able to mention that
deputy secretary, um, setting up
a new bureau called the, the
Compliance and Enforcement
Bureau.
Which is coming up with full
staffing soon, and that if
Our bureau as the cannabis and
Madam Chair, how many people are
going to be in that compliance
and enforcement bureau and what
agency is that?
Madam Chair and representative
um as it's currently structured,
we anticipate about 110 staff in
the compliance and enforcement,
it's actually the compliance and
enforcement division.
Under the Mexico Environment
Department.
Um, we've made the determination
that we need to structure
ourselves so that your permit
writers.
And in this case, the
individuals that are are
reviewing and issuing
applications and issuing permits
for hemp or whatever it may be,
should not be the same people
charged with enforcing those,
um, and so we're.
Splitting those two operations
apart.
Um, so that our permanent riders
are, are, are permit issuers can
concentrate on that piece and
then we'll have a separate
compliance and enforcement arm.
To deal with the issues that
arise with folks that uh.
Choose not to play nice.
Man chair
and uh thank you for the answer,
but.
So it's, you said 3 people
originally were gonna do this,
but you're gonna have a bureau,
I'm sorry, uh.
Uh, compliance and enforcement.
Division with 110.
People and it's all.
To deal with this issue of hemp.
And these, these uh synthetic
products.
Madam Chair and Representative,
no, that's not the case. This
compliance and enforcement
division will be handling
enforcement for our water
protection division for our uh
resource protection division for
our environmental protection
division as well as the
environmental health division.
So,
They're available to assist as
necessary. We don't really think
that there's gonna be a huge
need for that, at least
initially, but we'll grow into
it as necessary.
Uh, men share, um.
And I'm, I'm sorry, I didn't
catch your name. That's.
Um
You're from the environment
department, correct? OK.
So
These this compliance.
Division
is a new division.
And these 110 people will be new
employees.
No, actually, the, the majority
of these 110 staff are being
transferred, for example, from
the water protection division
we're splitting out the
enforcement arm.
So these are not new staff,
these are existing staff.
Right.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, a
couple of more questions.
So you gave us a number of
figures about the harm that this
does.
Um
And I just
I wonder if
And, and obviously I
Hopefully we don't have people
taking drugs or chemicals or
other things that
That put them their health at
risk or their lives at risk, but
I am curious whether
How the kind of figures that you
shared with us.
Compared to
The misuse of cannabis and the
misuse of alcohol.
Madam Chair Representative, I do
not have those numbers.
And I'm, I wonder if uh
Well, I just want another
moment.
I still, uh, Madam Chair, I
still have the question about
what is left.
To sell
If you're in the hemp business.
If
You exclude all these various
items that I listed from the
FIR.
Madam Chair Representative.
Currently, any product.
Most, if not all products that
contain form.
Meaning they are not
So, these products.
That are currently being
manufactured,
being distributed products that
he creates, right, it's a wonder
plant you can almost turn it
into a num uh anything.
Um, paper, there's hempcrete,
there's um CBDs, as we know, um,
um, for different tinctures and
sleep aids, there's a, there's a
plethora of different products
that aren't Delta 8, aren't what
we're calling um.
Synthetic, um, cannabinoids
here, so.
There are plenty of other
options in the marketplace for
what to do with him, Madam Chair
Representative.
So, so, madam chair and
representative we're not trying
to outlaw hemp products, not at
all, Madam Chair.
Um
I think that's
Do we have any other questions?
I just had some clarification
questions, um.
So is Delta 8 or.
Synthetic products, um, are they
approved by the FDA?
Madam Chair.
And, um,
Do we know if the FDA is working
with state partners, uh, to
address concerns related to the
synthetic products.
Madam Chair, we've been waiting
decades.
It is, it is unclear at this
moment what they are doing
specific to Delta 8 from our
perspective. They are still have
yet to approve hemp.
Natural hemp.
So when we pass this along with
Representative Lente in 2019
when this bill passed, we had to
include a clause that is still
in the act that says in New
Mexico, food products are not
considered adulterated that have
hemp.
Extract as a part of the product
because the FDA would still
consider naturally derived hemp
containing products, adultery.
Alrighty, um.
So it's several questions
regarding uh enforcement, but I
think most of that was covered.
Except for the one question of,
so if I were to buy this on the
Internet, how would we enforce
that?
Madam Chair, I don't believe
there's any.
Or at least I'm not aware of
anybody that's able to do that.
OK.
All right.
Um, that's all I have. What's
the, the will of the committee.
Disappeared.
Uh
Madam Chair, I moved to table.
Yeah.
We do need a second.
OK.
Already, let's um.
Let's take a vote.
Representative Armstrong.
Yes, the table.
Representative de la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente.
Not a table.
Representative Mason.
Yes the table.
Representative Matthews.
Uh, yes, the table, but I'd like
to explain my answer.
My boat after.
Roll it's called Representative
Murphy.
Representative Parajon.
Representative Serrado.
the last, Madam chair, a table,
Madam, final tally would be 4
votes, yes, 3 votes no.
Ready, you're, the bill's been
tabled.
And, uh, Representative Matthews
to explain her vote. Thank you.
Thank you. I, I, I don't want to
minimize the
Uh, I mean
You all made a strong case for
the harm, but as long as we are
in a world where these products
can come in through the
Internet.
And um,
Yeah
I don't
I really don't see how we can't,
whoops.
How we
can
hope to control.
The situation and it does seem
to me we need to be looking at
something on a bigger scale, the
national scale or I don't know
how that would work these days.
Um, or a regional or something,
but it's just we keep having
these debates about
products that
We don't necessarily want in our
state, but what we're, but.
People can get them all the time
in our state through the
internet.
And
So we encourage people when we
pass restrictions like this, use
the internet to get them.
And I just, I think that
We got a
Deal with that, and try to
figure out how we can handle
that better. Thank you.
Already. We can go to our next
film, um, HB 296. I will, uh,
let the committee know there is
a dinner for them, cause we
still have 2 more bills.
Already represented.
You would like to start to
present your bill.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representatives, I am very
excited to present this bill,
um, it is a perfect bill if you
read the FIRs, there are no
problems with it, so if there
was, uh, the last, um, bill was
very contentious this one shall
hopefully be a much easier path.
This bill essentially ensures
that we are updating our
processes to have more certified
public accountants. I don't know
how many of you have used.
Uh, survive public accountant. I
know our business owners have,
but there is a grave shortage in
New Mexico and um I have here my
experts.
And I'll have them briefly
introduce themselves, um, but
the CPA board has brought us
this bill and so they're the
ones who are really asking for
these changes, um, to keep the
same standards to to achieve a
license, uh, but to also make
sure that we are incorporating
the next generation of CPAs.
I'll have my experts introduce
themselves and then I'll
introduce a up.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Laura
Beltran Schmidt. She's, uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, I've been with,
uh, I've been in the accounting
profession for approximately 20
years. I am a proud graduate of
New Mexico State University in
22 July 2004, uh, New Mexico
legislation was changed with
Senate Bill 2219 that did
require additional education
requirements in order for an
accounting, an accounting
graduate to this.
created a significant financial
burden for me because I was in
school on track with a 4-year
degree on a 4-year scholarship.
I was on track to meet all of my
accounting hours, uh, would have
been able to have sat for the
exam, had it not been for this
legislation and because the
total hours change requirements.
I had to take out a loan, uh, to
finish my college schooling,
tacked on additional education
that had nothing to do with
accounting, but simply helps me
achieve those hours. House Bill
296 that has been placed on
students who by creating
alternative pathways and to help
fulfill our CPA pipeline.
Thank you, Madam Chairs
Committee, Larry Harran
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico Society of CPAs. I find
myself here again trying to
repair something the lobbyists
for the CPAs before me passed in
2004, Tom Horan, um, that's when
they had the 150 hour
requirement they put into law,
which was, which is burdensome
on CPAs. This bill does 3
things. It gives 3 different
pathways for students to pass
through university and qualify
for the CPA exam.
Secondly, once you take your CPA
exam, current law allows for 18
months for you to take all of
the portions and pass them. This
would extend that 18 months to
30 months to make it, uh, more
accessible so they don't have to
retake certain portions of the
test while maintaining those
high professional standards, and
then the third thing it does is
it ensures that CPA is coming in
from out of state have to meet
the same experience and
education requirements as New
Mexico CPAs and we do have a
committee substitute and once
that is once we talk about that,
madam, I'd like to move the
committee.
to
Oh
Awesome.
Thank you.
Already, so can you um?
Explain yourself.
Yes, please. Yes, madam, I'll
defer to Larry.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Actually, I need to thank your
committee staff for the
committee sub analyst Mary Lee
Souls caught something in the
bill that we missed, which was
in page 27 and 28, we needed to
make sure that the education and
experience requirements for
those out of state graduates.
Matched what it does for New
Mexico graduates, so she caught
that, we had a great discussion,
so she helped us fix our bill
and the third thing it does is
if you notice some fiscal impact
report, the public board of
public accounts Board asked for
an effective date of January
1st, 2026. We did that in the
committee sub, so it's just to
fix that technical error and
then to to change the effective
date pursuant to the regulators
who asked us to do that. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Alrighty.
So do we have anybody here in
favor of the bill.
We can get you the
Come up to the end of the room.
You'll have a minute.
Yeah
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Jeannette Contreras and
I'm the president and CEO of the
New Mexico Society of CPAs. I'm
here tonight on behalf of the
Society in strong support of
House Bill 296, our association
works extremely close with New
Mexico accounting firms in New
Mexico universities. We are
certain that the passing of this
bill will positively impact the
future of the accounting
profession in New Mexico. Thank
you for your time and
consideration. Thank you.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Daniel
Trujil, and I am on the public
accounts board, I'm the vice
chair.
We met to discuss this bill on
January 7, 2025.
And uh we believe that this bill
will break down the barriers to
become a CPA? Well, not, uh,
making
It
Less, less quality.
Individuals becoming CPAs, so
continuing to protect the public
interest.
Um
Based on that
I personally urge your support
to strengthen our profession,
ensure continued mobility.
Thank you. Do we have anybody
online?
Emily Wilson.
Good evening, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Emily Wilson. I am a CPA
in our community and in full
support of House Bill 296. Thank
you. Thank you. Do we have
anybody in opposition to the
bill?
Do we have anybody online?
Already, um, let's go to the
committee. Do we have any
questions from the committee?
Representative Matthews.
thank you
presenters and.
Haran
Um, I was just curious. I was
reading the FIR.
And it was talking about.
Let me find a piece here.
Um
Talked about how we have RLD
states are currently 753 out of
state CPA licenses and 71 permit
holders.
And then it talks about the fees
and so forth. I talked about.
Um, by doing away with the fees,
we would actually lose some
money.
Uh, 131, let's see, uh, about
138.
$1000 which is.
And the
The world of public finance, not
very much money, but I'm.
And so my question, Madam Chair,
is.
Uh, I was curious, are we making
these changes.
To get more CPAs into our state.
Or are we making these changes
so that more of our CPAs.
And go out and work in other.
Madam Chair and Representative
Matthews, yes, so, so the idea
is with the economy we have now
to allow CPAs to practice across
state lines, but a big part of
that is
Is what you hit on 2nd, which is
it allows New Mexico CPAs to do
more business across the
country, so it increases the
business for New Mexico.
Um, ma'am, that's anybody else
on?
committee.
What's the will of the
committee?
Move it do pass
Uh
Oh
Right. Um, a move I do pass of
the committee, so.
OK, you do it.
Madam Chair,
I move a do not pass on House
Bill 296 and a do pass on the
commerce and economic
development Committee sub for
House Bill 296.
OK.
And we've got a 2nd.
Patrick to take the role.
Representative Armstrong
Representative de la Cruz.
Representative Hernandez.
Representativeente, yes.
Representative Mason.
Representative Matthews.
Yes.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Parajon.
Yes.
Representative Serrado.
Madam Vice Chair, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, final tally is 8
votes. Yes, 0 votes no. right.
Got to do this.
Already, HB 20, our last bill.
I know, and the committee seems
to be barely hanging on, so.
Keep going.
Thank you, Representative, if
you'd like to, uh, explain your
bill. Oh, and it looks like we
have another.
Substitute, correct. OK, would
you like for me to explain the
bill and.
Um
Why don't you talk about the
bill first and then we'll we'll
move this up. Thank you, madam.
It is a pleasure to be here this
evening. I know where the last
to go, so we'll try to keep it
brief, I won't read my
introductory remarks.
Um,
I'm here this evening with um
secretary of New Mexico's
economic development department
and I'm presenting establish a
technology and innovation
division at the Economic
Development department.
Um, this is an opportunity for
New Mexico to capitalize on high
tech growing industries, um,
aerospace and space.
Biosciences, advanced computing,
clean energy and water, and we
have the resources, we have the
talent, um, and now is the time
for us to do that, and so this
bill uh establishes a division.
It sets up a research and
development and deployment fund,
uh, to support efforts in this
state around those initiatives
and it also creates the New
Mexico innovation prize, uh,
which is similar to.
Concepts like the X Prize, uh,
that can uh bring innovative
technologies to New Mexico, um.
I want to see if um my expert
would like to add anything, uh,
before we.
Uh, introduced the substitute.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name's Rob
Black Cabinet secretary
designate EDD um.
I, I'd like to start off to make
sure that I don't get in trouble
uh with those that do
appropriations, uh, this was not
part of the executive request as
far as the budget goes, so I
just want to be clear of that,
um, but, uh, the representative
did ask me to be here because
the the division would sit
within EDD and um I would say
that as far as the the approach
that she's taken the
comprehensive approach of how
she's thinking about what this
does on the technology side.
It's
the most comprehensive way of
thinking about it since we did
our 20021 economic strategy for
the state about what are the
tactical ways we actually
implement.
The state plan and so I'm
pleased to be here and support
her efforts.
We are pleased that you are
here.
Um
So do we have anybody that would
like to move the uh.
Substitute
Manager, I move.
Uh, adoption of the committee at
the discussion move the
committee substitute for.
Discussion.
Did you let let's go on to the
the.
OK, um, and then I have, um,
0.230891.2.
Great.
Um, so the committee substitute
makes um.
Mostly technical changes based
on feedback.
OK. Um, we're showing on.
The one we received yesterday
was a 0.1, not the 0.2. When was
that? When was this submitted
that was submitted yesterday at
107.
So you should have both. OK.
Hold on just a sec.
OK
How different is the 0.12.
Sorry,
Madam Chair, and representative,
um, most of the changes were
actually done in the 0.1 uh
version, there was an additional
change that I can check my email
for that was done in the 0.2.
Um,
Madam Chair Representative, so
the changes that were made, uh,
were inconsistencies between the
original and the substitute, so
for instance, um.
Section 8C1 on page 17, it's
still made reference to
reviewing awards on an ongoing
rolling basis, but that had
already been changed, um.
Section 10A2 on page 21 refers
to prioritizing projects that
have, um, higher percentages of
matching funds, and that needs
to have when applicable,
applicable added to the
beginning.
Um
Less consequential, but with the
addition of CNM to the core
member representation of the
board, um, changing 10 to 11.
Um, and then.
Uh
Section 4A on page 11.
Still names the four sub.
for sector specific
subcommittees.
Um
Which had been changed in the.
Previous version.
So I'm not hearing any
substantive changes. It sounds
like more of clean up.
Yes.
So I'm looking at the ranking
member to see if he's if your
side is OK with that for us to.
OK.
Please proceed.
Thank you, member, uh, Madam
Chair, um,
I think that um we would go
ahead and stand for questions,
um.
If
That does work. So, um, why
don't we first see if anybody is
in favor of the bill.
OK, if you'd like to please come
up.
And you've got a minute.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members.
My name's Nathan Bush. I'm uh.
Staff at the University of New
Mexico, we sincerely appreciate
the sponsor, uh, bringing this
bill forward. We really
appreciate the collaboration
between the executive, uh, the
bill sponsors and also a higher
education institutions, UNM
included. We've been uh
consulted about this bill every
step of the way and really
deeply appreciate the uh thought
that's gone into it. Thank you.
Man, I'm sure members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza,
executive director with New
Mexico ADA, the statewide
economic development
Professional Association, uh, we
stand in strong support of the
legislation. And really what we
believe is, you know, New Mexico
has a lot of great assets. We
have our research institutions,
our workforce, our
entrepreneurial spirit, and
those are great advantages, but
we really need a framework to,
to make those true competitive
advantages and we do believe
that bill uh succeeds in that
and also just do want to make
note that Secretary Black didn't
make. I mean we've
put a lot of effort and I know
the state has in terms of the 20
year economic development
strategic plan, we've had a lot
of conversations about that in
the interim. This is a bill that
really moves it forward and
makes implementation so that we
can move forward and really take
advantage of that plan. We stand
in strong support. Thank you.
Thank you. Is there anyone on
Zoom?
Alex Greenberg.
Uh, good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Alex Greenberg. I'm the
economic development policy
advisor for the governor's
office. I'd urge you to support
HB20 tonight, um, more than 75%
of all net new jobs are created
by small businesses, startups,
and currently we're missing out
on opportunities within our
science and tech, uh, sectors
like job growth, economic
development, new innovation
because of the lack of resources
and dedicated focus allowed to
those sectors from the economic
development department. Some of
our most important industries,
bioscience, advanced computing,
intelligent manufacturing.
Aerospace and clean energy and
water. These sectors that can
deliver high paying jobs and
meaningful work throughout the
state. I was previously acting
as the director of the Science
Technology office within the
state economic development
department, and it was only an
office one. currently is an
office one. currently he is in
office of two within another
staff allowed, but it still
lacks the sector dedicated focus
that's required. We have a
template of success with the New
Mexico Film Office, that when
you allow for dedicated staff, a
large team, resources and
incentives, the upside and
economic development and
economic impact that it could
generate.
It's time for New Mexico to be
able to capture the upside of
the intellectual property
generated in the state. So I
urge you to please support HB20.
Thank you.
Harold Lavender.
Uh, madam, Madam Chair, excuse
me, members of the committee.
I'm Harold Lavender. I work at
CNM with CNN Ingenuity. Uh, I
worked with several others as a
representative Dixon built this
bill and I had the pleasure of
seeing it come into being. uh
NCNM ingenuity is very involved
with entrepreneurship and
economic development, and I
strongly urge the committee to
pass this bill.
Clayton Abbey
Uh, good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
Clayton with New Mexico State
University. I do want to thank
uh, Madam Vice Chair Dixon and
Secretary Black also Alex
Greenberg, who has provided some
commentary and then my peer
institutions in Mexico Tech and
University of New Mexico, this
has been a collaborative effort
and we are looking forward to
the strides we make collectively
as a state with research and the
aftermath when we tied the
pipeline
together and uh with that I
strongly urge support and thank
everyone for your consideration.
Jason Weeks
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Jason
Weeks, registered lobbyist for
the Albuquerque Hispano Chamber
of Commerce. I want to thank the
sponsor for bringing it forward.
Also, Mr. Greenberg and Black
for supporting her in that
effort. Um, you know, New Mexico
is a place where innovation
needs to occur in order for us
to continue to diversify and
grow our economy. We do have a
huge tech sector or a small tech
sector that is, that could
become much bigger if we really
cultivate it. Um, this type of
bill really is going to help us
move our economy forward and
really
want to thank the sponsor for
bringing it. This will help
small businesses and large
businesses alike, bringing
larger businesses into the state
while allowing us to grow our
small tech uh base sector. So
please, I urge you, urge you all
to move this bill to the next
committee. Thank you.
We have anybody in opposition.
Anybody on Zoom?
All right, let's go to the
committee.
Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, um, representative
for bringing this bill forward.
How is this any different?
Um, then Lida.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Madam Leader for that
question. So this is
Fundamentally different in that
this is equipping our economic
development department with all
of the tools that they need to
aggressively support building
ecosystems and bioscience,
advanced computing, clean energy
and water, um, and aerospace and
space, this is providing the
staffing.
It's providing the connections
with industry by setting up an
advisory board and having
subcommittees, um, it's
supporting efforts um around the
state that our partnerships
between our national labs, our
universities and private sector
to develop, uh, new technologies
and compete for federal um
technology hubs and innovation
engines. It is.
It's the building blocks of
Uh, bringing in and supporting
businesses, so it's not just
giving money um to build a
building or a physical space. It
is all of the components that
are necessary.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative, for
that answer. Um,
I'm reading that this is a
grant.
Process. And so, um.
chair representative is, is it a
grant?
And how do we, if it is a grant,
how do we get around the
anti-donation clause.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
and Armstrong. So the RDND fund
is, it's similar to the matching
fund or TEF, except that it's
different. Uh, we have a gap in
New Mexico, where our
universities and partnerships
with.
The labs and industry have
applied for.
Space Valley Coalition funding
or um.
Quantum AI, these large federal.
Funding opportunities that
require matches.
And so the RD&D fund is designed
to work with our public entities
and.
You know
Essentially with the knowledge
of the economic development
department and the advisory
board be able to make decisions
about.
You know, where we have a
competitive advantage, offer
those contingent awards so that
we can maximize opportunities uh
in those areas and then, uh,
Secretary Black.
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
EDD has a special mandate as a
grantmaking organization, so we
have a variety of programs
whether it's in our healthy
foods program, our outdoor
trails program, uh, as well as
being able to run the film tax
credit, so we have a unique uh
legal authority to provide those
sort of grants, um, they do have
to have an economic benefit to
the state, and so we need to
document that and have uh
Make sure that we have our
procedures in place that ensure
that there's a broader benefit
beyond just the uh gift to a
company, um, but that it's a
company that is has the
opportunity to grow jobs and
create economic opportunity and
wealth here in the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Representative and
secretary, um.
Who sits on the um board.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, and
a leader, so, you know, that's a
really great question, and you
know, I will say that there's
some debate about, you know, how
large and expansive one should
make an advisory board, but when
we look back at the uh 2021
strategic plan, um, that the
state had commissioned. One of
the big, um, items that.
You know, was
I'd say prevalent in that
document was the need to really
have established communication
between industry.
Our universities, our
laboratories and the private
sector. Um, so the.
Um, advisory board, page 6.
Um, so the advisory board um has
an executive committee and then
it has subcommittees, but on the
advisory board itself, uh, are
11 core members. And so that
includes the president of the
New Mexico Independent Community
Colleges, um, and in all of
these cases or their designee.
Uh, president of the New Mexico
Chamber of Commerce, and then
one representative from each of
the following, Sandia National
Laboratories Los Alamos, Air
Force Research Lab, New Mexico
State University of New Mexico.
Uh, UNM Health Sciences, New
Mexico Tech, Navajo Tech, um,
and Central New Mexico Community
College, and then.
In addition to that, so those
are the core members and then
the secretary, um.
Sorry, also a representative
from, uh, if there's a
statutorily established center
of excellence, uh, like the
bioscience Authority.
Um, but then the secretary.
Is able to appoint additional
public members, and this is
where you really get the
expertise from the private
sector.
So having someone in skilled
trades, someone from a regional
economic development
um organization.
Um, a tribal representative,
someone from private equity with
at least 5 years' experience,
someone from venture capital
with at least 5 years of
experience, um, an individual,
um, who has worked with business
incubators or accelerators.
And then in addition, 8 members.
2 of each from those targeted
sectors.
And so that way you've really.
You've got the voices that you
need at the table.
Able to offer continuous insight
into, um, those areas. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I'm, I'm
impressed with diversity of the
of the members.
Who appoints those members? Um,
thank you, Madam Chair. um,
thank you later, so the um, the
core members are sentenced,
those are defined, uh, the
public members are then
appointed by the secretary of
the department. However, there's
a process similar to what was
put in place at the early
childhood, um
education and care department
whereby members of the public,
if they are interested in
serving, they can submit um
information to be a.
pointed
And Madam Chair ultimately the
governor.
Or who would appoint the the.
It would be secretary, OK.
And can you tell me, Madam Chair
representative, uh, what is a
representative from a skilled
trades association.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Madam Leader. So
skilled trades association is
going to be um.
You're building trades, for
instance, um, part of the
workforce development component.
Um, for a lot of these
industries.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for that answer. I
just want to make sure that the.
It's not one or the other, but
it could possibly be both.
Not just union and not just
merit shop, but a combination.
Is that specified in here
anywhere and I'm, I'm concerned
that that's just.
The union representation.
The definition and so maybe you
have a different answer.
Madam Chair Representative, I,
I, I get your point, but you
also have the designation of the
New Mexico Chamber of Commerce
in there, so you do have a
representative from the business
community side specific, as well
as someone from the labor side.
So I think that it was an
attempted for that balance.
respect.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
thank you.
That's not quite good enough for
me.
Um
I don't know what the language
would be.
But normally, there is
Representation from both sides.
And so, um, that's concerning to
me that part. That's not gonna
stop me.
Um, I mean, I'm supportive of
what you're trying to do, but
uh, it is a concern for me.
Chair and Madam Leader, I, you
know, if, if there's alternative
language.
You know, I think you could
certainly share that with us,
um, the point being that.
The workforce component is.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll be
sharing that with you, um, after
this.
Uh, not tonight.
But tomorrow, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Do we have any other
questions from the committee?
Um, I've got a couple of
questions.
Representative Mason.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Just a couple
of, it's a big bill and we, we
all know we need to.
But
all our the new technology move
forward but
Why
Why I had 10.
Where did that figure come from?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Representative Mason,
um, that figure, um, so the 100
million for the RD&D fund is
actually based on amounts from
recent uh award programs that
have required federal matches,
and so it's a beginning place,
uh, these, the matches required
for these types of initiatives
are significantly larger than a
lot of um, what would come out
of the match fund or the.
ology Enhancement, so.
The figure of 100 million was
based on, um, some of them added
to make a measurable impact in
our abilities.
uh, Madam Chair Representative.
According to the analysis I
read, uh, says here that the
Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Or an economic analysis of
Mexico state local governments.
that we already are spending
around 200 million a year on
R&D.
So this would
A 10 by 100 million would make.
50% increase in the budget.
Statewide R&D, is that true?
I was just reading for our
republic from uh analysis how
much do we spend a year on R&D
statewide.
Madam Chair, uh, and
Representative Mason, I don't
know that I know cumulatively.
Madam Chair Representatives,
there are a variety of programs
that that the the state supports
to help support
uh technology transfer and
research and development, uh,
from our GRT exemption for the
labs for them to provide
technical support and scientists
into small businesses here in
New Mexico, uh, to we do run
from our office of Science, our
strategy, science and
technology, a series of grant
programs
uh based off of support from the
legisla
last year
That are designed to support
things like uh
quantum computing things like
advanced energy, uh, water
purification.
Uh, areas where we see the
opportunity for tech innovation.
As a leadership position for New
Mexico, so there are.
We, we do administer some of
those sort of programs out of
EDD, um, but and there may be
additional programs that run
through the universities that
I'm not privy to, so I couldn't
speak to the the number that you
that you've articulated. I
apologize.
Thank you
It's, uh, we spent a lot, we
know that.
Thank you, uh, representative uh
Madam Chair.
Another
And by
That was report here said that
uh.
Bureau of Economic Analysis.
T3 they spending currently takes
up 6.
Closest state behind it
Washington.
I
any such thing as overspending
but a lot of resources.
That the government is picking
it may picks and chooses who
wins these contracts.
It's
I don't want to get into where
us as a state government are
picking the winners and the
losers.
And I'm sure your
representative, it, it sounds
like the numbers that you're
referencing might be as part of
the economy, uh, if you look at
Sandia National Labs, Los Alamos
National Labs.
Uh, Air Force Base, the Air
Force Research Laboratory. We
do.
Has a unique opportunity where
we do lead in in.
in many areas in New Mexico.
What we don't do is keep those
companies here.
Um, Microsoft started in New
Mexico and left.
Um, there are, we can list out a
variety of opportunities lost.
Uh, because we weren't anchoring
them with the ecosystem that
representative Dixon's bill
tries to create.
And so it's not just a grant of
money to someone. It's about
again working collaborative with
our national, our, our assets,
which are our national labs, our
universities, our research
universities, a skilled
workforce that has the highest
number of PhDs as a percentage
of any workforce in the country,
but also a skilled trades
workforce that's whether it's
from the oil and gas sector or
others that can help build hard
to build things, so we think
that uh whether that's on
quantum computing or in other
areas.
We are uniquely positioned.
Uh, but we need to make those
those investments that help
anchor those companies here in
New Mexico so we don't leave.
Thank you, Representative Madam
Jar, that was all my questions.
Thank you.
Um
Representative, do you have any
concerns that projects that the
technology and innovation
division would have any problems
attracting or finding necessary
skilled labor in New Mexico.
Representative, that's a great
question. Um,
And I think we, we see across
the US a lack of variety of
different types of skilled
labor, whether that's computer
programming, whether that's our
medical professionals, whether
that's uh performing in the
precise world that you need for
uh a spaceship.
Um, with that said, we have some
of the best training
institutions in the country here
in New Mexico and this
legislature has invested with
the governor, invested heavily
over the last several years in
our our CTE training programs,
so technical training programs,
and again, um,
We're one of the only states in
the country, I think we are the
only state in the country that
has seen freshman year
enrollment increased 3 years in
a row.
The investments this legislature
and the governor have made in
our uh
College tuition programs have
are building a workforce that
will support these sort of,
um, I would also note that um.
While not
In this bill itself, there's
funding for the department to
build career pathways, support
STEM education, support CTE, uh,
work with our universities, uh,
so really building from the
bottom up.
Madam Chair, you threw me a
softball. Uh, my apologies. We
have Jay tip, um, our JTI
program is one of the oldest and
best, uh, job on the job
training programs, uh, funding
programs in the country, so, you
know, again, we're helping skill
up those workers who are being
employed by new economic based
companies, uh, so uh thank you
for that softball. I'm sorry I
struck out.
I know it is getting late and
uh, but I did want you to shine
and be able to talk about how
our, our local universities and
um job programs are going to be
put to work, so, um, I just have
a couple other questions because
I know everybody's getting
tired, it is getting late, um,
under the, um,
Technology innovation price
program.
Um, HB 2 creates the technology
innovation and price program
that provides spending up to 5
million uh companies, um.
In those targeted sectors. Could
you tell me um what type of
companies would be eligible.
And would they need to have a
New Mexico presence.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
Any, any number of innovative
companies, uh, could compete in
the New Mexico Innovation prize,
but yes, there are requirements,
um, and a contract that uh
winners would have to sign, uh,
ensuring that they build and
grow here in New Mexico.
All righty, and the only the I
only have one other comment. Um,
I do see that there was funding
added to HB 2 in the
supplementals. Um, is that
correct?
Madam chair, yes indeed, there
is funding in the supplemental,
and then there is also um
additional funding in the recur.
Thank you very much. Alrighty,
uh, what's the will of the
committee?
Overdue pass.
It's, it's a supplemental.
Take it. OK, let's have one
person give it the now everybody
wants to practice.
I mean
I move a do not pass on House
Bill 20 and a due pass.
Or
House Bill 20.
HB 20
Do we have a second?
Do we have a second?
All right.
Patrick to take the role.
Representative Armstrong.
You know, I'm gonna vote no and
explain my vote.
Representative De la Cruz.
Yes, Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente, yes.
Representative Mason.
No.
Representative Matthews? Yes.
Representative Murphy.
Representative Parajon.
Yes.
Representative Serrado.
Representative, uh, Madam Vice
Chair. Yes, Madam Chair. Yes,
Madam Chair final tally is 7
votes yes, 2 votes, no. OK, we
have, you have a.
You, uh,
I do pass, but I know that
Representative Armstrong would
like to explain her vote. Uh
thank you, Madam Chair, just for
the reasons I stated before, and
I will, uh, work with you on
getting an amendment and then
happily.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
didn't want to, you know, tip
our hands that we had two
co-sponsors, uh, but thank you.
And we are adjourned until
Wednesday.
