Go to members of the committee
what
I have a few questions but.
Members of the committee.
Forgive me thank you let's let's
call the roll.
Representative Dow.
Here.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Gaydos.
Representative Hernandez.
Here.
Representative Thomson.
Here.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
here.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Serrato is here.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Martinez.
Vice chair Figueroa.
What is here.
I just here so we have a quorum
I think there's some
There's some up representatives
in the attendee Rome if you
could raise your hand
representative Garcia.
Any other representative in the
attendee room raise your hand as
a courtesy will bring you in as
a panelists.
I know the representative Garcia
is a cosigner on this bill.
And there was somebody else that
wanted to be included.
All righty thank you all members
of the committee a Joshua Adams.
Some are.
Sorry Mr.
Doing zoom on my I've had as
a little difficult
I usually just have a couple of
questions
you know I'm not with
I asked some questions of the
the gentleman from tall grass
the other day that to run a lot
of clarity this project is very
helpful for me.
so really I I just have a few
questions mostly about.
The changes from the previous
bills of this bill
what what those changes actually
the
So it sorry can I ask a question
at all.
When I'm asking questions the
chairman Lundstrom or vice
started small but I'm adjusting.
Thank you seven just just just
address
But you're Lundstrom and chilled
chill allocate the answer
whoever.
The specific expert or specific
person gets the attention
okay thank you Mr chair
Mr chair and madam chair there
was some money in the allocated
and also to for this project I'm
not sure if that changes we just
the between the first and this
bill can you kind of explains we
if if that's still going and
what that what that budget would
go towards.
Would be happy you Mr chairman
thank you Representative for the
question there are some
substantial changes between the
previous bill in this bill the
previous bill allowed for tax
credits and tax abatements this
bill does not do that what this
bill does are in terms of any
kind of state money that would
be involved with this bill it's
through a public private
partnership process.
We have put in so I the general
appropriations act funding that
would help with P. three P.
three investments the three
eight would be managed by the
New Mexico finance authority so
it's a regular application
process would be an application
process where they would
actually do the financial due
diligence and make a
determination whether or not an
applicant is eligible for P.
three funding so the only state
funding tied to this bill at
this time would be approved P.
three applicants.
Thank you Mr chair that's that's
actually quite cope live.
A lot of my problems with the
previous bill were tied to the
tax stocks so
are much more open to this bill
now that that that's gonna.
Worried about the risk that the
state has if something were to
hopefully not but were to go
wrong
ads you know the something
something were to happen the
risk factor for the state is
definitely something on my mind
so I'm glad that this kind of
mitigates a lot of the risk of
an animal they will be.
The charge of wax
So what's one more question
Question I'm I raise my hand
again I remember thank you Mr
chairman sure.
Thank you Representative
Representative Johnson.
Thank you Mr chair and that
thank you chairwoman Lundstrom
and that chair all
I did meet also with progress
the other day and I forgot to
ask a couple of questions my
questions pertain to the I'm
looking at the sheet here that
economic opportunities and
growth regarding the Escalante
project and how it projects over
five hundred jobs and sixty
permanent jobs can you remind me
again
Specifically or if you have that
information what kind of jobs
and who will be afforded those
jobs.
Thank you Representative I'd ask
Mister Campbell to respond to
that please thank you madam
chair representative
I don't have a specific
breakdown of of those jobs in
more detail than that what I can
tell you is the construction
jobs
you know there there is the
project does take some time to
complete so there is a you know
a fairly long period of time as
compared to maybe some other
construction type work since
this is major infrastructure on
the the what we called out on
that sheet is sixteen sixty or
more permanent jobs has to do
with operating the plant itself
Our thoughts on that or that you
know we would prefer to find
ways for the people that worked
there before.
The closure to either continue
some Steinborn so therefore.
Join us again and certainly our
focus I think as we share with
you the other day would be on.
People in in the community and
in that area as well I'll let
others speak to some of the
requirements in the bill around
apprenticeship and and some of
those things but there's
requirements that.
Would apply to us.
On that as well.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
with their well there'd be a
future job study for future job
training job.
Expertise development around
this.
development.
Yeah if I if I understand your
question correctly I think
you're asking if this provides
an opportunity for folks to gain
training and and skills.
Shuffling here I think I would
say yes to that and that's our
hope
if I might you know it's a bit
of a different thing but one of
the stories that.
I share the other day you know
here in Texas.
As wind generation developed in
the panhandle there was a lot of
debate around temporary jobs
permanent jobs and and folks
wonder what would happen
ultimately what happened is.
Many skilled jobs were created
and programs were put in place
and educational institutions
there the carry on even today so
we would expect similar things
what we're talking about here
today.
Thank you thank you I have other
questions but I'll go ahead and
raise my hand again later thank
you.
Thank you Representative
Gallegos.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
for bringing this bill and we've
heard a lot from both sides of
the of them.
From the sides of the insurance
to get my arms around it
could you tell me Mr chair and
and madam chair what protections
are in the bill to ensure that
the money is spent appropriately
and that that the projects
developed.
What projects are going to be
developed to protect the
environment as well.
Already I'll take the first part
of that
Madam way up Mr chairman I'll
talk about the protections in
terms of the funding and the
employment and I'd like to turn
it over to Representative small
on the other piece but what this
bill does is it allows for a
very specific definitions in
terms of how the development can
occur.
There is a a yes section in the
bill that creates an eleven
member development board.
And that board is
administratively attached to the
environment department.
That board is given a set of
criteria that they would use in
order to set up these hubs.
In terms of the
Construction all projects with
the construction costs in excess
of ten million dollars must
employ a minimum number of
apprentices from an
apprenticeship program if it's
available.
we also feel that because The
New Mexico binance Authority has
done such a very good job during
the pandemic to help move some
of our long purpose of lending
programs that they would be the
right state agency to provide
oversight to the public private
partnership agreements they
would actually provide that
oversight and reporting would be
done to their board but nope
project would be approved
without the health board's
approval so you to have a
different set of eyes looking at
the financial due diligence K.
and and they would make the
recommendation then to the full
board and I'd like to ask
Representative small to to add
to this please.
Thank you so much madam chair
you madam lip thank you for the
question and Mr chairman Mr
chair Committee there there are
strong standards that from the
get go
govern the carbon intensity
Madam Mr Chairman Madam economic
committee
on any upstream emissions there
The total allowable amount of of
streams emissions is only one
percent that it shall be one
percent or less by volume of all
gas use that takes New Mexico
strong standards and actually
improves them Mr chair committee
the carbon intensity basically
starts on site at one point five
kilograms of carbon dioxide per
kilogram of hydrogen
and then descends declines to
one.
And then ultimately in twenty
forty five it will be zero
Graham's
zero kilograms of carbon dioxide
per kilogram of hydrogen and Mr
chair Madam with basically this
starts
You know at least eighty percent
cleaner than the cleanest
natural gas in
developing this dispatchable
very clean power in it.
That ends as a fully zero carbon
resource which is critical
because in twenty forty five
when that zero the full zero
carbon comes into effect that is
right at the time when the
energy transition act.
Insurers that all power produced
utilized here in New Mexico will
be zero carbon power so it it
actually falls.
very well in line with the ETA
and will create much needed
clean dispatchable power as
well.
Thank you I'm.
And I a I think okay good on a
little late so you may have
already answered this question
but I because I heard the tail
end of of some of that
questioning but I I didn't catch
the number
when when you talk about jobs
what jobs can we expect in about
how many.
I'm gonna take a is.
Point Madam way up I'll try to
answer that then we can ask the
others to discuss this when
we're talking specifically about
the project in McKinley county I
have say in a projection of up
to five hundred construction
jobs and then the permanent
operational of peace is between
sixty and a hundred and that's
just for one facility what the
hell does is it offers the
opportunity to become an
industrial park so what part of
so we would be openly recruiting
other companies to be called
colocated say as an example but
if it's Escalante with the
Escalante side but the whole
idea is that the help is created
the help is created for
industrial clustering.
Yes we are
It did you have more at just
under just.
Maybe maybe just one or two
things more madam chair thank
you
it's a great point that those
numbers five hundred or more
construction jobs sixty
permanent jobs that's just the
Escalante project I've shared
with some of you as many as I I
I happen to have a last you guys
are plans around hydrogen in New
Mexico actually go far beyond
that happy to discuss that in
one on one if you'd like we
would expect to invest maybe
five or ten times more in
hydrogen in the state over time
and that sort of starts with
what we're talking about today
and establishing a base for the
hydrogen economy and then we
would expect significant growth
from there we actually got some
specific infrastructure plans
we're working on right.
That ultimately need to those
sorts of weapons.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you madam chair I'm can you talk
to me a little bit more about
the apprentice pieces well.
Right the would you like to talk
about that right Representative
small absolutely thank you so
much madam chair thank you madam
with
so our apprentice the apprentice
pieces
which are found throughout our
bill madam chair Mr chairman I
apologize settlement with for
all the construction projects
that are ten million dollars and
above and that is as Mr
Campbell's pointed out
the work just for Escalante in
addition to the potential work
in other on other projects will
be far in excess of ten million
dollars we start at a ten
percent apprenticeship target
right off the bat increasing to
seventeen and one half percent
then moving up to at least
twenty five percent.
Madam Mr chairman Madam with
these apprenticeship standards
are similar to what we have in
the Energy transitioned Act and
their key because these are very
highly skilled highly technical
jobs working you know I'm
projects that are in the
hundreds of millions of dollars
at the end of the day and so the
apprenticeship programs and
standards especially by partners
in the trades as we heard that
testified in support of this
from Boilermakers to I. B. E.
W..
To the sheet metal workers and
many others will be key to
making sure that this work is
done quickly safely and and on
time.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for that
I guess my final question would
be how many years before you're
fully operational.
Justin you want to.
Yeah when it comes to Escalante
specifically we're second about
twenty twenty five
there are few things that have
to happen around some regulatory
processes around in our
connection to the transmission
system I think one thing I
highlighted trying to highlight
the other night you know if the
bill were to move forward it
creates an opportunity for us to
try to go into a long term
contract with the utility for
the output of the.
So so there's some work there
that would come next really just
establishes this is an option
for local utilities is that up
to us to go to succeeded
presenting at you know the a
proposal that meets their needs
when it comes to reliability and
affordability so we would expect
the short so that my point is
there a few things that that
that are already in process that
will take some time some of that
has to do with interconnection
to the grid and some other
things but about twenty twenty
five.
Thank you Mr chair that's all
the questions I have to say.
Thank you Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Can you hear me we sure can okay
my question is is I'd like to go
back and here to.
Looking at the company's.
That will be involved in the
project.
And you know traditional is
special transportation we've
always had the issue.
Companies coming in.
Outside of New Mexico to perform
this work so let's start there.
Less you know give me some
insight on the company's.
Qualified here in New Mexico to
do the work.
Did you want to start it
mentioned that I have some of
the comments go ahead sure maybe
there are one or two things I
could offer up that would be
helpful and first maybe let me
share a little bit about all
grant at so you know where we're
coming from we're an energy
infrastructure company.
The historically that's had to
do with the natural gas
pipelines primarily but we have.
It's fairly big intentions and
designs around hydrogen
decarbonisation and energy
transition if we're as
successful as I think we will be
that will be you know
potentially aligned share our
company before too long here
We are.
The the investors that own our
company our infrastructure
investors and and there is an
indefinite.
You know ownership period for
that so so that it's very stable
platform and we intend and very
much hope to be in New Mexico
for decades to come
when it comes to construction
work that maybe the river with a
little bit more detail to your
question what I can tell you is
our preference in what we do our
existing business is working
with local construction
companies we find that those
folks are are well positioned.
You know given the particulars
of which are ever areas you
might be and you know we have
assets from Ohio to Indiana
through Kansas Wyoming Colorado
all of those present for
different conditions and so our
preference is to work with.
At the construction companies I
would expect that to be the same
here I'm not sure we've gone
through any at that in process
were frankly in the early you
know we're in the front end
engineering design process and
that will come later for for
qualifying folks in selecting
companies to build but what I
can tell you is that we.
Practice of of working with
local entities.
Mr chairman madam chair.
Is there going to be a
requirement for you to hire so
many New Mexicans.
To be able I know you talk about
five hundred jobs within the
construction here in sixty
permanent jobs.
But
I know a lot of companies bring
in their folks from other places
so is there a requirement that
you're gonna have to hire a
minimum of or X. amount of.
Of New Mexicans to perform.
The job.
If I could on that Mr Chairman
representative.
Talk about the project and all
the best which is Escalante okay
and the it's been scheduled for
decommissioning.
But around Escalante is the
labor is labor shed of all those
people that were released from
employment a year or so ago.
They're still in that immediate
area.
The retrofitting to a new.
The fuel source for that plant
doesn't change the skills that
in many cases of the operators
so that labor shed is already
available in that area these are
people that would gladly if if
available go back into those
local jobs.
We suspect that that's exactly
what's going to happen and one
of the reasons industry is
interested in buying that plant.
It is you know with your
background in your profession
workforce is the number one
issue now with economic
development.
So when folks like tall grass
come out and look at the site
that's going to be one of those
factors that it that they
evaluate the education
availability and the workforce
availability.
To make those kind of major
investments so just like in San
Juan County there is an
industrial labor force readily
available so we I anticipate
that these problems would be set
up in places where you've got
that industrial workforce
readily available.
Okay thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
Did you want to add anything to
that.
Thank you Representative I just
wanted to add one one more
detail in support of what madam
chair was saying you know in in
fact it took to her point jobs
at the power plant skilled jobs
and some of the folks.
There are already helping us
with the conversion and the work
we're doing on this so I would
expect.
I would expect that those folks
would carry on that's our
preference certainly.
Mr Chairman madam chair adjusted
this is the first P. three.
Then you've done in this
environment.
Not so much here in New Mexico
but have you done any other.
Or participate in any other P.
three of contracts around the
country.
I think I may be running afoul
of some but but I think it's the
seen Mr chair representative
We for Escalante we actually
intend to bring all of the
capitol.
For the project.
And and so the way we see it we
would capitalize the project
and.
And that would provide a basis
for a broader hydrogen hub that
could help with things like
decarbonisation transportation
and Smith manufacturing and
other things SO four Escalante
we don't intend to do that in
the P. three instead we intend
to bring.
At the capitol for the project.
Okay then I would go back to a
COVID of from the chairwoman you
mentioned P. three and
NMFA.
So where does that piece you
know it was clarification.
What the managing the P. three
and just and just said they're
bringing in all the capitol
what's the P. three role in this
Mr Chairman representative the
P. three role as for the
auxiliary businesses so you get
Escalante up and running your
you set up a hub there's going
to be a natural
Attraction for a light
businesses technical locate so
it's just like an industrial
park when you set up a
industrial park you go out look
for best IT companies and one of
the incentives to get those
those best fit companies would
be a P. three as an example and
number of you on this committee
Mr chairman and Representative
have helped on this it is the
whole issue around at Thomas
vehicle testing and the use of
alternative energies for
Eighteen wheelers.
And that there's been a lot of
work on that we change that that
law Mr
but chairman and Representative
last year where we've allowed
four times be able to vehicle
testing and use of other fuels
we would see that as a potential
site I know you're familiar
Representative Mr chairman with
the whole supercenter concept
but we think it that puts us in
a better more competitive
position if we can offer other
companies that are interested in
coal locating an incentive like
P. three.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
Hernandez a second time.
We done Representative Powdell
Culbert.
Okay Representative Hernandez
you have the floor.
Okay I think your hand went back
down Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative Lundstrom and and
Representative small for bring
in the bill forward got a few
questions that some comments at
the end of try to keep your pre
elected to spend a long time.
your public comment and in
today's hearing questions.
Madam Mr Mr chair and
representatives are I joined a
little bit late is right notice
to this hearing forgive me if
this has been discussed already
but can you remind us about tax
incentives in this bill for
their tax incentives that state
of New Mexico will provide for
for this specific project.
Good morning or good afternoon
majority leader Mr Chairman
there are no tax incentives in
this bill.
Mr chair and representative that
is one of the I would I would
argue is one of the biggest
differences between this house
bill two twenty eight the
original house bill four of
which I was actually a primary
sponsor with with you and and
and Representative small and
groups of Chrissy and others up
we felt that the tax package
that the taxes of the packaging
of Original Bill really was
designed to help
develop this idea of the hub in
really the state going in you
know full steam ahead
to really help build this up did
this industry that I believe
will be critical in our
transition to to clean energy up
I see this version of the bill
Almost as a compromise of sorts
to say okay well wait a minute
let's let's slow this train down
a little bit let's figure out a
way to still create the project
without putting so much of the
public's money into it
necessarily up Mr chair and
representative a little earlier
you were talking about the
carbon intensity and total
outboard emissions under this
concept can you can you repeat
that for us please one more time
and and for that for the rest of
the of the committee as well.
Absolutely and Mr Campbell can
add Mr chairman Mr Majority
Leader so we start by raising
the upstream standard for if gas
is used to allow only one
percent leakage New Mexico's
kind of nationally leading
leaking standards are going to
be no more than two percent so
we we double that with our
standard Mister chair Mister
Majority Leader we start at a
very low level in fact lower
than the federal standard of two
kilograms of carbon per one
kilogram of hydrogen we start at
one point I right from the get
go per kilogram of hydrogen
produced and then decreased that
to one finally.
Decreasing at all the way to
zero
and so madam chair Mr Chairman
said this is gonna start out
Right you know at least eighty
percent cleaner than natural gas
while providing this
dispatchable power in right on
time Mister chair Mister
Majority Leader for when the
energy transition acts
requirement for full zero carbon
resources goes into effect
that's when the standard within
House Bill to twenty eight goes
into affect to have zero
kilograms of of
Of carbon for for kilogram of
hydrogen.
So that.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative I think that's
critical and just for you know
as a reminder to the to the to
the committee.
There is a bill that was floated
by the executive actually I
think is is is is where who was
floating this months ago I think
in November December.
And as I recall it Mr chair and
representative that one was that
was at night to look grants.
Mr chair representative that
that is where some of the
discussion started
however Mr chair representative
and Mr Majority Leader I think
one of the things and you point
to the changes and and the
compromise that's been
constructed here even in the I
even at the during this section
session before the idea of the
tax credits was was was kind of
let go it'd gotten all the way
down to the two kilograms so I
think the the standard that
folks have asked for
appropriately so to have the in
a new industry to have it as
clean as possible there's been
an incredible amount of movement
and with this we've surpassed
that movie Mister chair Mister
Majority Leader landing.
Exactly at the fully caught the
zero carbon
zero echo a grant of come for
program of hydrogen for
dispatchable power.
Thank you Mr chair that that
that is a that is critical
critical information because I
think what what we as a
committee.
Need to understand and what we
as a
legislature really as a holy to
understand is that this has been
a work in progress in one of the
most critical pieces for me has
been that specific issue because
of this is supposed to be a part
of that transition we've got to
do it right and and I commend
you Mr chair and representative
smaller surplus from enters of
Arsia.
For the work that's gone in to
really tightening those pieces
are
you know it states
In many ways it feels a little
bit like the federal government
you know brought this concept
forward and you know per my
understanding is that this is
already happening in New Mexico
right there there's
also called.
great hydrogen production
already happening
So it's not new we're not
treating something that doesn't
already exist but we are
tightening up those standards so
that in this case this specific
project passed fit within the.
The framework that you just
discussed Mr chair
representative small are and so
consequently I think what we've
seen from the executive from the
first draft that was that was
put out back in November
December we've seen this work in
progress and and and close to to
the to the administration so we
expect that they per week to to
helping us get you know get to
this point out.
Mr chair representative mark
some Lundstrom we've had.
Lengthy conversations about this
concept over the past.
I don't know two months maybe I
I actually toward the Escalante
a plant up.
What a month or two ago in order
for myself up and we've been
having these conversations.
Would you agree Mr chair Senator
small Representative Lundstrom
that hydrogen will be a part of
our climate strategy.
Mr Mr chairman I would like to
if they would be at all possible
I'd like to ask both
Representative small
Representative Dixon was also a
co sponsor to make a comment on
that that's more their wheel
house and the hi Representative
I respect what they say that's
fine Mr chair and representative
of us from an iPod users addicts
and I don't see on the screen
but good to good to know that
here's well.
Is this the every re re face
question is hydrogen a part of
our climate strategy will
forward.
Mister chair Mister Majority
Leader in my opinion absolutely
it is
it is a key part of how we
provide energy to some of the
most hard to decarbonise
industry that is actually part
of house bill two to eight in
order to identify those and
really focused the development
efforts for those in the
dispatchable power that we're
talking about today that
Escalante can find is critical
within that mix so Mister chair
with the strong standards that
we're looking at it's a key part
of decarbonising and very
difficult to do without
clean consistent resources like
a tradition.
Mr chair and Representative
Majority Leader if I could add
on that I think in terms of when
we start looking at the global.
The house gas emissions plans
you know when we're talking
about the entire world it really
as part of the
you know consistently across the
board international agencies and
well respected
academic institutions all
realize that it is part of the
solution and so I would just add
that thank you.
Thank you madam thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative I and I agree
with you.
Hydrogen is not V. strategy to
to address the issue of climate
change it is a part of a much
broader strategy you know since
I've been in the legislature
which is now going on six seven
years
I believe that we've done a lot
of work toward that end the
great work that was done by you
Mr Chairman said small on the
energy transition act that think
was was key the good work that
we've done through the tax
committee to incentivize things
like rooftop solar which by the
way we have a bill floating
around somewhere but I I feel I
feel pretty confident that we'll
be able to amend the solar tax
credit to make it not only
refundable but also transferable
that means that more people are
gonna be would take advantage of
that incentive specifically
working class people who
otherwise may not be able to
front the money to buy a solar
system and then wait for the
credit to hit on their taxes a
year later.
We've we've we've taken an all
hands on deck approach to
dealing with our climate crisis
and and I'm grateful that our
legislature and grateful that
our governor.
Have been working over the last
three years to make this happen.
To me this is an opportunity to.
Not only create.
a pass for this specific
industry to be a part of that
claim it discussion.
But also to be.
In economic development in an
area that is pretty economically
depressed I mean you kind of get
both are both pieces here and so
you know I I think that.
We can not make the mistake of
assuming that this is gonna be
the fix for climate change this
is not the fix it's part of the
fix along with all of the other
things that we must be doing as
well we should be doing as well
and that in many cases we're
already doing.
Let me wrap this up Mr chair and
representative
despite by.
Sorry giving giving everybody
baby a little bit of insight
into how I look and how I
approach this issue as I stated
at the beginning I was one of
the primary sponsors along with
all of you what with with the
four of you on the side house
bill four up and.
Ultimately is difficult as this
issue is just as complex is the
actual mechanics of this issue
is I always look at
the bills that I'm gonna vote
for sponsored through that
weights of what working families
need.
and I was really touched Mr
chair and members of the
committee.
The previous hearing we had what
we heard you know but the three
hours of public testimony.
By the testimony of the brothers
and sisters in
In in in delivery.
You know these are the folks
who.
Shower after work.
Not before so the folks will get
get their hands dirty every
single day building our poll
building our schools.
You know building are.
Or is restricted.
One of the things about this
bill that I specifically
appreciate is the.
The language from
apprenticeships in making sure
that these jobs are connected to
Two eight a movie that I hold
dear because these are the folks
that builds country
a post industrial revolution.
That is critical to me and if we
can create sixty.
Hopefully hundred jobs we will
create five hundred construction
jobs and these jobs are gonna
put food on the table so people
who otherwise may not have
access to.
Eight that type of job it's in
my book good idea.
Up if we can do all that in
still you know make it a part of
our class transition strategy.
That's a winning combination.
That is a winning combination
madam chair Mr chair and and
representatives.
You know my my record in this
legislature has shown time and
time again my commitment to
working people I work on the tax
committee for the last seven
years has been about working
people you know the work that
we've done collectively Mr chair
unite have fought for ten years
to investor permanent fund.
In.
Early childhood education.
Most of
The beneficiaries will be kids
for working families.
I mean there there's a track
record here well how.
I approach some of the most
complex issues that confront us
your legislature and that is
through the lens I'll be working
for.
So for all those reasons Mr
chair and members will be
supporting house bill two twenty
eight I know the conversations
not over I've had plenty of
conversations with the credible
people who don't agree with this
particular bill and I learned a
lot from them and I hope that
they also.
For me as I.
Resent my perspective on on this
issue I appreciate the work
that's gone into this I know
it's not easy easy I appreciate
the work of the people behind
the scenes the bill drafter who
my goodness yes he has the
toughest job in the in Santa Fe
yeah because this is not the
only bill he works he's working
on all kinds of requests from
all kinds of legislators on a
variety of issues so I
definitely want to highlight and
celebrate of the the good works
I Council services well
I look for twenty for this bill
and I look forward to hearing
more from my colleagues and
learning more from you over the
course of the of the hearing
thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative small and and
Lundstrom Dixon and Garcia for
your time.
Thank you representative
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Sanchez for incredibly complex
bill that has a lot of
potential.
I.
Gonna start my questions I think
are my comments with the section
in the middle because this bill
does a lot of different things
and has a lot of different part
and starting in the section
where you develop the triple
peas as chair Lundstrom calls
because that's so much easier to
say that public private
partnership provision.
That I think is an amazing piece
of work in there my lands.
which I'm looking at this is
probably fiscal responsibility
and I'm perhaps Mister chair
more risk averse than many of my
compatriots here so that's
that's where most of my
questions are going but that's
why I really appreciate the work
and the detail built into the
sections that develop and the
guidelines for the trouble
piece.
And for the division that's
going to supervise them on page
eleven line one you know the
clawback provision there that's
really important and you got
that in and for there's further
sections downward talk about
announcements and release of
assets it's a private entity
doesn't hold up their end of the
triple P. agreement.
That's good stuff that is
necessary stuff.
There's a line in there that I
would like to see defined about
serving any public important
public purpose an important.
Let's see important public need.
And an important public purpose
and I don't really know what
those are and I'm going to
suggest that you might look at
some language in our benefit
corporation language where terms
like that have some definitions
that we use already but that
might help clarify that because
it's a little bit bank but that
whole section I'm excited about
and I think it has a lot of
potential to do great things.
I have some questions about the
definition section and how
definitions change in the
beginning part of the bill
toward the end and I think
perhaps that might be due to the
compromising and the work in
progress that we're talking
about that it's going under
revision constantly but in the
beginning part of the bill.
Clear region carbon intensity is
defined as something through the
is throughout the lifecycle
analysis and clean hydrogen.
With the word through and see
now I can't find the page but
through the point of production
and then the in both the
definitions at the end of the
bill and the rural electric coop
and and the renewable energy act
is defined as at the point at
production and those are two
different things so I don't know
if anybody wants to come in I
don't know if that's
intentional.
You know that Mr Chairman
representative that's an
excellent question now we do
have the bill drafter with us Mr
man border and you can't exactly
the nail on the head is you
start out as an independent
bills when you combine bills and
then you you do Google bills and
if it be alright Mr chairman if
we could add K. make a comment
on this please.
Mr chairman members of the
committee they were prevention
council service I'm here for the
sole purpose of providing
technical assistance on the
matter before this committee do
not appear in support of or
opposition to the matter before
you.
Mr chair the.
The definition of carbon
intensity is a little bit
different in the front part of
the bill in the back part of the
bill one part of the bill is
related solely to the hydrogen
Act.
The back of the bill sections I
think it's sixteen seventeen
related to the renewable energy
Corp Act and New Mexico rural
electric coop Act so perhaps
Representative small might want
to comment on why there is any
difference between definitions
between the from the bill and
the back of the bill.
Absolutely add thank you Mr
chair Representative Figueroa
the the largest difference
really does have to do with
how we started off kind of with
merged concepts that envisioned
the hydrogen production for many
of the hard to decarbonise
industries like long haul
trucking green cement those sort
steel and the like
within specifically for the zero
carbon resource definition
insects section sixteen or
seventeen.
That wrote that that specific to
electric generation what's
really important though Mr
Chairman representative Figueroa
there's been a clear and
consistent called to account for
life cycle emissions and in.
Missing in section seventeen in
the electric generation
definition we do account for
those life cycle emissions by
ensuring that
for the entire upstream if it's
if it's gas that is a maximum of
one percent leakage so that's
much higher than any federal
standard higher than the state
standard standard of of a
maximum of two percent and then
the descending
Point of production the carbon
intensity there and of course
when you combust when you
combustibles that greenhouse
gases so.
The.
Mainly a function of having two
concepts and important concepts
merge but importantly even in
the electric generation looking
to address the life cycle
emissions by Matt Matt setting a
cap for all of the the.
Possible leakage and putting new
tool sorry Mr chair but it's
that it's important because it's
in all of these cases were
actually put it we would be
putting into law stronger and
important standards that sat
strong that that
Put position New Mexico as a
leader thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative
Circling back to those those
definitions I think they
probably should be constant and
you had another one in the
definition of a clean generation
facility
it's defined in the front part
of the bill in the hydrogen hub
Act it says the definition as
it's defined in the renewable
energy act he said the and but
the renewable energy act
definition at the end.
Is defined by the claim.
Hydrogen definition in the end
which doesn't match the clean
hydrogen in the beginning so
there's just there are things
there that need to be looked at
because they're not they're not
quite in line I'm.
And I would also suggest page
sixteen.
Language what I'm looking at
language now which Mr chair I
apologize this is commerce not
Judiciary but I've read this
bill so many times I want to
give them what I see.
So page sixteen.
I think you tied the hands of
your hydrogen have your triple
P. board with the word shall and
I don't think it's your intent.
You are saying the board shall
approve a triple P. proposal if
it meets those three criteria.
And I thanks yes that you want
to say they may approve.
It was three Craig.
Of line thirteen on page
sixteen.
I found it Mr Chairman
representative chases down his
handout you want to make a
comment chase.
Your manager.
Mr chairman of the committee.
We shall approved only is it
fine to propose projects that
meets those three criteria so
it's not saying that has to
approve it but it
but in order to approve it the
board has to provide those three
criteria are satisfied if the
three criteria satisfied is
still has a discretion whether
to approve or not with the way
this bill is written they do not
have the discretion to approve a
project that produces hydrogen
if they can't be one two and
three that the clarify the issue
Representative Mr chair and Mr
Van Order it does not assume to
that was your intent but I had
the analyses that.
Did not read it that way so it
might be worth looking at
clarification.
Those are.
Those are some language issues
and I would also suggest annual
report might include the jobs
created if we're looking at this
as a jobs creation I'm kind of
act that that might be included
in the annual report section but
my my overall issues with the
bill are about risk and risking
a hundred and twenty five
million of taxpayer dollars my
issues are not with the triple
P. I'm.
I'd like to see the the triple
P. take a crack at this do what
they can do before and you know
we have other things we have
leader we have we have but I
believe you list on page nine
all of the other things federal
and state that these projects
can go after in terms of
subsidies and help so I'm a
little concerned about.
Putting that much money taxpayer
money down on something that is
still it's very new.
A lot of technological pieces
have to fall in place on a very
specific time line for it to pay
off the past few.
But that's because the risk can
be huge
The description I have clean
hydrogen in the renewable energy
act.
In the graduated down to zero I
appreciate that it's going down
to zero I just think we should
wait till it's zero before we
put it in as a zero carbon
definition those are my concerns
and thank you Mr chair thank you
Sanchez.
Mr chairman then make one
comment on that please please.
Yeah right one thing I wasn't
clear about I apologize Mr
chairman and committee members
the P. three isn't only just for
ancillary businesses it's for
needed infrastructure it's very
similar to the bill that was
passed off the house floor
couple days ago Representative
Representative joins Garrett's
bill Mr Chairman.
and actually the initial
thinking is for needed
infrastructure.
Take Escalante Mr chairman as an
example there's a county road
nineteen that services that area
that would absolutely need to be
upgraded there's a bridge that
would need to be replaced there
needs to be approved that with
broadband so what might what I
would anticipate for P. three
use Mr chairman is going to be
more initially for
infrastructure upgrades which is
a public benefit if the counties
the public partner and will just
say Escalante is the private
partner for new road.
County road nineteen would be a
major public benefit for
everybody thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
madam sponsor for that
clarification I appreciate that
I'm and.
I think that's part of my
concerns around the risk to is
is that for these P. threes as
opposed to the two limited well
we're not supposed to talk but
other bills but for these P.
threes we're talking about an
industry that is still very do
It's happening but we have set
these really strict criteria in
this bill
and it's speculative that
technology is going to allow us
to meet that we can't meet the
one percent upstream now we
can't enforce that we don't have
we don't have the technology
down we don't have hydrogen down
to zero carbon yet
and I so appreciate that it's
written in here that that's
where we're going but if it
doesn't if we don't meet those
criteria or doesn't turn out to
be profitable.
It's not just the loss of the
money we're putting into the
fund now but it's potentially a
lot of assets infrastructure
that we put money into that
we're going to be left with in
yet and that's that's my fear
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative Dow.
Thank thank you Mr chair thank
you chairman Lundstrom and I I
have some questions
This has so much potential it's
pretty exciting and and
personally my preference let's
just put this out there my
preference would be that this
post EPA coal mine would not
have been shut down and that it
continue to operate in people to
lose their jobs and that revenue
was not lost in the four corners
area that's not where we're at
and so the idea of being able to
retrofit and resume production
operations at that plant is is
really exciting
I have some questions because
there's so many different
versions of this as a substitute
and I've been I'm confused
because I heard I heard it said
that the as the one day would be
making the entire investment but
I've also understood that there
is a federal opportunity and
then I would I'm understanding
that there state dollars so
could you please break down how
much money we're talking about
over what period of time and the
breakdown of what is state
federal and private investment
dollars.
Very good question thank you Mr
thank you Mr chairman of thank
you representative of the
federal the federal program is
one that is being developed now
and this bill is a is an image
of that where we would have
something that is an image of
what's happening at the federal
level for us in New Mexico and
I'll have Jason talk about what
those kinds of incentives are
but for the state of New Mexico
what we're looking at here
specifically is a fund within
the New Mexico finance authority
that can be used for P. three
purposes not only for this bill
but for the bill that we just
passed off the house for a
couple days ago.
The it you know what's what's
amazing about this is because
I've been hearing P. three
legislation for a long time it's
the exact same language it's the
exact same language in the other
bill except that we allow for
additional uses that that's
that's the difference so there
in the budget currently there's
a hundred and twenty five
million dollars that is going to
be set up in a fund in the New
Mexico finance authority for the
purposes of paying for P. three
projects the way it works is the
fifty fifty match there's a
incredible amount of due
diligence that's outlined in the
bill before anyone even actually
qualifies for P. three but there
are no tax credits here there's
no tax abatements there's
nothing like that in this bill
specifically for setting up the
hub there's also as.
Is Mr Campbell talked about
private investment private
investment which is the absolute
all of this anyway when you talk
to these companies it it's not
the track tax credit pieces that
they care about you know they
they did they do a lot of
research when they're looking at
I guess retrofitting or
redeveloping and it very
Christine industrial site.
So it's not about tax credits
for them it's about expanding
some of their business
opportunities so in terms of
money it the one hundred twenty
five million it's enough fund
for the New Mexico finance
authority to administer and the
grant for the project agreement
is not approved without the
health board's approval so it's
just like when we all work on
the P. three pro are the public
private partnership projects
fund under the New Mexico
finance authority.
The staff does all the great
work on it and then they take it
to a board for approval so
you've got you've got technical
finance staff doing all the
financial due diligence and then
you have an administratively
attached to board that makes the
final decision on approval.
A lot of set of eyes on the.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
chairman Lundstrom and so.
Eat it is it appropriate if if
it's appropriate I would like to
know because I am definitely
concerned about the four corners
area and the impact they've had
on employment in the last couple
years but I also and no that
we've made great investments up
there.
Tens of millions of dollars in
in other projects is this this
is in addition to those projects
they are they're not dependent
upon each other.
You Mr chairman I'd like to ask
Mr sent out to make a comment on
that I can speak to McKinley
County that he would be better
positioned to speak to someone.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and Representative Dow you your
characterization of in addition
to other and investments
that that hydrogen hubs in in
the P. three investments would
be in addition to other
investments that have been made
in the four corners and San Juan
County specifically is is spot
on and
so you know what we're looking
at is is that a of defined it
includes the entire value chain
of hydrogen from production to
distribution and end uses
including research and
development and workforce
development and any of the
investments that would be
available with with either
federal funds or what's being
considered here with with the
trouble P. would be able to be
invested in in any aspect of
that hydrogen of
concept and the so that for
instance in San Juan County
there there is a potential
electric generation.
Company or facility that that
would potentially qualify.
As.
As.
Drawing down or applying for
these these trouble P. funds and
that would be in addition to
other investments that have
already been made in San Juan
County thank you thank you Mr
chairman thank you madam chair
thank you Jason and with those
additional P. three projects
they would not be subject to
this act because they are
secondary to a hydrogen hub or
would they also be with the they
they wouldn't be subject to the
to the standards in this act
it's a I mean it's a I know you
gave an example of an electric.
So Mr chairman and
Representative Dow if they were
to
hold it if we were to apply for
the P. three funds than they
would have to comply with with
the standards that are
established in this act if they
simply wanted to apply for for a
piece of the federal money that
will be available then they will
have to comply with the
standards that have been
established by the federal
government thank you Matt Mr
chairman thank you madam chair
thank you Jason and what if they
what if they want to comply with
this with out what if they want
to meet the standards and do
because because I thought I
understood that Escalante is
investing this fully themselves
and they will be a private
applying for the NMFA funds that
this is a private investment.
Mr chairman and and
Representative that what I think
that that's right but I think as
discussed earlier that there are
accessory businesses and
components that that would
complement the Escalante project
that that potentially could
apply for funding through this
legislation okay I'm on on page
eleven line twenty four I'm not
familiar with the term and and
current default can someone
define three what and and cured
default is.
Mr Chairman is the finance
authority on right now.
So this is the Marquita Russel
you wish to respond well that.
You yes if you could up did you
hear the question market what
and respond if you could.
Thank you Mr chairman uncured
default would be of it there are
different ways in which to
default on a loan one of which
is a payment the other may be a
technical default there is
perhaps provisions of the loan
agreement that they did not it
here too so in no cure default
would be an instance in which
the lender tells the borrower
there outside the parameters of
the loan agreement and they have
failed to make that better they
fail to remedy the situation.
Miss Russell could you please
introduce yourself I apologize I
Marquita Russel and the CEO of
the New Mexico finance authority
thank you Representative Dow
thank you thank you Mr chairman
madam chair and Archie that so
if they they would be informed
that they're non compliant on
any part of this agreement they
would be given the opportunity
to make a payment six a
technical issue complied and
then if that's an I'm sure if
it's I'm sure it is their time
line this is like a legal
definition has a timeline and
then the public partner because
it says the state can can choose
to take this over and assume
everything that's what happens
on page twelve top of page
twelve so I'm just wondering.
And.
Is it what's the time line on.
Curing a default.
So madam chair sorry Mr chairman
Representative at that would be
sort of dependent on the
situation and the default that
they're seeking to cure so in
most instances a technical
default will have a slightly
longer time frame than perhaps
you know a payment default so
there there will be definitions
that loan agreements are set out
in P. three agreements that'll
have to be determined by the
board and it would largely be
determined by the kind of
default that has occurred then I
you know I'm sorry I can't be
more specific but but that's
generally in lander terms how we
approach that thank you Mr
chairman chair thank you for
that rocket just a so so I guess
my question is we're putting one
of the the the risk is that the
private partners we're gonna
share management and the rest of
the hydrogen have project so it
theoretically Representative
Figueroa alluded to this it's a
it's a.
Cutting edge innovative approach
that has a lot of risk and could
have a lot of reward but the
risk in theory if there is a.
There's a non compliance that
can't be cured then the entire
burden could in essence if if if
the private investors left or
the state could assume if I'm
trying to understand some some
hypotheticals they're not a
hundred percent.
At carbon free that they didn't
they didn't meet the standard
that the environmental impacts
standard or they didn't is that
one reason that the that the the
management of the way language
is written could have been a
default that they couldn't cure.
Mr chairman if I then.
Wanting to talk about this and
I'm gonna ask Marquita to do it
is when they're looking at
measuring risks okay now when
they're looking at the kinds of
things that would go into these
agreements and how they
oversight is provided so
Marquita can talk about that
please.
Thank you Mr chairman yes so
again I think it really depends
on the underlying elements of
the of the transaction the
things that the board in this
instance would determine were
important for the success of the
project or important for meeting
the goals set out in the program
so there would need to be
determined in the rules the way
in which we would address each
of these potential non
compliance issues I think but a
defaulted being non compliance
issue we typically think of
defaults in terms of financial
payments but obviously there are
there are other ways in which a
project could not succeed you
could pay back the loan but not
create the jobs for instance so
the the rules part of the rules
would have to determine the way
in which we would define the
most important elements of the
program and then set out the the
parameters for meeting those
goals so I I would just take job
creation for the if in fact job
creations important they say
they're going to create a
certain number of jobs they fall
short of that but they come
pretty close
then there may be sort of a way
in which to cure the default
without them having to hire
additional folks so I'm I just I
mention this by the by way of
saying that that's not so black
and white but the goal of this
is to ensure that we identify
the key goals and objectives of
the program key risks associated
with it and our monitoring would
be put in place to
ensure that those of those goals
are met and that they've
complied with all the elements
of the program not sure I answer
that question if I may Mr
chairman and representative one
way to mitigate risks is through
the federal program that would
also be a companion so just if
you could talk about those.
Federal tax credits.
Sure and Mr Chairman
representative
It and when we maybe set some
might on that just in the
context of the Escalante project
itself which is really what
we're working on
I think just to make sure it's
clear that project itself does
not depend on tax incentives
from the state of New Mexico
there are some tax incentive
well if one in particular at the
federal level that will help
keep the cost of power that
project before that's called
forty five Q. for carbon
sequestration there is also an
effort.
It doesn't build back better and
we're hearing the effort
continues to provide tax
incentives for the production of
hydrogen that meet certain very
low carbon high standards.
Again everything we're looking
at when it comes to reliability
and affordability doesn't depend
on that we're not counting on
that at all but if that were to
come to pass if benefit the
project and and the way that
would play out is that we give
us the opportunity to compete
with with lower cost for the
output of the project which is
something we have to do to win a
long term contract the off state
so wanted to to clarify that I I
I think I think I hit to madam
chair I think I hit your
question and let me know if I
did thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman madam
chair and I guess whoever wants
to answer this I mean this I
mean can be perfectly Frank it's
a very it's a it's a I believe a
worthy endeavor but also a risky
endeavor and we're using
taxpayer dollars to do it so I'm
I've heard the opposition we're
getting flooded with email from
the opposition and that includes
environmental groups that have
eight habits and a fund and an
intent to suit and so I believe
that part of the promise we're
making in this bill is carbon
intensity clean hydrogen clean
hydrogen electric generation
facility it's got to be one of
those standards and I guess
because I'm not a lawyer did
understand the language I was I
fully expect if we do not meet
the standards that there are
going to be lawsuits and people
are gonna say that New Mexico's
not keeping its promise to the
people that the private
investors are keeping their
their promise to the people and
I I expect barriers to come and
I didn't know if that word and
cured will apply to the promise
of the definition of carbon
intensity carbon hydrogen and
clean hydrogen electric
generation facility and then it
what the burden of the state is
going to be in the legality of
finding that out in courts that
that really my question was
around the definition of just
because we listen to hundreds of
people oppose this bill and our
emails are flooded and some of
those groups are known to suit
so on for environmental impact
so could be paying I'm at the
your defaults and then it you
know it says that the public
may.
Take over all these things so
then in my mind I'm thinking the
worst case scenario because we
should do no harm of lawsuits
come because we didn't get to
carbon intensity we didn't get
to the clean hydrogen we didn't
get to the clean hydrogen
electric generation facility
definitions that were options
there's lawsuits we can't hear
the defaults and either the
private partners leave a for at
the state takes over the
hydrogen have whose rate for the
lawsuits throughout this
process.
Well Mister Mr chairman and
representative I think it's
going to depend on what the
issue is
It you know my first thanking if
it's an employee issue then is
gonna be the company but it
depends on what the issue is and
I and I think it's that's a
pretty common risks that the
state of New Mexico takes
whenever we start any new
program any new program has the
same kinds of concerns and I
think we've heard that
throughout the years
but I think at this point what
we're trying to do is we're
trying to take advantage of the
new industry we're trying to
grow economic base jobs we've
got some perfect locations and
and population in northwest New
Mexico that is welcoming these
folks with open arms generally
speaking you heard all the
testimony most of those that
were in favor of this bill
couple days ago from New
northwest New Mexico the
affected populations but I I
just feel that to it's that
that's kind of a hard question
for me to answer maybe somebody
else on our panel can but it's
very similar to any new
initiatives that we take on the
Thomas vehicles last year
space point people flying into
space I mean there's a whole ton
of those kind of things that as
legislators that we've done
that.
Gosh.
Your guess is as good as mine I
think.
And madam chair if I might Mr
Chairman.
Please.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
Representative Dow
Any of the you know the utility
or the the power purchase
agreement PPA would involve
responsibilities that the power
generator the power provider
would have to the power
purchaser those operate Mr chair
representative Dow under a
regulatory system some of the
structure that set up by by the
state law that we've done and it
would be included in this and
really is the rest of that
that's flushed out and and
ministered through the public
regulation commission so madam
chair are excuse me Mr chairman.
Representative Dow.
Mark my words I think there
wouldn't be a
If you I would not affect the P.
P. P. for that contract that
that the power purchase
agreement that would be a matter
between the power generator the
power purchaser in within a
system of laws that we set up as
a state that's administered by
the Public regulation.
Thank you thank you for that
clarification I appreciate that
Representative small and maybe
you have the answer to this
question as well so if this
becomes Mr chair Madam chair
representative of small if this
becomes too big of a burden and
it's not what we hoped it would
be is there what is the
obligation of the private
partners are they able to just
vacate the project.
Yes the contract would be all of
the requirements Mr Chairman
representative is the P. three
contract that is reviewed by the
finance authority staff and then
approved by the board and I
would suspect that will be
pretty hefty requirements in
there are just like any type of
Financial relationship okay.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
madam chair thank you for that I
appreciate it on page eighteen
aligned I.
It talks about in section four
subject to the availability of
qualified applicants whether the
construction of a proposed high
hydrogen have project with
construction costs greater than
ten million dollars.
So is that per bit.
Ten million dollars for the
total cost of this proposed
hydrogen have project.
Is over ten million dollars
therefore every.
Subcontract would also be
subject to the apprenticeship
program.
What this means Mr Mr Chairman
representative it's it's it's as
it says it's subject to the
availability of qualified
applicants whether the
construction of a proposed tried
to gin up project with
construction costs greater than
ten million dollars shall employ
apprentices from an
apprenticeship program during
the construction phase.
we feel like that is a very
I think it's a very easy kind of
requirement within this bill
because it's all based on
whether or not there are
applicants available to us.
we're we're hoping what we're
trying to do here with this
piece in the bill as we're
trying to grow apprentice
tradesman we know that there's a
shortage throughout the state of
New Mexico we thank offering
this kind of support helps grow.
Internships and I mean when you
think about it
ten million dollars in greater
for construction projects means
that it's not gonna be the
little guy so to speak that that
would be having to make sure
that there's qualified
applicants it would be for the
much bigger projects and it's
not just for I think what's
what's happened here folks are
thinking it's for a power plant.
Maybe but it's also for
distillery businesses that may
come in into the hub.
Mr chair madam chair I do not
read the language the way you're
speaking at subject to the
availability of qualified
applicants whether a
construction of a proposed
hydrogen have project with
construction costs greater than
ten million there it this prop
this there's a proposed hydrogen
have project.
It will have a construction cost
of greater than ten million
dollars shall employ apprentices
so I'm so it but there's lots
and lots of stuff contracts this
is I mean we know it's more than
a hundred twenty five million so
there's me all kinds of of
subcontracts and so they'll be
contracts less than ten million
with in this proposed hydrogen
have project which is more than
ten million so I I don't see the
language clearly identifying
that subcontracts may not be
subject to the apprenticeship
program.
With the the hydrogen have
project.
There will be some contracts.
Mr Mr chairman it also doesn't
say that they will be I mean
it's not written in here that
all subcontractors would also be
required to do this it's
basically about construction
projects that are greater than
ten million dollars and if
you're not up and.
You know you're you the we've
got some big project there then
it's ten percent for project for
which is on site construction
commences beginning on or after
January one twenty twenty three
and so for so it is pretty clear
how many people and what the
cost with the cost of the
construction project would have
to be thank you Mr chair thank
you madam chair and I I I have a
I have a problem with this
language here because it also
says availability qualified
applicants there will always be
a qualified applicant the
question is will it be an
applicant from the local
workforce area will it be in New
Mexico applicants and this
doesn't have I mean there's
always going to be a qualified
applicant They Might Be from out
of state.
And so I I I I'm concerned about
that Representative Powdrell
somewhat alluded to the the same
questions but there's not
language here and prioritizing
local workforce there's not
language here of course
prioritizing New Mexico
applicants and I think you know
my heart for it the region would
be that they have the
opportunity participate
throughout this entire.
Process not just the sixty jobs
if they qualify for one of the
sixty jobs in the ends which I
don't know how technical those
jobs are so I don't know how
many of those will be local New
Mexicans there's always the G.
R. T. there's always the
secondary impact those things
are all great but I I I think
there needs to be some
amendments to the language in
the section because when you go
back to.
The beginning of the the act in
the definition section when it
defines what an apprenticeship
program is it's very restrictive
it's the apprenticeship
assistance act and you and I
have a mutual friend who has a
very very great program company
in New Mexico that has all kinds
of apprenticeship programs but
they don't qualify under the
definition of the apprenticeship
assistance act so I think we've
gone way more and restrictive
than what we want to do to make
sure that every eligible worker
in your region who wants this
job can get it it was a job in
this the construction phase can
get it and I I think that the
language around apprentices the
printer ship assistance act is
too restrictive
Mr chair madam chair and maybe
this is a question for Adelante
and does this money that do the
all of the standards apply only
if they're receiving money from
the finance authority but does
not apply to the conditions of
the money that's privately
invested for the money that's
federally invested or does this
duties conditions the
apprenticeship assistance act
restrictions apply to all
dollars private federal and
state.
Mr Chairman representative what
this applies to is a
construction project in the
hydrogen of that's over ten
million dollars and when you
look at those projects.
The fund the sources of the
issue of whether it's a public
or private it's the it's the
ceiling of the cost okay.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
thank you madam chair and for
that answer so it it could be
creating restrictions on the
private dollars they would be
able to to at what contractors
able contract with because we
are clearly defining in the
definition section and
apprenticeship program I have no
problem with an apprenticeship
program I think it's awesome and
so you get to the definition and
it says an apprenticeship
program registered pursuant to
the apprenticeship assistance
act and then it becomes very
very restrictive and exclude
lots of contractors were
approved by the construction
industry division who meet all
the standards to be licensed and
bonded and are perfectly capable
of doing this job and having an
apprenticeship program outside
of the printer should assistance
act
so I think you know I I'm so
interested in this I think it's
such a great opportunity and I
love it and I think about all
the other regions who would love
to have a hundred twenty five
million dollar workforce project
in their area and I'm still I'm
I'm still undecided thank you.
Thank you Representative
Hernandez a second time.
All right thank you Mr chair
I have or the substitute in
front of me that I would like to
bring in front of our committee
to talk about that is start I
can get into it when I'm not
exactly sure how to do the
motion so.
I would I would like to I have
house committee substitute for
house bill two to rates but I
would like to bring up for
discussion I honestly don't know
how to do to do the work I'll
take that as a motion.
for discussion purposes yes very
no objection feel free to
discuss it give us the two oh
two number please yes Sir R. two
two two six nine nine point one.
And just for the folks listening
back home this was provided in
our share file so okay and on if
we were not and we're sitting
are committee would have this
big fat notebook with all the
proposed amendments this is in
our virtual notebook on our
computer screen so please
proceed.
Thank you Mr chair
This house committee substitute
is exactly the first forty four
pages are identical to the bill
that we are here.
with one change to that.
Which is on page forty three and
at of line seven it adds natural
gas to the R. P. S. the
renewable portfolio standard.
and then after page forty four
states are.
Ascension the changes the orders
are do you I'd be two from
January one twenty twenty three
to January one twenty point six.
so that we can
So that essentially to.
To keep the.
How are issues that are going to
be plaguing the metro areas in
the PNM great.
from happening so.
What I'm seeing what I'm saying
is on.
On page forty three line seven
eight.
Yes includes the words and
natural gas yes and I'm forty
four lines eighteen and
nineteen.
Are you included a hundred and
electric generation facility and
then what was the date what what
page did you change it insisting
on sorry page forty five of
lines sixteen and seventeen.
Twenty twenty three to twenty
twenty six.
There are did.
discussion on the proposed
committee sub Representative
Dow.
I'm sorry Mr chair my hand is
still from before.
I see.
You want to say a few words on
the committee seven I'll go back
to committee representative.
Just be postal treatments is
yeah it's just those three
amendments otherwise besides
that this bill is exactly the
same
As the bill that we have been
discussing not nothing else
changes there's no other changes
are.
What's all of you choice what
policy choice Representative are
you asking us to consider this
kind of just one minute to
explain the policy that these
words will create okay so what
this will do is that this will
add natural gas so.
My thinking on this is that.
It.
European countries that have
that have done this and then try
to go to hydrogen and
tell even just because
California
they are now amending their the
Iraqis to include natural gas as
their.
There as it is the lowest
Carbon producing.
Also fuel that we have that can
give us the dispatchable power
that we're going to need in
order to keep the lights on
without interrupting without
abnormal interactions are.
In the metro anywhere that the
PNM.
Our great happens to be so
that's gonna be the Albuquerque
metro area it's likely to be
Santa Fe farms and also a lot of
and all of the communities in
the middle
so then also into we can get
those up and running R..
The.
On.
It's forty five would allow the
current energy generation to
continue running so that we
don't also have that
interruption power at least
until we get to the point where
we have something that can take
it from the current to a much
clearer source thank you for
that.
An explanation so we are on
discussion of the proposed
committee sub.
Is there is there a need to do
is to make a motion at this time
of seven on this.
Hi I'm a group so there's no
discussion so by moves I'm I
move the committee substitute.
That's an improper motion.
One.
I move the committee substitute
for immediate consideration.
The sessions lane our our brains
are most.
College Oxford Mr the proper
motion is.
I believe this is where motion
as I I'm what do not passed
house bill two to anybody do
pass on.
Commerce committee substitute
for two twenty eight one point
two two two nine nine point one
is that what you're trying to
say that yes that is correct all
right.
Then of.
I do not hear a second
Representative Martinez Mr chair
Thank you.
So I I hope that we're getting
the motion right here so the
motion.
Is a do not pass.
On.
House commerce committee
substitute.
Number one but I do pass on
house committee subs commerce
committee substitute version to
that that's essentially what it
would do but there is not been a
motion second number one second
okay that that makes it thank
you for that so there's a motion
essentially to pass.
No this is proposed substitute
there has been a second Mr chair
I have a substitute motion to
table Representative Landis's
substitute all righty that is a
non debatable motion seeing
seeing no signal debate will
call the roll so what's on the
table now is a essentially
passing Representative Hernandez
is proposed substitute six nine
nine point one.
informally it's a do not pass.
I'm also to twenty eight but I
do pass that house committee
substitute what work.
Anyway so it Mr chair if I it so
on the first so I I the no to
table I'm voting to proceed with
Representative Hernandez as
substitute correct we're well I
building motion up miss died you
could please call the roll.
Representative Dow no to table.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative thank you yes to
table.
Representative Johnson.
I apologize Representative
Hernandez.
No to table.
Representative Townsend yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes table.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes to table.
Representative Serrato.
Yesterday will.
Representative Fajardo.
Thanks chair Figueroa.
Yes to table.
Chairman my instance.
Yes so that motion has failed
our been table brother back on
the bill Representative
Hernandez.
The most is that the right
Representative Hernandez you
still have the floor.
I have a few of I have a few
questions on I want to thank
everyone for the great questions
and the great explanations but
folks listening all those of the
commerce committee so we don't
see a lot of our friends up
better on this soon every day
but we just try to figure out
you know good economic policy
though the PPP which is as you
know short for public private
partnership all the PPP's can I
go to this committee so that's I
haven't does pry one of the
reasons why this bill is before
us couple quick points
and I had my notes here a moment
ago but
With regards to the definition I
I want to thank all the emails
all the phone calls all the
documents that I've received.
One of the main concerns is on
the definition section that was
answered.
In in in Q. and a and
essentially.
In that story construction we
define words you know we define
words so obviously Webster
dictionary proper plain English
what we define words so as there
is no doubt as to what a word
means in a statute and proper
statutory construction will
leave no doubt and no wiggle
room with regards to lawsuits
with regards to interpretation
with regards to anything like
that so changing definitions
that may not comport with our
notions of what that word means
and Webster is is is is
practically in every single bill
the subsidies was a concern to
me but I learned that there are
no subsidies there are no
taxpayer subsidies directly to
of you know hydrogen industry
but rather the the subsidiaries
that that surround these these
hybrid and hubs if they ever
come to fruition one of the the
conversations I had the past
couple days madam chair was the.
Is this the.
How the federal government under
the current administration is
making massive massive movements
toward.
The the use of hydrogen of
electrical generation one case
in point West Virginia I think
up I think a great many of the
activists that spoke about days
ago may agree that West Virginia
should be moving toward hydrogen
away from coal
but that's not conducive to New
Mexico because of our ability to
dive into the head first into
the solar and the wind of
markets you know we are the best
one of the best places in the
country for when one of the best
place in the country for solar
that doesn't stop this from
happening that hasn't stopped
that from taking place doesn't
take away our market in a
competitive advantage in those
markets but keep in mind West
Virginia up if you take the
counties of McKinley C. will and
San Juan they're as big as West
Virginia practically on if you
look at the size West Virginia
New Mexico is five times the
size of West Virginia.
So someone in Santa Fe.
Dictating of policy and in
Gallup is like someone and you
know.
Columbus Ohio dictating policy
and Morgantown or whatever so so
just keep in mind we're a large
swath of land here in New Mexico
the end to even on international
standards.
Of developing nations don't have
the same regulations as as
western developed nations and
people think that that's fair
that these these countries
should get their industry in
their economies.
Up to I don't growing Aviat
poverty and then dive headfirst
into the numbers of of the
western world California well
they are most advanced economy
in our country has we are on par
despite are underdeveloped.
With environmental rules and
regulations of California the
ETA was revolutionary that that
we have some of the strongest
rules imposed by the executive
branch I want to save time I'm
not gonna ask the chair but we
beefed up the the budget of the
environmental Department at to
the greatest extent of the
history of the state so we are
moving forward as a state and
being a leader in environmental
policy and and whether this bill
make you know come to fruition I
it does not take away from that
does not take away from that but
that there's nobody on this soon
that would disagree that
hydrogen is better than coal no
question about it
so if these entrepreneurs can
pull it off that be great if
they can you know they can't but
but I I think it's unfair to ask
Miss one of the poorest regions
of the country are to to take
the brunt of these of these
policy changes on.
Without considering things like
hydrogen hub Act.
Representative Garcia we're
gonna go to we're gonna I think
there's a motion on the table
you want to have the final say
remember It if I may Mister
chairman.
Maybe amendment that we need
that.
That was my nose I just on my
notes there are so let's go back
to the the the the five four
eight point two version there
was a a technical fix that
represent a small brought to my
attention and and since we don't
amend the committee selling to
propose that we.
Agree on what the amendment
would be and then go do a point
three committee sub before this
committee so on page thirty six.
Line seventeen and this is for
you Mr Van Order page thirty six
is the the statutory bill
drafter page thirty six line
seventeen.
Before the word after
insert on and after so read on
and after January first twenty
two thousand forty five.
And then we make the same a
change on page forty one line
eleven.
Before the word after in search
on and after January one twenty
forty five and the on after is
consistent with.
Statutes in other sections of
law
so.
That so I'm proposing although
and propose that change to the
committee substitute any
discussion on that change Mr
chairman I just get a second I'm
try I'm having issues with my
share file legislation see what
we're what we're looking at I
said can I just have can I just
have like a little let's take a
let's take thirty seconds thank
you find it.
Page thirty six line seventeen
page forty one line eleven thank
you.
Small is this and for you madam
asked on the previous.
Motion but is this a friendly
change absolutely technical
change that Mr chairman that we
need.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair I just
finally got about so all right
what you're talking thank you so
much any concerns about that
change it's not a formal
amendment it's a change to the
committee so but I think it's
pretty self explanatory so it's
a that's a friendly change so
what we're gonna do is we're
going to be for us is eight
point essentially a point three
Committee sub for the folks back
home the committee so as a clean
bill as opposed to a bill and
and an amendment that you have
to take twenty minutes to figure
out so we want we want to act on
the committee substitute as a
clean piece of legislation
Before us.
All right great so now we're up
point two two two five four
eight point three which is the
proposed committee sub with
those changes.
Representative Garcia did you
want to say a few words Europe
co chair on this in your hand is
up as a courtesy thank you
please thank thank you Mr thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee the reason I signed up
on this bill I've heard this
morning on both sides and give
Mr chair we all want the more we
all want this for forever but.
I heard it all Monique and what
Representative Martinez said
earlier you know my goals are in
line with his are you know
Michael to get people jobs
request a free clean energy and
they is the people that are out
there struggling Mr chair.
We have running water out there
and they can don't have the
money for the day will be more
and this is important for the
economy of northwest New Mexico
given thank you for the
opportunity sure if you were
future.
Thank you members of the
committee representative
Martinez thank you Mr chair
I'm gonna move a do not pass on
house bill two twenty eight but
I do pass on house commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for House Bill to
twenty eight the point three
version showing the amendments
that we just adopted.
You Mr there is a motion to
adopt the committee substitute
point three version.
Do I hear a second.
I will second that motion of
please call the roll say no
further debate please call the
roll.
I
don't know what I'd like to
explain my answer.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes.
Representative bangles yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes.
Representative Serrato.
No it the.
or.
Figueroa.
No.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Yes yes.
Yes so you have a do pass Madam
chair on the committee
substitute that is our only item
but before we before we adjourn
Representative Dow to explain
her vote yeah thank you Mr chair
thank you madam chair and thank
you Jason for the presentation
and Justin and Representative
small and for all the whole hall
I'm very very optimistic of
where this can go I have some
concerns about the language and
I think I can become a yes I'm
just not there yet.
Representative.
That out though to explain her
vote thank you Mr chairman thank
you madam chair for bringing
this forward you know I really
want to say I appreciate the
Sanchez diligent work to make
this and many of much better
built in kind of a lot of
discussions early on where I
want to give you know I like it
my vote is based on the idea
that there's a lot of community
concern and there's a lot of
water concern is a state that we
need more of an as we see wind
you know having to invested
itself right now for eight your
pay off and funding those
investors you know I I feel like
there's a lot of energy that
will last a lot longer on that
we could be investing in so I
think you forget forward.
Thank you all to think the fifty
one folks in the audience and
everyone who with all the emails
and communication that this is a
fantastic job.
we are adjourned thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee.
Thank you Mr chairman.
