So I think he's actually looking
at you but at this point in time
I think it's it's only right
that would probably call process
that we've stood by at least on
the on the house side into my
committee of which you're one of
those Madam chairwoman to make
sure that if it has a tax
implications we should look at
it because those types of things
use the table at all back to go
into the into the this bill so
at this point time I conferred
with you and I think at this
point I respect under present
with you want to have the same
type as one of the committee of
that so based on.
What is your business okay.
Okay so what I'd like to do
Senator is it says I I don't
know if there is that type of
education and so I am
indifferent with the chairman
led to it we are already
scheduled to meet tomorrow.
So that's what we're going to go
ahead and do for so we are gonna
roll the bills until tomorrow
and I will we will let you know
if it stayed in this committee.
Thank you.
All right of this so I will also
say that there is we will be
meeting tomorrow at nine thirty
you're still looking for a room
so we will we will get that
information to somebody else in
this room but we will we will
left keep in touch if we have
some information for you
tonight.
All right thank you.
