Vice Chair Anya Nornu here. I'm
getting so good at that and
eras, I am here as well, so we
got it for him.
And have your sheet back.
All righty.
Um, Representative Lujan, do you
wanna approach?
OK, we've got H.
HB 112.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, uh, committee.
Do you
I'm sure in your community, do
you like to start with the, the
presentation first and then move
on to the amendments.
How do you like
And start with the the
presentation and then uh we'll
move the amendment when you're
ready. Thank you.
Thank you.
So, um
Today I appear before you as the
sponsor of the bill because of
how important this matter is to
the safety uh to our
communities, families and
businesses in New Mexico.
Um
E
Be 112 is relating to the
cannabis regulation Act
providing for state criminal
history checks and national
criminal history background
checks.
As a condition of eligibility
for licensure.
Um
I'm here to
I think we all are as a
fiduciary to the state and to
our citizens to pursue in New
Mexico statute, the language
that will ensure that our state
has access to nationwide
criminal history information as
the cannabis regulation Act
originally intended.
As you know, that provision in
the Act was incorrectly drafted
and bears no resemblance to any
other state statutes where the
state licensing authority has
access to FBI criminal history
information.
The FBI has refused to provide
New Mexico or RLD and the CCD
access to nationwide criminal
background information for civil
licensure purposes due to the
statutory deficiencies in the
original cannabis regulation
Act.
Due to this denial by the FBI
RLD has only had access to
in-state DPS background checks.
Applicants could have murder or
kidnapping convictions or other.
Um, in other states or countries
and our regulators are unable to
know.
Organized criminal networks are
active in New Mexico, and this
loophole has opened the door to
money laundering of human and
drug trafficking, extortion, and
other activities threatening our
children and families, and this
business itself.
The current background check
language still is still
inadequate. It does not
incorporate feedback from the
clients and does not resemble
any other state, any of the
other states' language, as I
mentioned before.
The language in the bill before
you will move to ensure that the
state has the access and
therefore the ability to protect
our families and industry, as I
mentioned before, the language.
In the bill before you today is
built on language already
submitted.
Um, to this legislator by RLD
that was the result of careful
analysis and stakeholder
discussions.
And that was in um the regular
session of 2022.
RLD presented a bill with Senate
Bill 100 sponsored by then
Senator Lopez to amend the CRA
to ensure that New Mexico would
have access to this information,
and this is the 3rd year that I
I come forward with this
legislation myself.
Um
Then EB 100 was the result of a
significant amount of time
researching the statutory
requirements to achieve FBI
approval to access nationwide
criminal background reports for
civil licensure.
This effort included extensive
discussions with the FBI and
MDPS as well as comparative
analysis of other states whose
statutory language met the
threshold for the FBI, who then
received access to these um
reports.
Um
I have again brought this here
for you to review a
comprehensive table of
requirements for your review as
well as part of the Colorado
statute that covers the federal,
state, and.
Interagency receipts and review
of nationwide criminal history
information. I have that with
me, but I don't need, I don't
think we need to pass it out.
But again, I just ask for you
to, to give feedback where where
necessary, but to also
understand that this is, this is
something that has been um out
of place as we've moved to
create uh the cannabis industry
and is much necessary in our
state. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And with me, um,
I have, um, uh.
Expert witness who would like to
introduce himself.
Thank you, Representative
Uh, Madam Chair, committee
members, my name is Todd Stevens
and I'm the director of the
Cannabis Control Division of New
Mexico.
The division stands in strong
support of this bill. We would
like to first thank the
Representative Lujan for
carrying this bill.
Federal background checks are an
effective tool in helping
regulate the adult use cannabis
market effectively. This is the
3rd attempt to find the correct
language the FBI will find uh
acceptable to allow the CCD the
authority it needs. We believe
HB 112 with the amendment we
have worked on with
Representative Lujan will make
it clear who we are
fingerprinting and running
background checks on the updated
language ensures that we are
running those on an actual human
person and not a business or a
legal entity. This should
satisfy every hurdle the FBI
has identified in the latest
rejection. We look forward to
taking any and all questions
from any community members.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee.
Thank you. Um, do we want to
move the, the amendment for
discussion as well.
OK.
All right position to the moving
the amendment.
There is a 2nd, yeah.
But is anybody opposed to moving
the amendment?
OK. All right, so do you want to
discuss your moment? Yes, ma'am,
and that is a.
2019.1.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Basically, Madam Chair, the
amendments that we have, there's
7 different uh list of 7, and
they're, they're really just to
adhere to what um our RLD uh
mentioned in.
their statements to to come into
compliance with making sure that
we're not addressing the
business, but so just basic
language um changes, uh, I can
go through each one or you can
just read them through and see
that they're they're minor
adjustments and don't really
change the substance of the
bill.
Already.
Um, let's, let's go ahead and
keep moving. Let's, um, do we
have anybody here in favor of
the bill.
There's a mic behind you.
Maybe we'll get it where it just
comes down and we can pull it
back up.
The mass Glad to lighten the
mood for everybody this
afternoon, Madam Chair, John
Thompson, registered lobbyist
for Oasis Cannabis Company,
strongly support the
legislation. Thank you. Thank
you. Anyone else?
Um
In favor of the bill.
OK. Uh, good afternoon, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Mary Kay Root. Uh, I
was your former ABC director for
a while and I've watched with
interest as we've worked on
getting this cannabis. And thank
you to Representative Luhan for
her tireless advocacy trying to
get CCD the tools it needs and
the background channel is strong
support. Thank you. Thank you.
All righty.
Anybody else in the room um in
in favor. All right, let's go to
Zoom. Anybody on Zoom?
Ben Lowinger.
Madam Chair, committee members,
my name is Ben Lowinger. I'm the
executive director of the New
Mexico Cannabis Chamber of
Commerce, and we stand in strong
support of House Bill 112. This
was part of the original intent
of the canvas Regulation Act,
and this is one of the
challenges when our state goes
about unprohibiting something
that is still federally
prohibited. This is not
something that is special to New
Mexico. Many other states that
have legalized cannabis for
medical or adult use have had to
jump through the same.
hurdles, and after, uh, after a
few years, we feel strongly that
this is the right bill to ensure
that we have congruency with the
FBI in making sure that every
licensed person and entity in
New Mexico is uh doing the right
thing. Thank you, madam.
Matt Kennicott.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Matt Kennicott. I'm the
CEO of the Pug where a canvas
Industry group that uh supports
small campus businesses
throughout the state. We, uh, I
also have a, a micro uh con or
microfarm in Socorro called high
maintenance and uh consultancy
and through that business, we've
been in literally hundreds of
facilities across the state
we've seen all of the good and
some of the bad, and we fully
support this legislation.
Mr. Lillinger said this was the
original intent of the CRA and
we're glad to see this come back
and hopefully help clean out
some of the bad actors in the
industry.
Thank you so much. Uh, my name
is Chazano. um, uh, host of ASC
Chat Grassy Logic, a longtime
advocate here in New Mexico. Um,
I do fully support this bill.
This is something that we needed
from the beginning and it was
just something that, um, just
needed cleaning up, so yeah,
thank you.
That is all in sport.
Alrighty, do we have anybody
here in opposition.
OK, anything now.
Do we have anybody here on
opposition.
Do we have anybody on Zoom?
Already, let's go to the
committee. Any questions?
I'm over do pass.
I have some questions.
was I premature? All right,
let's start with uh.
All right, so we're, we're still
on questions, go ahead,
representative Anya.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, so I
have.
Some questions regarding OK, so.
In reading the title of the
bill, I understand the intent,
but then going into the content
of the bill, there are some
changes that I don't entirely
understand, so I was hoping for
some clarification, um, and then
I looked at the FIR.
And it seems like they kind of
mirror the same questions that I
had. So according to the FIR
they were worried that extending
the applicant pool.
will slow down the process for
um applicants who don't require
a water supply.
Let me see if I can find.
If we look at the FIR right
under significant issues.
Um, and also that the cannabis
regulation Act.
Currently requires applicants
for licensure.
Um, to demonstrate that they
have access to water, but in the
bill, it looks like you were
also requiring.
Laboratories to show the same
proof of access to water even
though.
Cannabis laboratories and retail
spaces.
Might not need that same kind of
water access, Madam Chair
Representative.
Madam chair, uh, representative,
uh, vice chair, um, I did read
through those, uh, those, those
issues and I don't know and I
can't speak to the slowing down
of that other than, you know, I
oh I see.
Hadn't comment before in the
last couple of years and so
they're commenting now, um,
which.
I, I haven't heard from them,
they're not here, I can't
understand that question any
more than you do, other than I
would defer to um RLD to ask
them.
It, it's, it, I wish I could
speak up because it's language
that needs to come out the last
it's already existing.
Yes, so that's that's why I'd
ask RLD. I'm sorry, we just, I
just told them that that I
believe that is already existing
language.
Or we were reading your mind, is
that what that was? I thought
that was me, yeah, maybe.
Go ahead, I'm sorry, Madam
Chair, committee members, um, I,
I can't speak for the office of
the state engineer, but I don't
believe this will slow down any
processing on the CCB or the RLD
side for processing any
application.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
thank you, um, representative
for that answer, and then my
other question is just kind of
wondering if.
Of this bill.
will expand the grounds for
denial suspension of or
revocation if that was the
intent or if it does that in the
language anywhere.
Madam Chair, committee members,
uh, the disqualifying uh
qualifications or convictions
that are in the original CRA
would be the same under this
bill.
All right, thank you very much,
Madam Chair. That was it for me.
OK, um, I've got some questions
if nobody else has any, um, on
the bill, if you go to the first
page.
Uh, under, um, line 23.
Under section A.
it says applicant means a person
seeking licensure.
Um
And I believe it also needs to
say or cannabis establishment
seeking like license.
In order for it to make sense.
Because I understand that we're
looking at um.
Being able to fingerprint.
But you would need to
fingerprint a person and also
the establishment with the
licensure.
Kevin Graham, the chief general
counsel for the regulation and
licensing department that's a
department where our cannabis
control division is housed so
I've been working on these bills
since uh since the original
pass.
I can tell you that the use of
the term person within the act
will include all corporate
persons there and so there
wouldn't be a harm to making the
addition that you're talking
about but because person already
includes all like corporations,
partnerships, applicants, um,
other than human being persons.
That's kind of why we had to
define it for the purposes of
the background check is saying a
human being, one of the things
the FBI had raised was that
You know, you can't run
fingerprints on a company, for
instance, so for that limited
purpose for the background
checks, we had to make sure that
meant human anywhere else it's
used in the bill it's gonna
include.
Any type of applicant.
Thank you. And Representative
and, and Kevin, I guess, um.
I understand that if you go to
page 20.
you start at the beginning from
um.
Section one to probably section
17.
I don't know that those terms,
um, are needed.
That whole section is needed in
in the bill anymore.
And the committee
you are.
Probably right, honestly, those
terms were put in last year in
the attempt we made to fix this
problem last year, which I gotta
admit I struck out.
Um, we added those definitions
trying again to to narrow that
person down to to identify that
it was gonna be a uh an actual
person person as opposed to a
corporate person, so that's
existing law at this time, uh,
if you were to remove those, I
don't see any harm.
I think it does need to be
removed.
Um
Let's see,
clarify those lines uh the
section of lines, so it's page
20, section 1 through 16. I
think that all those 3 sections
or 4 sections should be
eliminated out.
1 through 16. Um, and also if
you could expand or give me an
explanation. I understand
needing and I agree with that we
need to have um.
fingerprinting. Um, I just don't
understand why we needed to put
the water piece into this bill.
It, it seems to be.
Blog rolling to me.
I don't believe it's, it's love
is something that is already
exists and we have to, it's part
of the the the CRA and what is
what we have.
This is a long, if you remember
when we, we passed the CRA,
Madam Chair. Um, I had a, I had
to build a a.
that I was running as well and
understanding that and when we
got to the Senate and um Senator
Lopez worked on that portion,
and this is what was a
compromise is my understanding,
and so that's what needs to be
in place.
I, I don't know that it does
though because I don't think it
it speaks to.
I think you're trying to do two
different things, you're wanting
to get fingerprints, and then
you, you go into the whole
section of the water piece.
And I'm just wondering why it
needs to be in there.
Madam Chair, because it's
already existing and it has to,
it's just fortifying what was
already already um put into the
CRA, Madam Chair.
All righty. Um, well, I do
believe those those things do
need to be.
Cleaned up and and before.
Um
To make it a clean bill.
And since you're taking out this
whole section.
Those are the issues that I'm
having with the bill. Thank you,
Madam Chair, if you'd like, I
can, I can look further into
that portion, but I, I, I did
myself over the last couple
years,
I kept asking about that and
that that's basically the
response I received.
On the wider portion, the other
portion, I think we're we're in
um.
we can ask more on that into the
next committee and I can come
back and let you know, but as
far as I, I'm.
I've been told that that's, that
needs to stay in there.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
All righty, well,
Uh, Representative Mason has a
question.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, representative.
Just a couple and I'll have to
admit I probably didn't take
enough time to read this.
All the way through, but.
Uh, you mentioned here that the
Department of Public Safety.
Contact the FBI to do these gun
checks. Have they been, are they
on board if we talked to them
and they've agreed to do the.
Background.
Presentative asked Kevin Graham
again, yes, DPS is supportive of
doing the background checks.
This is similar to something
that we do for many different
types of boards and commissions
and licensed entities throughout
the state at the regulation and
licensing department just for
for a few examples, uh,
licensing and the
privatesigations Act. We already
do this licensing under the
Securities Act. We already do
this, um, licensing for the
alcohol beverage control
division we run these kinds of
background checks. So this is
pretty much a standard type of
duty that DPS does for.
not only our agency but many
other agencies uh like CYFD for
instance.
Uh, thank you.
represent
Madam Chair, but
Is that y'all
I
All of these or do we do?
the
apart.
The way the process works with
the FBI is that there is for
every state there's like a
master agency that you go
through, which is usually like
our DPS or another state might
be their highway patrol or
something of that nature, but
it's, it's a flow through so our
requests to go to DPS, DPS
accesses the FBI system it comes
back through DPS and back to us,
and that's the standard system.
Thank you, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Only one other question and it
might be in here.
I know early on in the deal.
If I want to open the.
What
Are the requirements for
personally.
Early on in the deal, they were
allowing felons.
Actually have a license sale,
not a license, Madam Chair,
committee members, um, we
license people for a number of
functions, whether it's retail,
production, manufacturing, uh,
consumption lounge each uh
licensure requires different.
Um
pieces of the of the puzzle, so
to speak, for example, a
retailer would not necessarily
need to get approval for a water
right as they wouldn't be using
it.
Madam,
what I meant, I'm opening the
dispensary.
What are the requirements for me
personally.
I mean, like I said originally
on in the first so it, it was
very lax.
In the people that could
actually own.
Eliasson fell not to make, I'm
not into the.
Growing or anything, I, that's
not part of the question.
Just the owner dispensary,
there's thousands of them in the
state.
The, the requirement, Madam
Chair, committee members, uh,
the license requirements for a
licenser would be similar to
like a business registration
passing the federal background
check, zoning approval, uh,
confirmation from Secretary of
State that the LLC uh is an
actual registered entity and
that renewal we would check tax
status as well.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
I guess um
A in my question down as we go.
Can they be a
Are the regulations on this is
strict as they are for me to
obtain a liquor license, Madam
Chair, committee members, I
don't necessarily know the the
site of what the liquor would
be, but these are pretty
intensive. We also changed
rules, uh, last year to require
all these documentations be
upfront and front loaded, uh,
for the approval of the, uh,
initial license.
Thank you.
And representative if I can add
a little there, I think you're
really talking about the
criminal history background, is
that what you're primarily
focused on, um, I can tell you
that when the CRA was passed, it
has several provisions in it
that basically say we're not
gonna to screen out people who
had been involved with cannabis
in the past, so for instance if
you had convictions for selling.
Marijuana near a pot in the
past, um, you know, now we're
we're trying to legalize this
industry we're trying to bring
it into the light, bring it into
a legal regulated industry, so
we call it cannabis every time
and we focus on, um, you know,
trying to get you on the
straight and narrow following
the law so the law requires that
we can't deny a license, for
instance, if you had just prior
convictions for selling cannabis
now if you did have other types
of felony convictions, say
selling.
harder drugs, uh, let's say uh
cocaine or something of that
nature or if you had been
involved in other felony conduct
like convictions for.
Things like embezzlement and
fraud and and other felonies
those are things that you can be
denied a license on the the in
fact last year's bill clarified
more of that and tightened it up
a little bit, um, but we do
still allow folks with certain
types of felonies, for instance,
felony DWI would not keep you
from getting a license, um, but
a a felony for trafficking and
methamphetamine would get you
denied for a license.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair. It's uh
I need to read further, me, it's
always been.
And
We have
hundreds of thousands of fencer.
So the regulate and we
But on the other hand, and to
me,
The similarities between
cannabis and alcohol shouldn't
vary.
I mean, both are
substance, both of them and you.
It, uh
The wire, the regulations are on
one side than they are on the
other. That's, I guess that's my
problem.
But it will move on.
It, uh,
I, I say that.
01 other. Why do we give?
Right, write the rule.
Who like Department of Public
Safety, why don't we
As
Put these rules and regulations
and statute.
So that everybody knows in black
and white.
Whether they'll change, I mean.
They can change it if they want
to.
It's written to me.
Madam chair, um, representative,
that was, that was the big
debate uh the different bills
that we we had when we passed uh
the CRA and um we decided to go
to uh rules commission.
To do that.
Uh, I know it says that.
I was asking why do we allow
Har
Regulators make the rules.
Other than I, you know, I feel
as a legislature, it's my job.
Mike rules.
For them to follow, not.
For me to follow rules,
madam, um, um, Representative
Mason, that makes that makes
sense in your, you could bring,
you can bring legislation
forward that would mitigate you
so choose.
Thank you.
I, I agree. One last statement,
Madam Chair Representative.
We all
Or I think everybody understands
that this needs to be regulated.
Uh
To me, we're kind of nitpicking
it.
I would like to see
I stated earlier.
The rules and regulations for
one industry.
Not to be laxer than India,
that's my.
I guess
sticking point in this thing.
Why
Cannabis gets an easier ride.
Licker
And it does.
In the record or we wouldn't
have as many dispensaries.
Lots of them and sometimes.
That that's the only thing they
got in town is things.
But thank you and I and I I
agree that we do need
regulation.
Yes, I'm just being tougher than
anybody else. Thank you,
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
you
Representative
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Parajon.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thanks and experts, um, my
question is related to, um, the
Public Records Act and the
privacy.
Um, concerns that I have around
this bill.
Could you, could you explain a
little bit how how the public
records Act is going to interact
with the inspection of public
Records Act.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I saw
that that came up too, but it,
it, it.
The provisions already exist
that those uh those those
records would be protected with
when we are, um, interfacing the
DPS or the FBI that any criminal
information in those records are
protected, is that,
does that answer your question
Madam,
could you?
So is that in?
Section 3.
Me.
Measure, I will defer, but.
party
the the CR CRA and we've we've
included here as well that it
hang on just a minute.
Mad, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, are you on page
21?
I'm on page 22 be confidential,
but it does section 3D. Thank
you, thank you, Madam Chair.
Give me just, if I may just to
read that section with you.
Madam Chair,
the provisions that you're
seeing on pages 21 and 22 will
only apply to the criminal
history records information.
There is a general provision for
all of the cannabis regulation
Act that says all the records of
the uh cans control division are
subject to the Open Records Act
and inspection of Public Records
Act the this provision
specifically has to do with
criminal history record
information. It is something
that's required under federal
law that we have to have
additional protections.
For those records and that's why
it's inserted here so the only
thing is this would apply to be
those criminal history records
we're getting from the FBI.
And Madam Chair Representative,
does that mean, um.
Does does that include whether
or not the criminal background
checks come back with a yes or a
no.
It, it would be anything of the
records that we got back from
the FBI, so yes, um, you know.
What they send you is not really
a yes or no. They send you,
here's what records we have on
this person, the critical thing
about fingerprints is that, you
know, well, I can lie about what
my social security number is or
give you a fake name, my
fingerprints come back to
fingerprints, so that's the
critical element here of making
sure we're bringing the real
criminal history on the person
who's applying.
Um, and so anything we get back
would be covered under these
protections,
I imagine that there's some if
you are denied your license
because of the criminal
background check, there's a note
that indicates why. Um,
if we deny a license to anybody
for any reason, they have to be
told why and then they have an
opportunity for an
administrative hearing to
challenge that, and they can
appeals to district court if
they still think we're wrong, so
yeah, you absolutely are
entitled to know why you got
denied.
And Madame Charon
representative, when you do
receive that why say you, um.
The FBI returns an investigation
that you have in the past
trafficked other drugs, so
that's why you can't get a
license.
That would appear then in the
public note and that would be
subject to IPRA, you could, you
could Ira that and get that
information about somebody's
criminal history, Madam Chair.
What are I'm sorry, Madam Chair,
if we issued what we call a
notice of contemplated action,
which is what we'd have to do if
we're going to deny a license.
We have to tell somebody, you
know, here's why we're issuing
this order, um, that, uh,
information would be that you
know you failed your background
check I'm pair.
would say
obtain
that shows that you have
disqualifying convictions.
That's all that would be in the
public record at that point.
Now the individual challenging
that decision would have a right
to obtain the copies of their
actual report that we got back
so that they could properly
challenge that, but it wouldn't
become a public record unless it
was entered as an exhibit in the
hearing and that would
essentially be their choice at
that point Madam Chair
Representative, uh, so.
Any notes that are kept um by
the folks who are handling the
sensitive information, those uh
sorry, they are, they are not
subjected to.
It would, madam chair
representative, it would depend
on what notes and in what
context, I mean if they were
just working notes that someone
was developing and they never
really became a public record
under the Public Records Act,
uh, that would not be subject to
EPA, but if it actually went
into a.
Potentially it could we have to,
we have to train our people,
that sort of thing, and we do
that for our other divisions as
well that if we're talking about
criminal history record
information that's either kept
very closely held, usually with
an attorney-client privilege.
Yeah, it could become a public
record, so it's, it's a training
issue for us and our staff to
make sure that doesn't happen.
Madam Chair and Representative,
I think.
It
I, I understand the intention to
make it in the rules piece, um,
I think the bill could be
strengthened by adding, uh, you
know, under 4 or 5 something
that would delineate that that.
That would be one of my.
Madam Chair, um,
Representative, would you, what
language would you if you have
now or would you like to work on
that, Madam Chair.
And Madam Chair representative,
I don't have the exact language
right now, um, just, just the
desire to have that section
strength in for the privacy of
our citizens.
I'm I'm uh I appreciate that
very much, and I'd be happy to
work on.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative. That concludes
my question.
Uh, representatives.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, representative and,
and, uh, experts here, you know,
it's, it's kind of a funny thing
to talk about. FBI background
checks when, you know, I don't
tell you kind of funny
navigating that. So I appreciate
everybody's work on this. Um,
just for my understanding, I I
think you kind of touched upon
it, but really just in layman's
terms, so I understand what's
happening now since this
language isn't right. How are we
getting applicants that are able
to go through the process if
we're not able to do it at the
FBI level. Madam Chair,
representative, simply, we are
only getting information, uh,
state back.
background checks from DPS so
it's not expanded to, as I
mentioned in my introductory, we
we don't know what is happening
in other states or other
countries or the records that.
The uh applicants could have. So
Madam Chair representative, so
right now all that's happening
is that
So
Just the mere attempt to try to
access FBI records is enough to
satisfy what already exists in
law. This is just actually
making you.
You have the have the ability to
access that record. Is that
correct?
Ma'am cheered at both. We, we do
not have any access to FBI
background information at this
point and this, this, uh, uh,
gives us the application process
to, to have that satisfies what
we would hope.
Thank you, Madam Chair, but I
guess my question is at this
moment, just the mere act of
trying to access it, satiates
what's happening is that all
we're really doing right now,
just so I understand.
I can tell you.
I'm chair so um you know right
now we, we can't get access, so
we run the state background
check and we asked them for
anything they can give us and go
through DPS and ask him oh we
get back is the state side
because the FBI has denied us,
so we make the request for the
background check, but the only
thing we get back is state. So
Madam Chair Representative and
expert, this effectively right
now, this actually makes us an
actionable piece of statue
rather than something that
symbolically exists that we
wanna do, right? OK. Um, the
other, only other question I
have, this is really uh
Just because I know it sounds
like you're gonna go back and go
ahead and make some
clarification. Um, the chair had
mentioned on page 20 lines 1
through 16, and I just want to
point to that, that's actually
starts on the bottom of page 19
on line 25, super minor, but I
just want to make sure if you're
gonna
Do it, go for it. So thank you.
That's all I have.
Any other questions?
Uh, Representative.
So I think, um, I would request.
That you could go and and.
Um, fix the bill.
OK
Um, I think there's some changes
that need to be done, um, I
think this is an essential piece
of what we need for this
industry. Background checks are
essential and we're trying to
bring it up to standard. Uh,
this is a very important piece
of legislation, but I'd like to
get it right. Um, I also, um, I
do still question the water
piece and if it can be taken
out, I would like it out.
Um, because they don't think it.
I, I think when you're talking
about background checks, it
should be about background
checks. If you want to have
another bill about the water
piece, right, because that's
where if you look on um.
Some of the uh
issues
that's where it clouds it up
there, so that would be my
request. Are you amenable to
that, Madam, madam, uh, chair,
I'm a mean amenable to um.
take the multiple requests that
I heard today and work with the
those individuals in yourself, I
would still have to um work to
get you the information
regarding the water piece and if
it can be, yes, I would, I
would.
I like to get this as clean as
possible, and I really
appreciate us working on this
all together.
I appreciate that. So at this
time we have not adopted the
amendment, um, I almost think
that um it would be cleaner if
you just replace the whole
thing, so I think if we just put
that on pause and it is a
substitute, um, but we, we have
it if.
So if you would coordinate with
the analysts and um.
And with Mr. Bailey, and we can
get you um out of here with a
clean bill. I, I think that
would be much better amen
amenable to that. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair. Thank you.
All righty, thank you all.
I appreciate the good work
today, I hope everybody got
their invitation for next week.
Um, if you'll let us know, it's
for the staff and for um, it's
for our committee dinner.
So if you'll let us know, um, if
you will be able to come and if
you can bring a plus one, we
would love to have one, but with
that I'm gonna say, have a great
weekend.
