Representative Johnson.
Here
Representative Martinez.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Your honor.
I am here.
Chairman I just and I'm here so
we have a quorum welcome
everyone else's house commerce
committee were to be hearing
house bill two twenty eight we
just talk a little bit of
procedure we'll go to the house
Sanchez and then more
importantly will go to members
of the public want to thank the
public for for its patience this
afternoon what a lengthy floor
session in a series of meetings
and so here we are everything is
that going to be a legislative
time these last seven days.
They are there is per
constitution we cannot introduce
legislation after a certain date
well that's incredibly limiting
for for legislative govern so.
We have a generic bills that are
introduced and then for
procedure they go normally to
the committee.
These lyrics that's fine to the
bills will that's.
Please.
We have a so the generic bills
are assigned leadership
committee chairs if I were to do
a generic bill this year you
know nine times out of ten I
would come to this committee.
So this is unusual the generic
bill used by Representative
Lundstrom instead of going to
her committee we'll go to this
committee I think it's more
conducive to the subject matter
of this committee it's been
hasn't been adopted yet for
discussion or certainly.
Acted on however.
However via the transparency we
put it online there's been
dozens and dozens of emails and
phone calls with regards to the
text so we're being as
transparent as we possibly can
given this crazy thirty day
session that is the last of its
kind in the entire nation having
said that what we want to do
tonight is we want to hear from
the public we wanna hear from
the public there are concerns
about the economy is in certain
parts of the state their
concerns about.
Of the the the transition to to
a renewable energy over the next
years and months and decades and
more poorly about that the
concept of using hydrogen as an
energy source so we'll go to the
public tonight the committee
just tons of questions we're
going to save committee
questions for to Morrow we will
convene at the the call of the
chair of for now we want to hear
from the Sanchez the experts and
then the public will hear from
the proponents of the bill those
folks were inclined to support
it or neutral and we'll hear
from the opponents of the bill
after that so tonight is all
about the public as a result we
have a hundred twenty one people
in the attendee room everyone
will get a minute to speak
and that's price four times the
the capacity of room three
seventeen that we normally meet
so you in those soon as
incredibly
Unfortunate the folks can be a
personally I think we're gonna
today and turn it into a
positive and hear more voices
tonight with that I will turn it
over to representatives.
madam chair left from
Representative small please
introduce yourselves in your
experts and and you have the
floor thank you.
All right well thank you Mr
chairman and good evening
committee locked also say good
evening to all the people that
have tuned in the state of being
at this is an incredibly
important this will it is very
it's the house commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill two to
eight and just generally Mr
chairman and committee this is a
he three bill it is a P. three
bill public private partnership
bill for the purposes of
hydrogen Development.
The title in the forgive me out
for brevity's sake I will move
for discussion purposes.
House of commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for hospital to twenty eight
please proceed.
Okay thank you very much Mr
chairman so basic way of this is
the point to version the section
names the first part of the bill
of course which is the hydrogen
Development Act of this bill in
a former version was a bill that
was adopted by the legislative
finance committee over a number
of meetings last summer
basically what it does is it
lays out a process for barring
P. three support for hydrogen
hub Development.
we allow for a board to be set
at eighty set of criteria for
the designation of Hobbs what
that criteria looks light on how
one with access to P. three
funding through the New Mexico
finance authority and basically
is set forth very bond for for
that purpose.
To Mr chairman turn it over for
some brief comments from my co
sponsor Representative small.
Thank you very much madam chair
Mister chairman really
appreciate the chance to briefly
discuss this today Mr chairman
and committee members house bill
two to eight in addition is as
Madam chair said
almost entirely a public private
partnership bill it also Mr
chair and committee has some
important environmental
components that conform with New
Mexico's commitment to
decarbonisation and carbon free
energy and Mr chair committee I
would like to address those
briefly Mr chair committee as
the committee as we all know
the energy transition act sets
forward ambitious standards and
needed standards for the state
of New Mexico getting us to
eighty percent renewable energy
by twenty forty and then getting
us to fully one hundred percent
carbon free energy by twenty
fifty it's that let it's the
carbon free energy component Mr
chair committee that is so
exciting and such a key part of
house bill two to eight because
Mr chair committee when we burn
Hydrogen we don't get carbon we
actually get a carbon free
energy generation source and so
as you look through in your bill
Mr chair and committee these
zero carbon resource definition
for clean hydrogen has
incredibly strong standards Mr
chair and committee these
include no more than one percent
leakage if the hydrogen is
produced from methane no more
than one percent leakage Mr
chairman committee from
the the entire upstream change
from when it.
All the way to when it's they're
at the point of production
additionally Mr chairman
committee income foreman's with
president Biden's bipartisan
infrastructure law which
dedicated eight billion dollars
to support decarbonisation
through hydrogen and sets a two
kilograms of hydrogen for one or
two kilograms of carbon for one
kilogram hydrogen standard we go
better Mr chair committee New
Mexico is going to do that
better from the get go it's
going to start off Mr chairman
committee at one point five
kilograms of carbon per one per
one kilogram of hydrogen and
then Mr chair committee it
descends to one in twenty thirty
four and then it descends even
more fully two zero
Is so I full zero grant
kilograms of carbon per kilogram
of hydrogen these incredibly
strong upstream standards as
well as descending point of
production standards insure that
the zero carbon resource
standard for dispatchable energy
that the clean hydrogen for
electric generating facilities
would be used for in our bill is
something that's going to create
jobs it will power New Mexico
and perhaps other states with
incredibly low and zero carbon
Mr chair committee I just want
to say one thing very clearly we
are not saying that hydrogen is
a renewable energy resource
again Mr chair committee let me
just say one more time hydrogen
is not a renewable energy
resource but Mr chairman
committee as you'll see in the
standards that are through our
Bill which are stronger than any
of the strongest federal
standards it is and can be a
zero carbon resource that will
provide zero carbon dispatchable
power at a time when that power
is incredibly needed Mr chair
committee that I think really
concludes this well one more
thing Mr chairman committee just
add.
There are no tax credits in this
bill.
Again Mr chair committee there
are no tax credits in this bill
this reply this relies upon
strong environmental standards
smart P. three partnerships and
the innovation and ingenuity of
New Mexicans to create jobs and
clean up our environment with
that I would close Mr chair
thank you.
Thank you and could you
introduce your up your expert
sitting with you at the virtual
table and they can say a brief
thank you Mr chairman one of the
experience that we have on this
evening as Mr Jason found out
all and the other would be Mr up
aygestin council so it doesn't.
Good evening Mr chairman.
Not sure how come my camera's
not coming on but Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Jason Sandell and I am a
businessman from Farmington New
Mexico.
It it's an absolute pleasure to
be with you all this evening and
an honor and thank you all very
much for the opportunity to
offer support in the testimony
in the passage of house commerce
and economic development
committee substitute for House
Bill to twenty eight.
just as it relates to.
of.
Of the recent report defining in
envisioning a clean hydrogen of
for New Mexico where I was
joined by Sen clean energy
solutions in the writing of that
report and I welcome your
questions this evening and and
look forward to the opportunity
thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee.
Thank you always good to see Mr
Sandell and the gentleman Justin
Campbell and you take a moment.
Introduce yourself and and talk
about the committee substitute.
Good evening thank you Mr
chairman my name is Justin
Campbell I am vice president of
power in transmission for tall
grass Energy.
We are an energy infrastructure
company that has a particular
effort around hydrogen and some
efforts here in New Mexico that
have to do with the things
Representative Representative
small described.
I'm very pleased to be with you
thank you for this opportunity I
thought there were three things
that I would highlight at least
initially here from our
perspective we see house bill
two twenty eight as providing an
opportunity for economic
development and jobs secondly we
think this is an important step
to keep in New Mexico at the
forefront of a growing emerging
industry and then the third when
it comes to the electric system
and decarbonisation you really
deep decarbonization
particularly you really need
three things you need renewables
you need short duration energy
storage and we're seeing that
was and then you need
dispatchable clean generation
and that's what hydrogen can
help provide to the electric
system as decarbonization
continues and that's very
important to reliability and
affordability over the long term
so with that I'll just stop
there and again thank you for
having me and I look forward to
the discussion.
Thank you very much Sir and also
joining us welcome by
Representative Harry Garcia one
of the co sponsors all of our
committee members have arrived
in the committee room there's a
there's committee that analysts
in the in the panel as soon as
well as the the bills after
who's here for any questions
we're up we're not going to go
to members of the audience if we
get up we're gonna go to room
three seventeen which is our
normal meeting room where
there's a there's some folks and
three seventeen that wish to
speak up of for or against the
bill we're going to three
seventeen that way when they
finish speaking we can should
those folks and then go home and
then we'll go to the proponents
of the bill and then the
opposition but when we let the
three seventeen as a computer
model in the room let's let
three seventeen in as a panelist
on mute yourself and please
enter take turns addressing the
committee you see yourselves
thank you right.
Is.
You.
Is there anyone at three
seventeen that wishes to address
the committee that was my
understanding yes please do that
now.
We sure as heck can.
What was a martyr.
In my district that okay.
One minute well.
The out of Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Joseph Hernandez and I am
here M. I'm here representing
the NM nativo I'm also here
representing you know that the
next generation of Navajo
allottees have been a lot of it
just outside of work.
Not easy which is near Chaco
canyon I'm here to oppose house
bill two to eight because this
is also fueled produce hydrogen
in no way this is going to be a
bridge too you know a green
hydrogen and all the way down
here there was a large oil rig
drilling rig in it had a our
large then camp as well as a
production if they were it was
really loud and when I spoke to
the community members that are
not easy they told me that it
just went up two weeks ago this
is going to be the result of a
hydrogen hub the community there
the the resident there I was
talking to Stoneleigh they don't
ask for this and they don't want
to and that's the whole point of
this hydrogen roundtable is that
we haven't been at that table
the community has been involved
in these discussions and that's
why I'm asking for this
committee to.
Thank you.
Next next person three seventeen
please address the committee of
one minute each there's no one
else.
Thank you very much now we're
gonna go to folks in favor of
the bill good and raise your
hand in the zoom go to the right
hand feature in the zone of
press raise hand so we can see
you there's a column on the
right hand side of our computer
screens.
We'll hear from the folks who
who who are in favor or.
We're leaning toward house bill
two twenty eight and that will
listen to the folks there's
about two.
There's about twelve to fifteen
folks who want to speak we can
go maybe about a half an hour
Max so we'll take a minute and a
half and then we'll see the on
the opponent side I think
there's a lot more.
So the opponents will pry have
about an hour a minute each but
for now we're going to.
We're gonna tell you when a
minute is up and then you can.
Representative of your remarks
just sooner or later
but we're gonna hear from Mr
Charles long followed by Mister
Scott Scanlon will all right
we'll on mutual on our side and
then on yourself on your side
thank you.
Mr Chairman welcome Mr lamb
members and members of the
committee my name is Charles
long I'm day McKinley County
treasurer and so also the
president of to Gallup McKinley
county schools and and I've been
a member of the Navajo Nation
met being
left the state.
I have been the Navajo leader
for many years in New Mexico.
I am in support to help us build
two two eight McKinley County
needs this legislation to pass
so do we can restore and
improved economic development in
our county the closure of tri
state power plant has taken away
many high paying jobs from more
counties many native American
workers specifically Navajos
have lost work and this is heard
many of are not far families
ability to survive in this
terrible economic times we are
in need of state.
Ways to produce energy and this
bill allows us to do that while
also restoring jobs for our
people please passed house bill
two twenty eight for our people
thank you.
Thank you Sir Mister Scott
Scanlon followed by a virtual
run below thank you Mr chairman
Scott Scanlon registered
lobbyist for San Juan County the
city of Farmington the city of
Bloomfield.
Farmington public schools and
San Juan college all five of
these organizations fully
support house bill two twenty
eight and urge your support we
believe it's a incredible
opportunity for economic
development in northwest New
Mexico and throughout the state
of New Mexico with our
universities and labs we fully
support this bill and so once
again Mr chairman and members of
the committee San Juan County
the city of Farmington the city
of Bloomfield.
Farmington public schools in San
Juan college stand in strong
support of this legislation
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you virtual drop below.
Welcome.
Mr chair
Browse your.
our workgroup disorders station
for thirty.
Very fortunate to work with a
over.
Which was a little.
There were able to.
Work for their families there's
a real.
There are three of them for
your.
Reporter
for the roof other groups to
reduce that.
Program.
Your program.
The players whose rate which
will.
Very soon we're OSHA VPP for
rules
there will no.
Where do.
Right
will be great for would be.
But will real Madrid.
We're we're gonna charge what we
have well.
For the lord to generate.
When.
Thank you Sir Terry Cole
followed by J. sent the honest.
Okay but.
J. son Dennis followed by Brian
conduct.
Yes of.
Chairman.
Yes Mister Condit if you could
make yourself.
I just please proceed.
Good afternoon chairman my Estes
J. something on this registered
lobbyists for the office of
president vice president of the
Navajo Nation of president of
supports this is.
What
is usually president supports
house bill two twenty eight the
hydrogen hub Development Act.
These also benefit economically
disadvantaged distressed
communities and specially those
impacted by the closure of coal
field industries such as the
coal fired power plants of their
these closures have impacted
many Navajo citizens that work
for these plants are now without
a job
this this will provide the jobs
to these displaced workers and
the we want to thank our chair
Patty Lundstrom for bringing
this legislation forward and the
and would like to ask the
committee to support this
initiative thank you Sir.
Mr Condit followed by Jennifer
Weber.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Brian con that I represent New
Mexico building construction
trades council we represent
fifteen construction propped you
to New Mexico with approximately
twelve thousand five hundred
members in fifteen different
practice once we stand in full
support of this legislation all
we have worked and every
industry in New Mexico and we
are are encouraging our
committee members of the
legislature to pass this
important legislation thank you.
Jennifer Weber followed by
Michael downturn you.
Yes good evening chairman asked
us and committee members my name
is Jennifer Weber and I'm here
on behalf of the New Mexico
chamber of commerce in support
of house bill two to eight the
chamber has supported efforts to
address the climate crisis from
the passage of the Energy
transitioned Act the efforts to
develop an effective methane
rule and from supporting income
tax credits for renewable energy
installation and now to the
development of a hydrogen
infrastructure in addition for
the past two years the chamber
has been focused on developing
and supporting efforts to
equitably diversify and grow New
Mexico's economy the bill before
you today will do just that
hoping our rural communities
driving good paying jobs with
new and evolving industries and
technologies this is an
opportunity to do more than just
talk about investing in
alternative energy and creating
rural jobs expanding hydrogen in
New Mexico will help make our
state competitive which will
enable new gains in the fight to
address systemic barriers that
affect our disadvantaged
communities revenues from
hydrogen development will help
diversify our budget and allow
us to invest more in need
priorities like education
workforce training and
affordable housing we urge your
support for house bill two to
eight and appreciate the Sanchez
bringing it forward thank you.
Michael d'antonio followed by
Brady board tuning.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my see Antonio
Xcel energy which serves all
appears to be to the eastern
part of New Mexico we we
Stanislaus or this bill we you
know excels and beater at
renewables in New Mexico and
nationally and we just feel like
the hydrogen well complicates is
a great addition to our
portfolio could be I this bill
were to pass that to me was to
not only continue to generate.
Our energy with clean wind and
solar to have a dispatchable
resource to make sure that our
students is reliable to our
press more so we strongly
support this bill thank you.
Thank you ready.
We're treating followed by Joan
Baker.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members my name is Brady
boarding a Representative fuel
cell energy we're a Connecticut
based manufacturer of fuel cells
and hydrogen production
equipment.
We look forward to the passage
of SB House Bill to twenty eight
we're developing technologies
that can convert waste methane
like we'd find a waste water
treatment plant into green
hydrogen as well as over
generated renewables for
electrolysis and use of recycled
water into green hydrogen it's
technology that is is up and
running in other places in the
country around the world we see
it as a promising investment for
the state of New Mexico and one
that we would like to be part of
as we urged support for H. B.
two twenty eight thank you.
Thank you Sir John Baker
followed by Vince Martinez.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee I'm John Baker the
political affairs director for
the local for twelve that's the
plumbers and pipefitters union
Mr chairman Fred that there's a
misconception about hydrogen
hubs and energy.
Hi.
Energy is a must as we
transition to clean energy here
in New Mexico according to the
US department of energy due to
their high efficiency and zero
or near zero emission operation
hydrogen and fuel cells have the
potential to reduce greenhouse
house gases and so many
applications hydrogen can be
produced from diverse and
domestic resources currently
most hydrogen is produced from
fossil fuels specifically
natural gas the cleanest burning
fossil fuel according to the
EPA.
But as we move towards renewable
resources such as biomass
geothermal solar wind
we are going to need hydrogen
hubs in the hydrogen.
The Energy already started if we
want to continue to produce
hydrogen energy and have proper
transmission for these renewable
sources.
Mr chair in closing I would like
to thank the sponsor for their
forward thinking and language in
regards to the apprenticeships
in this venture a recent
government research has found
that eighty six percent of
employers who have just one
apprentice stated it helps
develop their skills the skills
that are most relevant to their
businesses seventy eight percent
say the apprentices help improve
productivity and seventy four
percent of those businesses say
that his improve their quality
and product of service so it is
a great way to start this
venture.
This is a good bill in a great
strategy for New Mexico to
diversify our energy sources and
economy and we ask for your
support in this measure and vote
yes on house bill two twenty.
Thank you Mr Kirk Vince Martinez
followed by Kevin.
Gone wild.
Good evening Mr chairman members
of the committee I have been to
Martinez senior government
relations adviser for tri state
generation and transmission
association.
As you know tristate is a not
for profit cooperative we are
comprised of forty two
distribution cooperatives in
four states in New Mexico we
service Levin member
cooperatives in over one hundred
and eighty thousand member
owners are owners can feel good
about the energy they get from
tri state by twenty twenty four
will be fifty percent renewable
and by twenty thirty will be
over seventy percent renewable
New Mexico rural electric
cooperatives are the cornerstone
of economic stability in their
communities communities that
need that type of tools for
economic development that are
offered in house bill two twenty
eight New Mexico needs to be
open for business and rural New
Mexico needs a type of well
paying jobs and opportunities
that transitional energy sources
such as hydrogen offer and
provide the dispatchable carbon
free source of energy that
complements wind and solar and
ensures future reliability and
creates economic opportunities
for many of our rural
communities we urge you to
approve house bill two twenty
eight and Sir care this once in
a lifetime opportunity for New
Mexico thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee thank
you Sir bill followed by Tim was
intent.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm the
lady president CEO of the
government in the county chamber
of commerce our chamber stands
in strong support of H. B. two
twenty eight and we think the
sponsor chairwoman Lundstrom for
bringing it forward New Mexico
must take action now to
capitalize on the nearly three
hundred billion dollars
anticipated to be spent on
hydrogen related products within
the next eight years as well as
the planned additional eight
billion.
Mr Lee thank you what is going
on meet yourself you got muted
inadvertently I'm sorry.
Those are but excuse me Mr
chairman I don't know what we're
I got muted but I'll pick up
House Bill to twenty eight is
real economic to repair
Development I directed fracking
new industries and great jobs
that will support New Mexico
families over supplying our
energy economy and helping our
state to meet its climate goals
HB two twenty eight requires the
hydrogen produced within our
state must meet strict mandatory
standards for clean hydrogen
only thirty seconds of the
economic engine that at this
time simply cannot efficiently
decarbonise without low carbon
hydrogen long haul trucks by the
thousands travel like we through
our state every day and they
will have to rely on this
technology long with
manufacturing construction
electric generation and other
industries make no mistake
though committee this could be
New Mexico's best and only
opportunity we now then once
again we will find our state at
the bottom of the list looking
from our borders at neighboring
states benefiting from this
green energy and the robust
economy creates of their people
yes this committee move this
bill forward with a do pass
thank you for your time and
dedication as well as for your
service to New Mexico thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr Lee Tim wise intent
followed by Eileen Chavez
Yarborough.
Yes thank you Mr chairman I am
two employees intent and I have
lived and worked Boller and
Kenley county for all my life I
stand strong to support H. bill
to twenty eight.
Utilize an H. two is the next
step towards stabilization we
renewable energy for the future
H. two will be used to
decarbonise the transportation
industry and other industries
processes.
In the past three years I have
witnessed McKinley Boller
accounting lose three hundred
jobs with the closure of
marathon refinery and Escalante
generating station.
We need role jobs in New Mexico
please vote yes for H. B. two
two eight thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Eileen Travis job role
followed by avid Trujillo.
At chairman my **** and
committee members my name is
Eileen Chavez Yarborough I am
the executive director of Cibola
communities economic development
foundation I represent Cibola
County the city of requests in
the village of Milan I we stand
in support of house bill two to
eight because we would like to
see this emerging industry be a
part of our region we have the
ability and the assets on the
ground to make this happen make
no mistake the higher this this
hydrogen have is going to happen
somewhere and I would like
nothing more than to see it
happen in our region.
Like Neville said like Mr Bailey
said we have an opportunity
before us and we want to take
advantage of it
post ETA has left us with out a
road map about how we are
planning to replace those jobs
so we are trying to help
ourselves and this is the way
that we can do it
my understanding is that you
know this industry is going to
going to be very environmentally
conscious and and we hope that
it will provide much success and
many much needed jobs to
McKinley and Cibola County know
that all most of the jobs ninety
percent plus that were lost at
tri state are from Cibola County
and that is the impacted as by
fourteen point eight million
dollars annually in payroll plus
indirect jobs that have been
lost I appreciate you giving me
time to speak and I stand in
support and ask you to please
pass this legislation for the
hydrogen have house bill two to
eight thank you.
Thank you before you start
Mister to heal those folks using
other people's computers.
So all announced the name that I
see up on as your zoom I do and
then you you introduce yourself
of using two computers for one
computer for two people by all
means please interject so that
we don't skip you thank you
welcome Mr Arman to heal
followed by the most to you.
I thank you Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Armine Trujillo and I'm the CEO
for four corners economic
development sh and again we are
in support of H. B. two two
eight two here in San Juan
County we've seen the results of
but thank it just shut down and
they do our our the decrease in
employment due to the shut downs
of production with our power
plants and that.
Coupled with our shut downs with
that our mining operations we
see this as an opportunity to
look at alternative fuels to
bring new opportunities here to
San Juan County each and the
greater four corners region here
we are in support of HB two to
wage and we ask that the
committee take this into
consideration because again
these these are industry here in
San Juan County employed many
Navajos and those are the people
that would be affected along
with that many others here in
San Juan County so again I would
urged committee to take this
into consideration as we look at
this alternative opportunity and
look at you are economic
opportunities coming into the
future again thank you very much
Mr chairman for this opportunity
to ask for support for this bill
thank you.
Thank you Sir must Trujillo
followed by Robert up with
doctors.
Good evening Mr chairman
committee members many missed
must Trujillo with I. B. W. six
eleven with electrical you there
a great state New Mexico we
stand strong support of HB two
two eight.
For many reasons the
specifically not including or
are not to forget about the jobs
that we created but also to
diversify the energy generation
options here in New Mexico of
see that you know with the
renewable energy we need also a
reliable electrical generation.
The lower carbon impact in coal
and we see that happening here
with the H. B. two two eight so
once again my name is to must
repeal we stand in strong
support of a house bill two to a
thank you yes Sir robber up
without that followed by Mike
hi.
Chair members level some of this
bill the assassination thank you
for your presentation also
stands for also to twenty eight
important as you know the the
approximation
involving well yes and recently
on want to be one of these with
solar we believe that this is a
very viable alternative legal
action nation and to create
employment opportunities for the
nation along with all New
Mexicans thank you Mr chair we
strongly support wall to.
Thank you Mike Hyatt followed by
mark strand.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Mike Hyatt and the
superintendent for Gallup
McKinley county schools.
One of the detriments to closing
the power plants here in our
area that's not talked about
enough is how it has decimated
our bonding capacity to support
our students education.
In our part of the state we are
predominantly native American
and these are the students that
it's affecting tens of millions
of dollars been taken away from
our students due to poor energy
policy and regulation House Bill
to twenty eight helps restore
these tens of millions of
dollars in funding for our
students and it does so in a way
that helps protect the
environment and help provide the
needed energy resources for our
communities I urge you to pass
this house bill two twenty eight
for New Mexico's kids and their
education thank you.
Mark stranded followed by
Anthony the most junior.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
mark strand I am alignment this
work on the power lines for over
twenty eight years I am also the
president of the central New
Mexico labor council I strand I
stand in strong support of H. B.
two two eight thank you very
much.
Thank you and the demons junior
followed by Rachel Feldman.
Good evening.
Mr chairman and members of the
board this afternoon Mister
chair county manager for making
the county of McKinley County
staff and.
Favor of this bill as you know
we lost to our top three top top
three taxpayers and tristate
americana this will bring in
much needed jobs to the area for
McKinley County and and the US
will County so we're very much
in favor of this bill as it
moves forward the systems also
Mr chairman I got the
commissioner Baca with me as
well.
Welcome for Kerr are again
you've heard from community
members within the doubt
McKinley County area state how
important this bill would be for
us not only for jobs but for our
economic development are you
also heard Mr Hyatt state that
this would also be a benefit to
our kids within our area so we
have Gallup McKinley county and
in full support of this bill is
due to aids.
Thank you.
Thank you Rachel Feldman
followed by Andrew stone.
Hello can you hear me welcome we
sure can sure thank you it was
my intention to speak against
this bill and I'm popping up in
the four section do you want me
to wait for you to welcome and
thank you for your patience
Andrew stone followed by
Courtney Eichorst for these are
these are proponents of the bill
these are folks in favor of
house bill two twenty eight
thank you.
Thank you chairman thank you
committee and Andrew stone and I
work in solar finance and
community solar everyone is said
it we will need hydrogen to
complete our transition.
And this bill will help our
communities in the oil and gas
and coal and mining communities.
And
They definitely need that and
for its fair and just transition
it's an all hands on deck now
what I'm going to recommend is
that we look towards the green
hydrogen as much as we can
because with our wind in our
solar we can finish the
transition and having these
communities know how to deal
with hydrogen will take time and
that's why we have to start now
thank you.
Sure.
Courtney I course followed by as
is empty.
Okay good evening chaired
committee members appreciate you
guys allowing us the time this
evening to speak on behalf of
house bill two to eight my name
is Courtney I course from the
business manager of you a local
for twelve plumbers and
pipefitters and the president of
the New Mexico building and
construction trades council.
Everybody should know that
hydrogen is being developed
across the country right now
needs hydrogen hubs are going to
be an essential part of economic
development in the state.
It's going to happen across the
state it's not to me one County
other this is going to happen
all over the place because we
need it to it is something
that's going to happen in the
future to something that we are
currently doing across the
country as we speak we're
training apprentices right now
to do this type of work in our
great state of New Mexico so I
would like to thank the sponsors
for bringing this forward this
is a great start great
opportunity for us to get
started with the hydrogen
production in the state of New
Mexico and I would urge the
committee to vote I do pass for
house bill two twenty eight
thank you.
Thank you Sir I was just empty
followed by a one five zero five
eight.
chairman can hear me.
Yes.
Good even chairman chairman my
Estes and respected members of
the committee my name as I say
as empty I am the business
representative of the sheet
metal workers local forty nine.
You know our major concern with
this type of industry coming to
New Mexico in the us having
crucial apprenticeship standards
to train an employer citizens
that reside in those communities
the current measure before us
has those standards we and now
of with that we have an
opportunity to set the stage for
young adults to get into
education that will last a
lifetime with providing for
their loved ones and aid in the
development of our state's
infrastructure these skills
learn and develop do not stop
after construction of a hydrogen
power station they go on to the
next project to support our
communities and our economies I
thank you for your time
consideration and ask for your
support thank you.
One five zero five eight
followed by actually long.
One five zero five eight one and
on yourself.
And then introduce yourself.
We have an appearance from one
five zero five eight.
Good hold on one five zero five
eight we're gonna from Ashley
long.
Followed by Jason Weaks.
Chairman I just as members of
the committee my name is Ashley
long president directing
business representative of the
international association of
machinists and aerospace workers
and for the sake of time we
stand in strong support of the
bill we appreciate the Sanchez
work thank you.
Jason Weaks welcome thank you Mr
chairman of the committee
Yes Representative in McKinley
county electric generating
facility economic development
district to put authority my
comments tonight on behalf of
the authority chairman Clemente
Sanchez of the thirty very much
supports this legislation I
really feel like the public
Department concept really does
leverage both public involvement
and private involvement to help
develop these hood hubs
throughout New Mexico really
this is an economic development
bill but the other benefit is
that it will help diversify our
energy portfolio we really think
this is important legislation on
views a lot of investment in the
state and we stand in strong
support of this legislation
thank you.
Back to one five zero five eight
please look at your phone or
device your computer is very
good on mute yourself and
address the committee.
Already.
We'll go to Mr Ajay and do young
followed by Terry Cole.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr Dion is
not gonna be speaking I am Louis
we I am the bearer of Gallup and
as you heard in the past we've
lost two major industry Marathon
Oil and tri state so it's a
major loss to the city of Dallas
but also like to mention the
fact that the city council last
Tuesday night voted unanimously
in favor of house bill two
twenty eight we would appreciate
if everyone voted in favor of
thank you.
Thank you Mr mayor welcome Terry
Cole followed by why the roads
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Terry Cole
and I am president and CEO of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce so much of economic
development is about seizing
opportunities and recognizing
where strengths lie as a state
our strength is an energy we can
and should be a national leader
even international leader in the
production of well over half a
dozen forms and types of energy
energy should be the hallmark of
New Mexico's economic identity a
set of high demand job creating
industries that literally
spanned our state from corner to
corner yes we should be a
hydrogen energy production hub
we support this bill because it
will create an exciting new
industry within a competitive
advantage secretary for New
Mexico it will save jobs and
generate new jobs are we really
in a position to say no to job
growth in our state and it will
seize the opportunity in front
of us to be recognized and
invested in nationally as a
clean energy innovation leader
we can't be so myopic are
ideological that we let this
economic opportunity pass us by
let's get in on the ground floor
of this work we urge your
support of this bill and I
appreciate appreciate Mr
chairman being able to address
the committee this evening thank
you.
Thank you very much.
Why the roads full of our
Michael saves.
Thank you Mr chairman in the
committee my name's Wiley wrote
on the co founder of best
quality H. two power in a board
member of the metastable
Business council based in the
state we strongly support house
bill two twenty eight while the
main use of the hydrogen
produced will be used to produce
power it's also important to
point out that there will be a
lot of other opportunities to
utilize the hydrogen to
decarbonise hard to decarbonise
industry.
That such as a green cement
heavy freight transportation
utilizing the private
infrastructure of interstate
forty in the right field which
connects the east and west coast
it'll also be utilized to
produce semiconductors and to
recycle materials such as steel
and plastics the high concept is
built around not only producing
power but bringing in other
industries into the area and
that will bring good paying jobs
and to bring up prosperity to
McKinley it's both County thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Sir Michael sage
followed by Jason Espinoza.
Good evening meeting chaired
committee members my name is
Michael a dump from the
community of Las Lunacurrently
into County and I stand for
house bill two to eight from my
perspective by an order of
dispatchable power I believe
that rolling blackouts will
decide disproportionately affect
people of color I believe that
rolling blackouts will dispose
disproportionately affect people
with health conditions I don't
care taker for COVID long haul
are you concerned about the
possibility of rolling blackouts
I think we can all agree that we
want renewable power but I think
we can all the Dennis we agreed
that we need reliable
electricity hi Dennis port
helpful to to wait thank you.
Thank you Sir Jason Espinoza
followed by cutting Williams.
I chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza.
A registered lobbyist with the
associated general contractors
New Mexico which is the trusted
professional source that
delivers a unified voice for
that represents the entire
construction industry standard
struck for the legislature
should I believe it'll promote
economic development as well as
jobs across the state thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Sir Patty Williams
followed by Joseph sent.
Thank you Mr chair I'm good at
good evening committee members
I'm Patty Williams the
registered lobbyists for the
Navajo Nation council office of
the speaker and the Navajo
Nation council supports H. B.
two two eight the Navajo Nation
has been a critical player in
the north American energy
economy as its tribal lands in
New Mexico are rich in natural
resources as you've heard recent
and planned closures of coal
mines and coal fired generation
facilities have resulted in
massive loss of jobs and
revenues in north western New
Mexico the Navajo Nation is
developing a plan for the new
energy future
to bring long term prosperity to
the Navajo Nation and the four
corners area.
We have had tribal consultation
with the state of New Mexico in
the federal government and the
Navajo Nation sees an exciting
opportunity for New Mexico and
the Navajo Nation to be leading
voices in this new energy
economy.
Navajo Nation does request a
dedicated tribal seat on that
hydrogen have board that's
created by this bill.
And in order to support a
vibrant energy market in our
beautiful state the Navajo
Nation council urges that do
passed on house bill two twenty
eight and thanks the governor
and Representative Lundstrom for
their vision and bringing this
bill thank you.
Thank you Joseph Sanchez
followed by Kevin Greenwald.
Mr Chairman this is Joseph
Sanchez former state Rep
CEO of former CEO have responses
electric the largest electric
coop in the state New Mexico
engineer.
Our president Biden is pushing
hydrogen he's a democratic
president.
I potentially billions of
dollars for state are lots of
jobs the unions are backing
this.
I.
I don't think we need this for
our state we really need to
support this industry come into
our state it's going to be jobs
which we badly needed revenue
which we badly need we talk
about revenue into our states
are Mr chairman I urge the
committee to support this bill
thank you.
Welcome Representative good to
see you Kevin Greenwald followed
by ability more.
Sir welcome colleges for.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I'm can grow on
the CEO of the New Mexico where
electric coop association and
I'm trying not to be repetitive
this is an economic development
bill for rural areas I'm which
could also if it takes off
expand to other rural areas.
We entered into the twenty
nineteen energy transition act
with the full knowledge that if
we were ever going to get too
low or zero carbon we needed new
technologies we're never gonna
get there was solar and wind and
storage we need dispatchable
resources.
This is the first technology
that has emerged I can start
building on that process of
getting us to zero carbon.
we have we serve twenty two
percent of the population the
state eighty seven land area and
it's all the rural areas and we
see this as a great opportunity
to expand new jobs good jobs.
In future of New Mexico and we
can start in the prude area were
Escalante power plant is and
because they have all the
infrastructure pieces there to
begin the beginning of a great
how you can help so thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee for money or time to
addressee thank you.
Thank you Mr Gramm well Billy
Moore followed by Francis B..
Mister Moore you have the floor
good in on mute yourself.
Sure can.
Okay thank you Mr chairman
billing more chairman of the
northwest New Mexico council of
governments and the McKinley
County commissioner we're
strongly in support of house
bill two twenty eight
and you've heard many reasons
of economic growth and creation
of jobs in New Mexico.
As.
Spoken many times so we've been
hurt by the shut down of
tristate American refining.
I believe that playing hydrogen
as a source of New Mexico to
move forward and energy
development our federal
government is moving forward
with the development of hydrogen
as an energy source I believe
it's very.
Weisberger New Mexico to follow
suit and be be able to be one of
the leaders and developing a
hydrogen thank you for your time
and we strongly support the use
of hydrogen as an energy source
in New Mexico thank you
commissioner Francis B. followed
by Bernadette.
Ms be going on mute yourself.
Okay thank you can hear me now
we can introduce yourself please
my name is Francis being the
executive director of the Gallup
there's disagreement district
and Gallup New Mexico as well as
the coordinator in fiscal agent
for the regional economic
development partners alliance in
northwest New Mexico.
We stand very strongly in
support of house bill two twenty
eight for the reasons
articulated by all the previous
speakers and ask the committee
to vote to pass for house bill
two twenty eight thank you.
Thank you please introduce your
self we are we're gonna hear
from Bernalillo that followed by
Bruce Armstrong.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Dr Bernadette Montoya a proud
citizen of the state of New
Mexico and I stand in support of
house bill two twenty eight in
addition to the comments made by
others that came before me this
evening I would like to add that
this bill would allow for
expansion of renewable and clean
energy and investment in future
technologies and an avid
industry to our great state
allow our New Mexico by voting
in favor of this bill to be
among the first not the last in
this effort we have the perfect
infrastructure with the
Escalante station we have the
labor and most importantly we
have the will thank you for your
time and for your support of
this bill.
Thank you doctor Bruce
Armstrong.
Followed by.
Yes thank you chairman and
members of the committee my
name's Bruce Armstrong resident
of Gallup New Mexico and I
strongly support H. B. two
twenty eight.
It's been said that we should
not throw out the good in our
efforts to obtain the perfect.
What I see happening is we're
talking about green hydrogen
that's going to be developed and
Escalante if this bill goes
forward.
And we're talking about blue
hydrogen that's going to be
developed and we need to get the
green hydrogen eventually I
think we all realize that it's
not viable yet we need to.
Develop more opportunities for
the economy jobs we need.
To bring more businesses and
that will come in and we need to
take advantage of New Mexicos
assets that we have on the
ground both here as
transportation and logistics in
McKinley county as well as at
the state level with the lapse
and being able to solve big
problems we know that hydrogen
is the fuel of the future and I
strongly support this bill and
hope that we can move forward to
that future thank you.
Thank you Sir Paul followed by
Kylie Garcia good introduce your
self.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members my name is Paul Garcia
and I am a retired as assistant
professor from New Mexico State
University in requests one of
the things that has been left
out of the conversation until
now is the fact that New Mexico
will soon be hurting for
electrical generation in the
foreseeable future as Mr surge
was saying earlier as I came in
for work today the headline on
the QB TV news at four was in
our read it off my TV screen
there are cost possible rolling
outages from PNM for July and
August the truth is electrical
production from solar wind is
not dispatchable as we continue
to shut down dispatchable
electric plants we're going to
suffer from an unstable grid we
must find ways to have
dispatchable power available to
us so we do not suffer from
outages such as the outages the
Texas suffered last winter until
solar wind and other renewable
resources are improvement can be
dispatched readily hydrogen is a
perfect way to have dispatchable
power in the interim to fully
New Mexico is last in just about
everything this bill will
provide an Avenue for economic
growth in New Mexico the will
help schools with good tax bases
and good bonding ability as Mr
hides to mention that's not the
last in this burgeoning hydrogen
infrastructure that is going to
happen soon in this country
let's not lose this industry
before anything gets here that's
not lose jobs instead of doing
jobs this opportunity is a good
chance for New Mexico to be
first again thank you Mr chair
committee members for supporting
this bill.
Thank you professor Kylie Garcia
followed by Marlene.
Opening.
Good evening my name is Kyle
Garcia I am a student at NMSU
grants and a reporter for my
local newspaper but I address
you today as a community member
and the daughter of a power
plant worker who we just heard
from Paul Garcia I lived in
civil county my entire life when
local trusted as it's going to
power plant shut down many jobs
were lost in the delivered a
devastating blow to my community
if you years later the
opportunity for hydrogen to
revitalize the plant opened up
and renewed hope in our
community the support County
community is a strong one and we
fought to create economic growth
in new ways but this bill and
the way in which it would impact
the local plant local jobs the
environment and my community
would certainly help.
Our community needs these jobs
as a reporter I have seen this
journey towards clean energy
unfold right before my eyes I
have interviewed many experts
regarding the various issues at
hand I've spoken with many of by
community members not to mention
my dad currently works at the
local power plant and we as a
family are anxious and excited
at the possibility of seeing
hydrogen but bring the plant
back to life after years of
layoffs and job uncertainty this
is one of the first time in
years that I've seen so many
people from across the aisles
locally setting together and
with the same goals in mind and
I feel confident the hydrogen
can be a positive source of
energy growth and hope for New
Mexico so I strongly also
legislators can centers
supporting this bill because
doing so would be supporting
support County supporting our
families supporting the future
of clean energy and support in
New Mexico thank you.
Sure you are muted.
Marlene told vote followed by.
Mark Friedland.
Good evening I'm Dr Marlene
Travis Freeman.
Just because state university
grants campus.
The economic development board
for Cibola and communities in
Cibola county and I'm here to
speak on behalf of H. B. two
twenty eight.
I want to express my sincere
I'm.
Gratitude towards eight the
hydrogen hub building coming to
Cibola County I urge all the
legislators to support this bill
as this will spur economic
growth and development in Cibola
county I have been I have lived
in to the county all my life I
have two children Cibola County
and I this bill will help bring
the jobs necessary into requests
and see what County that will
help spur economic growth and
development please support this
bill.
And vote yes thank you.
Thank you mark.
Riemann followed by my rims.
Maybe Mr chair can you hear me
should we sure can something
Donatella additional Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
name is mark Freeman I'm a
member of the twenty fourth
nomination Council
Representative a communities in
McKinley some on the committees
are present across point not
just used to it I percent the
white rock lake valley her for
no and I is there all the way
from of the the the north of the
route to south apartments and
Representative area the distance
the port of house bill two
twenty eight and thank you to
Representative Lundstrom for
this bill it's a very it's a
very important bill that will
benefit you create jobs of
course for the state but given
opportunity for the Navajo
Nation to partner with the state
of New Mexico as we as as we
also see can Devers to create
clean energy on the Navajo
Nation ourselves we are we are
we are very real process to
looking forward to a cleaner
economy as well creating a
hydrogen economy on the now will
nation with the closure of the
now would generating station in
page Arizona as well as the
Peabody Meineke in tears on a
now would nation loss of total
revenue of forty million dollars
so we are seeking this
opportunity to help our people
create.
A program to help sustain
programs will help economically
health and social programs for
renewable people not one nation
so we do I do stand support of
this legislation and thank you
very much and here a month ago
best wishes to all of our
legislative this year thank you
Mr chairman.
Thank you Sir Myron Gordon
introduce yourself followed by
Eric Garcia.
Yes hi you have to have a vice
president my adviser here but
applications
we do support this office of the
president vice president
president Dr yes and myself have
issued a letter of support to us
supporting house bill two twenty
eight and that we do feel that
the nation needs to be part of
these vital discussions as we
look to renewables and other OB
so stable and energies and that
that application because we are
comprised in New Mexico and also
in Arizona we could be that tied
it helps our region become
stronger players in the hydrogen
market so again we support the
House Bill to twenty eight thank
you for the leadership of Patty
Lundstrom and that Mr Chairman
representative this time to just
a chime in with you all and we
look to get continued here to be
part of these this are very
important discussion section.
Thank you Eric Garcia followed
by and what is.
Mr Eric Garcia and and what is
Eric what is going on on you
you're still.
Thank you Sir.
Sorry Sir good evening chairman
and members of the committee my
name is there RCS city
councilman arrested Mexico
restaurants supports H. B. two
two eight I was an engineer for
for Peabody energy for fifteen
years doing long term planning I
believe the coal reserve will be
shrinking fast and loss of jobs
in the near future hi due to
plant would be placed jobs as
the coal industry starts to fade
away thank you for your time.
Thank you very much Jim what is
followed by Warren and sicker.
Good evening Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is mac what is member services
manager of continental divide
electric cooperative in grants
New Mexico we distribute
electricity to more than twenty
four thousand meters throughout
Cibola and parts of McKinley
Santa Bernalillo and Valencia
counties we support H. B. two
two eight for all the reasons
that I've been given thus far it
will be a tremendous economic
boost and reliable energy
producer for our cooperative
service area thank you respect
leave for your time support Mr
chairman and committee.
Thank you Sir Warren on sicker
welcome hello thank you very
much for sharing born insecure
director of economic development
for the city of farm to New
Mexico our community here is a.
Natural gas producer and with
companies like Pasco that are
working with aerotek to produce
hydrogen production units we
feel this is something that's
going to build in the future of
the economy for energy for our
community as well as the state
and so one led by sports this
bill.
We
appreciate you anyone else wish
to speak in favor of Matthew
Gonzalez welcome.
Mr chairman thank you for the
opportunity to comment on this
Mr chairman members the
committee my name is Matthew
Gonzalez and I'm the state
affairs director for the
consumer energy alliance of New
Mexico again thank you for the
opportunity comment on this at
C. A. we supported all the above
energy policies that promote
energy production and
environmental stewardship the
result affordable energy options
for working families and small
businesses I'm energy production
environmental stewardship are
not mutually exclusive they go
hand in hand and and here in New
Mexico would prove that New
Mexico's made a commitment to
clean up the environment we feel
like hydrogen in the hydrogen
industry is going to be a key
component of that and so for
those reasons we just want to
thank the sponsor for bringing
this important piece of
legislation for this will help
in the energy transition and and
helping us clean up the
environment so thank you for the
opportunity to speak please
stand in support.
Thank you and we have one person
who raised their hand DH put in
a introduce yourself DH welcome.
Got a I'm Donna house I am a.
Member of the Navajo Nation and
also assisted of the New Mexico
I am absolutely oppose this bill
it's definitely let you pick up
the opposition to the stage
where we're going with folks who
are in favor of the bill states
say they're those two there
though is there anyone else who
wishes to speak in favor of the
bill.
Anyone else who wishes to speak
in favor great so we had about
an hour or so of those in favor
those who wish to speak in
opposition to go out and raise
your hand will take you in the
order that you raise your hand
we want to thank everyone for
their patients I know there's a
lot of concern with this bill
and and folks
Folks have been very very
patient let me just take a quick
Gander there's a hundred ninety
seven per audience.
Mystique you will first give me
a sec it was like you do not
have the floor DH give me a
moment state what is the you're
in the room with us anyway as I
was saying there's a hundred
ninety six persons in the
audience who want to thank
everybody for being here and we
just get a feel for how many
folks are hoping to speak are
planning to speak in opposition.
It's a it's hard to say on my
computer but it's it's.
It's a lot so we're gonna
So we're gonna go on our maybe
more we're not gonna cut anybody
off would just be cognizant of
your neighbors
There's going to be.
So there's about sixty three
folks approximately want to
speak so everyone's going to get
a minute there you're gonna be
timed what's your minute is over
please please finish your
thought and and then we'll go to
your neighbors so at this time
we're gonna hear from and that
we're not gonna go to committee
tonight the committee is engage
were here the sponsors are here
we want to hear from the public
that's our priority today.
and and that's what we're gonna
do with that we're gonna would
reconvene at the.
At the calling of the chair
sometime tomorrow to go to
committee so that the committee
can question the Sanchez at this
time we're from DH followed by
Paul Gibson everyone has one
minute.
On this day twenty one
healthcare so welcome welcome
okay sorry I just started
already I'll start over in your
day to start a hell's I am a
citizen of the Navajo Nation and
also New Mexico I absolutely
oppose this bill it's definitely
not a bill that's going to
address the climate change issue
that we're facing right now it's
still very much of pollution
especially related to the
possible fuel so.
Absolutely vote against H. B.
two two eight thank you.
Thank you Paul Gibson followed
by Michael Eisen fell.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Paul Gibson co founder recheck
Our Democracy nonprofit advocacy
organization twenty five hundred
and members statewide with
members in every state house and
Senate district in New Mexico.
Well aren't rigs to listen to
all the testimony about the need
for jobs rural New Mexico we
feel there are better ways to
generate those jobs specifically
federal funds are available
right now offers wind and solar
and storage and that would be
next.
Genuinely clean alternative.
Depending upon the version of H.
B. two twenty seven that H. B.
two twenty eight have H. B. for
each to provide clean hydrogen
is hydrogen produced with the
carbon intensity equal to or
less than cell number the
difference by bill of kilo grams
of carbon dioxide equivalent
kilograms of hydrogen reduced
you can't just to provide clean
hard agenda something that
allows non acceptable amount of
greenhouse gases and then just
pretend it's clean.
H. B. two twenty eight minutes
before call for the state and
former blue hydrogen which emits
more greenhouse gases than coal.
Dozen highly credit national
environmental organizations join
food and water watch in a letter
to US senators Schumer and
speaker Pelosi yes hydrogen and
carbon capture I quote new
research from scientists at
Cornell and Stanford Alliance
also fuel engine.
These finish your thought Paul
okay thank you how.
Google carbon capture and
storage as larger greenhouse gas
emissions from coal this
hydrogen is generally referred
to as Lou hydrogen and sometimes
referred to as low carbon are
decarbonise tried.
Despite the huge emissions of
blue hydrogen also fuel industry
expansion blue hydrogen as a way
to make sustainable energy and
fossil fuels they ignore the
impacts of climate change public
health and environment
proponents of blue hydrogen or
sensually pushing for more
fossil fuel development
including fracking pipelines and
harms to indigenous and black
communities often first and
worst because of the systemic
patterns of industrial
development built alongside
marginalized communities we have
better options than this please
vote no.
Thank you we're gonna put the
timer on the screen so that the
so that the speaker kinda sees
their time keep in mind the more
time you take.
Some folks may not get to speak
so we want everybody to speak so
just because of your neighbors
so that everyone has a voice
please.
A less than minutes great.
A man is Max.
It's not letting us put the time
around at this time we'll fix it
but I'm gonna keep of time on my
watch I'll tell you forty five
seconds and then a minute thank
you Michael Eisen fell below by
June Parsons welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Mike Eisen told I live in
Farmington on behalf of over a
thousand members of San Juan
citizens alliance we oppose H.
B. two twenty eight.
This is a subsidy bill for
hydrogen derived from natural
gas relying on responsibly
sourced gas response we source
gas doesn't exist in northwest
New Mexico carbon sequestration
speculative climate concerns
mandate that we transition
quickly to renewables not
doubling down on fossil fuels it
seems like this bill was crafted
for Gallup primarily and you
heard from tall grass they are
part of the Blackstone group
with over six hundred nineteen
billion dollars in assets.
They don't need to be given
subsidies but one of the poorest
states in the country to I think
you find to provide gas to
Escalante
and also
Representative small set headers
is not a renewable energy
resource but in the bill the
bill would amend the renewable
energy subsidizing fossil fuels
and clean hydrogen.
We.
Vote no on house bill two twenty
eight thank you.
June Parsons followed by Gen Jim
McCann.
Honorable chairman
representatives my name is Jim
Parsons from Rio Rancho can you
hear me.
I am speaking in strong
opposition to H. B. two two
eight blue hydrogen H. B. two
two eight would increase
production of fossil fuels
particularly natural gas and
coal and result in increased
emissions of carcinogenic and
global warming methane this
means that H. B. two two eight
would actually increase New
Mexico's production of
greenhouse gases particularly
global warming methane from
natural gas causing our climate
crisis terribly methane is
eighty times that is eight
thousand percent more potent in
heating air in CO two I implore
you to please responsibly vote
no on environmentally disastrous
H. B. two two eight thank you
thank you Jim McCann followed by
Rachel Feldman good evening
Mister chair members of the
committee and the public my name
is Jim mackenzie and I'm
speaking as a co coordinator of
three fifteen New Mexico and
representing our seven thousand
members I am a retired member of
the I. B. E. W. and we're
building the Escalante power
station back in the day we stand
in opposition to H. three two
two eight the efforts to pass
another bill to support a
methane based industry is
fundamentally flawed the idea
here that one can redefine also
fill base high as renewable
energy based on U. S. bank
methane sourcing rules and
commercially unavailable CCS.
Thank ology defies common sense
carbon capture and sequestration
five seconds after decades of
research efforts has failed and
the market place but here is
presenting as a cornerstone of
the proposed hydrogen economy a
quick history lesson remember
the promises of the uranium
mining industry.
When we and and how that fell on
its face and how frontline
communities are still burdened
with the legacy of health and
environmental damages they
traded for those jobs thank you.
Thank you Rachel Feldman Public
Catherine share.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes Michael L. you still can the
mute his device welcome miss
Rachel bell.
Hello Mr chair and committee I'm
a retired
Policy Ellen and analyst and
over a long career I have relied
on scientists and data to make
decisions and to advise
policymakers on what course of
action they should take and in
doing so I.
After always navigated many many
political interests and social
and economic economic interests
that argue against what is
supported by the science I have
made the effort as a non
environmentalist but a caring
person to talk to lots of
scientists and engineers and
environmentalists about this
bill and I have not found a
single person from on a
scientific basis who supports it
everyone I've talked to explains
to me what.
I would be an environmental
disaster for our state.
This yeah so I encourage you to
vote against this bill because
it isn't supported by the
science it is it is a focus of
and economic development which
is entirely speculative whether
that work or not thank you thank
you keep in mind that was about
sixty folks we had a we have
about sixty minutes the more you
talk if folks don't get to speak
today they're gonna be very
upset.
Please be respectful of your
neighbors and do not take more
than a minute preferably less
thank you.
Adam painful by Athina.
Catherine sheriff all right Andy
page.
Good evening chair members of
the committee my name is
Katherine chair and I live in
Santa Fe and strong opposition
to investment by the state of
New Mexico in blue hydrogen
production the hydrogen
production and its harm help
help help her make provisions
including nitrogen oxides
particulates carbon monoxide and
volatile organic compounds the
carbon capture that defines the
hydrogen is unproven technology
that has never been successful
on a large scale and the burning
of hydrogen your respective it's
up it's color green we work
right generates nitrogen oxides
that contribute to the
development of respiratory and
cardiovascular disease.
New Mexico has far better
options for healthy and
sustainable economic futures
states rural areas I urge the
members of the committees to
oppose H. B. two two eight and
any investment in hydrogen
production in New Mexico I
solutions like hydrogen have
already cost us precious time in
our fight against the climate
crisis diversifying new Mexico's
economy can work meeting move
away from reliance on toxic
extractive industries that last
thank you to the committee.
The pain followed by Stephanie
Lujan amount of.
Yes thank you Mr chairman and
committee my name is Andy Payne
I strongly oppose H. B. two
twenty eight most of the
comments in support of this
bills are focused on creating
jobs I agree that creating jobs
is essential those jobs need to
be green if we're going to order
by climate change H. B. two
twenty eight will encourage use
of fossil fuels and thirty two
increasing greenhouse gases it's
not a solution toward solving
climate change for just a short
term and short sighted attempt
to create jobs now however we
can create thousands of good
jobs by using proven renewable
energy resources like wind and
solar to produce truly green
hydrogen.
In hydrogen can be produced
using solar and wind rather than
fossil fuels so rather than
passing H. B. two two eight
which would produce dirty
heightens in New Mexico should
incentivize encourage producing
clean hydrogen from electricity
generated from wind and solar
please vote no on each B. two
two eight thank you.
Thank you Stephanie Lujan Amato
of I look but then.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee this is
Stephanie how out of Los crucis
and I'm on the steering
committee of three fifty New
Mexico we stand firmly opposed
to the H. B. two to a committee
set up I am a mother and work in
the field of science and
environmental education I am
very concerned about the impact
of the climate crisis on our
kids and while hydrogen might
sound good producing hydrogen
from natural gas is even worse
for the climate then burning
that natural gas directly my
main concern is that we would be
incentivizing this effort to
benefit the fossil fuel industry
instead of making that kind of
investment in our children's
future let's make those kinds of
investments in the quick
expansion of wind and solar
energy production that's needed
to really solve the climate
crisis and supply sustainable
New Mexico jobs in addition I
know I speak for many folks when
I say that it's been
disappointing to witness how
this bill keeps being revived
after legitimately being tabled
and other house committees let
those decisions stand please
vote no on the H. B. two two
eight committee seven thank you.
Chris the Donald followed by
Luke McMath.
Thank you for your patience
agency.
Thank you Representative my
name's at the necklace at chair
committee members monies that
the increased to do I'm a
retired navy environmental and
energy engineer former hydrogen
fuel cell researcher and
granddaughter of the coal miners
who died of black lung I would
just like to say that we need to
make sure that we understand the
politics and business may be
negotiable but not science that
one percent of methane leakage
is way too much we don't talk
about the carbon dioxide
equivalency of methane and now
it turns out that over a hundred
years yes it's only twenty five
times worse than carbon dioxide
but over the short term is
actually a hundred and fifty to
two hundred times every single
molecule of methane that gets
out is like a hundred fifty to
two hundred molecules of methane
that needs to state of carbon
that needs to stay in the ground
we have other dispatchable
resources that we can use like
solar thermal power and
geothermal plants to produce
electricity I had the answer
actually possibly for our
hydrogen hub let's develop the
market Public trains we have
wind doesn't blow everywhere we
have bright sunny days it
doesn't shine everywhere so well
let's develop the renewable
energy that somebody else can
make the hydrogen and develop
the market I oppose this bill as
it is I think we need a
different partner.
Thank you look like mass
followed by.
Ariel Nancy.
can you hear me.
Yes.
Good evening Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is the big math educator working
for APS and I stand in strong
opposition to any effort to
prolong the use of methane gas
especially fracked methane gas
as this bill would jeopardize is
not just my future but those of
the children I work with every
day and health of communities
already strongly adversely
affected by oil and gas
extraction hydrogen derived from
what choices or other re methods
has a place in the carbonized
economy hi Jim his creation
produces and realizing carbon
does not beyond that the
duplicitous way the ongoing
hydrogen has been handled is
unacceptable without referral to
house natural resources Energy
arm where it was initially
tabled or any other committees
that have a rifle stay in these
matters please vote no to HB two
two eight.
Thank you Sir if I may I I know
there's folks concerned about
procedure of other bills are.
I don't care.
Our charges house bill two
twenty eight so please speak on
the merits of house bill two
twenty eight that is the that is
the before this committee we're
obligated to listen to it and
hear it.
That's why we have the committee
process we don't care what
committees before after do we
just what we do in the moment so
thank you for that.
Next up more oil not just the
followed by John brown's.
This biological no you yourself.
I'm sorry.
Good evening chair and committee
members I am the executive
director of new energy economy
and I on behalf of thirty five
hundred members I'm asking you
to vote no on house bill two
twenty eight clean hydrogen is
an oxymoron because it is an
electric generation facility
that permits the emission of
carbon dioxide ninety nine point
eight percent of hydrogen causes
more pollution than burning gas
carbon sequestration is an empty
promise it hasn't worked in
Europe or the US and has
resulted in billions of dollars
for you did on taxpayers just
look at the hydrogen project
failures in Mississippi and
Texas in Mississippi ratepayers
and taxpayers were stuck with
the seven point five billion
dollar price tag and not with
one kilowatt of energy.
In Texas another utter failure
the government lost all of its
investments as did other
investors nothing to show but
stranded assets contrary to
representative small are
assertions section sixteen and
seventeen defines hydrogen which
emits carbon dioxide as
renewables this is or well in
and dangerous using hydrogen
will not break our dependence on
fossil fuels the hydrogen hub
approach merely props up a dying
fossil fuel industry and puts
New Mexico state on this at risk
can I think.
Descendants thank you in the
last six years there have been
five hundred and seventy two oil
and gas bankruptcies why would
we tie The New Mexico financing
authority finance authority or
any other government agency this
vile volatile sorry volatile and
economically risky secretary
please vote no on page B. two
twenty eight thank you don't
brown followed by Ruth strangle.
Yes thank you committee chair
and committee my name is John
Brown a Franciscan sister and
the director of New Mexico
interfaith power light we work
with faith communities and
people of faith all over the
state and we believe that this
bill is ethically irresponsible
we do need creative forward
thinking legislation economy and
jobs that truly are just clean
and just transition but this is
not the solution for that we
should put this kind of effort
into truly just transition for
our our communities so that we
don't go through this yo yo boom
and bust economy and dreams in
the sky that only cost pollution
and poor health for our
communities I we do believe that
this is good financial
stewardship it seems to benefit
large troop corporations and
financial interests many out of
state we're concerned about
stranded into assets and what
kind of things that people of
the state will have to address
after the fact and finally the
health of the frontline
communities and our state.
creation and climate are
concerns Feinstein said we
cannot solve our problems with
the same thinking we used when
we created them and I feel this
is using the same thinking to
not address two problems that we
have thank you.
Thank you Ruth.
Was speaking Ruth or John Brown.
This call followed by a Katy
Shoop.
Mr chair and members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak my name is
Ruth struggle and I am the co
chair of the board of directors
of the New Mexico chapter of
interfaith power and light.
Creating so called blue hydrogen
requires massive carbon
sequestration something that
doesn't yet exist at the same
time making green hydrogen will
soon be the less expensive
alternative so why choose
hydrogen made from methane
feedstock why use taxpayer money
to subsidize a technology that
will soon become a stranded
asset.
Combustion hydrogen creates
nitric oxide pollution which has
serious health impacts at the
same time current methods of
lowering this pollution and gas
power plants are quite limited.
People living nearby will be
adversely affected the hydrogen
is not a clean source of power
no matter how you dress it up
please reject this bill thank
you.
Thank you for those comments
Kelly sure find don Schreiber.
Hello my name is Kelly show I'm
an organizer with citizens
caring for the future and a
young woman living and Carlsbad
living on the front lines have a
first hand understanding of just
how little enforcement of
regulation is that in the
Permian basin NMED has one
inspector for every eighteen
thousand three hundred thirty
three oil and gas wells in our
state and yet it is claim that
we can responsibly sourced the
gas it takes to make hydrogen
that is quite simply omit and
there's no reason that we should
be increasing demand for natural
gas at such a crucial moment for
our planet make no mistake that
a yes vote on this bill will be
a state on your record Mexicans
made abundantly clear they do
not support incentivizing
hydrogen production please show
us with your actions that you
value our input not just with
their words and rhetoric listen
to those of us that will be most
affected by these halves in
upstream methane emissions that
come with them W. made by
corporate interests and the
powers that be in Santa Fe but
again stage B. two twenty eight
thank you for your time.
Thank you let's stick to the
merits of the bill shall we don
try were followed by a more
money attention.
Mr chairman members don Shriver
Rio Arriba county with a hundred
and twenty two methane wells on
our ranch thirty three within a
mile of our whole I'm standing
with my frontline indigenous
brothers and sisters in
opposition to methane in
opposition to blue hydrogen in
opposition to H. B. two two
eight because we live daily with
the reality that no such thing
as responsibly sourced gas it's
possible to hydrogen is not a
stepping stone to green hydrogen
blue hydrogen as a stepping
stone to forcing our community
members to continue to live in a
world of methane pollution live
in a goldfish bowl of fossil
fuels hydrogen the birds are
investments away from the real
clean energy of renewables and
seriously dilutes our whole for
diversified New Mexico economy.
Vote no against HB two two eight
thank you.
Thank you Sir Mario Atencio
followed by Marlene.
Correct chairman.
Members of the committee memo
Mario Atencio I'm Navajo and the
vice president we're Torreon
stardate chapterhouse.
I am.
Stand in opposition to house
bill two to eight.
Because as of constituents.
In the greater tropical
landscape the feedstock for any
sex hygiene projects well great
adverse effects on the greater
tropical landscape.
Especially the water resources.
My family owns individual Indian
a lot it lands within the
greater tropical landscaping
already because oil and gas
development.
Have contaminated the aquifer
right now Navajo dam is is
drinking water for all of Navajo
communities in the state of New
Mexico.
Oil and gas and hydrogen fracked
gas.
The blue hi Jim so called comes
from frac heights hi Drug the
fraction gas and those
industries are direct threat on
the drinking water for all the
Navajo Nation.
And this is so chairman thank
you for your time again please
vote no for house bill two to
eight tell water resource
impacts are truly study thank
you thank you there's about
thirty six folks waiting to
speak with that a little under
half an hour one of the have
equal time for both sides when
it.
In a few minutes go to a forty
five second clock but what's
important is your name where
you're from who you represent
you know that's in the now and
then a couple points on the
bills thank you Marlene.
Parole followed by a Emily
frozen.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members I am sister Marlene Care
to sister mercy of the Americas
and a member of the New Mexico
interfaith power money and
opposed to H. B. two twenty
eight.
The introduction of a new
product or process was
ultimately facts are disputed no
should be resisted I also feel
hydrogen is a new technology and
is still being developed we must
apply the precautionary
principle the precautionary
principle states that if a
product an action or policy has
a suspected risk of causing harm
to the public or to the
environment protective action
should be supported before there
is complete scientific proof of
breast we have not adequately
addressed the front and and and
consequences of fossil fuels
hydrogen threats along the
production and distribution
chain.
Studies found that one point
four percent rate of methane
emissions made hydrogen a worst
climate polluter than fossil
fuels also fuel hydrogen
incentives as a climate threat
ethical moral perspectives due
to be considered in the
foundation for the common good
we already have on sustainable
pollution we don't need more
pollution from hi Jim I also
feel hydrogen please vote no on
this H. B. two twenty eight
thank you very much.
The frozen followed by Elaine
seminal.
Hi my name is Emily virgin and I
work with San Juan citizens
alliance on energy transition in
northwest New Mexico I urge you
all to not support H. P. two two
eight also the hydrogen is
unproven and needs serious
further analysis public input
and consultation the bill
characterizes this is an
emergency but the real emergency
is climate change and it's
serious impact on our state also
feel hydrogen is in no way zero
crime and and relies on unproven
carbon capture technology
hydrogen will further contribute
to the disastrous effects of
climate change New Mexico cannot
afford to turn away from the
future of clean energy promise
by the energy transition act per
the pockets of extractive fossil
fuel hydrogen before the state
with any waste anymore time and
resources on this fall solution
we should refocus our priorities
to clean dependable for
renewable energy thank you.
Thank you Elaine's cimento hello
by sterling Grogan.
Thank you chair and committee
members of the Sanchez presented
this bill in our Willian terms
cementing the oil and gas status
quo over health and protection
of the people of New Mexico the
United States in the planet it
is a disgrace to the house and
the citizens of the New Mexico
to pass this bill we can't
ignore that there is a hundred
and forty two thousand dollars
of oil and gas contributions
sitting on this committee table
if you include the governor and
the US senators we have a total
of five hundred
dollars
That we missed out of the bill
yes bill is justifying work hard
and over six secret stray shin
and transport and injection and
has been proven risking and
never has never intended to be
stored permanently C. C. S.
worsens the fossil fuel
pollution CCS increases the cost
of like Tricity to families by
twenty to fifty percent C. C.
asked to please water supplies
in extreme drought see see us
contaminate water and make it
more dangerous for humans and
animals vote this bill down
because your and our legacy
depends on it thank you very
much.
To save time we're letting for
five people into the as
panelists so I'll just call you.
One by one Stirling program.
And members of the committee
thank you for this opportunity
to speak to the spending I'm a
college just in Santa Fe and I
stand in opposition strong
opposition to HB to twenty eight
because it is based on a false
premise hydrogen from fracked
gas which is what this bill
talks about.
That emits carbon dioxide and
other harmful global warming
gases can never be defined as
renewable gas is finite not
renewable and investments in
hydrogen are wasteful and dirty
please vote no on H. B. two
twenty eight thank you.
Thank you Sir Lucas Herndon.
I call your name related under
yourself Mr heard yesterday
thank you Mr chair thank you to
the committee I stand in firm
opposition to this bill and for
all the reasons previously
stated and for all of the time
and commitment that everybody
here who has done this multiple
times were multiple bills has
been here for thank you.
Thank you Sir steep wise bird.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members I live in terraced New
Mexico where a lot of my
neighbors wells are going dry
our trees are dying from heat
and bark beetle we've all heard
that to ask that Mr methane is a
very powerful greenhouse gas and
this year there atmospheric
methane has reached record all
time highs and this is despite
the fact of the pandemic and
promises by countries to reduce
their emissions this is very bad
news
researchers are scared that we
have right reached an error
reversible point where more
warming melts from across to
more methane comes out so we
really cannot afford any more
methane to make hydrogen from
methane already rising
temperatures are causing sand
dunes to migrate on the Navajo
Nation and dust will condition
conditions are starting to
return in the eastern part of
the state jobs from real clean
energy yes let's apply to the
federal do you through the other
program that came out this week
jobs from blue had to know thank
you thank you Barbara Khalif.
I'm sorry did you call me
welcome why don't you go a young
to the to introduce yourself.
Okay.
Afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee my name
is in Toledo I come from a
traditional homelands in the
four corners region where energy
exploitation has been taking
place for decades at the expense
of my people's health our land
our water and our futures I
stand in opposition because we
have been promised riches and
the luxuries of development but
in fact energy extraction has
been disease death Cox's city
pose Water and many lost
relatives many of our people
still don't have electricity or
running water first was uranium
in cold and gas and hydrogen
hydrogen is made up from fossil
fuels ninety nine point eight
percent of hydrogen comes from
fossil fuels do not tell me that
there is a such thing as clean
hydrogen we remember your lies
but clean coal and clean gas
hydrogen will mean more fracking
in my homeland will mean more
disease more destruction in our
communities have not been
informed about these proposals
nor have we been consulted this
is another instance of decision
making without proper
consultation from the state
legislator and this proposal as
another instance of investment
in energy that budget busting
deal companies and utilities at
the expense of the people on the
planet no more false solutions
more sacrifice owned and
experiments with unproven
technologies and best in real
solutions and vote against this
bill thank you have a wonderful
night.
Thank you Mr Lee.
Can you hear me now.
Yes please okay good evening
chairman justice members of the
committee my name is Barbara
Calif I'm speaking for the
league of women voters of New
Mexico we oppose the house bill
two twenty eight the bills
described as relating to
economic development however we
cannot afford to subsidize
potential economic development
was increase greenhouse gas
emissions I do gin produced from
natural gas is not clean because
the upstream methane emissions
will be considerable the carbon
dioxide sequestration on which
is bill depends has not been
demonstrated on a large scale
the bill will perpetuate or up
reliance on fossil fuels
Furthermore H. B. two twenty
eight does not regulate or
reduce the many dangers inherent
in the production of hydrogen
from methane please vote no one
H. B. two twenty eight thank
you.
Thank you Ralph runs.
Thank you chairman I asked Mr
members of the committee for the
opportunity to comment my name
is Ralph Ron's resident of house
district twenty four Albuquerque
I urge the committee to vote no
or vote yes to table you too
many errors in admissions in
this bill I noted sponsors malls
assertion a few times that this
is their apartment resource
which is a hundred percent
reliance on the still unproven
high cost very energy intensive
process carbon capture
sequestration defined on page
for the bill despite more than
thirty years and subsidize
research and applications
committee members since we now
have been seriously restricted
on time to make comments I will
send you a brief email that
identifies their own emissions
section three B. beginning page
seven line I please do not make
a rush decision on this unproven
concept leave the burden of a
huge stranded assets on the
taxpayers long after the
governor and this legislature
are out of the public eye thank
you.
Ali thank you Mr chair and
committee members
I'm Bob all right and I live in
rural Santa Fe County.
Pretty much everyone has said
what I wanted to say.
I just wanted to.
Note that the bill will allow
all twice carbon.
To be produced as hydrogen all
the way through twenty.
Thirty five and it's not until
twenty forty five.
Twenty almost twenty five years
from now that.
It will actually be clean
hydrogen.
I think we need to do better and
we can do better thank you very
much please close twenty two
twenty eight thank you Mr Lee
Mary Ann's.
Chair members of the committee
my name is Marianna asked us and
I'm with earth care member based
organization in Santa Fe County
we oppose house bill two twenty
eight because it is investing in
continued fracking pollution our
members have asked for real
climate solutions investments in
the abundance of renewables our
state I have a moral duty to our
communities are used in our land
and water to invest in solutions
that will not continue to
progress down in greenhouse gas
emissions and negative health
impacts this is not quite a
leadership the staff New
Mexicans to oppose this bill
thanks.
Thank you for being concise
Wendy welcome.
Hi thank you I'm Wendy Baldwin
and others have spoken
eloquently so I'm gonna keep my
comments to the H. B. two two
two eight seems to me really
only to be good for the oil and
gas industry which sees the
writing on the wall and it's
like a last gasp so I hope that
you will vote against two two
eight and thanks for taking our
comments.
Very welcome Representative rose
Russians.
My name is rose rushing I live
in Farmington and I'm speaking
on behalf the western
environmental law center we
oppose this one hundred and
twenty five million dollar
taxpayer handouts to fossil fuel
development as house to the need
to be to the New Mexico economic
development department
identified nine blowing growing
clean industry including
bioscience aerospace and bell
hydrogen which is not been
proven work anywhere in the US
is not one of them how many jobs
with a one hundred twenty five
million dollar investment here
in Farmington and solar power
create how vibrant and strong
for our community be without the
oil and gas pollution that makes
us sick and shortens our lives
please listen to the unified
community members who are here
today for a fourth time to
propose hydrogen but now thank
you.
Thank you Dan.
Good evening chairman Masterson
committee my name is Daniel
Pritchard and electrical
engineer with renewable talents
in organizations supporting
clean energy and economic
development in northern New
Mexico I stand against house
bill two to eight by some
estimates the cost to retrofit
an old coal plants to burn
methane source hydrogen exceeds
the cost of equivalent solar
plus batteries by about a
hundred million dollars let's
use that excess hundred million
dollars to create actual good
clean jobs inTaos our electric
cooperative is well on its way
to a hundred percent renewable
electricity with solar and
battery storage we know how to
solve this problem without
hydrogen please vote no on bill
two two eight thank you.
Thank you Sir Jody Benson.
Yes thank you this is Jody
Benson from Los Alamos and I
will join all the eloquent
witnesses who spoke before me as
well as the hundreds of
thousands of New Mexicans who
oppose house bill two to eight
please vote no on house bill two
to eight.
The.
Mr chairman and committee
members a word McCartney I don't
know if you've noticed but gas
prices are pretty high the pop
so it's kind of a puzzling to me
why have the taxpayers are once
again subsidizing the fossil
fuel industry.
The university of Massachusetts
Amherst.
Study found that for every one
million dollars invested
renewable energy.
It creates I board jobs and if
that one million dollars for
Best also fuels so this bill.
H. B. two two two eight would
release a hundred twenty five
million dollars of our taxpayer
money.
That's six hundred and twenty
five renewable jobs that we
won't see.
Also I just want to point out is
a quarrel coop member I'm not in
agreement nor are a lot of the
coop members with the coops CEOs
that came out support of H. B.
two twenty eight I'm opposed to
our taxpayer money is used for
both the climate catastrophe is
so is my two year old grandson
teddy thank you.
Thank you and thank you teddy
Representative Ramona blabber.
Thanks for your care committee
my name is one of labor with the
Sierra Club Rio Grande chapter
representing thirty five
thousand members and supporters
in New Mexico hydrogen
production especially would
arrive from methane presents
many different pollution safety
and local health threats
including significant climate
damaging methane pollution from
extractions or transportation
carbon pollution from production
process with no precedent of
successful carbon capture health
harming nitrogen oxide pollution
from come busting hydrogen which
is up to six times worse than
gas plants produce unproven and
no prospects to permanently
sequester millions of tons of
carbon underground in New Mexico
and and use explosion and health
risks HB twenty two twenty eight
does not regulate resolve or
reduce those dangers it would
simply incentivize hydrogen at
different levels it would also
amend our renewable energy act
to include fossil fuel hydrogen
the purpose of the renewable
energy act is to replace
existing sources of climate
pollution was sources that emit
no greenhouse gases not to add
new sources of climate pollution
so we ask you respectfully to
please vote no on H. B. two
twenty in the thanks thank you
Mr leader Cindy Ozzie.
Hi I am from San Juan County.
And.
I am speaking on a gaps two
eight two two eight and I'm from
a community word since late
sixties it's been highly.
extracted what
Coal oil and gas in our waters
contaminated and we don't need
to continue to see that
impact and there's people talk
about jobs but if the local
people aren't employed and
they're still live in a property
electricity no water no full
coverages and so forth so I
don't think that this is going
to provide any jobs as Alcon
application government is saying
and they're they're really just
working against the people thank
you.
Thank you Diane the cash.
Thank you I oppose this bill and
I fear that we and our children
will all suffer more in the long
run by delaying hard turn toward
the immediate production of
carbon free renewable energy
sources absolutely let's invest
in our communities to have
economically and historically
relied on fossil fuels by
developing the industry of the
production of truly carbon free
renewable resources where they
live and work we owe it to them
and we can't afford to put this
off thank you.
Hello.
Committee.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members my name is Dr
Angelo Committee family medicine
physician living and working in
Albuquerque in Sapporo I speak
for myself and other health care
providers strong opposition to
H. B. two twenty eight
we're facing a con number to see
that that the man's action to
avoid a serious adverse health
effects of the devastating
consequences of climate change
we must reduce greenhouse gas
emissions.
And H. B. two to wait is a move
in the wrong direction thirty
fossil fuel hydrogen production.
Worst in the emissions problem
and the health problems
associated with methane.
Therefore I strongly urge you to
oppose H. B. twenty eight thank
you.
Thank you Dr Lauren how.
Thank you Mr chairman my name is
Lauren Holland I'm here to speak
on behalf of the public action
lines as their environmental
justice organizer countless
frontline communities and
grassroots organizations that
are in direct opposition to HB
two two eight and the
development of hydrogen hubs
hydrogen production requires the
burning of more fossil fuels
from the oil and gas industry
this means that the only gas
industry has everything to do
with the production of hydrogen
as actually needed for hydrogen
production how is the market
based on oil and gas industry
supposed to lead us to a fair
and just transition to renewable
energy that we desperately need
we need our committee members to
understand that this technology
is highly improving as young
taxpayers and constituents to
committee members that are here
today we feel it is extremely
negligent tort choice to invest
in hydrogen hubs and we deserve
better the immense amount of
water usage is something our
state should be the most
concerned about as ever this
occasion of our southwestern
climate continues we need real
climate leadership from our
elected officials not leaders
who were landfall solutions like
hydrogen hubs that jeopardize
the health and well being of the
people who elected them please
vote no on H. B. two two eight
thank you.
Leona.
Good evening at.
Chair Estes and members of the
committee I'm from the
northwestern part of the state I
am the next and I am going to
become an a lot T. so I just
want to speak to to all of the
support that was given and our
state that I oppose this bill
and urge you to vote against it
thank you so much.
Thank you J. Levine.
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for the time
my name is Jay Levin I live in
Taos and I stand in opposition
to HB to twenty eight.
hi this is a false solution it
does nothing for the climate as
you've heard so many other
people talk about.
If this it's not it's also not a
great idea for New Mexico or or
Mother Earth because of all the
bad things it does to bring more
natural gas into production and
into use in our state.
There is no future long on there
is no future on our planet if we
do not start to end fossil fuels
rural right on America on New
Mexico on our world we must go
in the opposite direction plenty
of other folks have said really
important things about this bill
I'll leave it at that thank you
so much Mr chairman and members
of the committee again my name
is a living from Towson I stand
in opposition to HB two two
eight.
Thank you Sir Charles long.
Mr long good and yourself you
have the floor.
Mr chairman already spoke.
Register long will we're we're
was the first one to speak in
support of this house bill two
to eight.
Her hand was up so we brought
you into the room good to see
you a path she Lee.
Okay good and on mute yourself
please.
Hold that thought Michael
Michael assault.
Or or Michael Gordon training.
Okay.
Thank you Apache Mr chair and
committee members my name is
Patricia Healy I live in Gallup
I oppose H. B. two two eight I
have many concerns but I will
only mention two of them.
First are we going to have the
capacity to develop oversee and
enforce standards that will be
necessary to ensure that this
large project is conducted
safely NMED and EMNRD are
already understaffed second I am
very concerned about the
ultimate cost to New Mexico we
are now looking at this as a
source of jobs and federal
dollars.
But I believe this is going to
be a short lived project and New
Mexico will be left with a big
bill thank you.
Thank you Michael.
We'll call.
Please on mute yourself.
Okay.
We're going to resume user and
M. S. J. E. hi.
Thank you Mr Chairman name is
and Rondon on the resident of
McKinley County and the
renewable nation tribal member
of aids propose H. B. two two
eight there's lack of public
input it's a false solution the
guy is by the oil industry and I
don't support our tax dollars.
For this the.
Faults we producing energy.
Thank you.
Thank you Janet Carter.
Thank you Mr chairman for the up
to the speak my name is Janet
Carter and I'm a resident of
Santa Fe I mean health care
provider and I know that climate
change is killing our children
and our seniors they are most
impacted and we cannot afford
the type of of damage that that
that hydrogen this type of
hydrogen production will do to
both air and the water of our
state our with Isabel's very
precious resources are watered
particularly it burns Water in
addition hydrogen is as a fuel
is quite expensive currently you
sixteen dollars a kilogram much
more than gasoline and.
And finally this is not the way
for economic development in our
state if we want economic
development in our state that we
must.
Take the types of funds that are
being given for the sub and put
them towards clean renewable
sustainable energy sources such
as solar such as wind that can
last us for the next thousand
years and keep New Mexico
healthy M. and vibrant so thank
you for your time and I stand in
opposition to this bill thank
you.
Thank you the diagram.
Thank you chairman and committee
I'm not here and I worked in the
service industry in Santa Fe for
over forty years I want to thank
everyone who's spoken today we
all want the same things a safe
secure future for our children
planet.
The U. N. has declared that our
planet is in code red fossil
fuels goddess here.
We cannot continue to invest our
tax dollars in an industry that
is deceived us time and again
that has a terrible
accountability record when it
comes to clean ups.
That is perpetuated
environmental racism and that is
well on its way to destroying
every other industry in
likelihood in our state
including agriculture and
tourism.
CO two driven drought we'll take
our water our food and every
single one of our jobs if left
unchecked.
Where are the sustainable
transitional jobs that were
supposed to be put in place for
former New Mexico workers in
extractive industries.
We have a twenty five hundred
square mile plus methane hot
spot over our state where is the
remediation for that.
Please vote no on H. B. two two
eight thank you.
Thank you not a crystal curly.
Good evening honorable chairman
and members of the committee my
name is crystal currently and
I'm the executive director of
indigenous likely is a nonprofit
serving McKinley County family
members the major investor
betting on reopening the
Escalante coal plant for
hydrogen manufactures an out of
state company name tall grass
energy we used to have tall
grass in the four corners but
after a hundred and forty years
of being an energy sacrifice so
for coal uranium and oil and gas
have been extracted with little
regulation in our on going
industrial or need that spot
drought and warming we don't see
grant waving much in the breeze
in McKinley county but before.
For from before New Mexico has
even been a state.
McKinley County has been a
target for fossil fuel industry.
We've been exploited and our.
I'm sorry when we start over our
land has been exploited and our
people have been exploited and
bill Miller is the tall grass
CEO and he's been reported to
have been worth forty two
million dollars making over six
million dollars in two thousand
nineteen alone our people live
near transmission lines with now
it electricity or running water.
Corporate greed and
environmental racism isn't for
New Mexico McKinley County has
continually see continuously
been a target for fossil fuel
industry and corporate
legislature's in our county
continued to push legislation
that is not healthy for
communities after all McKinley
County has gone through nuclear
coal fracking and here we are
again the target for fossil fuel
time.
Thank you please finish your
thought.
Okay just have one last sentence
these industries of extraction
are greedy colluding and most of
all deceitful much like this
hydrogen legislation proposed
and the session today also
Lucien's the climate change are
not the answer please vote now
for H. B. two twenty eight thank
you.
Know what Thomas.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is Noah Thomas
Paris I missed in the bank talk
college asking you all to vote
no on SB twenty eight the so
called blue hygiene depends on
natural gas natural gas depends
on fracking and fracking is a
process that point is more than
fifty billion gallons of water
in New Mexico alone each year
would be unwise to pass a bill
that would increase our reliance
on a process that actively
poisons Mexico's water next of a
mega drought just last year the
state engineer was telling
farmers not to farm all of this
is for fuel source that is more
carbon intensive and simply
burning natural gas directly
looking at an article from
Cornell dot EDU that reads and I
quote the carbon footprint to
create new hydrogen is more than
twenty percent greater than
either natural gas or coal
directly for heat for about
sixty percent greater than using
diesel oil for heat according to
new research published August
twelfth in energy science and
engineering please vote no
against H. B. two twenty eight
thank you thank you there's a
person in the in the.
Near the Mike let's see if you
could and get yourself you
better while we're gonna try
again.
Michael for the call that
spelled M. I. C. H. A. E. L..
Yes Mr chair yes please twenty
thank you thank you thank you
are many miss Kateri Saba this
is a shared account apologies
I am speaking from unceded
territory of the southern to a.
Peoples and I work with
high school students in a
farming internship program
we work with the small farmers
that no it was just mentioning
we were told to not
not water this year
and I'm speaking in opposition
of H. B. two two eight
I as you can tell from many of
my fellow speakers tonight.
This is a false solution in
these industries are not
interested in our people they're
not interested in our water or
air and I dream of the future
where these are some of the
things that we you know already
have to talk about as young
people and I now we have to be
here again to say no to a
solution that will benefit our
community so thank you.
McCartney.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members I'm in
McCartney I live in Berlin New
Mexico I'm one of the a gardener
who was told not to water last
year I oppose H. B. two twenty
eight.
This is an investment The New
Mexico should not jump into
prematurely without a thorough
study of the concerns have been
raised here tonight.
Specially with hydrogen
production coming from methane
feedstock we have no insurance
or evidence that a huge
investment in hydrogen
production.
Would benefit New Mexicans in
the long haul and improve our
client.
We know that renewable such as
wind and solar as alternative
energy sources reduce our
carbon.
In.
And print and that's where we
need this money we need to
develop our wind and solar
resources so that we can be an
exporter of those clean
renewable energies and and think
about other ways to develop jobs
that are badly needed and we
hear that such as being perhaps
a wind turbine factory up in the
northwest region please vote
against H. B. two twenty eight
thank you.
Good evening.
Mr chair and committee.
I am totally against H. B. two
two eight.
I live in northern New Mexico
intermountain New Mexico.
I have up.
Experience with what all in cash
your we will do my grandmother
and lives in northern Arizona.
Orders a lot of that oil and gas
activity they have contaminated
all of their fresh groundwater
and.
Seven my of my uncles and that
have died of cancer.
We will I can't speak to to
eight thank you.
This.
Good evening Mister chair
committee members and to my own
representative Representative
Dow good evening my name is nana
Benavidez some of the community
might organizer on behalf of New
Mexico cafe in grant and Hidalgo
counties and I'll be brief and
just say for all the reasons
previously stated we stand in
opposition of two two eight and
ask that you do the same.
Thank you and welcome.
Hello on the lands.
Chairman and members of the
committee my name is a lot of
the other clients I work with
the state southwest organizing
project and I'm a long time
resident of Valencia County my
family hails from that of the
New Mexico and I just wanted to
come on to voiced my opposition
to this bill you know the way
that we see is hydrogen this is
defined as our normal from a lot
of the research we've seen that
is not true we're very concerned
with this as it's been framed
you know we we keep talking
about the economy
this divide between rural and
municipal counties but you know
I think that one of the things
that we really value in our
rural communities is our
farmlands and our water and if
we continue to invest in things
like hydrogen and a lot of these
solutions we're not gonna have
that water you know a lot of our
assistance have been curtailed
and the use of hydrogen is going
to continue to exploit that
water and we're very concerned
about that
you know the other pieces that
you know a lot of the part of
the partners that have been
proposed in this public private
partnerships are folks who have
already led New Mexicans down
when the money runs out I just
don't see them sticking around
and that's really unfortunate
because we need good jobs and I
think that you know there's a
lot include actual clean
renewables like solar and wind
and you know picking up some
lingering and I know that
doesn't pertain to the bill but
I just wanted to to put that out
there and thank you committee
members for listening to my
comments.
Appreciate you're gonna make a
quick statement before go back
to public comment with we heard
a one hour of of of folks in
favor the bill we've now heard
one hour.
Of those opposed
I think every single committee
in this building stops at a
particular time this committee
does not.
Cut off debate this committee
does not cut off public comment
I suggested that folks do go to
forty five seconds so that
everybody could talk.
my friends at western
environmental law.
mean tweeted me saying Malmo
**** not reducing the amount of
time for one minute forty five
seconds for people testifying
against the hydrogen Bill facts
no I didn't do that the the
clock remain the same at one
minute I'm merely suggested
please keep your comments short
so that everyone could talk.
My friends up ad per progress
now New Mexico felt compelled
to.
To like it my friend's at Rio
Grande this year club felt
compelled to retweet it that's
incorrect that's incorrect and
not appreciate it at all anyway.
Let's finish up guys we're gonna
go more than our please keep
your comments to forty five
seconds or a minute out of
respect for the folks behind you
there's about ten more folks run
to go till nine because we want
to hear what everyone has to say
please be cognizant of your
neighbors and the folks who've
waited over three hours to
testify do not take up their
time.
Ryan Sweeney.
Hi can you hear me.
Yes Sir.
All right thanks to get
headphones and everything thank
you Mr chair members and Brian
Sweeney in Santa Fe this in the
three field hi addition built in
the session claim we need so
called clean fossil gas hydrogen
to reduce greenhouse gas
pollution from hard to
decarbonise industries like
shipping aviation and steel.
The projects being promoted or
not in the sectors the twenty
twenty five Escalante electric
project will create large
amounts of carbon pollution with
only the promise for capture and
storage at some unknown time in
the future CCS is expensive
and has a history of failure
similarly New Mexico gas company
demonstration project as plants
begin blending hydrogen into the
company's pipelines next year
it'll be then operating well
before it captures the carbon
these projects will not be clean
and do not target hard to
decarbonise industry yeah New
Mexicans are being asked to
subsidize these and other
projects with this bill New
Mexicans get more climate
pollution and pay for it up
front to the tune of a hundred
and twenty five million dollars
in exchange for the promise that
this pollution will be reduced
someday in the future if methane
controls and CCS can be applied
pretty much everywhere possible.
Which is unlikely these bills
are simply another subsidy.
Possible industries thanks.
Thank you Sir Julia Bernal.
Thank you good evening Mr
chairman and committee members
of the committee hello my name
is Julia Bernal and the director
of public action alliance and
I'm from Sandia Pueblo we are
prior and care more water right
holders first in time first in
right we're also the neighboring
Pueblo to Albuquerque where a
proposed hydrogen hub is being
proposed and it I asked for
tribal consulted on future
hydrogen hub Development the
answer was no so please vote no
on H. B. two to eight because
hydrogen production is a water
resource of intensive industry I
would ultimately affect the
public water rights we already
use massive amounts of water for
oil and gas and hydrogen is of
course a continued a continuum
of that already exploitative
industry also carbon
sequestration is a complete scam
there is no proof and permanent
sequestration of carbon dioxide
because it's virtually
impossible to quantify how much
carbon to be sequestered and
forests because.
This is very dependent on so
many parameters like elevation
and temperatures and mixtures of
various greenhouse gases and
please listen to the
constituents and members of the
public who have been undermined
in this process because we're
already faced for inner
iterations of hydrogen bills and
it's clear that the people don't
want it and they're clearly
upset so please vote no for H.
B. two two eight thank you
Virginia.
Good and provide your mute
button Virginia we're going to
offer Simpson.
Thank you Mr chairman Oscar
Senator.
President of Albuquerque New
Mexico by training on a
geologist.
Basically I've dealt with water
resource management for forty
years and a lot of those years
had to do with regulating our
evaluating the impacts of oil
and gas development.
Senate bill two to wait is
promoting clean hydrogen using
the feedstock of natural gas
which is a huge pollution source
it will continue to add
greenhouse gases and toxic gases
and pollute our air water.
And our wildlife and lands that
that a natural gas production in
the fragmentation and hydraulic
fracking significantly will
increase our greenhouse gas
pollution and worsening climate
change I vote I asked to
committee members to vote
against Senate bill I mean house
bill to do a thank you thank you
Sir Virginia.
Thank you chairman and committee
my name is Virginia Pasternak I
live in Santa Fe NA thank
everybody for their voices
against H. B. two two eight I
stand with you please up vote
against H. B. two two eight
thank you very much thank you
senator Johnson.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Senica and
I'm a representative of yucca
used in economic crisis action
we strongly oppose H. B. two
twenty eight recognize that many
changes have been made to the
original hydrogen bill again in
the state recently to restart
that hydrogen is a false
solution we need to be
transitioning away from fossil
fuels for ninety nine point
eight percent of hydrogen
currently in production is from
possible sources it's
nonsensical to believe that
hydrogen is what just transition
would look like even the so
called conversion of hydrogen is
not feasible in New Mexico
because of the massive amounts
of water resources required
eighteen tons of water for
everyone kind of hydrogen
produced and we all know we are
in a trial in short supply of
water in this bill specifically
twice as much CO two is produces
hydrogen let's get a clean
renewable as it's been expressed
many times carbon capture
sequestration is an unproven
technology and can be counted on
to reduce the affects how you
will have on local communities
this technology has failed
repeatedly when it's been trying
to scale in other places and
yeah there's no such thing is
clean hygiene there's no
reliable CCS process in addition
to the members of being
technologically and viable and
unable to meaningfully reduce
carbon emissions increased
without proper consultation to
indigenous communities New
Mexico which is unacceptable
here you have me to potential
for the real solutions of wind
and solar and we can't afford to
waste time on her vocal
solutions so please listen to
your community and constituents
are telling you info against
each B. two twenty eight thank
you Jennette wallet Ortiz.
We'll go to Charlie Barrett I'm
sorry your wallet Ortiz please
yes Sir thank you share my
assistant committee for allowing
me to speak my name is Janet
lower keys forty a resident of
New Mexico a voter and retired
professor recently in January of
twenty to the national oceanic
atmospheric administration.
Reported that the atmospheric
concentration of methane soared
past nineteen hundred parts per
billion in twenty twenty one
which was the fourth warmest
year on record this is another
sign that we've got to stop
using fossil fuel for any kind
of energy right generation I
stand strongly against H. three
two two eight not only is it a
hand out of a hundred twenty
five million to fossil fuel
companies throwing a lifeline to
keep them surviving that also
creates more toxic environment
in New Mexico and New Mexico
through hydrogen production
hydrogen is not renewable
pursuing this bill would be a
farce toxic jobs are not worth
it we have the brain power in
New Mexico to use this money for
good well paying jobs that are
true renewable energy jobs we
just need the political will and
I hope that you have the
political will to vote this down
no one H. B. two twenty eight
thank you so much for your time
Charlie Baker.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members my name is
Charles Barrett I'm an ecologist
Forster living of ostriches New
Mexico.
What oil and gas company's never
mention is that carbon capture
sequestration cannot scale in
time to prevent catastrophic
climate change.
TCS has received billions of
dollars in subsidies since pilot
projects began in the nineteen
nineties yet to this day there
hasn't been any notable state
scale adoption of CCS.
hydrogen is not compatible with
carbon neutral with a carbon
neutral economy it's also fuel
hydrogen hub is a distraction
from cheaper safer and more
efficient energy options and
rapid electrification necessary
for appropriate clean and
renewable transition.
Please vote no on H. B. two two
eight thank you.
Thank you Carl Peterson it's.
Unmute yourself.
Correct there we go can you
hear.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members my name is Carl Peterson
and I am with I A. B. Q. how can
we pass H. B. two two eight with
its dirty CO two production
Rachel one point five to one
we're producing more CO two than
we are hydrogen.
This bill also implies that we
can sequester CO two efficiently
and federal class six wells
sequester Asian has been shown
to be a six point nine billion
dollar deal we fell here and is
not a solution for atmospheric
emissions.
The committee is being asked
tonight to make a profound
decision based on incomplete and
misleading information please do
not pass this bill thank you.
Miss all in all which.
Chairman members of the
committee my name's Nikolayevich
I'm a disabled veteran exposed
to environmental toxins leader
of the automotive progressive
caucus leader of the
environmental justice caucus and
I speak today in opposition of
house bill two to eight the idea
that New Mexico's going to
subsidize a low pollution that
our federal government
government would not this is the
definition of our state being
open for exploitation not just
business time and time again to
communities and the people of
the state said no to fossil
fuels these are the alleged
people who will assume the
employment of these very
industries and resource care
state where we are subject to
make it methane leaks we were
told we cannot go outside due to
toxic air why would we invite
another dangerous industry to
the table for this and many
reasons stated by my community
do PNM caucuses and more I ask
you to oppose house bill two to
eight thank you.
Thank you missile no region
thank you for stepping up no
vacancy occurred in the house
Nancy go away.
Hi am Nancy Galloway.
I'm and president of Albuquerque
in voter and the climate
activist.
And I propose.
Two two eight we must not
encouraging the use of fossil
fuel intensive and water
intensive technologies likely
hydrogen we've got to keep it in
the ground because we are
running out of time Lujan
hydrogen also relies upon carbon
capture which is never
improvement the communities who
spoke in favor of this bill do
need jobs but they need clean
jobs not polluting jobs they
deserve much better there are
many clean energy technologies
that would provide them clean
jobs the hydrogen production is
not clean our children deserve
efuture our children deserve a
future.
Please don't take it away by
chasing false promises.
Please support the development
of wind solar June geothermal
and other truly clean
technologies.
Not methods that simply exists
for the purpose of lining the
pockets of fossil fuel industry
this is urgent we don't have
time to waste thank you Janet
Carter.
He spoke so don't we will be
back Lillian Castillo.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is lily
Annika studio I am with kavu.
Hi to speak up or turn your
volume up please.
The here.
Of of the better just kind of
shut thank you okay my name is
Lillian Castillo I'm with have
climate advocates voces in need
us we stand and so an opposition
to H. B. two twenty eight
sciences confirmed over and over
again.
Deuce the health harming and
climate changing carbon
pollution that is damaging our
planet hydrogen does not fit the
bill not even its fourth
iteration and we urge everyone
we urge of a no vote on H. B.
two twenty eight thank you.
Thank you we we we could hear
you thank you rasta for.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members my name is raised to
four I'm from the Pueblo a few
minutes I service the community
programming director for public
science I'm here to share my
opposition of H. B. of.
Twenty two eight because
hydrogen is yet another attempt
to green wash full solutions as
a mother educator community
organizer creating solutions for
climate mitigation must center
this practice of additions
peoples and their concept of
stewardship along with proper
tribal consultation we can't
possibly believe that these
proposed solutions to mitigate
climate change can be solved
within the same market system
that because the climate crisis
in the first place.
We urge you to listen to the
voices of the people who are
most impacted think about what
is morally and ethically right
instead of continuing the legacy
of extractive colonialism please
vote no against H. B. two twenty
eight.
I'm Solomon.
Well Mr chairman this is Tom
Solomon from three fifty New
Mexico want to speak up a little
bit different aspect to this
which is the economics of blue
hydrogen versus green hydrogen
there been multiple of studies
forecasting the cost to clients
of green hydrogen over the next
eight years saying that by
twenty thirty the cost of green
hydrogen is going to
significantly undercut the cost
of producing blue hydrogen and
what that means is that the
investments that we're promoting
in this bill to produce blue
hydrogen which means you got to
build air separation units got
built the methane reformers you
have to build carbon
sequestration equipment you have
to build
Us you to pipelines all of that
stuff is going to be wasted
assets that will be stranded and
drag on any companies that
produce them meaning that
they're going to be going
bankrupt in the face of
competition from much cleaner
and cheaper green hydrogen so we
are just going down the wrong
economic road with this
direction and do meeting
companies that in New Mexico
they choose to follow this path
and invest in producing blue
hydrogen into bankruptcy along
with all of their employees
within about years and so this
is the wrong thing to do with
New Mexico's precious economic
resources that I urge a no code
in the economic development
committee thank you very much.
Thank you Sir Charlie markets.
Good in on mute yourself Mister
Marcus.
Welcome can you hear me Mr
chairman you sure can.
Okay thank you.
You first for the opportunity to
speak I'm a registered lobbyist
for New Mexico Chile Association
and also New Mexico New Mexico
business coalition.
you know what's interesting in
my observations tonight is all
the people that seem to support
this bill are doing so in the
interest of bringing jobs to
their communities for that I
don't fault them but what I also
observed is that all the you all
the people that are considered
environmentalists are concerned
with the environment well the
ones that are opposed to this
legislation that proponent
proposes to help the environment
with clean remissions and so I I
find it ironic and wonder as to
what the actual goals of this
legislation as and although I
have high regard and respect for
the Sanchez
Again question what do and
goalless and so for those
reasons we stand in opposition
to the bill and thank you again
for the opportunity to speak
thank you Sir for joining us
Karen.
Yes Mr chairman committee
members my name is Karen bowler
I'm an old fart living in red
Roswell who opposes this bill
and the keep it short I'll just
think what they all said thank
you.
All righty well miss Brooks
we're gonna bring you in as a
panelist because of because of
your computer
So when you're well when when
when you're taken out of the
panelists you're gonna get
kicked out of the zoom so try to
jump back in but I know that you
had your hand up earlier and
wanted to speak so we're gonna
bring you and go out and click
panelist.
Okay and we can hear you.
But miss Brooks I believe the
okay I think I just figure out
how the unusual Jessica Brooks
welcome on my point is is and
when you get when you get kicked
out.
Welcome S. okay with.
I wonder why but I was just
trying to shorten the list but I
reduced and enough strong
opposition to H. B. two twenty
eight
I just to call the blue hydrogen
production clean renewable
energy is simply I know some
people ability to it is not true
it's simply a lie it is not
renewable in any way shape or
form it creates a lot of carbon
pollution is really matters to
increase subsidies for the fuel
fossil fuel industry they need
to start going to clear energy
solutions themselves.
so I stand strongly thank you
for the time to speak and our
courage you to vote no on H. B.
two twenty eight.
Thank you Mr rose and why you
stay with us here in the room we
are not gonna go to committee as
mentioned we're not gonna take
action on this bill tonight as
mentioned
but we do want to give up we get
we gave the opponents and after
twenty twenty five minutes or so
we want to give maybe Mr Justin
Campbell or Mr
Mr Jason sent sent out just to
speak on some of the.
I'm is that were made in and the
the factual allegations with
regards to the science behind
this endeavor of up
Representative Lundstrom good
enough.
Give me about five ten minutes
to respond to you and your team.
Right right to start with Justin
Campbell then we get a chance to
stand out go ahead.
Thank you madam chair of thank
you Mr chairman.
With limited time I'll just
perhaps clear a few things
the first I wanted to point out
has to do with achieving deep
decarbonization on the electric
system and just to be clear I've
spent my career nearly twenty
years in the utility business
and working on things like
decarbonization in places like
California electrification of
what you need to do you really
need well let me just let me
just say this some of the
committee today presented
hydrogen fueled power plants as
an alternative to wind and solar
and I would characterize it
different those are compliments
and so to achieve deep
decarbonization what you really
need on the electric system is a
lot of wind and solar which we
think is good and support you
need short duration energy
storage lithium ion batteries
are the most used technology
right now and you also have to
have dispatchable clean
generation and so that comes
from things like pumped
hydroelectric projects
geothermal projects and
dispatchable hydrogen fuel
generation clean hydrogen fuel
generation and so I would
encourage and suggest that you
think of these as complementary.
I'll offer just one sort of.
Wait a look at it that has to do
with how what trick Systems or
plant one thing you have to
think about as you as you look
forward and plan for double and
reliable service you have to
think about what the mix of your
generation fleet is and how many
megawatts you need as a result
what's playing out real time in
other markets right now is
without that dispatchable clean
generation incremental resources
other types are less and less
able to carry loads when when
it's needed most at times what's
hot summer perhaps and so having
some the presents an opportunity
for those clean dispatchable
resources to participate and
help is very important in
achieving some of the the
correct objectives of the deep
decarbonization so I that
perhaps that verification.
Something else I'd like to
perhaps contribute maybe clear
up at least in so far as what
we're working on at the
Escalante power plant it does
not depend on tax subsidies from
the state of New Mexico that's
not in house bill two to eight
and that is not part of our plan
so I just I just want to make it
clear that it's if this is not
something that hinges on on tax
credits or tax subsidies at the
state level.
As we look at the specific
engineering of what we're doing
and start to look at what the
cost is and at you know what
this adds up to what we're
seeing is far more affordable
way to put dispatchable clean
generation on the system as
compared to those other
alternate and so so I I just
wanted to clarify that
there are tax credits for the
Escalante project in H. two two
two eight and that's not
something that that it depends
on.
and then I also wanted to.
Just perhaps maybe at one point
on on the actual emissions and
I'm I'm very sensitive to those
standards I think if there was a
lot talked about today around.
A study that's out there there
was a lot talked about in terms
of carbon intensity what I would
encourage the committee to look
at is the standards that are in
the bill when it comes to
hydrogen used for electric
generation and I would point out
that those standards are tighter
than what we see even at the
federal level right now I also
point out that those those
standards tightened over time in
a way that matches what's going
on in New Mexico with the
progression of renewable energy
and teach that decarbonisation
across the whole economy so that
that's really tuned to that old
family gets to zero it starts at
a very high level meeting a very
high standard for reducing
emissions and increases from
there and just to put a number
to that based on.
The analysis were doing.
If you look at CO two emissions
post conversion what we're
seeing Escalante is a ninety
eight percent reduction carbon
emissions to broaden that to all
greenhouse gases somewhere in
the ninety two to ninety three
percent reduction and its lower
greenhouse gas emissions and the
other alternatives some of the
other alternatives we talk about
today so I just wanted to
clarify those points if there
are other questions I'm I should
say perhaps one more thing I
could offer
on the question of carbon
sequestration.
Understand that the range of
comments today but I would point
out that today there are.
There are in commercial
operation.
Carbon sequestration projects
that have any annual storage
capacity of thirty six million
tons per year some of those have
been operations as far back as
the nineties
for what we're doing it
Escalante we expect.
A need of about one million tons
per year so from our perspective
respectfully what we're doing
there fits within what's been
done elsewhere.
And and I would I would just
maybe we leave it at that and
take questions of the thank you
Sir will of we're gonna do
questions tomorrow of a chair.
Anyone else.
K. L. to make a comment or two
as well as representatives
Mominul close Mr chairman thank
you.
Thank you very much
Representative Mr Chairman
esteemed members of the
committee.
I also like to take a moment to
show my appreciation to Navajo
vice president Lyster honorable
delegate Freeman and Office of
speaker Daymon for the Navajo
Nation for taking time from
their very busy schedules to
attend this hearing this evening
it's been enlightening all the
way around and appreciate the
committee's time.
What we hear from opponents is
typically emotional blue is that
no fossil fuel promotes fracking
handout to big business
speculative science misleading
information greenwashing flights
that's what we hear yet across
the world governments including
ours and those in states across
the United States or introducing
industrial policies that will
decarbonise their economies in
response to climate change these
efforts include major
investments and policies
positioning clean hydrogen to
fuel power generation in
transportation which could lay
the groundwork for a global
hydrogen supply chain.
The United States secretary
Terry of energy secretary
Grandhomme has stated hydrogen
has the potential to decarbonise
a variety of energy market
sectors for energy including
industrial how were residential
commercial transportation and
beyond and serve as a renewable
energy storage mechanism I think
that that's why we see the
Navajo Nation that hickory
Apache San Juan college labor
organizations McKinley County
San Juan County and beyond
standing up supporting this
legislation.
According to the hydrogen
council as of January twenty
twenty eighteen governments
whose economies account for more
than seventy percent of global
global GDP have developed
national hydrogen strategies.
House Bill to twenty eight is
about fuel in the states
economic future for decades with
jobs in rural communities
workforce development and
retraining for people who need
it most passing this legislation
would demonstrate foresight and
more importantly put us in a far
better position to win one of
the four hydrogen it's the
federal government under
president Biden is signing with
eight billion dollars from the
infrastructure bill signed into
law this last year such a move
would be earnest money we need
to demonstrate our seriousness
in turning New Mexico into an
international clean energy up
doing so will unleash attacks
stated good more jobs more
infrastructure and more economic
development for communities.
This is a very serious point to
me Mr chairman and for all of us
in New Mexico this is welcome
news for New Mexico especially
our rural areas especially
northwest New Mexico where we
have been ravaged economically
since October of two thousand
and eight nearly fifteen years
for example the city of
Farmington not adjusted gross
receipts tax collection a key
indicator of our communities
financial well being has plunged
thirteen point five percent from
two thousand and nine to two
thousand and eighteen our
neighbors in the Navajo in the
hickory Apache nations are also
suffering.
A hydrogen economy can list
these communities investment in
the energy transition will
benefit New Mexico with higher
incomes increased revenues and
perhaps most importantly a
morale boost where and when it's
needed most.
We hold competitive advantages
over other states and what there
be no question other states are
competing for these investment
dollars we have strong
intellectual leadership
plentiful natural gas the right
geology for carbon and hydrogen
storage growing geo thermal wind
and solar power fuel and
electricity delivery
infrastructure and knowledgeable
workforce in superior training
resources this legislation this
boat.
It's an opportunity it's an
opportunity for communities for
New Mexico to Steve's a once in
a lifetime generation pants to
secure our state's economic and
environmental future for that
for quite honestly it's a home
run well Mr Chairman a slam dunk
for the land of enchantment
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Well.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr chairman thank you for a
respectful open and and and very
late in.
Open hearing Mr chair madam
chair members of the committee
everybody who's tuned in I
really want to emphasize first
my feeling of gratitude second
Mr chair I want to share with
you and the committee just like
our work was not finished when
in two thousand and nineteen we
pass energy transition act that
set a zero carbon energy
electricity generation future
for New Mexico our work still
won't be done as we respond to
the challenge of our time which
is the climate crisis but I
think today Mr Chairman tonight
and as we go forward and what is
admittedly an incredibly fast
moving based upon the bipartisan
infrastructure law effort to
embrace decarbonization through
many strategies one of those
being hydrogen
that that this is a key part of
how we can decarbonise in our
state folks should and are
setting a very high standard but
Mr chair and committee I think
as we heard from Justin and we
will continue to hear as we
engage in this debate New Mexico
can meet that standard we cannot
we will not deviate from our
zero carbon future but we have
to do it Mr chair and committee
in a way that creates jobs
creates economic opportunity
brings investment to the state
in New Mexico seizes
opportunities working with
partners including in the
private sector and at the
federal level and I think as we
engage in this again admittedly
Time challenged conversation
what you and the committee and
New Mexicans will see is that
this is a key way for us to
decarbonise to create jobs to
actually safeguard our natural
and cultural heritage
it won't be easy I think we've
seen that for the long hearings
it is so important just like the
energy transition act other key
steps that our state has taken
this is a part of our road
towards a decarbonise growing
economy and I just thank you Mr
chairman for helping hold this
hearing tonight thank you.
Mr Chairman all all finished up
here I I want to thank you and I
want to thank the committee for
the hearing I felt like it was a
very fair hearing I'm sorry to
say that you were pursuant
attacked while trying to conduct
a meaningful meeting tonight.
You know my initial reaction to
the opposition and to the
comments is a clear lack of
respect for the needs of
northwest New Mexico especially
when I hear people say why don't
you do this or have somebody
tell us what we need to do.
I think that is completely
disrespectful to the people of
northwest New Mexico.
That's what we always hear last
we've heard for many years it's
time that we set our own course
in northwest New Mexico we bring
this for
The legislative process which is
something that is done for every
sixty and thirty day session.
My hope Mr chairman is that we
can come together and we can
work some of these things out
certainly I'm open to do that Mr
Chairman but what I'm not open
to is being told what I can and
can't do in northwest New Mexico
I am.
Bill like that was completely
inappropriate.
So again I want to thank you Mr
chairman and I want to thank the
committee for the long and late
our I also want to thank all the
people that testified.
I know we waited around a long
time today and I look forward to
seeing if we can't come together
and and and make some of these
things work.
Google comments were completely
inaccurate and once we get to
committee questions are going to
be happy to to comment to those
things thank you Mr chairman
thank you minutes thank you
Sanchez experts members of the
public for the record there's
still hundred thirty three folks
here in the audience and we
really want to thank them for
sharing their evening with us
during supper time we
We are will for the folks back
home are committees were each on
two different committees for
example on Monday Wednesday
Friday morning and afternoon
other committees are Tuesday
Thursday morning afternoon so
we'll check with our friends and
minority other folks as to our
committee schedules tomorrow
obviously we go on the floor the
Levin to about six or so so
we'll figure out a time to meet
pry in the early afternoon or
mid afternoon.
or at the at the latest of.
Friday morning but we'll try to
meet tomorrow go to committee
and then take that take action
on the bill thank you on behalf
of by our crew up and the
committee thank you all for a
great hearing we went three
hours we'll try to carve out
another couple hours tomorrow
thank you all and have a good
night we're adjourned.
