Culbert.
Your.
Thank you.
Representative Powdell Culbert.
Madam chair if you get a lot.
Thank you
and chairman Maestas and I am
here so we have a quorum up
please go ahead and let
Representative but the share of
this bill into the committee
room.
On her up if I could ask.
Up on a vial.
The trolley.
To raise your hand so we can
find you and let you and thank
you miss money.
And I'm sorry for butchering
your last name.
The trail.
And then any other welcome
Representative or will come into
anyone else you need to look at
it just to let in for this
hearing.
And it's just the two of us one
challenge myself thank you so
much so now we'll go to
Or people in the attendee room.
A lot of our price for the next
hearing but hopefully summer for
this hearing we have fifteen
panelists in the.
In the committee zoom and with
that I'll turn it over to you
representative welcome you know
welcome we've issue it's great
to see you as a patient on all
your endeavors and let's hear
from Representative regarding
house bill two eighteen.
Thank you and I miss you want to
but I'm I'm getting a lot of the
you today and hopefully down the
down the road we keep seeing
each other so that's a good
thing thank you thank you Mr
chair and I'm really happy to be
here again to introduce this
year it is house bill two
eighteen.
On house bill two eighteen
enacts the student loan bill of
rights act.
To regulate student loan
services to extend prior
servicers extending into the
private education loan
secretary.
Mr chair members of the
committee as you all know the
student loan debt crisis in this
country has been wreaking havoc
for years on all people website
financing to produce pursue
their dreams through education.
But particularly on our
communities of color and other
historically marginalized groups
Mr chairman members of the
committee in New Mexico are
citizens are the second most
likely in the nation to default
on their student loans we need
to do everything we can to
protect our hardest working and
most vulnerable citizens from
potential financial ruling we
owe this to them to give them
every chance that building a
successful life and career and
for the families to be able to
succeed in New Mexico.
If we claim to value education
in Venice which I know we all do
then we really need to step up
and hopefully pass this bill.
This bill will protect borrowers
from the unscrupulous practices
out of state loan servicers and
will provide a pathway to
resolve disputes instead of
automatically defaulting.
This bill will also require loan
companies to be forthcoming and
transparent on possible
repayment plans and resources to
improve financial literacy
literacy.
And lastly and most importantly
this bill would give power to
the blowers to control how they
pay their loans and requiring
lenders and servicers to make
all repayment plans readily
available and allow borrowers to
pay off higher interest loans
first.
Mr chair and members of the
committee in some.
The student loan bill of rights
is a crucial step forward to
protecting our citizens
bettering themselves.
Cation by increasing
transparency to borrowers
promoting responsible lending
and servicing would loan
companies and giving farmers a
fair shake with the options when
life's events make repayment
more challenging.
I hope that we pass this bill to
protect our citizens from
difficulties that jeopardize
their financial security and
allow them to put their
education to good use and
positively continue to
contribute to society and Mr
chairman members of the
committee I do have with me
today I expert witness who is
bonding the trial and I'd like
for her if if I may Mister chair
ask you to introduce yourself
and safe you opening words
welcome as the trial thank you
for being here.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Bonnie
let's trial and I am the
director of research at the
student bar our protection
center and a former federal
regulator of the student loan
market that consumer financial
protection bureau and I'm here
today because I do not student
loan servicing failures can do
to already struggling borrowers
I work with hundreds of
borrowers I tons of thousands of
their complaints including those
right here in New Mexico and
from all of this I can tell you
one thing for certain.
They need your help we need the
state's help many of the
committees help.
We've all heard the numbers
before but I think they're worth
repeating.
Five million Americans a one
point seven trillion dollars in
student loan debt that's larger
than the auto loan market the
credit card market and back the
stock market a second mortgages
so what does this mean for New
Mexico more than two hundred and
twenty thousand New Mexico
residents a collective seven
billion dollars in student loan
that at the eighty nine percent
increase in only ten years and
it's not only young people
living in urban areas.
New Mexicans living in rural
parts of the state there's over
seventy four thousand New
Mexicans living in rural parts
of the state nearly twenty
thousand New Mexico state that
are over the age of sixty.
Every month all across the state
hundreds of thousands of student
loan bills come due borrowers
are trying to make their Simone
payments for private out of
state companies are putting up
obstacles that make it nearly
impossible for them to do so.
I'm consider for example the
borrower living outside of Santa
Fe hi this payment auto debited
from his account what is the
company's company applied it to
another person's loans this bill
before you today would ensure
that that borrower is held
harmless while the company sort
out the problem.
Or consider the borrower from
Lee County who refinance your
student loan paid off the old
one but her student loan company
continue to report the old loan
on her credit eventually
recording as we and housing for
credit score to drop
significantly.
This bill would ensure she can
get a substantive response from
the company and has a timely
Avenue for remediation as they
work to sort that issue out.
And I think it's important to
make clear up front this bill
isn't about loan forgiveness
isn't about giving people a free
ride this bill is about making
sure that we're nearly a quarter
million New Mexicans go to make
their student loan payment they
have the same protections they
would have if they were paying
their mortgage or paying their
credit card right now New Mexico
consumers have more protections
when we paying payday lenders or
debt collectors than they do in
repaying their student loans
because the student loan market
still alludes the purview of
state overstate.
New Mexico regulates mortgage
lenders collection eight
agencies money transmitters auto
lenders but doesn't oversee the
second largest consumer
financial markets Justin amount
that.
This bill will let New Mexico
identify the servicing practices
that harm your constituents and
stop them in their tracks the
lady stand up for your
constituents to make sure
they're protected and you can
make sure that these companies
the ones that have an enormous
role in the lives determining
the financial future of your
constituents are following the
law.
And this isn't a new concept
more than two dozen states have
introduced similar legislation
with bipartisan support thirteen
states already have the spot on
the box now as I mentioned New
Mexico already sees a dozen
other consumer financial markets
in this manner this bill simply
update and modernize New Mexico
not to include perhaps most
important financial product in
many of your constituents I just
their student loan.
And so I would just like to
close the best student loan
borrowers need to help the needy
to intervene to protect an
entire generation squeeze by
mountains to learn that.
And as echoed by the comments
you received from New Mexico
program earlier today this
committee can send a clear
message to those farmers who
have done everything we've asked
of them now they want to school
and they took on historic that's
to get the degree to chase the
American dream and their
struggles matter in their fight
is our fight and in New Mexico
is not going to sit by while
they're being cheated thank you.
Mr chair I just got a text from
Senator do the may I mention
that.
Please do yeah thank you so
Senator Katie Duhigg is a co
sponsor with me on this bill and
I'm a co sponsor with her on her
bill and in the Senate and she
regrets that she will be unable
to be with us today Mister chair
members of the committee because
she's doing what many of us are
doing right now and that is she
doing double duty she's
presenting bills in the Senate
Judiciary on as we're speaking
but she just wanted me to convey
that and also to convey that
yesterday evening when she
presented this bill in the
Senate house I mean the Senate
committee our counterparts
she passed out on the line to
one bipartisan bills and she's
very happy and wanted me to
announce that today that that
was a huge indication Mr chair
members of the committee why
this bill is so needed
invaluable to our students
across the state of New Mexico
and then I do want to add one
more thing and I it just so
happened to come in today I
can't I didn't get a chance so
you but I got we got a letter.
From a on student loan
consolidation.
Private sector company.
Wanting.
Their high interest but they're
the secretary.
Wait into this household to try
to get us to consolidate my
student loans and put them all
under one private lending source
and their deceptive because
they're saying that they then in
turn can turn around and lend us
money against the consolidation.
That because of the value of the
consolidation and debt and
they're talking about you won't
have to have credit check.
Mr chair of the state interest
rate reduction lower monthly
payments and guess what they
also throw in loan forgiveness
at some point but you've got to
talk to them and call this
number in order to be able to
get.
All of these questions answered
I bring this up because it just
happened to come in and it's
very important because it's
exactly this type of
I call it backdoor side door
coming in trying to
Grab those of us better in
student loan debt and presented
in a different manner in order
to be able to track this again
and again and again and that's
the predatory nature of this so
that's why we need to pass this
bill thank you Mr chair
that's it for our presentations
and so we'll be open and and
hopefully engaging so and
question and answer thank you.
All right thank you
Representative thank you
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Now we'll go to members of the
audience so we have seventy
seven attendees that are in the
In the lobby in the in the zoom
lobby so far we have four hands
raise good enough raise your
hand within the zoom for
proponents those who are in
favor this do though those in
favor and then we'll go to the
opponents so let's see two four
six seven.
There's about ten folks
Well more about fifteen or so so
we'll do a man and a half we'll
do a minute half each because of
the time try not to make try to
make different points you don't
have to do the whole of minute
thirty seconds but why don't we
go with Mr Chuck bell followed
by Bill Jordan what we'll do is
we'll let you into the room the
virtual committee room and then
you on mute yourself Mr bell
welcome.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I'm Chuck bell from
Consumer Reports are based in
New York we've just sent you a
four page memo and support
strong support of this bill we
believe it's imperative that
student loan servicers improve
their level of customer service
for borrowers and we have really
strong evidence from one federal
study that seven out of ten
borrowers who have gone into
default could avoid default if
they had been given the correct
information about their option
to in in role in an income
driven repayment program so
that's a pretty massive
information feel.
Experiencing and we think it's
would if states no act of
student loan borrowers are going
to continue to be on protected
so we strongly support the
provisions of this bill and the
establishment of a student loan
point person to help borrowers
in New Mexico with their loans
we think they'll pay a very big
dividends both for their lives
and their families and for the
overall health of your economy
so thank you so much and our
please refer to my memo I have
some more details and facts in
there for you.
Appreciate you Mr bell will get
that memo to other members of
this bill moves forward thank
you Sir Mister Bill Jordan
followed by.
So you think.
Good unmuted yourself Mr door.
Welcome thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee Bill
Jordan with New Mexico voices
for children we really want to
thank the sponsor for drawing
attention to this problem facing
so many our young people H. E.
stated there are some bad actors
particularly among private
colleges with limited oversight
oversight students are left to
fend for themselves and often
get trapped in a cycle of that
if we want our young people to
get a solid start when they
finish their educations this is
the most helpful step that we
could take we urge the committee
to support the legislation and
we want to again thank the
sponsor for championing this
measure thank you.
Thank you Missouri think
followed by Karen would look.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is that we
think and I'm a registered
lobbyist with the national young
farmers coalition I'm also a
farmer and rancher here in
Albuquerque New Mexico and
sickle county.
Number is it stands in strong
support of this bill House Bill
to any and student loans are a
huge barrier for young and
beginning farmers and ranchers
across the country those who are
looking to break into the
agricultural field and those who
are trying to maintain their
families appropriations these
barriers are made even more
challenging to overcome was
predatory loan servicers like
those mentioned by
Representative earlier and
misinformation that's provided
to student loan borrowers we are
stand in full support and we
urge the committee to to the
same thank you for your time
today.
Thank you.
Miss Karen what lock followed by
sharing and solace a lady.
I'm.
Members of the committee can we
lock with the national for
creation of social workers New
Mexico chapter we strong support
at this bill with.
Workers graduating with an
average of forty.
Jack.
This is very important bill
so that that they are made aware
of their rights I remember when
I was when I graduated from our
school there was quite a bit of
misinformation sent around and I
have your lan find out how we
can how are we going to be able
to prepare to pay for the one
and something like this student
loan bills go up right is going
to encourage those people to
have that information in front
of them and so that they are
well informed.
And we appreciate that
thank you very much thanks to
the sponsor and
Thank you.
Mr chair you mute.
Thank you Mr Gonzalez Lee
followed by John dress.
Yes thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Sharon Gonzales Ali and I
live in Santa Fe County and I
just always like to say that I
concur with everything that has
been shared and strongly urge
the committee to support this
bill and thank you for the
sponsors as well thank you.
John welcome.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee my name is John
birch I'm with the American
federation of teachers New
Mexico we are also here in
support of house bill two one
eight the sponsor and her expert
witness did a great job
explaining why this type of
relief is needed
however I did want to underscore
who's impacted by by student
loan debt deception and some of
the practices employed by
servicers I think we often
assume that it's it's young
folks straight out of college
but the reality is that the
student loan industry
disproportionally a path impacts
borrowers of color especially
native American borrowers they
target of veterans and and also
women borrowers and so this
would go a long way to level the
playing field
one of the things they have to
New Mexico does as we host
student data clinics that help
educate members on what their
rights are and how to be best
advocates for they're borrowing
however this bill is necessary
in order to give those
educational sessions sort of T.
at the state level so we
certainly know there's a need we
know that it disproportionately
affects a lot of our friends and
neighbors we do our strong
support from this committee as
was done in Senate tax last
evening when it was hard thank
you for your time.
Thank you Mr durch are part of.
RT Mr Romero we carver.
Hello my name is our initial.
We.
Thank you percent at we cover up
yeah you can see.
Yes so.
We have public.
Students bill of rights is.
Excuse me I'm sorry of.
I think we're sorry no those are
bad Representative Dow is the
that there's a glitch in the
matrix Representative Dow keeps
getting kicked out of the room
but so that was aware that I was
now we're trying to solve the
problems wanted apologies
settlement we cover you have the
floor no worries appreciate it
on the on the shore merry cover
thank you chairing committee on
various Representative yucca
youth United for kind of crisis
action all spend very much time
putting what is already been
said but I just want to state on
the record that yucca as a youth
led and you'll see that
organization strongly supports
house bill two one eight I hope
that you do the same as members
of this committee thank you for
your time.
Mr chair you're on mute we
couldn't hear you.
Thank you that's that's all we
have for positive comments from
the attendees but here in the
committee room us sitting
sitting behind us on the virtual
diss our auditor brand Cologne.
Of water quality was to address
the committee.
Please do I just Mr chair
members the committee it's
always an honor a privilege to
be before you I only wish it was
in person but thank you for your
yeoman's efforts to really
engage the public in a way that
is absolutely superscript Act of
the houses done a tremendous job
pulling it those who decide to
attend committee hearings and
engaging the public in a way
that's actually comfortable and
user friendly so I want to just
commend the leadership of the
house for really really making
the extra effort and I would
just quickly say that I stand in
support of house bill two
eighteen the student loan bill
of rights.
Being at the head of a household
with three people and all three
of those people continue to
service student loans and mine
originally came out in nineteen
eighty eight if you can believe
that from New Mexico State
University I took ten years to
get that bachelor's degree and
then finally thankfully sure you
are on the admissions committee
for UNM School of Law and
allowed me to be part of the
class of two thousand one and
I've been able to pay back those
loans a little quicker since
then but I'll just say that I
continue to receive
solicitations from these third
party vendors to that promised
me the sun the moon and the
stars as the honorable
representative Patricia Roybal
Caballero indicated in her
opening remarks.
This is clearly a space where
the office of the state auditor
increases accountability
transparency and excellence and
we need accountability and
transparency in this sector we
can do all we want about
financial literacy but those in
power those who have capacity
will always find a way to prey
on those who do not have those
skills so please Mr chairman
members of the committee we
encourage do pass out of your
distinguished Committee and wish
you continued success in your
work and thank you for your
service as the only citizen
legislature in the country which
I hope we change in the not too
distant future thank you Mr
chairman I rest thank you Mr
great to see you have awesome
more audience members will back
to the members of the public and
I mentioned.
A pro and pro against what we do
I think there's a few more folks
that wish to speak in favor
clarify but but by all means if
it's different Mr Tim Davis
followed by money I've been
able.
Welcome.
Thank you Mr chair this is Tim
Davis with the New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty college you
should lead opportunity and not
financial ruin unfortunately far
too many New Mexicans graduate
with crippling amounts that this
bill will provide crucial
consumer protections for New
Mexicans with student loans and
as you've already heard student
loan servicing is the second
largest financial services
industry in our state and in the
country and it's almost entirely
unregulated let's give a quick
example of one of the problems
of this bill would address
student loan services are
legally responsible for
providing people with correct
repayment information and
helping borrowers access the
most affordable repayment plans
if they have a right to under
federal law however.
Thanks to the consumer financial
protection agency show that a
systemic practice and steering
bars away from the most
affordable plans and pushing
them into even greater that is
something that happens all the
time so we do ask the committee
please support this bill for
that reason and for all the
other reasons that have been
stated thank you.
Thank you Mr Davis Maria Griego
Gordon on mute yourself.
I if Mr good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee actually wins the
Cutler and and my colleague Tim
Davis us spoke to spoke from the
New Mexico it's an online
poverty thought go ahead and
and comments thank you.
Be sure to give miss her
computer back welcome anyone
else wish to speak in favor
anyone wish to speak in
opposition go and raise your
hand in the zoom.
Raise your hand any concerns on
the language.
All right numbers the audience
there's for the folks at home or
seventy eight members of the in
the attendee room so let's go to
members of the committee
In on page anyone have any
questions.
I have a few questions and I
will go to other members of the
committee.
So
Representative Roybal Caballero
so this is a.
You know the bill is up fifty
three pages and you have to go
to page forty nine to deal with
any current sections a lot so
you have this all new material
And I suppose
of Business School Judiciary
next or where or is this the
last stop.
Mr chair and members of the
committee I do believe that goes
to Judiciary okay great so
they'll has it and I don't have
the I didn't but the bill up in
front of me so I'm sorry if I'm
mistaken but I don't think I am.
Thank you.
Thank you I can find it right
now when we're looking.
No that's fine you're correct it
if
it passes here goes to House
Judiciary so they're only
fantastic lawyers who can
analyze the language and and
improve on it but were it's just
amazing that this is not
currently in statute when you do
get to section twenty eight
The definition of unfair unfair
and deceptive trade practice we
include this profession in the
in the definition section of the
for trade practices act which I
think is is is is fantastic
The agency let's trial could you
comment why up.
Why is this industry unlike
other.
You know credit cards and other
banking institutions what why is
this just remain under the radar
screen to regulators in your
opinion.
Mr chair thank you so much for
the question I'm the the problem
that we see is that because the
word student comes before the
word loaned people for so long
treated as something else people
have called often called one
that good.
under this guy's like we yes we
want people to go to school and
get an education but
unfortunately we we have to long
put aside the fact that the step
also comes with all of the state
fallout of other traditional
credit products when you in fact
it's even worse if you default
on a student loan they can go
after your they can attack your
wages without a court order they
can revoke your professional
license they can seize your tax
refund and your social security
benefits and so it's it's the
worst of both worlds they have
the this extraordinary
collections ability and it is a
wild west of unregulated
appropriations because we cost
you money that good that.
Well thank you for that know it
is a low interest rate but it's
You know you get you get so many
opportunities as a student to
sign those forms and.
You know what like I went to
school district for the author
when I was in law school I live
like a lawyer when I became a
lawyer I live like a lost.
paying off paying off all the
loans but
And then of course you know that
your college degree doesn't
necessarily market is not met
some college degrees are
necessarily marketable I think
that a liberal arts degree is
fantastic.
For your money in your
experience on this earth but it
doesn't necessarily correlate
into a market ability right off
the bat it's I think other
skills do more so sometimes but
the how many other states of
Representative local I don't
miss the trial how many other
states have done this and is
there a national effort to do
the state to state.
Mr chair I'll I'll go ahead and
let this for trial answer that.
Thank you.
Be we so I I mentioned thirteen
other states have this in the
books already on the law and and
more than two dozen states have
introduced it and so this is
definitely the trends are moving
forward much like we've seen
with licensing and oversight of
other other entities.
Other consumer financial
markets.
Thank you in just one final
comment original replica there's
It was talk on the campaign
trail of abolishing student debt
of since the federal government
just writing a check to all the
lenders abolishing student debt
that was pushed back like I just
paid off my debt to why should
this guy get a break.
We can't think of it that way
when I think of it as to is this
a good idea does this move our
country forward our country
writes checks all over the place
in the hundreds of millions of
dollars for
to blow up the world forty three
times instead of forty two times
I mean we up we we spend money
left and right at the federal
level and I don't think we could
get more bang for the Buck to
boost our economy help
individuals overcome their
situations than to than to
abolish student debt and and and
start over with regards to that
but hopefully that will happen I
don't think that I think they'll
be just tremendous tremendous
boost to our economy and and us
as a nation are going back to
committee Representative
Figueroa.
Mr chair and thank you
Representative and shoes thank
you for bringing a bill to
address
widespread concern and the
gentleman is oversight that this
industry has.
Ronin without any oversight for
so long and reaches into so many
New Mexican families who are
affected by this industry and we
are not making sure that it is
unfair which this year already
pointed out thank you Mr
chairman I was going to say that
I am so glad that this is now
included in the unfair trade
practices through this bill that
is very important
I was asking Representative Mr
chair if you is a little bit
about what's the difference
between this bill and the one we
looked at last year.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative I thank the chair
kind of alluded to in but I I'm
happy to explain last year I I
don't know if it was last year
the year before the prior bill
was house bill one seventy two
and as.
Will recall I think that was
about twenty to twenty something
pages long and and this
particular bill as the chair
referenced is fifty four pages
long and.
It's different because we're
creating a whole new section of
law that has not been addressed
which he the chair so well
described and that's really
important because it falls under
consumer protection well
practices and and a very
necessary
Portion of the law that needs to
protect a larger portion of
population that is being
inadvertently and adversely
affected by these practices so
it was absolutely on important
to add all of the provisions
necessary to cover all aspects
of the consumer protection as
well as address any gaps that we
have an existing law so that we
don't have to come back in and
correct any of those we address
some right up at the beginning I
think that chair reference the
section twenty eight if you look
at burying all the sections
actually they're all expanding
on in the area that that we need
to do and then we the also
want to make sure that we are
lying and Bonnie can add a
little bit more she'd like with
federal level
laws expectations so that we
then become more
In a better position to align
with the federal laws and
statutes as very continue to
progress through and as the
states have shown the previous
states have given us a lot of
guidance in terms of how we can
Mr chair and representative
improves and that's the good
thing about having others come
in before you is that you have
an opportunity here look at
where they needed to do in order
to on improve their their
statutes as well Mr chair like
to see a funny would like to add
to that.
The trial I'm sorry thank you Mr
trump
thank you Mr chairman and thank
you thank you Representative I I
would echo everything just sad
we have seen the state have been
passing these bills since twenty
fourteen and so you know each
time houses we see more and we
we see how companies try to get
around them and we can do better
and so the bill is it's it's a
stronger bill than it was from
when you order a twenty nineteen
I'm and I think critically we
see this bill addresses I'm
really gross gaps in the private
to market in particular
The last bill did not have I'm
really explicit protections for
the private student loan market
because we often think about the
student loan market as loans
made by the federal government
that are serviced by these
private companies and that's
that's the vast majority of the
market but there's also this
multi hundred billion dollar
market that that are entirely
private players with with no no
intersection with the federal
government whatsoever and this
bill cards at specific
protections for those borrowers
to ensure that they're being
treated the same way as
borrowers have any other type of
student loans.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Mr trial and and Representative
that actually leads to my next
question is the intent of this
bill to address private student
loans and you said yes that's
particularly then added to
address those and that is
excellent and then loan
servicers of federal and state
loans as well.
Okay yes.
Mr Chairman representative yes
if yes.
Well thank you for.
Bring bill forward to to deal
with a crucial issue.
Thank you Representative thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you.
Representative Martinus thank
you Mr chair almost with the
parents.
There's a motion for a do pass
by Representative Martinez
there's a second by
Representative guy goes is there
any further discussion.
Seeing none of please call the
roll.
Hello.
No.
Representative Dow no.
Representative.
Yes Representative yes thank
you.
Representative.
Yes.
Martinez.
Yes.
Yes thank you.
Representative bill yes thank
you.
Madam chair Figueroa.
Yes.
This.
Yes Representative committee of
a do pass and but sit tight
before you go to
thank you thank you Mr chair
members of the committee
appreciated thank you important
bill to move forward.
A great proposal thank you miss
the trial say hi to your cousin
the troll Sprewell when you see
in.
He.
This of Representative general
governor who do you wish to have
in the room with us for for
House.
It's so there's.
So first of all right let's make
sure we have Representative Liz
Thomson she's on already we have
senator Jeff Steinborn.
We had Mr Dan Mayfield over him
if they could raise their hand
so we could find them in the.
Okay yes if that would help and
then let me make sure the
Senator knows that we're on.
We'll hear from your The
presentation and we look forward
to this credibly.
Exciting.
Public banking.
Presenters level we'll hear from
the up supporters of Bill so the
supporters right here and and
well here all.
We'll go back to the committee
for Q. NA but is everyone in the
room that you that you need
Representative.
I'm actually the senator wanted
to be here for the present
opening he had some important so
if you don't mind may I call him
real quickly I'm gonna call him
real quickly he's not answering
to the text and perhaps Mr
Mayfield and others could help
me with that.
Thank you this too well.
We'll stay on the.
In order.
I'm the senator wants to know if
he was sent the link.
We can't hear you okay.
Okay thank you.
So for those folks were awaiting
the arrival.
Yes thank.
It.
Virtual reality the house.
Thank you so I'm getting ready
to connect Mr chair so let's
just give them a couple more
minutes.
All.
Would be.
And so we once there's seventy
four folks in the attendee room.
And we're just awaiting.
Senator.
Want to wait till it was more.
And your unmuted result is.
Okay I'm Mr chair he's
requesting that just sell send
it to him not as a PDF but is a
separate document the link.
He's having.
Great.
Yeah yeah.
What what what's is preferred
email for the preferred email
this Senator.
For the.
The legislative Jeff at Jeff
Steinborn dot com.
But you'll get it you'll get it
here in a minute.
You.
So what are we introduce our our
folks and then he'll be with us
here momentarily.
I'm so we're you well welcome
Senator welcome center we we
we're grateful for you being
here we're gonna turn it back
over to a representative will
come into to introduce folks and
do essentially chair the meeting
and do the presentation and we
we thank you for joining us
policies for not getting in the.
Of the link quicker take it.
Okay you're gonna put on the
bill no let me let me go ahead
and and formally introduce set
and then I'll turn it over to
you so thank you Mr chair and
thank you members of the
committee good to see you again
so soon and I do want to
acknowledge that they have we
have another sponsor with us
today and that is Representative
Liz Thomson so in addition to
our expert witnesses we have a
Representative Liz Thomson with
us as well and I'm here together
with Senator Steinborn to co
sponsor to introduce house bill
two thirty six which is known as
the public banking act and it is
associated with our public
finance
statutes and in order to give us
a great opening and description
all go ahead now and turn it
over to Senator Steinborn.
Mr chair.
Well.
Welcome welcome Mr chairman and
it's great to be with your with
your committee I apologize to
Senate we were we are protracted
on the floor and so so I'm doing
the first ever built
presentation from a car but
don't let that fool you Mr
chairman this is an incredibly
important bill substantive and I
will just briefly explain it I'm
this is an idea Mr chair
committee to create a public
bank in the state of New Mexico
it's an idea that's literally
been talked about for a very
long time probably well well
over a decade in the state the
idea of a public bank is not
known our country of the state
of North Dakota did one hundred
years ago and the concept is is
pretty simple which is to
basically leverage public funds
taxpayer dollars.
To create our own financial
institution.
To then leverage those funds in
a variety of ways to foster
economic development foster
community development.
We put our money to use for us
it instead of you know parking
that money and out of state
funds where someone else is
making the fees and
it's just we can do a whole lot
more with our money if we create
our own.
Emirates Mr chair and committee
how that'll be done it sets up a
it's that's up a a a board
appointed by a variety of the
governor and the Legislative
Council and several state.
Officers including the state
treasurer.
It hires a CEO that has
experience running an
institution of this size so
it'll be run by professionals
with a border professionals
overseeing it.
And and it will have I to do
share standards that will have
to be a chartered bank before it
goes into operation.
And
and clearly need all of those
requirements of a chartered
bank.
And beyond that Mr chair it
allows a fairly wide berth of
activities that we're we want to
enable the bank to do from
making investments in New Mexico
companies and supporting
nonprofits and community
development but it will not be a
standard bank in this is I think
the biggest point of
misconception also sweat stock
gonna have branches where it's
learning data Vigil customers
it's a product that will be
available to other institutions
like.
Community banks credit unions to
into communities for
infrastructure but but it's a
product that they'll be able to
use will help support them and
that's why it's such a vital
asset in the state of North
Dakota because it's in
partnership community banks and
yeah we would hope that our
Canadian banks here we come to
see it that way and with that Mr
chair I'm sure they'll be
questions and and we're happy to
stand for them we have some very
good experts here.
To speak to you as well.
So thank you Mr chair and and
thank you senator at this time I
am as has been the custom of
this committee is that we
introduce the expert witness us
with us today and ask them to go
ahead and give a brief opening
statement in
And there credentials and we can
begin with whoever wants to
raise your hand of the expert
witnesses would like to begin.
What are you going to call about
okay why don't I go yeah I was
thank you I was about to do that
thank you Mr child go ahead and
call on Angela market market.
Thank you Mr chairman my Estes
members of the committee I'm
Angela murdered executive
director of alliance for local
economic prosperity which is the
public bank's think tank.
I am the first one to a
knowledge that I know there are
some concerns about this bill
and I want to dispel a couple of
them.
in response to what the
community bankers have been
saying in their someone to run
your statements the community
bankers will probably come on
board with us once we're
actually up and running and out
of sleep
They'll participate in those
partnership loans because they
will appreciate having the
additional business also on of
COVID that's been made by the
treasurer state treasurer is
that
He has appreciated the
incremental deposit of funds
into the State Bank rather than
making what I call the big leap
to put all deposits in the bank
and the state treasurer will as
well as the NMFA CEO and the
economic development secretary
will also be on the board of the
bank.
I'd like to knowledge that else
left
has this vision of New Mexico
state community communities
being very thriving robust
communities and the way that we
see that happening is enhanced
by keeping our state revenue
local safe and working for New
Mexicans and better affording
economic prosperity.
We want to
We will.
Excuse me we have of the cities
and counties who agree with
this legislation it is been
endorsed through resolution and
memorials by the cities of Santa
Fe Albuquerque and Los crucis as
well as the County Board of San
Miguel and Santa Fe and us
Bernalillo county treasurer.
They all our knowledge and the
significance of keeping our
revenue save local and working
for New Mexicans in contrast to
having it extracted by the Wall
Street banks.
Our small businesses.
Dues and the rural areas are
crying for additional support
financial support and we see the
public bank as giving the
capability of helping strengthen
our finance system by keeping
focus efficiency and
effectiveness and building
resilience in our state's
financial system thank you we'll
be glad to take questions.
Thank you miss Margaret MXL call
on Dan Mayfield.
Welcome.
We can't hear you.
Damn we're not hearing you.
You're not on Hermio but
Representative reason why not
hearing you.
Can you hear me now
Representative yes yes we hear
you all right I'm sorry about
that good afternoon Mister
chairman members the committee
sorry about being on mute my
name is Dan Mayfield I'm I'm
here Representative Ezzell for
local economic prosperity bank
today New Mexico's public bank
think tank community banks and
neighborhood credit unions have
been around for decades as a way
for communities to build assets
to watch mom and pop businesses
and help keep money in the hands
of working people but today New
Mexico's money is put into the
coffers of global banks used to
finance projects all over the
world well New Mexico small
businesses are school ramming
for start up capital and small
business loans in the states
economic development programs
working to find new ways to help
businesses make New Mexico there
are new all these big banks are
not helping in fact we pay three
hundred and fifty four million
dollars in interest of these
banks in twenty nineteen and we
should be keeping that money
here in New Mexico working for
us the public banking act is a
chance to invest in ourselves
not in Wall Street there is a
need here that we see every day
I'm sure you hear stories of
small businesses in your
districts that cannot get the
financing they want or that they
need to grow and hire more
people I'm sure you see the
inadequacies are states finance
system a public bank can help
fill those gaps.
Our public bank is designed to
work with community banks and
credit unions not compete with
that it will work with that it
will not have branches you won't
have a quarter branch it will.
On its own in fact it will
partner with credit unions and
banks to leverage their local
knowledge to make the loans
where they're needed.
Making money help to spread the
risk and that's what a public
bank will do in North Dakota for
example they were able to
weather the COVID nineteen
recession better because they
were able to tap into the
reserves of their public.
We deserve the same in New
Mexico.
Albuquerque Santa Fe Los crucis
Santa Fe County San Miguel
County in the Berlin county
treasurer and all come out with
the four of us with resolutions
and memorials because they
understand what a public thank
you do for the state of New
Mexico let me decisions will be
undertaken through transparent
authority accountable directly
to taxpayers by managing a tiny
portion of the state's revenues
would aim to revive an
alternative financial resources
for the state economy that will
benefit us all thank you very
much Mr chairman.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you and and next I see
Steven complex turn on even you
say briefly a few words opening.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
members the committee my name is
Steven lecture I am a Santa Fe
resident I'm also the chairman
of the New Mexico educational
retirement board I've spent a
career on Wall Street and in the
banking sector including it's.
That we are managing the assets
of Zurich financial services at
that time I was managing seven
hundred fifty billion dollars so
I have a great deal of
understanding of the world
banking and just mention I have
served as a I'm pay consultants
to that to aflac and I'm happy
to answer any questions and I am
a strong supporter and advocate
of this additional tool for the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
I'm not sure that I see any of
our we have Mister we had
brightly white.
And
Also but I don't see them Mr
chair so all those
Well postal is we here with us
in the room okay then I'll call
on how the state couple of
opening words briefly.
Welcome Mr Stewart Gordon on
mute yourself you're you're here
in the virtual committee when
with us.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the committee
it's a pleasure to be here today
I'm Paul stall I represent the
credit union association of New
Mexico and that involves forty
credit unions across the state
and about nine hundred thousand
New Mexicans are served by
credit unions credit unions
believe that it's great public
policy to take our dollars in
New Mexico and reinvest in New
Mexico if there's one thing that
credit unions leave them it's
that New Mexico is that correct
we need to do business and a
great place to grow we need more
help with that leveraging
dollars we already have rather
than sending them out of state
just doesn't make sense are
sending those dollars away
means no jobs means no housing
means no economic development
means no community development
over the public bank we can
invest our own money hi in those
projects and credit unions are
ready willing and able to
partner with the public thank to
help grow New Mexico in a
sustainable way those funds will
continue to support the state
and continue to grow jobs year
after year after year rather
than seeing them leave the state
and not return anything to the
people of New Mexico I do
strongly support house bill two
thirty six I would ask your
support as well.
Thank you thank you Mr Stalin
thank you Mr chair I think that
we will at this point
stand for questions and I
appreciate the time you gave us
for opening.
Absolutely and representative
Thompson here here on this bill
I'm sorry.
That's okay I'm sorry your I'm
I'm I am the co sponsor I'm
still learning it and I will say
that it's probably not a perfect
bill but I don't think we've
ever had a perfect bill so we're
here to up to work on it and get
it as perfect as we can get it
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you and so who we have in
front of us we have in front of
us is senator Jeff Steinborn
Representative but but the share
of this and Representative Liz
Thomson.
And then sitting next to them
are for experts Angela market
data may feel Steven luxturna
and Paul stole so we'll now go
to members of the public we have
seventy nine attendees will go
for the proponents of the bill
first if you wish to speak in
favor of the bill please raise
your hand there's a gosh doctor.
Eighteen twenty folks.
we're gonna institute a timer
which we did in the previous.
Previous hearing just for
practice.
So are going to raise your hand
if you wish to speak and for
every other minute have you
don't have to take the woman and
a half please try to make
various up points and introduce
yourself even if I say your name
we should introduce yourself
from the get go so will now hear
from and I'm just going to read
you know what.
What you're up.
Your sign up is Las Vegas peace
and justice center followed by
UWC USA meeting.
Welcome.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members my name is Pat Leanne.
Thank you for this opportunity
to state that the Las Vegas
peace and justice order here in
northeast New Mexico is in full
support of the public bank for
New Mexico we're very familiar
with the North Dakota public
bank and they have gotten their
north Dakotans through severe
crises that no other states have
been able to handle and
successfully storms floods the
two thousand and eight recession
COVID nineteen and so much more
it's now time for New Mexicans
to have a chance a greater
economic justice as well here in
northeast New Mexico we need a
treatment center for addiction
issues the use want to skate
park families want more green
spaces for recreation all of
these projects could be
supported in part by the New
Mexico public bank we also
strongly support community banks
and credit unions and it would
be a win win for them as well so
please Mr chair committee
members the Las Vegas peace and
justice center hopes that you
will although in favor of house
bill two three six thank you.
Thank you and as well all roads
lead to Vegas so well we're not
W. E. R. U. W. C. USA followed
by.
Katie Updike.
My name is innocent in and I am
for your years old and I am in
support of the public bank bill
house bill two thirty six
because the public bank keeps
money inside the state instead
of sending it out of state.
Public banks consider to forty
percent in the poor states such
as New Mexico it can make a big
difference what the public think
we can say for forty percent you
can have more community projects
for happier community with this
in mind I hope you will.
I hope you'll support house bill
two thirty six for New Mexico.
Miss your again.
Essendant.
Thank you anything else.
No thank you I mean it could job
thank you and now are Katie
Updike followed by so we think.
Hello I'm Katie Updike thank you
so much for taking this bill
seriously
I'm not sure that I could say
the.
The reasons of support any
better than Paul Stahl did just
a moment ago but I I should
introduce myself by saying that
I did the feasibility study for
the City of Santa Fe public bank
four years ago with I hired
Chris Erickson from arrowhead
center and in an issue
it was clear that it was
feasible then the city it was
clear that it created serious
economic value for the city on
the other hand we all
acknowledged at the time that it
would be more efficient and.
Better to do a public bank at
the state level in part because
the state already in fact.
Thurs as a bank in many
instances through the NMFA's
through the mortgage finance
authority through the common
investment funds
using a public bank to.
Help those institutions keep
their deposits in working in New
Mexico would be ideal.
Thank you.
Thank you Rizzoli Fink followed
by a Gary Payton.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is that we
think and I met a member of the
New farmers coalition I'm the
state organized I'm also a
registered lobbyist for the
national and farmers coalition
having a public bank here in New
Mexico will help our small
farmers and ranchers family
farms finance new and innovative
ways to grow their operations we
also think it will help keep
dollars in New Mexico by
investing and reinvesting in our
communities both urban and rural
we support this effort knowing
that a public bank will not
compete with existing community
banks and we urge members of the
committee to support this
incredibly critical piece of
legislation thank you for your
time.
Thank you Mr great Gary Payton
followed by.
Justin Friedman.
Mr paid what and I'm mute
yourself.
Mr chairman and committee
members my name is Gary Payton
representing the coalition of
sustainable communities New
Mexico a coalition of the
elected leaders of Los crucis
Albuquerque Santa Fe and Santa
Fe County communities the
represent approximately forty
percent of the state's
population at as has been
mentioned by the bills experts
are members in December in
January passed resolutions are
memorials calling for this
public bank.
This public bank can be a
significant change agent in our
local communities we envision
support for municipal solar
arrays on public buildings
community solar projects in low
and moderate income
neighborhoods the increase their
energy independence and lower
their cost burdens support for
farmers and ranchers to bridge
the transition line from current
methods to more regenerative
agriculture.
Even green quarters long you're
you're Asian laterals to
mitigate exposure to urban heat
promoting healthy walking and
banking and biking.
A public bank will provide new
opportunities as part of a
change changing from local
communities.
We urge you to vote yes on house
bill two thirty six thank you
very much.
Good to hear from the glove.
Justin Friedman followed by.
David native capital.
Hello can you hear me we.
You can't okay my name is Justin
Friedman I have been at how
stress and for over fifty years
I recently had a talk with the
community banker in our town
he's deeply opposed to having
the state public bank we have to
support our New Mexico community
bankers because they have been
able to survive and attempted to
stay profitable in the midst of
what is essentially a
chronically depressed no growth
New Mexico economy how does he
keep its doors open by having to
make the most profitable most
secure least risky loans and in
the downturn such as we are
experiencing increases has
investments in out of town will
probably out of state Wall
Street instruments what
community bankers missing the
short term survival strategy is
that a public bank will help
grow our economy help them
stabilize their own businesses
and yes they may have to compete
with the new community banks but
the part will get bigger another
objection that the voice was
that there is no need for a
public bank that community banks
where do you find all the loan
which needed just ask for small
entrepreneurs inTaos who would
like to expand their for
spinning Business over store
local historic homes for tourist
industry lodging this is true
I'll tell you another group that
does not want to see State Bank
it's Wall Street investment
houses want to keep our money in
their coffers the public bank
can return eighteen percent
return on investment for New
Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you Sir David Abbey
corporal followed by.
Family farm to table.
To say your names.
Thank you chairman members of
the committee like to speak in
favor of house bill two thirty
six point sixty a Servicio for
native community capital we're a
community development financial
institution headquartered on the
Laguna pueblo and I just want to
mention that the committee bank
as a concept I think really
helps us level the playing field
and hit the restart button
the NMFA that New Mexico SBHC
and the recent
recovery fund that was managed
by some mountain have done much
to stimulate the New Mexico
economy but not enough not
enough in any country and so I
think the public back would help
us to identify partners to work
with local community banks and
financial institutions such as
ours that are working closest to
the people who need access to
capital over the years that I've
been doing this about twenty
years
the statements I've heard from
conventional Wall Street banks
are things such as why would I
go through the brain damage of
figuring out how to do a deal in
Indian country when when I get
when I could get what I need
from my bank regulators by
serving Hispanics or blacks
there's just a lot of financial
institutions aren't willing to
do the homework and work with
organizations like ours to get
funds deployed to serve people
on tribal lands and so for that
I
I support the public bank
legislation.
Thank you Pam Roy followed by
earth care.
Good in on mute yourself.
Mr Chairman.
Welcome thank you Mr chairman
and committee members my name is
Pam Roy with farm to table and I
am the coordinator of the New
Mexico food and agriculture
policy council we are in full
support of the public banking
initiative and feel that it will
really benefit and strengthen
Mexico's local food systems
never cultural economies keep
our money at home help us build
out our economic opportunities
here and for many reasons our
colleagues before us of stated
so we look forward to your
support for this bill from New
Mexico food in agriculture
policy council thank you.
Thank you of the earth care Paul
of IJT Matthews.
Hello chairman members of the
committee my name is because
still Aguilar and I'm actually
not here is representative of
earth care today but as a
representative of yucca youth
United for climate crisis action
for those of you who don't know
us yucca is a youth led climate
and environmental justice
organization with members
throughout northern New Mexico
in New Mexico the connection
between environmental justice
and economic justice is
undeniable we've gotten abusive
relationship with extractive
industries that is funding us
third of our state budget we
need to shift our economic
system so that it begins to
serve the people of our state so
that it begin so that it serves
our by pop Communities us young
folks working families so that
it does it does it.
Sorry doesn't necessitate the
desecration of our lands the
poisoning of our bodies so that
it doesn't threaten our future
we see a public banking as a way
to facilitate greater democratic
control of our financial
institutions and our economic
system we see it as a way to
cultivate deeper investment in
our communities and the
recycling of dollars within our
local economy we are strong
supporters of H. B. two thirty
six and thank the and thank the
sponsors and you chairman and
members of the committee for
voting yes on this important
bill thank you.
Thank you JD Matthews followed
by.
Clipped and Chadwick.
Hi Mr chair and members of the
committee my name's JT Matthews
I'm with New Mexico working
families party I'm here to say
that we support public banking
in New Mexico and we think H. B.
two thirty six takes a very
positive step in that direction
without taking too much time of
the the committee I just want to
you know leave it up into the
capable hands of the sponsors to
make the case for the bill and
why it deserves to pass this
committee because I know they
will thank you Mr chairman
committee and have a have a
great day.
Thank you Sir Clift in Chadwick
followed by Nancy beers.
I thank you I'm.
Several years working with the
buy local initiatives as we
watched money we tell and so
stopping that economic leakage
is one of the principal reasons
I feel we need to support H. B.
two thirty six for public
banking act of one of the things
that we will do with the money
details will be able to find
letting based on economic and
social benefits to New Mexicans
which will allow us to ship
performance metrics so we're not
going to be worried about what's
profitable shareholders will be
able to lend to projects that
have positive outcomes that can
be measured as part of the
return on the investment one of
the other things is that the
public banking act directs a
portion of the proceeds of any
landing back into the state's
coffers.
North Dakota's experience has
shown that this is an effective
way of mitigating against rising
state income taxes as well as
others taxes so again I will
leave it to the experts to
advise on other reasons why
public thank is in New Mexico's
best interest I will ask
personally the chairman and
members of the committee please
pass each week to produce.
Sir could you state your name
and who you represent the that
faded out the first five seconds
your presentation my apologies
my name is clicked and Chadwick
I have been working with keep
kirke in Albuquerque not just
here on my own behalf.
Yes Sir Nancy Bierce followed by
Hamilton brown.
Welcome misters.
Mr chair and members of the
committee yes my name is Nancy
Burson the Bernalillo county
treasurer
I first want to disclose
personally that the public
banking idea was an idea that
came out of my democratic ward
almost eight to ten years ago so
I have a long history with
supporting public banking and
having us move forward as it did
throughout kirke usability study
with the Santa fe's city and now
on to the state legislature so
I'm very happy to see it come to
your committee.
Also as a county treasurer I
always enjoyed having other
banking options for New Mexico
as we like to say you Love
having more tools in our tool
tool.
absolutely be a positive one of.
Why is I think the people's
money should be used for the
people it's a way to democratize
our tax dollars for the public
good so I do ask that you for
the support this house bill two
thirty six and asked the
committee to a for the past for
the public bank act thank you so
much.
Thank you madam treasured good
to see you how Milton brown
followed by Elaine Solomon.
When we.
Hi my name's Hamilton brown I'm
a retired physician living in
past New Mexico and I'm speaking
on my own behalf.
Several years ago I needed a a
mortgage and I wanted the money
to stay in New Mexico so I went
to my credit union and got a
very nice
mortgage and then when it came
time to pay my monthly payment
all the money went to New Jersey
and I was really discussed it
with that and I want my money
anytime I'm borrow money I would
love it to stay in New Mexico
also Intel since I've been here
thirty years I've seen to local
banks to local community banks
one gets sold to a Wall Street
bank and the other I believe to
another out of state thank I'm
glad that central bank is still
in the business in our town but
why the heck are they borrowing
money from an out of State Bank
when they are need all cash flow
why can't they put their money
in or borrow money from a local
State Bank I believe so strongly
that state dollars should stay
in New Mexico.
and so I strongly support this
bill and thank you very much Mr
chairman and members of the
committee.
You Sir Elaine Solomon.
Well by Kenneth mayors.
The chairman and members of the
committee thank you my name is
Elaine Solomon I am the board
chair of the alliance for local
economic prosperity today I ask
that you please not be overly
influenced by the voices that
are telling you our current
financial system is working or
that it's adequate enough and
just needs a little incremental
tweaking in order to be just
fine in our financial system in
New Mexico was working we would
not be at the top of every bad
index and the bottom of every
good index in comparison to the
rest of the United States.
We ask you to be bold and
innovative to enhance our
current financial system so what
works for all New Mexicans this
does not preclude are being also
conservative and fiscally
responsible the public banking
act can bring us all of their.
Please support the public
banking bill and help us realize
the incredible potential of our
state thank you.
Thank you Kenneth Myers followed
by J. Darling.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members my name is Ken
Mayers I'm the secretary and co
founder of the Santa Fe chapter
of veterans for peace veterans
for peace strongly supports the
speak to thirty six.
Primarily for two reasons one is
the most obvious and that is to
keep this money in our state
invested in our state
infrastructure invested in our
state business investment
invested in various benefits to
the state.
The second is that he keeps the
money from going to Wall Street
where thanks Wall Street invest
our money in environmentally
destructive and.
That are counter to the
promotion of peace in the
country.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for your service J.
Darling followed by Lisa
Robinson will Welch.
Good enough on mute yourself.
J. Darling at some.
So sorry yes Mr chair and
members of the committee.
We can hear you.
Good in under your self a second
time we're gonna start over
your.
Okay.
All right can you hear me now
you sure can go to introduce
yourself you're you're fine
right Mr chair and members of
the committee I'm referencing
Darling of the environmental
justice team at the Santa Fe
unitarians Universalists
aggregation and also three fifty
Santa Fe and I'm speaking in
support of the public banking
act.
Creating a public bank would
provide a valuable tool for
community economic development
for our state in particular for
energy projects public bank
could help community banks and
credit unions finance solar
energy projects what are the.
Lowering elected boards and
accelerating our transition also
fuels.
It would support projects to
whether ice homes Marshall
Walgreens that's why I think
temperatures on a change this
bill is about all of our state
money would help pave the way to
more prosperous and greener
future for all New Mexicans I
urge you to drive thank you.
Thank you Alicia Robinson wells
followed by Bob.
Thank you for the opportunity to
speak in support of the spell my
name is Alicia Robinson Welch
on behalf of agriculture network
and lack of such a CSA our
network and CSA program works
with nearly forty small farmers
concentrated in Bernalillo
county but ranging all across
New Mexico from the learning in
Espanol up north down to Anthony
in the southern border.
we work with working with all
the small farmers we see how
difficult it is for small scale
farmers to obtain loans with
national banks for the purposes
of land purchase equipment and
other costs of running a farm
and it's even harder for small
scale farmers are committed to
local distribution to keep their
produce with the New Mexico we
believe that this this public
bank will help support those
small scale farmers be able to
acquire loans and keep that
money within our state thank you
for state your support of this
bill.
Thank you
of our Bob followed by L. Paul
Gibson.
Please introduce yourself.
Good enough on mute yourself.
Can you hear me now your can
welcome thank you Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Bob then I serve on the
board of the alliance for
locally Qalat economic
prosperity and I also which
served on the our task force of
the set City of Santa Fe looking
at public banking.
I'd like to just mention three
things that I think
are are worthy of emphasis on
what this bank could do for New
Mexico as you have heard how
many different ways that the on
under banked.
Our could be benefited by this
through working with our
community banks and credit
unions.
The R..
Trend in banking today is more
toward transactional banking
this done by computer and by.
Not face to face kind of
understanding of who the
borrower is and this would
return having a public bank
would return us to relational
banking as opposed to
transactional banking I'm
running out of time so I will
just say I hope you will
support.
H. B. two thirty six thank you.
Thank you Sir Paul Gibson
followed by George gamble.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members my name is Paul Gibson
co founder retake Our Democracy
an all volunteer organization
with twenty five hundred members
statewide and retake strongly
supports H. B. two thirty six
over the past six years I have
sent many hearing such as this
and listen to public comment
expert witnesses of legislators
applauding an idea of investing
in our infrastructure our
children our water systems and
any other any of a number of
worthwhile investments but
there's always a but but it is
not time or but we simply can't
afford it if you pass this bill
and if New Mexico creates a
state public bank you have
created a tool that will enable
you to essentially create the
money that is always felt to be
missing when an opportunity
arises you won't have to say but
public bank can leverage its
deposits by a factor of ten
meeting the proposed five fifty
million dollars our state would
deposit can be magnified ten
times creating fifty million
dollars in lending power it can
then leverage further leverage
that power by partnering with
local jurisdictions credit
unions and community banks
your hair here that this is not
the time to be venturing into
both directions but this is on
and that this is uncharted
territory this is precisely the
time for bold action and H. feed
twelve to thirty six does not
ask for you to go into uncharted
waters as a public bank in North
Dakota has demonstrated for one
hundred years the budget for the
public bank we check our
democracy democracy strongly
supports this bill and hope you
will support as well thank you.
Thank you Sir.
George gamble for by Cathy
Wooten.
Hello my name is do you gamble
and my husband George's sitting
here next to me.
Of we are both volunteers with
the alliance for local economic
prosperity and before the COVID
we travel to seven counties in
the north central economic
development district to explore
social and economic needs.
We've spoken with county
commissioners and visited with
community people who know
something about social and
economic needs in their
communities.
What we discovered is that New
Mexico is not for it's not for
in terms of the amount of money
it has saved.
It's not four in the amount of
talent and eager entrepreneurs
that are out there waiting to do
something positive.
But it's work because we haven't
had the appropriate or
sufficient investments in things
like education and
infrastructure and regenerative
farming and just so many needs
that are out there people just
wanting to get going but they do
not have the resources so I can
tell you from talking directly
with these people out in the
communities there is a great
need for a public bank and I
hope you all will supported
thank you very much.
Thank you.
Introduce yourself but I want to
say your phone number but.
Welcome.
Kathy wouldn't followed by
twelve thirty two.
Hi I'm this is Kathy Wilson can
you finally hear me sure can
welcome okay thank you very much
and thank you to the sponsors of
this bill and to the committee
for hearing all these fabulous
and very worthwhile real world
reasons why we need a public
bank in the state of New Mexico
I'm really just representing
myself as a seventy four year
resident of the state and as I
worked in banking back in the
day right before the majority
National Bank started coming in
and buying up local banks I
remember that the the
relationship between the
consumer and the banker was key
face to face across the desk
and this can restore that
relationship by supporting our
community banks to enable them
to do more for their local
customers.
I repeat I can't repeat all of
the other very very good reasons
positive reasons for supporting
this move but this move will
make all of the good things that
we are wanting to have happened
for New Mexico possible instead
of impossible so thank you for
supporting this and I ask for
your do passcode thank you very
much.
Thank you.
And twelve thirty two please
introduce yourself followed by
Vincent Hagens.
But in on mute yourself.
Welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Gail right now to log I lived
in New Mexico since nineteen
ninety three an aspect now but I
lived the first half of my adult
life in North Dakota and I am a
former North Dakota state
representative.
I support the formation of New
Mexico State Bank for several
reasons but one of them is that
I'd like to tell you about north
Dakota's experience in this area
I understand that can be some
community banks are very
concerned that a public bank
would threaten their business I
do not believe that this would
happen North the bank of North
Dakota has been a backup banker
community banks and think about
this the North Dakota population
is seven hundred and seventy
thousand.
The state has eighty nine
community banks doesn't sound
like they've been put out of
business these community banks
lend to farmers and small
businesses in the most rural
state of the nation.
And all of these banks are still
in business they partner with
the community the state bank
partners with the community
banks so that loans can be made
locally to borrowers who are
well known to them this
increases community banks
lending power and this is an
important risk sharing function
so I think this would only
strengthen community banks as it
has done in my former state.
And I asked that the committee
given the bill a do pass thank
you.
Thank you for joining us.
Vincent Higgins followed by
clipped in Chadwick.
Good enough on mute yourself.
Thank you Mr
Senator Steinborn.
Representative color yellow
welcome to you representative
Thompson this to the committee
thank you for giving me
opportunity to speak.
The interesting is that when I
moved to the east mountains of
New Mexico because of my last
job.
Realize that.
The.
For structure.
Here and what I wanted to know
was how was going to be
addressed.
In the two years that I've been
here I've come to see that a
public New Mexico as offered by
the alliance for economic
prosperity has come up with a
good idea to level the playing
field instead of saving go that
are too big to fail.
They want to save and help
those.
People who haven't been helped.
So this opportunity presents
itself as offering capital to
the people of New Mexico to
invest in their own businesses
to grow their own economies one
of the things I noticed with the
bank of North Dakota.
Is that what community projects
in any other state per capita.
Is that any.
Because the public bank supports
the growth of these institutions
we need those banks in the far
reaches of our state support
house bill two thirty six thank
you for your time.
We should serve him Shanahan
followed by blue up.
Mark hello.
Good and on mute yourself
mission.
Mission on Gordon on mute
yourself.
I'm sorry Sir thank you chair
this is I can Janet hand
I am the former builder and
developer in Santa Fe also the
former executive officer of the
Santa Fe area home builders
association and I want to bring
a different perspective the
unintended consequences of the
national Dodd Frank act of
twenty ten essentially made
infrastructure loans for local
developers almost impossible to
get.
Prior to two thousand eight
crash it was pretty easy to go
get an infrastructure loan if
you own your property free and
clear.
You could even have local banks
competing with each other
lenders that money those days
are over and then this is
contributed to the housing
shortage that we see in Santa Fe
New Mexico and across the United
States a public bank
backstopping local banks will
get local banks back into the
business of subdivision
infrastructure lending which the
Dodd Frank act essentially made
to toxic for anybody to handle
this is created the housing
shortage that we have in our
communities the public bank is
the answer to this we have been
seeking relief and this Lente
conundrum that we've been facing
for over a decade and I do
implore this committee to
understand that if we want to
solve the housing process
housing shortage problem that we
face the community bank could be
the one clear answer to our
problems so we definitely stand
in support of H. B. two thirty
six I don't want to be a former
developer I want to get back in
the developing and building
subdivisions but show us the
money.
Thank you Sir.
Luisa Bucklew.
Going on mute yourself.
My name is the ways of our kalo
I am about and share with aflac
I'm also twenty five years
partner in a group called
results and we have been working
at true at and Poverty both
domestically and globally
in order to end poverty you have
to have a strong infrastructure
and education.
And Health and in the economy
right now our state does not
have that we we are at the top
of the poor last not the R.
we're not sustainable
I believe that a public bank
would make a huge difference in
helping has have that
loaning capacity of our own
money to help build those pieces
that and infrastructure
we're seeing right now all of
the cracks are in.
The.
Pandemic
I also just want to know that
in the previous bill that was
discussed they were talking
about student loans I'm in North
Dakota because sent bank has
been around a long time they now
have the ability to belong to
their students at very very low
road very very low wage our
public can't bank could grow to
do that.
Thank you so much anyone else
wish to speak in favor anyone
else was to speak in favor we'll
give you a quick sack there's
eighty two attendees
What Debbie Moore you wish to
speak in favor.
Mr Chadwick did you already
addressed the committee.
All right I think this.
Your hand is up Mr chair what
thanks thank you already dressed
the committee.
Right right now we'll go to
opposition good and raise your
hands and opposition I have a
list of folks
We let the bankers go first and
then other members of the public
there's eighty one attendees.
some folks can get in about
eighty one people could so.
Early.
The technology is there so when
I I'm gonna call out a name and
then brought up about is if you
could let these folks up.
Permit them to talk and then
when I can say your name you
unmute yourself I could have
When we go to Mr a Jerry Walker
welcome Sir.
Mr Chairman good afternoon and
thank you very much for the
opportunity Mr chairman with all
due respect to the sponsors of
the bill on the folks who have
spoken in favor of of the bill
let me just say right up front
that community banks in New
Mexico do not support creation
of a public bank Mr chairman the
downside of creating a public
bank as as noted in the FIR
committee hasn't from of the.
Lara always the upside as we
demonstrated by the folks will
be following the speaking just
very quickly the associate the
independent community bankers
association of New Mexico of
which on the president and CEO
well we have some thirty three
had state headquartered home on
banks in our state we employ
some twenty eight hundred people
around the state two hundred and
twenty locations throughout the
state in every corner every
county of the state and Mr
chairman and members of the
committee our banks are about to
New Mexico and we're not about
Wall Street we've heard a lot of
the talk about Wall Street and
wanting to take our bring a
money home Mr Chairman most of
the money till now what we're
talking about by creating a
public is actually do funding
some from local community banks
which would be the ultimate
purpose the end result of the
community bank so Mister
chairman I thank you for
allowing me to speak up I will
yield the floor and esta
Committee please to vote no.
Sure you Mr walking also the the
men and a half this just to
manage the time obviously want
to finish your thoughts.
Are we want to let the bankers.
Say their peace on this.
You know major initiative before
us so I'm not up.
Mr of.
Brett.
The Milano are you with us I am
thank you welcome Sir yes thank
you thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee I'm
Brett Maley on and I am the.
In the.
Executive.
President well of course you
wouldn't start over apologize.
Sorry.
I'm familiar with the EVP and
CFO of first American bank and
chairman of ICBA New Mexico I
also live in Los crucis our bank
is which started in nineteen oh
three and we serve thirteen
communities across New Mexico.
Our bank as well as other New
Mexico community banks have a
strong local deposit base or
with the position.
We're able and ready to lend
money and support our local
communities.
We're ready to well really
support economic development
projects support local farmers
and businesses that provide for
families that need a personal
loan or mortgage.
Advocates of a public bank
suggests that the entity could
serve the bankers bank and
partner with community banks
there are no less than six
private institutions filling
that role currently no mention
this need to fully service the
Canadian banking industry needs
for their customers in New
Mexico.
Public bank would also only
compete with private lenders
unity banks that compete for
deposits.
Our directing state or local
deposits away from our community
banks will lessen not increase
the love the capacity of our
banks across the state of New
Mexico jeopardized the safety
and soundness of institutions by
transferring those deposits.
Numerous studies have been
completed and all of them that
basically come back and found
the economically.
Not feasible.
Mr chair members of the
committee of public bank will
face all the risks and
regulation of our local
community banks the dream of
giving money to all of the great
projects to.
Many things that are of wish
list will face the same
challenge to be repaid I
strongly oppose house bill two
thirty six due to the financial
right next federal lawsuits that
would pass through to our state
actors thank you.
Mr chair you are muted.
Thank you of Teresa Molina your
next your unmuted on on my side
okay good afternoon Mister
chairman my SS and members of
the committee my name is that a
cell only not president of first
New Mexico bank in demi I'm a
former member of the Dallas
Federal Reserve Bank and
representing the el Paso branch.
The likelihood of a public bank
receiving access to the federal
reserve payment system or the
Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation FDIC is practically
mail without access to the
federal reserve payment system a
public bank would be severely
limited in its ability to
process payments in a timely
manner or have access to the
Feds short term liquidity
funding program that federal
federally insured institutions
are granted.
There are currently several
governmental and quasi
governmental agencies in New
Mexico that provided access to
lower cost funding for community
infrastructure improvements
economic economic development
projects.
Public safety equipment and
affordable housing and hospital
hospital equipment purchases
expansion of early childhood
education along with much needed
broadband infrastructure
improvements in all areas of the
state for more remote learning
and economic development
purposes would be negatively
impacted I asked the committee
to well we're all on house bill
two thirty six thank you.
Mr Allen Shuttlesworth what are
you going on mute yourself
followed by Jed Jed fanning.
Mr Chairman can you hear me we
sure can welcome Sir thank you
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Alan
shuttles were on the president
and CEO of main bank which is a
locally owned community bank
based in Albuquerque New Mexico
has two years I have served as a
member of the FDIC community
bank advisory board.
As New Mexico's first financial
respond or Smitty banks approved
and distributed close to nine
thousand five hundred small
business loans totaling over one
point two billion dollars.
Through the paycheck protection
program in twenty twenty of all
the PDP loans funded in New
Mexico the largest portion came
from community banks in the
questions keep is continues to
increase as work on the ground
to be as were as we're having
this hearing right now New
Mexico community banks are
invested in their communities we
are involved in community
programs community development
projects and participate and
assist in financial literacy
programs to help propel our
communities forward as a side
note Maybank holes all of our
deposits from New Mexico we
learned exclusively in the state
of New Mexico our model is very
common from the community banks
here New Mexico community banks
have adequate liquidity and are
ready to land on any economic
development project or to any
qualifying small business that
needs funding.
And finally having served on the
FDIC community bank advisory
board and personally having seen
the steps necessary to obtain
FDA see insurance for deposits
there is little to indicate a
public bank would be granted
coverage.
Mr Chairman with that that's my
comment thank you.
Thank you.
I would go with the.
Gen funding followed by Gerry
lots is a has a blue.
A blue thing by name Mr panic
here Mr chair you able to hear
me your M..
Mr chair committee members good
afternoon I'm Jed fanning CEO of
citizens bank of Los crucis and
I'm also a board member for the
independent community bankers
association of New Mexico there
is not been a demonstrated
public policy needs supporting
the creation of a public bank in
New Mexico there's no shortage
of community bank locations with
dollars to land and willingness
to serve New Mexicans community
banks provide sixty percent of
all small business loans and
more than eighty percent of ag
loans thank the deposit Sir kept
local by putting them out in
loans to support businesses
consumers and economic
development and our community
banking group does in fact keep
deposits local safe and working
as of June thirtieth New Mexico
community banks had a sixty two
percent loan to deposit ratio
this means that there's over
five billion dollars in
liquidity and lending purposes
for community banks the argument
that are existing banks are not
meeting the needs of our
communities and their businesses
and residents is simply not
accurate I know what was only
released yesterday but the
fiscal impact report prepared by
your legislative finance
committee raises multiple
concerns and questions and
specifically it indicates that
funds dedicated to a public bank
would be an unnecessary
duplication of public resources
I would ask you to please note
on page one of the fiscal impact
report that it estimates
negative revenues with losses
increasing each year for the
public bank there are other
pressing needs that deserve our
state's attention resources
especially now capitalizing a
bank will divert needed state
funds revenues from immediate
needs needs that have been made
worse by COVID nineteen pandemic
would ask you to just consider
the downsides of this bill and I
urge you to.
To oppose it and I thank you for
the opportunity to participate
today.
Thank you Sir a Gerry lots.
Yes thank you.
Ask you chairman Maestas and
members of the committee my name
is Gerry let some of the
regional president of sentry
bank century bank has been
serving New Mexico since
eighteen eighty seven with
locations in Santa Fe Espanol of
cell most Albuquerque Rio Rancho
Los crucis we're very proud of
our local ownership our local
board members and are over two
hundred employees we stand in
opposition to house bill two
thirty six proponents of a
public bank have asserted that
such an entity would not compete
with their community banks and
we respectfully do not the the
proposal that way.
As has mentioned we also have
concerns about what we believe
are unaddressed questions such
as how would a public bank
operate in the long term without
access to the federal reserve's
discount window for short term
lending would such an entity
have access to related to that
payment systems is this bill in
conflict with the state
constitution's anti donation
clause will the services be in
direct competition with the New
Mexico finance authority and if
so to what benefit our bank like
many others is very well
capitalized and we are
continually seeking new business
loan opportunities in our market
areas there is more than
adequate capital for business
expansion and economic
development Lente and we remain
committed to providing financing
to our various New Mexico
communities thank you so much
for the time today.
Thank you Sir Mr Mike Martin
followed by John Anderson.
Mr mine got in on mute yourself.
Welcome there you.
Mr chairman members of the
committee my name is Michael
Martin and I want to thank you
for the time to be here I am
president and CEO western
banking lords for New Mexico our
bank was founded in nineteen oh
seven when our family moved to
New Mexico in nineteen eighty
four we have long range in the
state.
From two thousand ten until
almost two thousand thirteen
also serve New Mexico on the
state investment council and
built significantly with the
issues that were surrounding got
in at the appointed time the
risk of political influence in
governance rounding this bank is
actually very significant the
political risk has been
identified by the FDIC is
concerned this potential risk
raises questions about whether
or not we're opening the door to
door to abuse and pay to play
dealings that were saying that
the state investment council in
late two thousand.
Uses the cost the state millions
of dollars.
Compounding this concern this
proposed bank will have the
ability to make equity
investments and loans to the
same customer.
Recipe for disaster that is
generally prohibited and bank.
Secondly banks to fail since two
thousand nine five hundred
eleven banks in the US federal
because of the risk of thanks
failure New Mexico statutes
requiring a system of collateral
is ation were insurance on
public funds the spot bank
offers neither deposit insurance
for deposit collaterals addition
to those depositors so the risk
to the state is actually all of
the money that's on deposit at
this bank under the proposal
that's four hundred million
dollars.
Finally the proposal claims that
the bank makes almost four
million dollars in income over
six years but the severance tax
permanent fund does used to
capitalize this bank would make
during that same time period
based off the September
thirtieth numbers of this past
year twenty one point two
million so even if the bank does
have its profitability
assumption the state still loses
seventeen point two million
dollars that concludes my
remarks and I stand in
opposition bill.
Thank you.
Mr John understand welcome
followed by Ashley Wagner.
Thank you sure can take a train
or what thank you Mr chairman
I'm John Anderson and
Representative in New Mexico
bankers Association and up we
have as members FE FDIC insured
community regional and
nationwide banks and I just
wanted to take a few moments and
basically discuss our opposition
to.
house bill two thirty six Mr
chairman and members
are our basic.
Slides are that we don't believe
the public bank is necessary we
don't believe it would provide
any benefit to New Mexico
residents or businesses.
The implications are creating a
public bank pose risks to New
Mexico taxpayers and would
saddle the state was significant
unrewarded costs to replicate a
highly competitive regulated and
federally insured banking
system.
That exist in communities across
the state has just been
eloquently discussed but many of
the committee bank for me.
Guarding the public bank would
consume public funds about a
hundred million dollars.
That could be used for other
urgent needs such as health
safety or infrastructure and
community development instead of
offering financial services
which are already provided a
fission laid by and I want to
repeat tax paying private sector
banks operating in a highly
competitive market place.
I wanted to call the attention
to the committee page two of the
bill which on lines eight
through eleven which basically
reads that the public bank of
New Mexico is created as a
public body politic and
corporate constituting a
governmental instrumentality
which shall be chartered
pursuant to the laws of the
United States.
And frankly I can find nothing
in the bill that would indicate
to me exactly who in fact is
going to be chartering this
thank whether it's the OC state
whether it's FDIC whether it's
the state etcetera so I think
this is really an important
question and I would assume that
the financial institutions
division which regulates state
banks here in the state would be
a can do it would be an
important entity to discuss the
chartering of this particular
bank I think this is going to be
highly questionable whether or
not this chase State Bank can be
chartered as such if you
probably know the bank of North
Dakota which basically got its
origin in nineteen nineteen I is
basically a bank that is not
shared is such and basically has
no FDIC insurance as AJ and
basically any potential losses
will be backed by the full faith
and credit
of the state of North Dakota not
sure that this is where it needs
to be in the in the bill but
never the less I think that's
something you want to consider I
also wanted to say that this
state is committing a hundred
million dollars to and
establishing a very expensive
infrastructure for a new entity
that may compete with existing
instrumentality use of the state
searches the finance authority
maybe the mortgage finance
authority and with community and
national banks.
To the extent that the public
banking page with other state
instrumentality is without
subsidy funds dedicated the
public bank are and unnecessary
duplication of public resources.
To the extent the public bank
will compete with local and
national banks.
The bank likely will only be
able to do so to the extent and
subsidized by the state from
resources that might be more
effectively is for other health
needs here in the state.
I congratulate the authors of
finance of the FIR
basically that was replaced as
Mr fanning pointed out your
street in a moment ago it is a
incredibly well read well slide
out and documented
F. I. R. which I think really
really.
The points out some of the
difficulties that would be faced
by a public bank based on the
bills that have both been
introduced in the house and
Senate so I just again want to
repeat The New Mexico bankers
Association does not to work
House Bill two thirty six and
thank you for the time you
collided me.
Absolutely and we'll go back to
the main and a half Mr chair
representative in association
So that's for the additional
time we'll go with miss Terry
Cole and Debbie Moore welcome
screen good to see you.
You Mr chairman and members of
the committee I'm terrible.
You all for your call the
chamber on the.
I want made by Federal Reserve
Bank walk in twenty one when we
look at public thank.
Mr chair.
The former point that states no
one should be able to identify
the specific market here the
public bank would laugh.
Zero seven ways that existing
offside public agencies might be
able to meet those needs that
this wise advice for us today.
Mexico we are one problem this
legislation sixty all what the
private sector not adequately
rate provided women jumping into
the business of banking is the
only school.
Hey strong ever since that for
example he's already happening.
It doesn't appear as I was being
given to help work with
existing.
May be expanded for just
the public thank additionally
what private banks offer high
quality services flexibility
and security service departments
fiscal agent it's hard we
started one day the decision.
Today to reject this legislation
Mr chairman members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity to share our own.
Thank you miss Cole a Debbie
Moore followed by a six six
eight six.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members at Debbie Moore
president and CEO of the greater
Las Cruces chamber of commerce
and I stand by May be half of my
board in opposition to this bill
for all of the many reasons
you've heard before we just it
is our opinion that many of
these issues that you've heard
as a as not being fulfilled are
being fulfilled by a strong
community banking industry and
public programs and we just fell
at this time there's no
justification for public bank
thank you Mr chair.
Thank you please in addition so
six six eight six followed by
Carla Suntech.
Yes Mr chairman my name is Jason
why it I am the president of
Western Commerzbank in Carlsbad
New Mexico I'm also the
president of western bank of
Clovis and Clovis New Mexico and
in addition I'm the president of
the New Mexico bankers
association I'd like to add a
few things that may or may not
been said.
The.
One of ours that decisions made
especially lending decisions
bank are going to be made based
on political concerns rather
than strict economic factors
which could pose a significant
risk.
To the public bank in addition
personally speaking on behalf of
my banks we have significant
amount of money of public fund
money.
On deposit that stay in our
communities that we use to
reinvest in our communities
through loans through.
Jobs and multiple other factors
how we utilize that money.
I'd also like to say that we do
not sell our loans outside of
the state that any mortgage loan
that is done it any of our banks
is kept the money is kept in the
state by taking taking this
money out and moving it to Santa
Fe it will.
Greatly affect all the ability
of our bank to do mortgage loans
New Mexico.
Thank you for the time.
Thank you this call us on tight
followed by ability.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee on
Carless ontact the president of
the New Mexico business
coalition.
In N. B. C. respectfully opposes
this bill we believe that
community banks excel in
building a quality community
partner that meets the needs of
small businesses and consumers
we have over two hundred and
twenty locations of these banks
throughout the state and they
have state we've been providing
loans to people for many many
years one of the most important
issues for providing safe loans
is to have an established
relationship with the consumer.
There is no better scenario that
a community bank with a banker
making these decisions has
established relationships and
knows firsthand the needs of the
community as well as the
consumers.
This is something that will not
be easily accomplished by a
public bank risk in the
resources of the state if a
borrower fails to repay the loan
this puts New Mexico taxpayers
at a higher risk for loss of tax
dollars community banks have
their own dollars at risk not
taxpayers for those reasons we
oppose this bill thank you for
your time and consideration.
Thank you flexibility and then
Ashley Wagner.
Mr Lee welcomes.
Good and on mute yourself Mr
Lee.
You Mr chairman.
Hello we we we can hear you Sir
Mr lanky.
Mr Chairman ability president
and CEO of the Gallup we can we
County chamber of commerce and
the three hundred fifty member
businesses we support
we are in opposition to this
bill for many of the reasons
stated that it will take
committee's time to rehash those
but also want to save this
committee it is our community of
in the banking industry in our
community these are the folks
who step up time and time again
to make sure that every event is
sponsored that
worthy causes like our community
pantry the food bank those
places are funded and and
supported in many many ways and
we see that reducing the
capacity of them to do business
and removing that piece of
business from them that provides
the capacity for them to support
our communities would be
detrimental and so for that
reason as well as the other
reasons stated we stand opposed
thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee.
Miss miss Ashley Wagner welcome.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we oppose
this bill because we believe it
will disadvantage taxpayers H.
B. two thirty six to appropriate
one hundred million dollars to
the newly created public banks
have a which is from the general
fund and the other half of the
severance tax permanent fund
currently these funds generate a
return to the state as
managed by the state investment
council and the state
treasurer's office according to
the fiscal impact report one
year severance tax permanent
fund earnings and fifty million
dollars and six point seven five
percent is almost three point
four million dollars but this
bill aims to divert away that
public money from their funds or
for more immediate economic
recovery needs and put into a
risky investment however there
is legal concern about whether
this measure even meets the
definition of investment article
eight section ten of the New
Mexico constitution authorizes
the legislature to determine how
money in the severance tax
permanent fund will be invested
but strictly limited
distributions from the fund well
other economically targeted
investment programs have a
requirement our mechanism that
allows for repayment or
investment returns to folks low
back into the STPS the language
in this bill makes is so there
is no possibility of realized
investment gains or losses thank
you.
Thank you and.
I believe you may have spoken
with not please do six six eight
six.
Welcome.
Did you already addressed the
committee phone number six six
eight six.
Yes Sir I I already spoke okay
but in a put your hand down.
Of Mr J. Jenkins welcome Sir
good to see you followed by
Burrel Gretchen are.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
members of the committee thank
you my name is Jay Jenkins I'm
president and CEO of CNB bank
out in Carlsbad.
we oppose this bill along with
many of my colleagues are spoke
today we're out in rural New
Mexico and we're rolling up our
sleeves and we're meeting the
needs of our local community
every day and believe you me
it's tough
yeah we give back to our
community on a daily basis on a
yearly basis and we hold public
funds if those public funds are
taken out of our bank it would
be devastating I never thought
my wildest dreams I'd be in
front of a committee trying to
defend my job and the job of
eighty of our employees locally
we used to supply a huge
economic impact locally we have
projects going in Albuquerque
we've got projects Los crucis
Farmington all over the state
and we do our best and it's
difficult it's getting harder
and harder every day but the
Q. many community banking
industry we're there every
single day we're locally owned
we've been around since nineteen
twenty four and we're not going
any place you know our funds are
held locally at this referencing
the fiscal impact report it is a
very well written report with a
lot of questions the only other
thing I'd like to to point out
there was a letter by the New
Mexico financial institutions
division dated November twelfth
twenty twenty and it was to the
New Mexico Indian Affairs
Committee by Rebecca more and I
would ask committee to also
reviewed that letter nine pages
of lots of questions and we urge
you to strongly oppose this bill
thank you.
Thank you Mr Jenkins hope all is
well good to see you burl up.
Yes thank you a girl reckoner
and on in Santa Fe on just a
resident citizen and taxpayer
not associating with the banking
industry but I follow this issue
and I'm very concerned that for
many of the reasons you've
already heard this is just a
scheme that is very questionable
a lot of ways the North Dakota
banking is mentioned frequently
as an example I think the
certain facts or really known
about what goes on there the
North Dakota bank requires every
municipality in the state to put
its funds in that bank so it is
in that sense a monopoly in
North Dakota for municipal
banking
they've got a five billion
dollar lending capacity in the
state as mentioned before with
seven hundred or eight hundred
thousand people this bank may
have New Mexico's public bank
may have five hundred million it
would be small in comparison and
if a hundred million is funded
initially where is the other
four hundred million coming from
likely taxpayers I don't think
that's been disclosed what the
tax impact on the communities
going to be on taxpayers
Washington DC explore the public
bank last year and came up with
a hundred and sixty page report
and concluded no public bank for
DC there were other sources of
funds for the needs that were
identified and and programs
anyway the feasibility of this
has to be explored further and
this is not a feasibility report
or or bill this is for the bank
and it's just not time thank you
very much I would urge you to
oppose house bill two thirty six
thank you thank you Mr reckoner
anyone else anyone else wish to
speak in opposition but in raise
your hand within the zone.
And we'll go back to because I.
I believe I may have could you
for native surely will just go
back to Mister Jerry Walker and
before we go to the committee
members Mr Walker any final
thought Sir.
Please re introduce yourself Mr
chairman Jerry Walker with the
independent community bankers
thank you Sir very much and
thank you to the committee for
sitting through what's been
fairly long hearing I just a
couple of points Mr chairman if
you might to I would just urge
the committee to stop learning
center we're not creating a bank
here Mr for it Mr chairman we're
creating a new state agency that
is being operated under the
guise of the bank but it's not
really a bank it's a state
agency that the legislature
would have to appropriate to its
operating budget every year just
like you would for just like you
do for any other state agency so
that's something I think the
committee really needs to take a
look at but Mr chairman
community banks of the in the
economic engine for our states
in state of our banks today
provide sixty percent of the
small business loans up around
the country and here in New
Mexico that's pretty well true
to eighty percent of the
agricultural loans for farmers
and ranchers that's pretty will
true here in New Mexico to you
know we've heard Mr chairman a
lot of talk this afternoon about
the environmental and economic
justice about the renewable
energy social benefits but not
much about the mentioning
families and small businesses
and then Mr chairman that's what
our our members have been doing
our banks have been doing a set
for a long long long time of the
under banked have been mentioned
this afternoon and that is a
problem we contend Mr chairman
that the credit union industry
which are non taxed in this
country and in the state they
should be the ones that are
serving the underbanked
population simply because they
do have that tax free status and
we think that's where that
should come from Mr Chairman
finally a final comment if the
driving force behind this move
for a public bank is to punish
Wall Street so be it so be it
just recognized that community
banks of course would be
collateral damage as this is
happening.
So Mister chairman thank you
very much for a good hearing and
that we would all stand for
questions and we appreciate your
time.
Thank you Sir.
There's
Normally I would go back to the
to the Sanchez but what you'll
have an opportunity through Q.
and a and then at the end to to
address any of the.
Any of the arguments made by the
opposition because we want to
have a full an robust
conversation right now this is a
very.
Very important it is endeavor
and and a marvelous idea to to
contemplate we'll go to members
of the committee we want to
thank everyone from the audience
there sixty seven percent still
an attendee as well as folks
this thing on the webcast we
also joined behind the Dyess.
under brand Cologne is with us
welcome Sir and we'll go to
members of the committee
Representative Baldonado.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you monsters of the bill.
Lot of fun lot of for a lot of
against it is interesting we
knew was to be a long day Mr
chairman so here we are but I do
have a few questions for
For that I think and I guess
I'll start with the with
Representative Roybal Caballero
sense the person it'll be sort
of the the lead on the bill
the
The.
But we talked about it was
mentioned several times in in
public comment and and I believe
in the in the in the
presentation as well that the
state of North Dakota
has the only public banks from
what I can understand in the
existence and states are.
That Mr Chairman representative
that bank is that
Does that lend money to.
For car loans and things of that
nature is it more I understood
to be was originally in of of
started because of the farming
industry in these are areas that
still the case with the not to
go to bank Madam Mr Chairman
representative.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative for the question
and I will on defer to Mr Dan
may fail to give a little bit
more detail.
If I may Mister chair.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Castellano and
Representative Baldonado in
North Dakota how the bank works
that does what we post here
partnership loans with local
banks and community banks and
credit unions to make sure those
loans can have it is not to
direct loans now.
After things like that.
So I'm Mr Chairman
representative and and then are
just do they they don't have
like a public location like a
you know a storefront location
on the corner that's not how
that works and okay Mr Chairman
representative remote of your
Representative Baldonado note
there are no there are no
location physical locations for
a back we're proposing either we
don't think that that would be a
good way for we us to do it here
in New Mexico as well doesn't
make sense to compete on that
level.
And and and Mr Chairman
representative and and and I I
did a little the little dig in a
little research and it looks to
be that there was other states
that maybe had at one point had
some sort of public think it the
states or territories American
Samoa on where we go and then
Delaware looks like they have
something at some point but it
seems that those are all the
funds I guess that's the case
those don't exist any longer Mr
chairman and chairman.
Representative go ahead I'm
sorry Mr Chairman
representative.
American small it's still has a
public bank it was started a few
years ago when all of the local
banks pulled out of Americans
smoke nature stops doing landing
there where we go did see need
for this in their bank still
doesn't exist there and north
Dakota's public bank has been in
existence for more than a
hundred years providing capital
to community banks it does not
compete with community banks and
I don't know where that is
coming from it helps community
banks it helps credit unions it
doesn't compete with them in any
way it doesn't rob useful
deposits from community banks
just work with them to create
false.
Thank you on chairman and and
and Mr Chairman representative
It's the North Dakota bank that
I understand is not an FDIC
insured institution is that
correct.
Mr Chairman representative
Baldonado no it is not there is
there though is precedent for
public banks to join the FDIC
the American bank the I'm sorry
the public bank small up
recently joining the state of
Texas now has joined the FBI see
there's only precedent for this
and we believe that the public
thank your New Mexico be easily
access all of the funds the
types of funds that that that
would be necessary to operate.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative and and Dan.
The there's there's even the
City of Santa Fe did this looked
at looked at creating a public
bank but I know that from what I
could dig up there's several
states Washington Wyoming
Vermont gas futures in the city
of offenders Seattle San
Francisco and Oakland have all
the yeah and and done conducted
conducted feasibility studies Mr
chairman and Representative Dan
does that sound pretty accurate
a lot of these places look at
doing this before.
Mr Chairman representative
Baldonado yes
A Los Angeles Berkeley San
Francisco San Diego
Massachusetts Vermont Seattle
Portland New Jersey Maine PC
Washington state and city of
Philadelphia all have done
studies in overwhelmingly what
the study show is that a public
bank would help those issues
those municipalities in their
cases in our case a state save
money improve small business and
help local banks and helped
local credit unions not compete.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and and Representative but yet
we still have no other states of
the cities are are running their
own bank so they there must be
some some Representative there
some some finding it's not
opening the floodgates to these
operations is there is there an
answer for that Mr Chairman
representative there.
Mr Chairman representative
Baldonado they are working this
is become an interesting
national movement you know ever
since the Great Recession in two
thousand eight local communities
like ours is seen that there are
better ways to finance the
system and are better ways to
keep our money working locally
and that's where the movie
nationally is come from there's
are there are seventeen states
now with legislation in process.
L. A. San Francisco and New
Jersey in New York City all have
passed legislation and they're
all working right now today on
their business plans to make
their public banks apps and that
was something that the study
from Santa Fe said that we could
do here in New Mexico I
recognize that Santa Fe as the
city was too small it did not
have the horsepower the economic
force power to make a public
bank happen the study from Santa
Fe recommended that if it was
moved to the state level the
state would have the economic
force power to make it happen to
make it worthwhile.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and and Representative Dan.
me to curse to me that we have
you know something in place
already that that functions and
not seeing a banking
Position but the amendment The
New Mexico finance authority I'm
not familiar down I've I've I'm
sorry I don't know that you're
even from the state that I
didn't get that information but
but Mr Chairman representative
because to me that the NMFA
does fill this need in terms of
lending to municipalities and
counties and for larger projects
things of that nature I know
that my local county or city
recently secured some funding
for a project through the
through the the NMFA.
Why do we need this we've got
something that's already
functioning in that world this
Mr chairman and Representative.
Mr Chairman Representative
Baldonado Hey I am a new date of
New Mexico I am a fourth
generation Albuquerque high
graduate you can believe that on
my dad's side and on my mom's
side you're from the COVID.
That's my.
Yes yeah it's not far from you
guys there yet my most families
the abate those from down there
and anyway long story short the
NMFA we've talked quite all
right but with Marquita Russel
on this and she sees that we
could add capacity to what she
does I would like to turn over
to Angela Merker on this is the
executive director of a a Philly
do athletic and she has she has
had numerous discussions with
Marquita Russel the director of
the NMFA about exactly how the
public bank will completely help
the NMFA basically leveraged
money it has can go further.
Chairman yes Representative
Baldonado and other committee
members
Regarding the NMFA and the
public bank the distinction here
is that the public banks can
leverage those funds it's a bank
so it's creating money and the
NMFA can't do that they receive
allocations every year
appropriations and they they
keep those funds circulating but
it's not about leveraging to get
to that eight times of their all
of their deposits so.
Excuse me.
And market knowledge is that
they don't they're not able to
line up land
all of the and meet all of the
needs that the state has both in
whether it's small business
development or whether it's
through infrastructure and when
as we described the public bank
she's she made the statement
that she could see where this
would be a compliment to that
and help to increase the
capacity of the state to finance
more.
Community community development
and so it's not an either or
it's how can the public bank
actually strengthened what's
happening now and perhaps over
time even bring additional focus
and efficiencies to the.
Different economic development
funds that are currently
existing in different locations
across in the state system Mr
chair and and Representative
I'll just add to that I think
the key word in all of what the
public bank representative is
leveraging Marquita was very
intentional about I can ology
that as were many of the other
individuals and and department
heads that we spoke to very are
key to acknowledge that this
public bank with is seen as a
way in which to leverage and
expand allow the capacity that
NMFA has and others have in our
state and allow them to leverage
and then the the key thing is
that the money circulates as as
Angelus said with the in the
public bank and it stays within
New Mexico rather than
going out of state so that was a
very key conversation that we
had we and we've had several
conversations with miss Russell
because we see one of the major
areas of public assistance would
be with NMFA as well as with
economic development department
we see these as critical because
the public bank actually fuel on
a smaller scale and local
communities it fuels the
capacity of local communities to
be able to expand and and the
answer to the many
infrastructure
issues that they're facing right
now because of the lack of
capital but Mr chair in addition
the public health bank is
actually very well positioned to
address the renewable energy
economic development for us that
we're seeing in our state
because of the way in which we
want to be able to keep that
money growing within our state
and investing and circulating
thank you.
Mr chair and thank you
Representative for that question
thank you madam thank you Mr
chairman and representative
The mental I think a couple
times you use the terminology
the dystrophy creating money
what can you describe a little
better just the I don't quite
know what you mean by creating
money well it's about how.
The funds and the bank can be
leveraged to actually
finance additional funds so if
we start with fifty million were
actually able because it's a
bank and we can.
What I was saying leverage we
can actually create landing
behind that for up to the ten
times in our pro forma which
looks at five years of
functioning we don't expand that
more than four times and we
still show strong returns and
and by the way the pro forma was
not requested to look at the
benefits of the bank when the
FAA off if I do what FIR was
developed so there's no
there's no.
Attention to the public bank
budget and that FIR I just want
to highlight that.
Thank you thank you madam Mr
chairman and and Representative
and and and Angela I know this
is a bunch of hands up so I'm
gonna I'm gonna yield that way
everybody else can ask questions
and and I'll be in the floor but
I do appreciate the that the
questions that were answered I'm
not
I'm not sold on this idea but
let's continue the debate see
what happens thank you Mr
chairman and.
Thank you Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you Mr chairman.
And representative I'm not sold
on this.
But my concerns you know I'm
just gonna cut through the
chase.
our first question before I tell
you what I'm really concerned
about.
Is.
Can you tell me.
The state this in this region.
That is currently operating.
AS State Bank.
And that's to the
Representative.
I'm Mr Chairman representative I
missed the very first part your
question I'm sorry okay what is
you tell me in our region.
Who is currently operating in
public State Bank.
Mr chair and representative I
think that the it was mentioned
that North Dakota is the only
bank but we have in line I
believe Dan mentioned California
and I just went blank on the
other states in line but
California is in line I think
they passed legislation already
and if I can Mr chair departed
and on the other side went
blank.
Thank you Representative Mr
chairman and and Representative
Powdrell Culbert it there are
several states now that are
moving towards this we are
really on the forefront of this
revolution right now and with
their seventeen states that have
legislation in process right now
California just passed
legislation allowing them to
charter sex State Bank much like
we would charter are all making
sure they're all New Jersey in
New York City both passed
legislation that would allow
them to charter public banks to
we're just the first ones to be
thinking ahead here in the
southwest I think we're really
on the cutting edge of something
really awesome thank you.
Mr chairman and and
Representative what about
Colorado.
Is in Colorado looking at some
very similar legislation.
Mr.
Chairman representative I
believe Colorado is one of those
seventeen states absolutely and
I and by the way California is
the state that is in the region
of what I would consider in the
southwest thank you.
I realize that thank you.
Well what I'm I'm just going to
cut through the chase.
I know you know discussion with
some of my legislative friends
from Colorado that they're
looking at the State Bank
because of the FDIC rules as I
understand it that from
marijuana sales.
That there's only so much money
a dispensary can put in to
a bank in Colorado because of
this the FDIC and I think that
rule is forty thousand dollars a
may be damage and can address
that and because of the amount
of dollars that are being made
by the revenues generated from
marijuana still is the reason
that they're really looking at
the State Bank and so that would
you like to chime in on that or
Representative by way of the
representative thank you.
Thank you madam chair
representative please do damn.
Thank you Mr Chairman
representative will have your
own representative Akhil
Culbert.
So Colorado is a unique position
they are studying a public bank
right now in two thousand
fifteen there was a ballot
proposal that it would establish
a State Bank of the Roosevelt
wheels was approved by the title
board there for inclusion Public
pope was later rejected upon
modifications and other
objections but they're studying
it again now in Colorado one of
the things I found with the
public banking is it does not
intersect with cannabis okay the
because this is not a retail
bank it does not have retail
branches it does not open up
accounts it only serves
community banks and credit
unions right so we cannot take
any of those cannabis funds
itself.
And there's the confusion there
the people are thinking that
this is a retail bank it's going
to be taking municipal costs and
all that it's going to have
branches all over no it's simply
a banker's bank so because of
that it will help in the long
run probably New Mexico's
cannabis businesses listening
cannabis entrepreneurs because
it will close the gaps on all of
the the difference between
making a load and not making a
lower caste cannabis on your
days pretty steep but by
underwriting the loan that would
go to one of those entrepreneurs
we might be able to close that
gap and help get more and
businesses how we might help
those entrepreneurs in New
Mexico get the business lending
business loans they need and I
would love to see our community
banks really step up and start
to finance some of those
cannabis businesses I know it's
very top right now in our
federal regulations about that.
But I think in the long run.
The New Mexico public bank will
help lower the risk for not just
cannabis businesses but every
business in New Mexico and help
small businesses get the funding
they need from local community
banks.
Thank you and Mr Chairman
representative and Dan I'm I'm
not asking this line of
questions because I'm a
supporter of of our
recreational.
This okay so let's let's put
that out there but this is
interesting because.
This is one of few pieces of
legislation.
That.
During my entire tenure as a
legislator that we've heard non
support from every part of the
state.
And and that concerns me.
is that we have just of course
we have the bankers.
But you know various other
entities that says this is not a
good idea a good idea so I think
that there's some merit to that
I have some concerns what would
happen.
Possible.
This type of a bank without the
hundred million from the state
of New Mexico.
Mr chairman and Representative
once again all column damn.
Yes he has some great scenarios
the way I appreciate that
question Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Mr Chairman representative were
buckled yet and Representative
Powdrell Culbert there are ways
to do this without state of New
Mexico but that reduces the
horse power in the bank he
simply needs the horse power in
the funding of the
capitalization to make the loans
happened right we could do it
with less money within the bank
is much less impactful and if we
have money from the state of New
Mexico it can make the impact it
needs there have been studies
have shown that in other states
in I believe it was Vermont the
matter fact tried to do a public
bank with a crowd funding
background to it you know
basically like you find a up a
new a new gadget and they
realize that they couldn't raise
enough money basically get that
and of course power behind and
by having to me the fifty
million dollars in
capitalization for the state of
New Mexico it's enough
horsepower to get the bank up in
going it's also enough capital
and enough that we can land out
enough that we can start
building the reserves in the
bank to grow.
And that's really key to this
proposal is growing it so that
down the line you can help more
and more people in larger
projects thank you.
I'm.
Mr chairman and and
Representative one of the other
things that when reading about
this I've been looking at this
for a couple weeks and then you
know you and I have a discussion
earlier in the week and
Most banks.
As you were saying really do
look for investors.
So do you not think that there
is not enough revenue.
And the lack of a better word
also are general New Mexico
Environment to fund this.
then by using state dollars
using taxpayer dollars.
That's my question.
and Representative I believe
Senator Steinborn would like to
answer that question.
Representative yes it's kind of
an answer to your previous
question as well you're getting
at the heart of why we're doing
this that we we we want this to
be a public bank part of the
mission of this bank is written
into the legislation is unity
development focus.
We get to guide the mission of
the bank.
this is not a this is not a
start up to just create another
commercial bank with all its
limitations frankly and it's you
know exclusive profit driven
focus to risk ratios and
everything else this that this
is a public tank or community
development and New Mexico
centric kind of focuses and and
so that's why we're we're
choosing to channel state funds
for this.
And because of the benefits we
get out of it and quite frankly
we have billions of dollars in
any one time we have three
billion dollars sitting in an
account so we would also argue
this is just a smart way to
leverage public dollars for
public purposes rather than not
take advantage of this
instrument so.
Those are my answers your
questions.
Okay thank you senator
Mr Chairman representative and
senator.
I mean banks are in business.
No matter what name you put in
front of it.
To make money I mean that's just
just the way that that that it
flows and so my concern is we
could talk taxed more dollars
into a public.
State Bank.
How does it get its one hundred
million dollars back if they're
not in business to make money.
If the bank is not in business
to make revenue that would come
back to the taxpayer.
Mr Chairman representative I'm
I'll start with this and then
whoever would like to Senator
somebody else would like to
chime in
thank you know when you look at
it from a tax payer perspective
it's really incredible that we
heard from around the state
From taxpayers all over I'm
local governments all over from
local organizations all over
talking about the needs in their
particularly backyard Center
particular communities in their
neighborhoods and how
inaccessible it's been to be
able to apply for loans that
work to improve on their in
their for the purposes in the
beauty in a public bank is that.
The taxpayers are taxpayers
around the state and it's the to
be the taxpayers that are in
need on it's a very taxpayers
that need the infrastructure
improvements a very taxpayers
that need the small businesses
it's the very taxpayers that
need the home improvements at
the very taxpayers that need
you know in a capital to expand
in however way they would need
to expand and import more
importantly Mr Chairman
representative it's the very
taxpayers to their local
governments that are hurting and
needing and not being able to
capitalize what are public
projects which should be in the
public arena because this is
what public does this is what
local governments do and state
governments do is they provide.
The taxpayers with.
Thank you
projects and money and and
investment and so I see the
senator would like to chime in
and I'll go ahead and turn it
over to him thank you
Representative I I just want to
I just thank you Matt Mr
chairman and this and
Representative I just want to be
clear we're not we're not doing
anything other than replacing
where that funding is sitting.
we're we're moving it from the
state investment council or some
treasury account of which state
treasurer has three billion
dollars anyone moment sitting in
one place and we're choosing to
move it to another place the
capitalization is still there
yes we're creating a new
instrument to work for New
Mexico and other ways to that
will obviously involves some
expenditures of funds to do that
but but we're not doing anything
with the money other than moving
it to a different instrument to
then start making money for us
and actually unlike a fund that
we might take some of that money
like we're doing frankly with
other things during this
pandemic where you're just
liquidating that money the
difference here is you're
actually getting a return on
that money in your rolling this
corpus you know the north the
coding bank actually returns I
think in the last ten years
they've they've given three
hundred million dollars back to
the general fund it's a revenue
maker for the state and so so
those are the two points I'd
like to make which is we're not
we're just moving it and number
two we're gonna be making money
off it because it's going to be
professionally manage money just
like all the professional.
Marshall community bankers who
joined us today this will be
manage the same way and I will
be making money except that
money will then be put to use
for for kind of a broader set up
for public purposes and chair
and representative it's making
money for the people and not
making money money for
private for profit only and
that's what makes a difference
in the people in this case are
those that are being represented
by their local governments and
making these kinds of
improvements so that's where the
community development focus
since and I was controlling that
because it's our visions and our
priorities that are coming from
our communities that are being
articulated to our
representation Mr Chairman
representative better dictating
what those needs are in those
communities so how best to have
it then make money for the very
taxpayers that are putting money
into it and getting the return
for it then having go into
commercial reservation for
profit corporate interests and
most of the time outside of the
state and I think Angela
Marquardt would like to say a
few words.
Thank you Mr chairman
representatives I just wanted to
add a data point here to what
Senator Steinborn and
Representative Roybal Caballero
said last year bank of North
Dakota had an eighteen percent
return on investment so they're
not
they're not not making money
there are John R. online this
they're making money through
good management of the funds and
at the same time supporting that
community economic development
and you can do both.
Okay thank you Mr chairman and
and and Representative what
couple of final questions.
Community banks.
Are already meeting.
Many many of the request.
For loans large and small.
And if the finance authority.
Is already meeting many of the
request and that's just
unbelievable the different types
of programs that are available
by way of the New Mexico finance
authority.
And I'm still trying to figure
out why do we need a public
State Bank.
And also.
How does New Mexico get it's a
hundred million dollars back.
If this bank.
Sales.
Or it completely fails.
The money back because this
taxpayer dollars and the
messaging the messages.
That I I keep receiving from you
all and might not be just you it
might be because I'm not in
favor of this but it may be that
This is a high risk loans.
They probably would not be
finance.
Without substantial collateral
in any other environment so I
just kind of clarify that for me
and and.
Mr Chairman representative about
relinquish the floor
Mr Chairman representative thank
you very much for those
questions I think we have some
really good examples and to
clarify the distinction that you
raise once again as we've been
addressing throughout is really
important I'll defer to do and
to do that.
Thank you Mr chairman
Representative Roybal Caballero
and Representative public
partial Culbert thank you for.
Let me speak because I really
feel like did banks are not
really meeting the needs right
now yes they have a lot of
liquidity yes there's a lot of
capital out there there is not
enough capital out there in the
goal of the public bank you see
increase the amount of capital
that is available for community
banks and credit unions to let
you know I have a list here of
nine small businesses that wish
they could get along but they've
been turned down by banks need
to elder to artist your
Albuquerque the banks don't
understand her business and will
give her a long John Sikura owns
a board game company he just
he's not been able to get along
my friend John Rodriguez is a
concrete company has been
growing for fourteen years two
years ago get anything more than
a revolving line of credit more
even and is on a lot of the snow
in downtown Albuquerque who was
on the economic review company
she struggled to get her PDP
landing across there the banks
are not meeting the needs like
we really need that to yes there
are probably some federal
regulations are prohibiting that
but a lot of that comes down to
risk so the public bank under my
under rights these loans with
their community bank partners to
reduce that risk in make more
loans happen and Representative
is on the committee I'm sure you
guys have a ton of stories from
businesses in your communities
to where you hear that they need
small business lending support
and they're not getting it a
public banks goal is to help
reduce the risk for community
banks so they can make the loan
and get another customer and
what that does is it turned a
high risk loan into a much lower
risk loan because it's right
around in that helps the economy
that helps grown jobs that helps
small businesses get the Lente
they need that puts people to
work and creates jobs almost
immediately but the public bank
once it gets.
Charted in it just lowers the
risk and then the crazy thing is
the community bank picks up a
new small business lending
customer and there's really no
downside.
It was going to continue that
the way the state gets its money
back Representative is that.
It creates a multiplier effect
you know I know you've been
involved in several economic
development discussions in the
past we always talk about the
multiplier effect on a job right
the multiplier affect all of the
jobs will be created by the
public bank is huge and so you
you start multiplying that and
the money goes back in the
general fund it's been the
standard way we assess economic
development projects for years
here in New Mexico is using
multiplier effect we know that
there's about a three times
multiplier effect on this money
at the public bank.
Okay thank thank you thank you
Mr chairman and thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative a I
appreciate it Representative
general come that we are
managing your experts for the
various questions posed we'll go
back to committee representative
Gallegos.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative for bringing
this legislation
You know it sounds like you it
sounds like this concept has
been building up for the the
last few years
I'm just wondering why we you
have but there hasn't been the.
A study on it yet.
Mr chair and representative
Senator Steinborn has his
handout go ahead Senator well I
think actually
Mr chair representative.
And that Representative cover
Roybal Caballero I actually want
to defer to Angela because they
have been studying this for
several years the City of Santa
Fe study there's been quite a
bit of analysis you know the
legislature we proposed to even
study at kind of in a different
format and of course the bankers
were lined up two rows deep no
disrespect I mean I I respect
your industry and your rights
advocate but the fact is is is
you know they they have been
opposed to obviously looking at
this idea from day one but the
analysis is Kerr occurred in a
variety of different forms in
addition to a hundred years
areas in North Dakota but
financial if I can maybe you
want to answer the amount of
analysis it's been done on this.
Thank you senator and Mr chair
or a representatives members of
the committee the
the Affleck has been studying
this for a number of years as
the senator noted and over the
last year and a half we've
engaged in developing a business
plan for with the five year pro
forma for the bank and the group
that has developed that has
included a finance professor
from UNM and his graduate
students retired community
bankers are credit union
association CEO Paul style and a
couple of credit union CEOs and
several others with banking or
and or finance experience
including stupid what Steven
block stern who had to leave the
the call but so it's had a
pretty robust development and
and a lot of betting and the
core of that business plan is
what has folded down to creating
the legislation that you have
before you now so the this
hasn't been this has been not
study did in fact it's been very
intensively studied over the
last several years and
particularly over the last year
and a half to two years.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for that answer I guess I should
have been pointed more for the
feasibility
Assessment by but you know for
for legislators to really look
if we're going to we're going to
put these kind of dollars and
don't we want that kind of an
analysis to be done
Mr chair.
Mr chair and representative I
think that
it's street this this is this is
a different kind of study and I
think that's what Angelus record
was was talking about
in the this is not something
that you just undertake quote
unquote with as a feasibility
necessarily and that's why over
the years it has been rolling
out
more and more in line with I
guess a national as Dan has
mentioned the national momentum
a national movement because
The thing to remember Mr
Chairman representative this and
that Senator alluded to or
actually said it is that there
is a fear
and there's a fear of of
It's unnecessarily view point of
it being competitive.
And whenever there is a proposal
or are legislation such as this
that is actually creating an
instrument or tool as as the
senator mentioned it's viewed as
a competitiveness and not as a
compliment and so the studies
over the years have been very
intentional on.
Setting up an associating the
public bank as a compliment to
and and leverage in a way in
which to leverage funds as
opposed to just looking at it is
taking funds from the general
fund and placing them somewhere
because we're going to
distribute them as a program and
that's not what this this would
fall into that her view of the
feasibility all it wouldn't fall
into that particular sincerely
as a feasibility and so that's
one of the things that
that I think distinguishes it
from just doing
You know the regular business
feasibility studies and I think
that in this case Mr Chairman
representative.
It it I would have welcomed I
continue to welcome all of the
comments from the banking
institutions that were made I
wish they would really read
carefully the bill really read
carefully the bill because the
bill is
has evolved as I said over the
years and have really we've been
listening to the comments that
have been made we've been
listening to the state officer
administrative offices we've
been listening to the banks and
every every point that was
raised in opposition is actually
addressed and is associated with
the business plan because this
is a business venture so it's
handled as a business plan and
not a feasibility study and so
the best possible way we could
presented
Mr Chairman representative would
be as a business plan to improve
the business doing business in
the state of New Mexico on
behalf of the taxpayers in the
state of New Mexico and that's
really the beauty in the fact
that we came up and you can you
can relate to this
Representative as well as many
others because we in this.
Secretary of committee economic
development are familiar with
doing business plans that's how
we do business and and and in
our field is by creating
business plans and not
necessarily on fees abilities so
our business plan that has been
vetted Mr chair and
representative throughout these
years actually wants to if ever
there was a time to take bold
steps in taking control of our
own finances it is now it is now
because of what we're facing on
in the many challenges that
we're facing so it's really a
win win for everybody because
this is this is the best way
that we can provide through our
business plan that in invests
and uses taxpayer money but more
importantly it complements and
helps with their community banks
and on and and community efforts
around the state in a manner in
which it enhances our capacity
it doesn't compete with the
capacity because it's not a
commercial bank and doesn't have
the same
mission and Mr Chairman
representative and actually
compliments Committee banks more
than anything in our state so
our business plan I think is
associate is is the best study
that we can present associated
with this legislation thank you
Mr Chairman representative.
thank you Representative and and
Mr chair
could you address some of the
concerns that were brought up
regarding
Not having
the coverage of the protection
by FDIC.
Can you can you walk me through
that a little bit yes.
Mr Chairman representative and
again I'll defer to Dan.
You.
Thank you Mr chair
representative and the FDIC
insurance is for deposit holders
of the two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars which you know
all of us probably protects our
our money but if this at the
State Bank level we're talking
about fifty million dollars so
it's apples to oranges those two
things don't really compare even
it you know worst case scenario
we just doesn't work right the
bigger issue is being able to
access the FDIC deposit systems
which have been brought up as an
issue and we all believe it is
in the business plan we discuss
that in the bill we discuss how
that's our mission in this and
we believe that it's totally.
Just easy at least what's the
easier shouldn't say but it's we
believe it's a possibility that
we can just get in and do that
you know there are precedents in
American Samoa Texas other
places where public banks have
been able to access the reserve
payment systems and the other
part of that is those are
necessary to run the bank right
a lot a lot of times community
banks use those for overnight
credit card transfer
transactions and things since
this is not a retail bank it
won't be doing that this this
bank will be making M. O. use
with community banks to do loans
on the ground they do not
necessarily need overnight
payments back and forth to make
this back to reality and that's
one of the ways that the thank
you regards because that's
acceptable for so many years
without so thank you very much.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for the response so at it I
think I understand it but just
to clarify so so it's it's what
if safe.
The project a project
when under or is state you know
one of these the bank of the
public bank would go under with
that many investors many be
protected in that thank.
Mr chair and representative Dan
you want to answer that or do
you.
Well senator anybody.
I really would prefer that you
would Mr chair representative we
welcome you know Angela Merker
to study this issue quite a bit
and I think she would be the
best person to handle this thank
you and I and I I think it's
important Mr chair
representative thank you so much
for for raising that question
because I think it's important
for us to be able to draw the
distinctions which is what
you're wanting to do I hope in
this question and on the the
distinction is quite clear when
you actually put an example to
it so Angela go head.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative members of the
committee and Representative
the.
Let me clarify one point first
regarding the FDIC even though
we wouldn't be covered by the
insurance the commitment due to
the requirement for chartering a
New Mexico bank would be that we
would comply with the regulatory
standards of the FDIC so there
would be there would be
compliance standards there to me
first off and that would get an
annual review secondly done if
there were what is the danger of
the banks going under as you put
it or if the issues on that
that's where the capitalization
is there to support that back up
but also it's about having a
strong board a governance system
in place as well as the
management system the management
of the bank who are
well qualified and are going to
monitor both the.
The development of the kinds of
loans that are going out and as
well as the financial
Performance of the bank
beyond that it's the backing of
the state which is also the
implication with the NMFA.
The right that they get the bond
rating state do is because the
of the full faith and credit of
the state of New Mexico's
finances that's behind that
that's given a credit rating so
when we're looking at the
performance of those bank we
have back up there to but with
all of those safeguards that we
have built in to the.
Operation and management and
governance of the bank that
would be a very low have a very
low chance of occurring if I
could just have real quick Mr
chairman and representative
number one all banks have to
maintain a certain ratio of of
deposits to lending you're there
so you know it's it's the same
kind of structure is a normal
bank that protects people's
money aside from the fact that
in this case you know we're you
know the distinction Dan made
about FDIC covering small
deposits I want to point out
earlier someone said that we
would be taking commercial
deposits in this bank does not
it I mean it specifically says
that on page two line twenty two
but.
But beyond that you know would
we this takes the same rest
frankly that the state
investment council and that
others make it's it's you know
when they're managed well they
they give us a better rate of
return and what if they're
poorly managed they put the
funds more risk in we've seen
that with the state investment
council who managed our
retirement funds and all that
stuff we we one time had a went
through an area where where
those funds were politicized so
it's just you know we've seen
banks poorly managed and and
needed their own controls so
they all involve a level of risk
and return and obviously you
know implicit in all this is is
the upside opportunity we're
trying to create for our state
in terms of both economic
development and community
development but hopefully that
puts a little more meat on the
bones as it were.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you for Representative is
Senator for further
clarification and I guess my
last question kind of as a
a follow up to what you just
said with the public bank we.
Talk to me about transparency.
What kind of what kind of
Transparency you know how how
much access would be with the
public have to to what's going
on.
Mr chair representative I'll
start was saying that we we will
on it so all of the all of the
structures that Dan will
describe
will be in place to create not
just the transparency the
accountability but the complete
oversight because when we we
feel very strongly that when you
deal with taxpayer money and
it's owned by the state of New
Mexico that we have an ultimate
obligation to make sure that all
of this is covered and it's
pretty described in the bill but
then can you go over that real
quickly please for us thank you
Mr Chairman representative.
Thank you Mr chair
representative I can over this
pretty quickly international
transparency ease in the bill as
something that both represented
the Senator make sure that was
in there because they feel very
strongly about transparency
issues as well and every year
the bank is required to do a
formal report every quarter the
bank is required to do a formal
report in those would include
the audits those would include
all of the information that
would have to go to the FDIC to
maintain all of the other thank
you stop this required to hit
the bank keep the bank in
operation right and quarterly
those reports would be available
but then having the NMFA CEO the
state treasurer and the
secretary of economic
development on the board they
also have a commitment to
transparency and they will help
you do everything on that too.
Transparency is very very
important on this because it is
it is state might right and
we're trying to make it work for
us so we need to make sure the
board directors state the state
legislature appoints the network
directors is working to be good
stewards of the money.
Mr Chairman representative were
the ones that are going to be
doing all of that accountability
and oversight and making sure
and that's why that this is so
very important thank you for the
question if I can just briefly
act is that it it could Mr
because I think that's a really
important question
Representative.
Which is that this is a public
entity it's our and in the
members are are literally
have to.
Also be apt file file financial
disclosure statements which is
in the bill their budget the
budget of the bank which is
developed by the CEO acts
actually has to be approved by
the legislature just like every
other public entity we have and
I would assume that the blank
itself is subject to the open
meetings act but but certainly
you know all those things are
public mechanisms that will well
You know create an open book on
this bank and what it does in
the decisions that are made in
its financial statements
etcetera in a way that
you know is on a level with with
every other and maybe even more
so frankly that the some of the
other financial investment
institutions.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
for those answers that that was
really important to me to to be
able to clarify and and have
that have that out there
Just because the way things are
are given to us now is I can't
tell where this bill goes next
or if this is been this is the
final step can you can you tell
me that.
Mr chair representative sorry I
didn't I didn't hear actually
okay no no if.
And given our paperwork these
days I can't tell if this is the
first stop or your last up
as far as where the bill goes
next Mr Chairman representative
this is our first stop okay
and
isheri Committee.
Yes here is the next stop okay
yeah thank you okay
Okay that's all I have thank you
thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representatives and senators and
and specialists I'm gonna just
say I.
Find this relatively difficult
I'm gonna looking at the hands
left to that are raised to speak
I'm gonna do a little looks like
halftime region
we have heard from.
Cities municipalities and
counties to indoors and support
this idea we've heard from
chamber of commerce's and
Community chambers of commerce
and community banks to oppose
this idea.
While
we've heard from people all
across the state in support and
in opposition we have an S. I.
R. and then asks a whole bunch
of questions and aids.
It's still.
Not totally clear looking at age
two for example on the bill who
does harder this bank.
Well.
Representative Senator you want
to go ahead.
Thanks to it's the page two who
charters the bank well.
It has to be chartered according
to federal laws if I can Mr
Chairman representative it's a
good question and the federal
laws there's there's a whole
list of things you have to do to
be to be in compliance and then
we have a state division that
actually overseas banks and have
to has to approve it so this
bank would have to follow those
two key fundamental steps in
order to receive a charter and
and beyond that Dan or Angela
did you want to add to that.
At that rate.
I just want to add briefly Mr
Chairman representative New
Mexico can charter a banking
anyway that it wants and they
can it has the chartering
authority for this Angela has
done a deep dive into how a bank
actually gets stronger if we
want to share some of the high
points of that age or.
Thank you
Mr Chairman representative
Representative Figueroa the bank
would be chartered initially by
the state and if there are blue
majority requirements would be
development of a business plan
and also a performance that
would give the first five years
so
financial activity month by
month with the projections of
the lending program and that's
what we initiated with the.
UNM project with of the pro
forma in our business plan.
It's it would need further
development but that's those are
the key steps that it would take
to charter a bank here in New
Mexico.
Representative if I could if I
could add just because it's a
good opportunity to make a
really important point which is
that the bank the money from the
state treasurer and state
investment council will not be
deposited until think it's
received its charter and so that
in and of itself is is the
ultimate consumer protection for
New Mexicans and for this money
is that the the the money cannot
be deposited into the bank is
actually receive that charter
and that's in the legislation on
page you know twelve and
thirteen.
Thank you Mr chair and the
Sanchez that does help although
there might be some concerns
about the state getting harder
bank for the state.
There's some circularity there
and then.
Might cause some concern from
the public perspective but at
least there is chartering
process is clear and as I
understand it from what you said
Mr chair and.
The panel I'm just gonna say
there are federal requirements
and state requirements in the
chartering process that must be
met so we're flies and I thank
you for that uses are in for the
bill lay out who will be on the
board of directors they are
totally politically appointed
how would you respond to
concerns about political
influence at the bank.
Mr Chairman representative when
you talk about political do you
mean the the on.
Secretary of economic
development the state treasurer
and I don't have all of the ones
that we outlined in the is that
what you mean by political I
just want to make sure I'm clear
that is.
Mr chair and representative
this year all political
appointees and their ability in
this administration's change.
And there is the potential for
possibly undue influence thank
you I wanted to make sure that I
was understanding Senator you
want to go ahead and try then I
would it's a great question
Representative Mr chair it's
what is the one the first
questions we all heard and
believe me you me the me
personally the I mean I've been
a broken record that's lance's
laughing the very most important
thing we can do our for right
ability test of this proposal is
that this money be
professionally managed.
And and that it it have a you
know a very talented group of
people managing that in hiring
that then CEO who is not a
politician it's somebody who
successfully managed an equal
size institution are greater and
that's in the legislation really
the Bordeaux itself is no more
political or less well than the
state investment council and
everything else those those
members are appointed by
governors in this particular
case we have members appointed
by the Legislative Council which
of course is bipartisan and
bicameral so I think that in of
itself as a check against that
and and what yes one of those
things in any hiring process you
know with the cream really rises
to the top and you know the
state ethics commission in a way
is done a similar way although
not pointed by Legislative
Council but it's appointed by
the minority and whatever so we
I think this is even better than
that in a way because we have a
diversity of.
You know people who the governor
gets to make some points but
then the Legislative Council
again which is bi partisan bi
cameral and then that group
actually hires CEO who's a total
independent person who is
directly responsible for
managing the bank under the
rules of a charter so.
You know I think that's.
That's my answer Mr chairman and
Representative I will tell you
that this is been as I've been
working with the senator on this
bill and he's been.
Really intentional and driving
us all kind of crazy on this
issue because he does want to
make sure if I do that we ended
up with insuring not only that
the our executive officers were
coming to the bank with the
necessary skills knowledge and
abilities and experiences in the
field but if you make note on
page just just going to that
section
we actually stipulated also
story on page three the level of
experience and years of
experience that appointees would
have to have in their particular
feels so it's not that you just
you know somebody who working
you're campaigning got elected
in that you just a point as as a
as a political favor or whatever
it actually these individuals
have to be vetted and in much
the same manner that we're
having expectations of the CEO
and the other chief financial on
persons on board Mr chair
because it's so very important
and we feel an extra extra
responsibility because of the
public nature of it and and
because it has been brought to
our attention and as we all know
of past bad experiences on that
I know that that you're wearing
of another's before our time in
the legislature so we were very
intentional about that thank you
Mr chairman thank you
Representative for.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you panel the comparison to the
political appointees of the
state investment council is a
good reminder is that yeah we do
this and it works across the
board
In the I really appreciate the
qualifications Mr chair
representative that are laid out
very specifically in the bill
those are those are pretty high
bars that are being set
high bars for folks who don't
get paid.
I think it might be tough to
find them but I'm glad the high
bar is set.
And I appreciate the
transparency Mr chairman that's
written into the bill at this
specifically mentions equipment
will be taken up all their
meetings and decisions and it
will be available I think that's
on page five there's a reference
to the audit acts and I wondered
if that was the state statute or
federal statute I'm not familiar
with that Mr chair.
Senator.
Mr chair representative about
how jazz Representative we
actually have the I don't know
if any one of our team knows.
That provision that's in the
bill we do have the bill drafter
in there that may be a standard
standard provision but and for
that reason Anthony are you on
are you on the line can you
address that.
It would be after the Mongolia
yes.
This shift.
on that's completely possible
but anyway that we we agree it's
a good thing and you know
institutions over a certain size
on our state have to submit to
audits and I'm sure that's
probably why that's in there.
Thank you thank you to all we
have
Would you like to say Mr
Chairman representative I saw
Arbiter on would you like to.
Were you did you come on to make
a statement or did you want to
answer that question Mr chair.
Mr chair representative members
of the committee it's a pleasure
to be with you I'll just briefly
say that that is consistent with
any of these types of
governmental entities they will
have to submit and comply with
the audit act on an annual basis
and it is it is pro forma and
necessary any of the tax dollars
that the transfer move within
these agencies whether they
cause a governmental entities or
agency level state agency level
bodies they do have to submit on
an annual basis to comply with
the audit act our office puts on
a training for about a thousand
civil servants on an annual
basis to help make sure that
they understand the art Act of
the requirements that are placed
upon them based on the size of
the organization good Senator
mentioned based on size of
organization I'll just say that
it's just about every
organization that receives
government these may have lesser
procedures what we call agreed
upon procedures as opposed to a
full financial audit but every
governmental entity that does
subject themselves to the audit
act and has to comply with the
provisions there and thank you
Mr chairman members the
committee.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
under current handy that you're
here appreciate that.
and now so Mr chair and and
panel we can get to the core of
the question.
During his thanks mate made
loans on page ten and says may
not make loans to private
individuals or entities but on
the very next session sessions
as new the board will make the.
Outline the lending program so
in the in please confusion
doesn't public bank make loans
or does it not and if it does
Mr chair and representative Dan
would you like to answer that.
This.
Mr chairman and Representative
Figueroa thank you for the
question of the bank does it
make loans in partnership with
community banks it is not it
does not make independent loans
to independent do you know
general citizens like you and me
it does not do mortgages on its
own it does not do car loans on
its own it is not itself make
those loans through M. O. used
memorandums of understanding it
creates loan products that it
shares with community banks and
that's been one of the major
misconceptions about this
community banks is that saying
it's going to you know totally
destroy the lawn making world in
New Mexico no it's going to in
its it and that's part of the
the meat of the matter why a
public thank you so also why it
works so well is that it
partners with those local
community banks to make those
loans happen especially the
loans that they can't do today
those they want to do well as
the can't do those can become a
reality with the public banks
supporting so when the bill says
it does not make loans to
individuals that is one hundred
percent correct we do not make
Los individuals we do not want
the public banks compete with
public with community banks we
do not want this thing to
actually you know we compete
with them and create long we do
want to do is create those
partnerships lots and I
apologize I don't know exactly
what line I believe it's Page
ten lines for its is no
individual loans page nine line
twenty five lays out how those
demo use with with community
banks are supposed to work in so
yes did you actually read a
little bit confusing because
this is it makes all the doesn't
make our it does not make loans
to you and me the only partners.
With community banks and credit
unions to make loans possibility
that future.
Okay thank you Mr chairman thank
you Mr Mayfield to clarify that
and I know we're covering things
that have been covered a little
bit already with their and their
primary concern they are the
function of this public bank so
the community banks are telling
us.
We don't need thank
is.
House function how's it going to
help create these loans the
community banks aren't on board
and aren't interested does
that's one question and the
second part of the question
would be
community banks already are not
making those loans.
Share our.
Anger cultural collapse or or
small business or the artist you
mentioned you can get those
loans from the community bank
the question is why a and the
assumption is probably too risky
doesn't mean the bank's criteria
so.
We use public banks to
underwrite loans that are risky
and how is that.
Good use of taxpayer dollars so
two part question.
Representative thank you for
that question because it's
giving us a great opportunity to
explain and to give examples of
how this would work in the
ground that you just asked the
question so I will let down do
that I do have a couple of spots
but if he doesn't answer those
thoughts I'll pick up but I'm
sure he will thank you going
again.
Mr Chairman representative
figueroa I will try to channel
you Representative Roybal
Caballero get your thoughts on
but you know we really wish
community banks were on board
with this because they are key
to making this work in North
Dakota community banks are
really are part and parcel of
making the keep the public bank
work there it's really important
I come from this I we're
actually two hats I wear of this
path where work with athletic
but then I also wear a hat as
the vice president for
government affairs the credit
union association here in New
Mexico I work with Paul still
who's on earlier we
representative of the state's
forty two credit you gets in the
credit unions recognize that by
having more access to capital
they can provide more loans
right and banks are not making
the loans they want to make it
some of that is because of the
federal regulations and you have
you know it debt ratios and all
these other complicate things I
don't want to get into that make
it difficult make it risky to
lend to people right you into
similar barriers to making logs
lolz the idea is that if you are
able to under writer questions
of that loan you reduce the risk
on that loan and then you can
make those loans have it so it's
it's partnership in lines of
credit right and that's how this
works and makes everything a
possibility in unfortunately
this is one of the great
misconceptions the community
banks that had about how the
public thank actually work for a
long time and I'm sure you guys
have got the stuff in your email
it thousand times community
bankers and I really wish that
they would have come to us and
read the bill before they sent
you a lot of that messaging
because a lot of it was just
from other states public banking
bills not ours so you our bill
we learn from the mistakes from
other.
From other states we've learned
that one of the big barriers was
that they were competing with
those community banks to do all
the stuff we said well that's
down we want to work with those
community banks we want to
partner with that make these
things happen and they can't
make those all today and I'm
sure every community bankers the
design here wants to make more
loans they want more business
lending customers they want that
we want to help them do that
with the with the public thank
it's not the date you know they
they are often Amstrong on being
able to make those because of
the risk and because of those
ratios they must keep up right
you got to have certain you know
capital and that and asset
ratios you've got to maintain
thank and one battle can for
that offer one risk you can
throw that up so we take all of
that out of the margins with the
public thank you to make all of
those bones a total possibility
then that's where they should
really should be coming in I
really feel like community bank
should be supporting us in this
not fighting this thing I really
feel to understand why they are
fighting this possibility of
them getting more customers you
would think they would want or
customers in this that they're
fighting us in I don't
understand that thank you.
I believe the.
Mr Chairman Mr chair
representative I do want to
clarify a couple things and then
the senator does want to add to
this and they're over in in in
community and economic
development one of the hardest
things to do is to respond to
smaller loans.
because most commercial banks
and community banks
don't see smaller amounts of
loans as necessarily viable or
as a way to increase their long
term interest return on
investment or return on loan
also the other thing that's very
difficult to get is if you have
to I'll go in and ask for a
long term loan one that perhaps
you not you you
all right you know need long
term
Conditions in terms in order to
be able to function in your
particular business plan and
then also we've heard over and
over again Representative and Mr
Chairman are at interim
committee hearings over and over
again on examples of new start
up businesses in new business us
having a hard time so what
happens with the public thank is
that the public bank in
partnership with the
community banks our local banks
or whenever actually.
By the what most of us
understand as
Lines of credit lines of credit
capitalization other ways in
which to secure to make the
banks and community banks feel
secure in loan lending to these
hard to land communities and
that's where the local
communities expressed over and
over and over to us local
governments I'm particularly
school boards
hello you know local government
public entities expressed to us
and why you heard them today be
so explicit about supporting
public banks because if we can
find that line of credit and
that.
Security for lack of a better
word in partnership and we keep
that money circulating in the
state because it's the same as I
said earlier public money
taxpayer money then it's a win
win for everybody and that's why
dances we don't understand why
they say the committee bank see
it is a is a bad thing as
competitive or in conflict to so
that's my two cents and I think
senator wanted to add a little
bit to that.
Senator you're on mute.
Thank you Representative Mr
chair I'll be parole right
Representative you kind of ask
another key essential question
which is you know what's the
deal you know if they're viewing
it as competition what is this
thank you and and I'll just say
it this way it's it's kind of a
popery of different activities
some that deal with meeting
commercial needs that are out
there in emerging industries in
the bank's speaks about
addressing emerging growing
industry but then some of it
really is Lente for public
purposes and to meet the needs
of the public sector and even
the nonprofit five oh one see
three secretary and it requires
on
on page ten on section C.
subsection see that have a
diverse portfolio so it's what's
really interesting about the
banking and because it's new
it's kind of a blank canvas
other than we know that on this
campus you're gonna have
different colors of different
activities by the law will be a
diverse support portfolio it the
this bill requires that it be
spread out around the state so
that opportunity is spreading
State and and then of course if
the managed under the same
ratios of you know loan to dat
that other banks have so it's
really kind of got a diversity
of opportunities and I do agree
fully that should this become
enacted into law it would be
another arrow in the quiver of
commercial banks as well like is
done in north North Dakota and a
partnership would emerge there
and this would be an asset kind
of like the other loan program
that we did for the pandemic
that was done through commercial
banks this is really kind of
similar in that way
it's actually very similar in
that way the only difference is
I will say is that had this bank
existed then we may choose to
channel some of these funds
through this type of instrument
rather than that otherwise
because then the state itself
would be using this activity
actually grow this court.
Purpose to be able to reinvest
back in the state anyway so I
don't know if I confuse you more
or answer the question but it it
it says is important question.
Thank you senator thank you
Representative Figueroa the that
was important to flesh out but
it's it's five oh eight we have
another bill about four people
still on the list to ask
questions so let's try to for
questions precise to the the
question posed thank you
Representative thank you Mr
chair I appreciate that and I
will I think the other folks
will probably get our money
remaining question and so I will
yield the rest of my time
thanks.
Subset I mean to do that but
thank you Representative who is
next Representative Martínez a
representative that out though.
Representative Martinez you have
the floor.
Thank you Mr chair I'm gonna
move it to pass on house bill
two thirty six.
So we have a motion for a do
pass on house bill thirty two
thirty six the motion to table.
Wait time time and I'll go ahead
and second that motion.
Bills to more people on the list
so I'll go back to you
Representative Powdrell Culbert
for that motion at the
appropriate time.
Of the Martinez you have any
questions.
No Mr chair here the floor all
right fantastic Representative
set out the.
Thank you so much Mr chairman
and thank you to everyone on
this bill I really mean that I
mean I'll make this quick Mr
chairman I know where we're
getting kind of time but I
really do want to thank all the
community bankers and reaching
out to us everyone on this call
I mean I know that you know Dan
has been really communicated
with me and you know the
representative and and and the
Senator have also been really
response my call back my my
questions I appreciate
everyone's input on this I also
want to say I think the young
folks that came out today on
both this bill in the prior bill
today you know I was is for some
of these for me on the session
to have folks that young engage
I really appreciate the other
folks and others that came in
today I have one brief question
I feel like you've already
covered in a number of ways on
so I just want to know is there
any other lessons you feel like
you've learned from past our
state banks have been created
that you implemented in various
protections for New Mexicans
that are in our our funds.
Mr chair and Representative Dan
did you.
I noticed that you wanted to
answer that.
The representative Mr chairman
representatives I I do job in
pretty quickly I do want to
answer I know Angela has a lot
more on this so tricky brief the
one thing we learned when
looking and reading at every
other study and every other.
State banking option out there
was that the unsuccessful State
Bank did compete with their
community banks we do not want
to do that the successful
community banks are partners
with their community banks and
that was something we learned
early and that is something we
try to preserve in this
legislation we also learned the
transparency is key we also
learn that reinvesting that
money back into the state
creates more opportunity
increase for customers for
community banks thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative thank you at a
dance Mister may feel for that
as well I I I I didn't actually
know that was the answer I
appreciate it because that news
directly one of the concerns I
can receiving that I mean I know
we talked about it immensely but
one of things that folks would
really point to their letters
was just the you know the
competent not the competition
that the other states have
failed and the competition was a
problem so it's really good to
see the learning and United
States Mr chairman that's all I
had thank you.
Thank you very much
Representative Dow.
Good and yourself Representative
Dow.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative for bringing
the bill I'm I.
I first of all was a little
surprised by the past motion so
I kind of wondering what I'm
supposed to have my questions
because I have so many this is
the biggest FIR I've seen I mean
granted this is only my third
sixty day sixty day my fifth
year I have not seen this big of
an FIR
that has responses from the New
Mexico Attorney General New
Mexico finance authority state
investment council state
treasurer's office economic
development office regulation
licensing department all with
the school implications all with
significant issues all with many
things to make us take pause
I I am also concerned.
Mr Chairman representative that
we're proposing that this bill
is to help local banks and
community banks when the local
banks the banks spoke in
opposition Mr Chairman
representative I don't I think
it was Dan Mayfield are you
representing the community banks
and credit unions.
Chair representative what do you
wish Mr may help answer that
Representative please yes
please.
Mr chair Representative Dow I am
here today representing applet
the last local economic
prosperity which is the New
Mexico local it's it's the the
public bank's think tank here in
New Mexico I happen to also if
you do that is through a company
that I operate on the side my
nine to five is with credit
unions however with the credit
union world I was asked to also
participate in this by the board
of directors for the New Mexico
credit union association which
represents almost eleven billion
dollars in assets and almost one
million members across the
state.
To support this legislation
because they recognize that the
having access to more capital is
key and I believe that the the
first part of your question was
about how community banks are
not supporting this in coming
from this world also I don't
understand that access to
capital is key right earlier we
heard one of our community
banker Frank tells makers banks
and that is what this actually
is to bankers bank wholesale
bank in many ways so the bankers
bank they provide loans to banks
they accept bank deposits in the
re discount the bill legislation
right which means lots and they
do all these things for
community banks.
We don't have one of those in
New Mexico Texas has one
Louisiana has one Minnesota has
won better reserves one.
We're proposing to start one for
ourselves in New Mexico and I
really believe that by starting
a wholesale bank in many ways S.
S. central bank the bankers.
And here in New Mexico it will
provide.
Low cost capital to community
banks into credit unions but on
top of that at the state of New
Mexico actually owns it I guess
the point guess the proceeds
from it and all that money goes
here still there I don't see a
downside in any of that cycle
right the money keeps turning
the cycle keeps going and
there's no downside any of that
bring the financial institutions
and I really feel bad community
banks didn't take us up on our
offers to participate in these
discussions so they would
understand what we're actually
going for here but the this
would actually proposal that
will help the community banks
that she would be one which she
which is get more low cost money
and they can do it using New
Mexico as were so thank you very
much Representative Dow thank
you thank you Mr chairman I'm
and thank you for that very long
answer to questions I did now
thank you so I but I guess what
you're saying Mr Chairman
representative and at Dan is
that the committee that at and
I'm not asking a question is
that the at the credit unions
are in favor but the local banks
are not the Canadian banks are
not and so I heard at.
Just these are just yes or no
because I know we're all tired
we still have more bills to go
so on the parameters are your
perimeter you gave examples of
people who could not get loans
very specific stories of artists
that's sort of a so your
parameters are different are we
taking more risk because this is
this is taxpayer dollars we're
taking out a general fund or
taking out a severance tax fund
we're sabotaging a bank with tax
payer dollars.
And your are the parameters less
I I heard at one point you said
this is not commercial then at
some point I heard one say this
is not individuals so how could
those folks that were denied at
a traditional bank what's the
difference the printers that are
gonna allow them to get a test
instead of and now.
Mr Chairman representative Dow
what what we believe and how we
see this working is that it
helps reduce that risk so you go
to a bank you try to get along
today and the risks the you're
you're assigned a restore thing
that like your credit score
right in that that risk score
doesn't meet a certain threshold
you will get that well.
But it's not always based just
on that risk score it's also
based on the amount of money
that you are putting up front
for that loan so it's a ten
thousand dollar loan in the
risks for something hi but if
the State Bank on under under
right part of that it lowers
that whole risks for and then it
makes these things the
possibility for people that
don't have it today thank you
thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative so the state
assumes the risk.
The status interest okay so are
we going to be in compliance
with the fair lending Act from
adopt the Dobbs Frank rules are
there this is completely outside
of the FDIC we're not following
any of those rules do right.
Mr chair and Representative
Representative Senator did you
hear that question.
Yeah I want to hear Dodd Frank
that's code for Dan and you
answer this.
You need to be Mr chairman and
Representative we do need to
make a further clerk Kate will
have to go through Dan to
clarify because it was a it was
mentioned in our previous
discussion so I just wanna make
sure we get on the main point
that you want thank you Danya
generally generally though.
Representative Mr chair you know
that the bank CEO in the bank
itself has to follow federal
complaints and that includes
Dodd Frank.
Okay so on that federal okay so
it's default the pace.
We're.
Financed by the bank that's what
tax payers yes eight exactly the
state investment council and
every other investment vehicle
the state Mr chair
representative.
So thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative so then how
how do you get a National Bank
charter if you're if you don't
have FDIC insurance or you're
going to try to if you don't get
the FBI how do you get the FDI
insurance if you don't follow
the fair lending Act and Frank
dot like I don't I'm not
understanding.
I don't understand okay and Mr
chair representative I'll have
down because he we explained
earlier about how we get the
charter beginning with federal
and state and then how it
relates to FDIC so your
questions right on down can you
go ahead and.
Answer please okay this brief Mr
chairman Representative Dow
thank you for the question the
bank will have a compliance
officer and that's in the bill
in that officer will will be
charged with making sure the
bank needs all FDIC rules FDIC
insurance is for people like you
and me it is not for
institutions like this FDA
insurers which covers deposits
of two hundred fifty thousand
dollars we're as we're talking
about fifty million dollars at
this process from the state so
that's apples to oranges when
you talk with FDIC insured FDIC
insurance we really believe that
we we will have to follow all of
the FDIC regulations which
includes auditing transparency
making sure their debt to loan
ratios are the same as any other
bank it's the same it's the same
regulations any other bank would
have to follow the only
difference is that since it has
one depositor and that others
were the two hundred fifty
thousand dollars deposits if the
issue FDIC insurance makes no
sense for two hundred fifty
thousand dollars so we don't
need that it is you know the
other part of that is the FDIC
payment system and that is
something we also believe we
can't access okay thank you
thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Representative so the
investors the taxpayers it's
governed by eighty four so with
our Canadian banks local banks
commercial banks the board of
directors are personally liable
both financially and criminally
for the bank is that gonna be
the case for the what bank are
the board of directors and the
the folks that are on the board
are they are they criminally
liable for any issues that
happen the Canadian banks.
Mr Chairman representative I
think that the same deal I think
that applies with any
CEO or positions that deal with
monetary responsibilities will
all go through that same due
diligence legal due diligence
that applies across the board to
any of our publicly operated and
owned and taxpayer and
government related entities were
not this this will impact it
would be even stricter so Angela
did you want to add to that.
Yes.
Mr chair representative
the.
There are let's see.
In the.
I'm having trouble with my mic
there we go.
Done the compliance.
I'm sorry would you repeat the
question again I was having
troubles here with my mic.
I remember what the question was
anymore.
I.
It had to do with just whether
or we were going to go through
all of that background checks
and bedding and everything that
that is necessary in order to
keep
our public monies and.
It was and then and then hold
people that are pointed really
liable as we do to private
banking.
We would be doing so and they
would also carry the insurance
coverage that's required for.
Board of directors kind of
liability as well as the senior
management team but I also want
to re emphasize that there will
be a compliance and risk officer
they are who is tracking all of
that and we would report
directly to the board.
so that there is an independent
access to the board if there's
any question about issues among
the management team that that
that that person would feel is
not being handled by the CEO.
If I may Mr Chairman
representative doubt today I
know we I want to continue my
thoughts about state deposits
being insured.
To date our state deposits are
not insured with the federal
with the large global banks that
we deposit with they are not
insured and in fact there
probably a greater risk because
they're being put into Wall
Street derivatives in Wall
Street funds right now in the
could be a greater risk than our
funds would be a public bank to
keep that money here it working
for New Mexico thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and and thank you Representative
and I I I was also getting a
little bit confused during the
testimony because weary for when
we're asked about rate of
return to referring to
multipliers and it sounded like
you're referring to job creation
and it sounded like there is a
reference to it may not be a
financial rate of return like we
see in the past it be job
creation did I understand that
correctly simple yes or no to
undersecretary okay so the so
we're gonna take the dollars
that we generally receive a rate
of return for and we're going to
invest into job creation and
then the okay so we the reserve
rate of return comes from the G.
R. T. R. or that the multi that
they're buying they're spending
there's they're they're
reinvesting in the community and
so I guess my question on that
point is how is that different
than like lead a J. tipping the
things we do in our economic
developments at a world.
So why would we do that why
would.
So so okay so you're saying it's
the same so I believe we have
another path I don't eat at the
answer for you on that the
multiplier is the jobs of
multipliers the creation and
that's what we do with the
economic development that's what
you J. typically to finance
authority cover.
Mr chair representative I
apologize I just have to say
that there is a financial rate
of return about the role of the
bank and and at the pro formas
and the business plan that has
been done by you know business
gurus in the state and all the
financial people who testified
earlier and others at UNM that
have done the pro forma from the
breaking world the corpus grows
to fund growth I think Dan is
also speaking about a rate of
return a dividend in terms of a
multiplier but not the way we
measure totally thank you thank
you Mr chairman thank you
senator and so the rate that
there is a reference to three
hundred million dollars so are
we currently is in the private
corporate world our community
bank world are they also
generating three hundred million
and that's spread out between
the jobs in that tellers and the
bankers and CEOs and you know
all the folks with commercial
banking and now these would just
be shifted to like kind of
government jobs or is there
duplicated how is there an
increased rate of return more
creating another layer where the
community banks now have to go
to the public came thank and the
the credit unions now have to go
through the.
Public bank how is that
inefficiency I might I might not
understand no I see it's gonna
take a quick jump in.
Mr Chairman representative I
think it's additive.
At thinking that's the way I
think about this it's additive
in terms of doing some lending
activity which commercial banks
are not doing doing some public
sector Lente that maybe exist in
another state agency but right
now that Lente is happening
through a different financial
entity
And it's so it's it's just I I
think we're kind of growing the
pie which is a point that Dan
was making earlier throughout
this presentation growing the
pie in various different ways
you're kind of grabbing pieces
so I I would look at it as you
just.
Commercial bank with with us and
I know that's their concern but
that's of the bill is way beyond
that the opportunities and I
think there are part of their
part of the success of this as
well by the way thank thank you
senator and thank you chairman
thank you senator and this is
maybe a philosophical question
because during the public
comment couple of people were
saying we should be investing in
in things that are in that are
bad for the environment we
shouldn't be using state dollars
to invest in things that harm
the environment that harm public
I don't know what they're
referring to things that we
would consider and
Well maybe if oil and gas maybe
sort of and that we should make
more investments in like
renewable energy I mean I'm
making assumptions because they
said we will take control of the
things that we invest in and we
will invest invest in bad actors
we will invest in you know
things are hard on the
environment when I looked up a
little bit I don't know much
about North Dakota but when I
did see is that what makes their
program successful is how the
role that fossil fuels play in
making their banks solvents and
so is it the intention to start
sort of and I'm sorry I'm just
being totally Frank here to
start making decisions on
investments based on topical
opinions about whether those
investments are good or bad for
public good.
Representative those are
decisions to have we're the one
says legislators that make those
have these discussions and we
elevate them from our
communities from those
communities that we're
representing and we're bringing
them forward and we're the ones
that give importance or no
importance to these important
issues in the beauty behind the
public bank is that we're owning
it on you know the it's owned by
on the tax payers in essence and
and it that's what makes it
public I think Angelo wanted yes
did you want to say something
Angela now okay I thought I saw
you remove it so and you said
the burning issues but you know
the beauty in this is that with
the ones that are bringing those
to the fore so we we highlight
that we elevate them as they
apply on on our community
community basis and as we
Representative our particular
districts so there's no there's
no underlying intent there's no
there's no anything if it's it's
it's good to do business and
it's good for the business and
growth and expansion and for our
populations to help elevate them
then let's do it that's what we
that's what we operate on and
off of and that's those are the
kinds of decisions that we hope
will be are discussed in
elevated and made by the our
board of directors and and
everyone and with our oversight
and with their accountability
will just.
Thank thank you madam Mr
Chairman thank you madam
representative and that's why
I'm asking I I think that the
public comment elevated what
could be at one of what people
perceived as a benefit of public
bank and I if we're not gonna
discuss now I don't know when we
would discuss it and so could
this board decide that investing
in oil and gas is something they
don't believe is philosophically
good for the and that at for the
public good and therefore they
would not make an investment and
that type of I'm just trying to
make an example.
We're.
Let's.
That's a good question Senator
you want to well the chair and
senator Representative there's
no social authority in this bill
for this board to make those
decisions and so you know I
respect the opinion of the
person who made the comment I
think there's there's certainly
a value and saying Hey as a
public body they may choose to
invest in.
You know but I think the bill
actually doesn't really have a
category there that says things
they think are socially valuable
if there is a community
development aspect to it which
is defined as you know broadband
renewable energy food security
you know I think the bill is
really specific so I wouldn't
worry about road you're going
down the you know it's a fair
question.
The bill doesn't feel right that
space thank thank you Mr
chairman and thank you senator
like I I do worry because we
also said that New Mexico pre K.
would not compete with private
providers and it certainly does
sites ask these questions to see
you know to that this out that's
what we're here for so and you
know I think.
I think I'm good for now I think
there's enough questions and I
think this FIR is pretty fast
it's like enough of for us to
you know I hope that we will at
not move this forward when
there's so many questions thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative and and
you have your hand up
Representative Martinez or
that's inadvertent.
Through the last time Mr chair
all right fantastic so before we
go to the motions
The COVID Preciado the dialogue
I want to the state on the
regular local thank.
It is a revolutionary.
Eleven equities.
This.
This is the more gravitas Mr
chair yeah right can you hear me
now.
Some are great about the echo so
anyway it yes.
About.
It happened up when there was no
access to capital in the great
state of North Dakota and North
Dakota eight red state they love
their bank and and when COVID
head March North Carolina North
Dakota was the.
Their government was remain
solvent and and commerce
remained less affected in terms
of their banking institutions
things like that there was
In terms of the history that was
house House memorial seven back
in two thousand seventeen to
study MFA to Mexico are NMFA
accessibility and the
possibility of State Bank in two
thousand eighteen it was house
joint memorial seventeen to
study created in New Mexico in
two thousand nineteen that was
house memorial is forty one and
fifty four which with the same
studies state owned banks and
then set a memorial of course
Senator said more I in two
thousand nineteen and I think
maybe one hearing generals bills
and this year twenty twenty one.
House bill two thirty six and
your bill house Senate Bill
rather three thirteen over in
the Senate so it's been an idea
that's kicked around but the.
The first time in recent memory
was in house memorial sixty two
back two thousand sixteen.
that looked at the possibility
of a of a going to North Dakota
and studying their bank and see
if it's a good idea or not and
of course I was the main sponsor
of that that memorial back in
two thousand sixteen so it's
been around awhile I think of
it's it's being talked about and
you know Google doesn't states
as mentioned and it's it's
definitely worth considering
nothing prohibits the federal
government or the state
government from doing things
like this.
it's not unconstitutional
governments can create capital
ventures covers governments
nothing's prohibits the state of
Mexico from from drilling on oil
and getting you know ninety
cents on the dollar instead of
six cents on the dollar so we we
need to think outside the box
and and I appreciate Senator for
his work on this I appreciate
Representative for her work it
is a huge huge left I think it
will take if it does come to
fruition it'll take a while and
if it and if it's a bad idea
that it that it's about idea but
it's
There is some unanswered
questions and but to me local
governments being able to borrow
and do capital projects sooner
rather than later it is
definitely in our interest for
access to capital and less is is
different in our interest and
and a bank would just be a bank
like any other banks a lot of
the questions that by our in our
answered in my mind.
I think it's just like any other
bank but anyway I'll leave it at
that we have a motion for it to
pass and a second Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Mr chair on motion to table so
we have a motion to table it's a
non debatable motion I'm
assuming Representative
Castellano hand is inadvertently
raised
so let's call the roll on the
tabling motion.
Chairman.
Hello to table.
Yes to table.
Representative Dow to table yes
to table.
Representative the table yes
stable.
Representative us to table no to
table Representative must be
nice to table.
No to table.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
to table yes to table.
Representative to table no to
table.
By checking it out to table.
No to table and chairman my
Estes to table noted table so
the table the motion has failed
of five to four we're back on
the original motion
on a do pass please call the
roll.
Thank you.
This is a new path
Representative Baldonado.
No.
Representative Dow no.
Representative Fajardo now.
Representative Gaydos yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Culbert no.
Representative the.
Yes.
We get a lot.
Yes.
This.
And I vote yes and so Senator
representatives you have a do
passed motion on to judiciary
definitely of focus on on some
of the legal aspects of it but
presheaf the time intelligence
to explaining this and we'll see
if our.
You know what that what the
chief executive and others want
to do with this with this idea
Senator.
Thank you Mr chair I just want
to thank the committee it was an
important discussion had to
happen it will be the first of
many and I just want to say you
know we by moving the bill long
it is of course and staff we
look forward to continue
conversations with with other
all the state agencies.
Our commercial banks in
continuing to you can make it
better as I get present
themselves so thank you for
allowing the discussion and
advancing on a really good idea
for the state so thank you for
your time.
Thank you
Mr chairman thank you very much
I I agree with everything the
senator said it's very important
for the discussion as I said
several times thank you for the
questions because the more it
gets question the more we're
able to be stronger in the
arguments and support of but
we're flushing out a lot of the
important issues and that's why
these questions were very
important and I just want to say
thank you to everyone because it
forced us to flush it out in a
better way and keep it moving so
that we are prepared for all how
it rolls out continues to roll
out so I it and this is an
incredible amount of time that
you gave us today and it's very
appreciative I'm very
appreciative thank you.
Absolutely let's all take a
breath let folks exit the room
and let's bring in
Representative Lujan.
Thank you.
Will now go to.
House bill two thirty six give
us.
Excuse me.
Representative Lujan in the
room.
Okay okay let them both and she
maybe on a phone and a computer
so will not go to a house bill
two thirty five give us a second
to have folks leave the room and
and enter the room.
And Representative Lujan who do
you want us to bring into the
room six.
You're you're on mute
Representative Lujan.
You want to bring back I'm I am
having them I do challenges
today there I mean the
microphone for audio and.
I know trying to know the
computer at the same time so you
got me here
my and my my focus like you to
have let in my witnesses are are
ready so hello are
superintendent of insurance he's
an.
Brian Brian Brock the general
counsel for the office of
superintendent and raise your
list of rock and hard.
You taught who.
Berendt Mr Braniff you could
raise your hand as well so we
can see you.
So Mister Brock is in Mr Barron
is in.
Welcome S. hello Representative
hi you have the floor house bill
two thirty five.
And I have one more Mr chair
issued they'll goal is to get
her to catch is the deputy
superintendent all marvelous Mr
touches your hand in the system
so we can find your name
quicker.
Great addition to the
superintendents of insurances
office I don't see her all right
I don't know if she's in yet but
we'll get our agency yes I.
Yes come in she'll be there okay
thank you all right here we'll
get our and thank you are
welcome Representative Lujan
thank you for your patience
today house bill to thirty five.
Mr chair members of the
committee thank you for giving
me the opportunity to present
house bill two thirty I do today
this is an important piece of
legislation for the insurance
can.
Consumers of the state and with
the amendment I am recommending
G. today it also nicely balances
the interests and needs of the
insurance industry that serves
as your New Mexico.
The purpose of the bill it is
to update the insurance code to
eliminate outdated or
conflicting provisions by
updating terms haven't reflected
legislative changes on such
things as audit you date then
your provisions of the state
contracting statutes the
increasing age for dependent and
the model provisions from the
national association of
insurance commissioners which
governs the accreditation of the
office of the super intended and
insurance.
Still need a great deal progress
this year in addition to
strengthening and consumer
focused it generated sixty seven
million dollars in savings for
New Mexicans who have auto
insurance.
With the second round of fading
yet to come and it reduced the
health insurance premiums for
those who purchase their
coverage on the New Mexico
health insurance exchange and
for the first time in years
thigh is writing rules on the
laws passed by the legislature.
To implement the provisions we
adopted also because the
transparent and inclusive manner
which the agency is doing its
business I particularly I can't
particularly pleasure in
announcing that last month the
superintendent announced
appointment of the first Latino
women as their deputy
superintendent.
There is one new provision in
the bill that provides statutory
authority for the superintendent
of insurance to take action to
ensure the availability of
insurance during any governor
declared public health emergency
given by me on the incredible
level of corporation.
Insurers are provided at the
start of the pandemic but also
noted the existing insurance co
does not provide statutory
authorization I agree that this
needs to be fixed.
The large number of amendment
our results of the impact of
negotiation with the insurance
industry.
A thorough and your effort has
been made to resolve their
concerns which is why I again
urge you to adopt the amendment.
There also are number of
consumer family provisions of
this fairly lengthy bill my
experts I have already
introduced
and we are here to answer your
question
thank you Mr chair committee.
Thank you and let's up to allow
us to
Formally talk about the
amendment sake skip that part
members of the committee.
I move for a for discussion
purposes of the proposed
amendment eight six five last of
dot for is that the one we're.
In about Representative.
That amendment.
Okay.
Get it on your shared file
should be up there.
That's all wait a second but the
number Representative Lujan.
In the bottom left corner of the
that.
What is
it is a.
I thank
you for.
You're correct it's eight six
five point four.
Thank you Sir of.
Let me know a Representative
part of when you get into your
shared file and see if it's
there.
But we could also email it.
This email I I don't see
anything.
Runtastic and for folks
for folks keeping score at home
there's a
There's an internal file that.
To save on paper and you know to
not spread COVID were all
virtual our we don't have paper
documents unless we choose to
print them up.
So in our shared file you can go
to house bill two thirty five
and you have the agency analysis
is you have the bill language of
the committee analysis is the
FIR and then you have the
proposed amendments and the
proposed amendment is there in
the shared file but anyway going
to email it to the
representative and so
and we will go to members of the
audience let's go what we do
those in favor
So those who wish to speak in
favor of the bill Gordon raise
your hand within the we have
twelve attendees with us that
have stuck it out this far those
who wish to speak in favor going
raise your hand.
Don't be shy and then
Those who wish to speak.
Mr you in favor opposition.
We'll go to Mr chair and then
those in opposition go to or
let's we have Mister Anderson
and and Melanie are you in favor
or opposed Mr Anderson Mr
Chairman I'm in favor of
fantastic please we'll do those
in favor and let's you're
promised understand what.
Thank you Mr chairman John
Anders Representative medical
insurance pool.
And that we have been working
with the superintendent and the
and the members of the staff to
prepare several amendments which
occur at which are bound the A.
L. last part of the of the bill
sections thirty four.
R. excuse me through.
Third thirty eight and they're
playing up basically clean out
provisions many of which came
about because a lot of our
provisions were drafted prior to
the ACA so it was a time we
thought appropriate in dealing
with that this bill which is
that on that this and clean up
bills to get many of these
things are a car I and so we
have worked with the
superintendent and our board
which consists of the
superintendents chairman of our
board and in child just recently
Senator Martin Hickey Dr Hickey
whose nuclear activities center
is also on our board and we
basically had them review our
proposed amendments and they
approve them so if that whenever
that time arrives you should you
want me to go through those
amendments I'd be happy to do
the cell but it's basically all
clean out right about now large
part because of the ACA.
Thank you.
Thank you and next to misa and
Melanie welcome good enough on
mute yourself.
I thank you Mr chair it's and
Conway
Aloni is my maiden name.
And I am here on behalf of the
State Farm insurance companies
and I apologize our week
testifying on the amendments on
the bill itself.
Okay well first of all we have
been working with the
superintendent of insurance and
we appreciate that these
amendments to offer.
A a very big step toward some of
the concerns that we have we
still have remaining concerns
and primarily in three areas the
first area on concerns the very
very broad
emergency powers that this bill
would give the department of
insurance we do understand that
the department or I'm sorry the
office of superintendent of
insurance did have some problems
during the pandemic with some
bad actors but many of the
insurances insurance company
including State Farm are
concerned that these particular
brought in regency powers are
are too sweeping they literally
could override any other
provisions of the insurance code
and so we have concerns about
the broad scope of that and we
continue to oppose for that
reason the second area and I
know others will hit on other
areas for us is the restrictions
on advertising this bill
requires insurance companies to
submit all of their proposed
advertising to the New Mexico
superintendent of insurance for
pre for approval and then
there's a period now with the
amendment of thirty days before
they would know if that
advertising is approved as you
might imagine State Farm does a
lot of advertising for its auto
and homeowners lines not for
health lines and this would be a
very significant burden for us
with respect to all of our.
Advertising so for those two
reasons and some that will be
addressed by other people
testifying today we still stand
in opposition to this bill thank
you.
Mr chair you're on mute.
Thank you I said some really
profound things is now but we
will go to opposition please
raise your hand if you're in
opposition we will go to Mr
Brent Moore followed by John.
It's not.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Brent
Moore I'm a registered lobbyist
for the American property and
casualty insurance association
and for Allstate insurance
company and both entities
respectfully stand in opposition
to house bill two thirty five
what I would say with house bill
two thirty five as you can see
from the materials in front of
you it is quite a large bill and
it touches upon a number of
areas within the insurance code
it is not as if the the bill
focuses in on one particular
area and it's been a difficult
day for the insurance industry
to digest all of the potential
changes that are within the bill
we have done our best since the
bills have been introduced but
there is a lot to this bill I
would say there are three areas
that really jumped out for my
clients in terms of this bill
but there are lots of things and
that it the first is the broad
authority that is granted under
the provisions that would allow
for emergency authority for the
superintendent the really on a
lot of guard rails around what
the superintendent might do I'm
not saying that the
superintendent has any designs
or motives but it's a broad
grant and we know that at some
point different folks will sit
in that chair the second is it
requires prior approval of
advertising and with national
companies it's difficult to get
a prior approval out of New
Mexico when you're running and a
nationwide advertising campaign
we think that provision is
difficult there is also prior
approval provisions on the
rebate provisions which would
make it difficult for insurers
to provide value added products
and these prior approval
provisions really do limit the
ability of insurers and there
are other issues we would ask
for more time to talk about
these issues with the
superintendent and to try to get
to some reasonable level of
modernization of the insurance
co and I appreciate indulgence
of long me to go over my to.
Time but we respectfully ask for
for more time to work on the
bill thank you.
Thank you Sir appreciate all the
time you put in thus far of John
snow.
Thank you.
Development that's okay can you
hear me we sure can hi my name
is John shouts as you said Mr
chairman thank you I'm with the
national association of mutual
insurance companies or Manik
Manik is a property casualty
insurance trade association on
Monday I'd emailed the committee
as well as bill sponsor letter
reflecting our concerns with the
bill as filed I will say we very
much appreciate the amendment it
does take care of a lot of the
issues that we raised the bill
at appreciate to Billsponsored
superintendent told doing that I
will say unfortunately to the
issues that remain in the bill
or tools are more significant
and to not be applicable to
residential points on the
emergency authority this is
section three of the bill it is
incredibly broad really doesn't
have any substantive limits I'm
not sure there's any provision
of the insurance code or maybe
other laws related to the
insurance that could be re
written during an emergency
under the story or at least
tempted and again this is not a
reflection on superintendent
told this is something that we
would propose in any state where
was proposed on and to that
point you know other states may
use procedurally different
processes emergency rules
whatever the case may be but the
substantive authority if it's
going to change we think has to
have some kind of specific
guardrails based on the
perceived issues from this time
on the advertising just at that
as well that section eleven of
the bill the amendment does make
the December period for that a
little shorter it's thirty days
what is the issue here is that
actors most of them are not
going to follow the requirement
anyway so we propose the
department needs more Garcia
superintendents more story there
specifically target that are
responding that actors as
opposed to the rest of the
industry thank you and I
apologize for government over.
Not all anyone else wish to
speak in opposition expressed
concerns we have ten attendees.
And we will go to members of the
committee Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you Mr chairman some of my
concerns have already been
addressed you know I've sold
insurance but equitable for
about seven years and because we
have and I'm sure is no
different now we had as an
independent agent you depended
on your your national companies
to find the advertising.
And the.
You know because you didn't have
it sometimes in your budget to
do it so I have some concerns of
that is well because many times
you can't make money without
advertise and word of mouth is
great but it's always.
So much better for the agent to
see the project.
The issue is trying to sell
advertised on national
television and I'm also worried
about this broad scope so just
echoing with some of the
folks have already have have
already stated and that's a
major concern thank you Mr
chair.
Thank you very much
Representative Fajardo.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative I'm so I guess my
question is I am.
I understand the reasoning
behind this bill I mean I'm
looking at and some of it does
look like some cleanup languages
and things like that but what's
the purpose.
Mr chair and representative.
Thank you Mr chair and
representative for reasons I
previously previously stated I'd
like to ask just to be and
adjust to the expert witness
thank you.
Mr Chairman.
Members of the committee my name
is Brian Broadcom general
counsel for the office of the
superintendent of insurance I
appreciate the opportunity to
address the representatives.
Question you know there are the
the insurance code is one of the
largest bodies of statutory law
and state and it has been
amended many many times and
often times the entrance
Department has come before this
body.
In an effort to try and get
things cleaned up you're right
there are some parts of this
this bill it cleans up grammar
syntax
legal citations those sorts of
things in addition and has
brought forth by some of the.
Members of the public there are
some parts of the bill that are
little more substantive at our
tent is to try and clean those
things up that need to be
cleaned up but also to try and
put into the wall.
Provisions that allow us to.
Recognize modernisations in
insurance regulation trying to
be a little more efficient in
our regulatory efforts.
All the while balancing the
needs of the insurers to conduct
their business with our need to
be sure that the consumers are
property protect.
It is a large bill there are
many different provisions
in it than they are different
reasons behind each of those but
in general that that's why we're
before you today.
please
thank you.
Mr Chairman representative how
to.
What is the insurance code is
Brian references.
Mess we discussed at length so
whether we should just try to
tackle some logic in the in the
organization and all the
material wood setting insurance
code circulation Task not
something that we should go
along and wouldn't be possible
for you to take up normal each
legislative process so what we
have tried to do in this bill is
to identify the things that
clearly needed correction or
that we're no longer an
insurance department there was
true under the PRC we're now
constitutional office the office
is super and super general
insurance not.
The department of insurance
yes was referenced by
Representative Lujan the for
Blue Care Act.
required us to make certain
other changes for example the
statute says dependents are only
covered up to age twenty five
the the.
Says it has to be covered up to
age twenty six Mr Hansen noted
there are provisions in the.
Current statutes on the medical
insurance pool just outdated or
work conflicting with other
provisions.
The lawsuit one point I want to
make here is really sixty nine
page bill.
And you're hearing about one or
two provisions.
There is an objection to the
rest of these.
I want to highlight the
practice.
We made it very serious and
diligent effort to accommodate
issues questions concerns the
insurance industry.
I'm very proud of the fact that
we have a good relationship with
them also call them out all the
time for how well they responded
to the COVID emergency.
It was.
Great with some limited
exceptions of most of those
were.
Our state folks
So the amendments that you have
in front of you that I hope you
will adopt you know really
address a whole bunch of those
concerns and issues.
We will tell you.
One comment emergency hit the
first question we were asked
we're we're as well as work
statutory authority do you have
rob to take emergency action.
And the answer we got for
everybody was there is no
emergency authority.
So we've tried to draw this in a
way that clearly outlines that
there is no unilateral ability
to click.
Is tied to the governor's a
governor's declaration what
something the superintendent can
you on his or her own.
And it's only for the period of
that emergency.
So
What are the amendments.
And the bill was drawn is one we
have no hesitancy Committee to
you for adoption it will
streamline our code will enable
us to do our job.
way.
We hope over the next few years
to take a.
They really serious look at the
ribbon the entire insurance
coverage practice that should be
done not by some kind of.
Commission not something that we
would attempt to do our own.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative and I
think you kind of hit the nail
my biggest concern and that is
the part that hot that's
expanding
you know the emergency powers
I'm as you as you if you guys
known as this committee is fully
aware.
I'm.
You know there's a there's a
huge effort within the state New
Mexico to rein in the bipartisan
effort to remain the governor's
emergency powers that is also
something that's going on and
twenty seven other states.
And it's a bipartisan effort
across the country because we've
seen an abuse of those emergency
powers so that's my heartburn is
we're trying to reign that in.
And your us to expand it so my
question as you said we've made
a correction.
Why do we need to expand it and
one of the things that you you
said
Mr Chairman representative was
that.
We knew that the insurance
companies acted when you ask
them to and if they act when you
ask them to why do we need to
put this in statute.
If we did the job.
Mr Chairman representative
harder if I may this is not an
expansion.
No the there is no statutory
authority for emergency action
in the insurance co so I
apologize this is new but again
I want to emphasize that the
legislature.
In part are some way curtails
the ability of the governor then
our office would be curtailed
to.
The card is very inextricably
tied.
This does not grant the
authority of any superintendent
to take unilateral action is
absolutely tried to governor's
declaration of a public health
emergency and if you court
limitations.
On that authority another word
you say it can't be more for X.
number of days or something of
the sort or that she only has
certain powers.
I would carry over to Russ.
Really brought urgency Claude
would give the superintendent
inappropriately brought
unilateral authority this does
not do that we're not asking you
to approve.
Thank you thank you Mr Chairman
representative and I'm and I'm
sorry I I do that eight what is
your last name looking at your.
Your screen is is is our tail.
Last name is told to your
amendment T. O. I okay thank you
this I'm and so what I'm every
my name what is the governor's
emergency powers right now how
long does it last.
Madam.
Mr Chairman representative it's
up to the governor as it stands
now.
For example in the COVID should
emergency for decoration for
certain amount of time and then
J. stunts Senator.
As you know.
And it if I'm not mistaken
Mr chairman and representative
that those emergency powers last
thirty days and Mike in my
incorrect and not and I just
anybody here now I don't to my
understanding those Canadian
parent only last thirty days and
then she has to renew them.
Mr chairman I believe that
that's right in this instance we
also have the unique
circumstances of federal
declaration.
Click health emergency which she
made reference to her decoration
but again the point is
this is not something we can do
on our own Senator bridges is
for thirty days and that would
be our ability to.
Your your your bills sixty days.
So you're extending that twice
as long as the governor's
authority but it's hard to the
governor's declaration.
The original bill I think the
amended in other ways remember
removes the sixty day extension.
Curtails that complete.
Okay.
You can vote for without
creating
The independent authority and
without creating something that
is going to extend beyond the
governor's declaration and I
know it's a long day but let's
let's go to the chair.
I'm sorry Mr.
Trying to find the thirty days
on the amendment.
One set.
Okay sec.
Thank you.
Thank you I'm gonna go ahead
with the amendment Mr chair
representative I have any
further questions I'll come
back.
Thank you.
Thank you very much anyone else
have any other.
Questions on this bill.
Just a couple quick comments I
know that
Want to thank everybody for
working hard on this bill in
order to when I first class that
I thought I just adjusted fees
which of you know I think we
should re every time there's a
dollar sign and states that you
we need to review that you know
every five ten years an adjusted
for inflation
This does a lot more than that
and I know it's there's there's
opposition to some of the
provisions in here but I would
hope that is if this were to
move forward that those
conversations still still take
place that you
And that you are you know try to
find some common ground
obviously if you can't you can't
but by all means appreciate the
leadership of the sponsor the
superintendent in in trying to
deal with the.
With the without opposition and
reasonable way so I I I
I look forward to that
continuing it as long as the
bill keeps continuing
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr chair I move the
to pass second.
All righty we let's back up
let's back up we are there's a
there's an amendment in front of
us that we move for discussion.
What's the pleasure the
committee with regard to the
amendment Mr chair I will
adoption of the amendment thank
you for correcting me I I I
skipped over a critical part
thank you we have a I get.
We have a motion to adopt the
amendment a second by whom.
Thank you Representative and so
the it's eight six five dot
four.
let's call the roll on the
amendment.
Thank you.
Two one nine eight six five
point four to adopt the
amendment.
Representative Baldonado.
past.
Representative Dow.
Yesterday at the minute.
Representative.
Yes.
It was yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Colbert.
Yes.
Bill yes.
Representative Baldonado.
Yes.
Madam chair Figueroa.
Yes.
And if a yes so you have an
amended bill Representative
Lujan Representative Phoenix.
I will do passed as amended.
Properly second staff.
So there's a motion for a do
pass as amended by
Representative Martinez a second
by Representative Serrato.
please call the roll.
No.
Representative Dow.
No.
Representative will.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Yes.
Representative Colbert.
No.
Representative does yes.
Madam chair to get off yes.
And chairman Maestas.
Yes so you have a due pass
Representative one as amended I
I look forward to more
amendments in judiciary
if you do if you deem it
appropriate thank you for all
your work everyone thank you and
I'll just bursting into action
thank you for joining us Mr
auditor this is a.
W. secretary contentious thank
you for joining us great just
you just always we are will not
be product more and.
There's really no need to meet
on the weekends.
The two.
Without.
Thank you Mr chairman.
