Representative Johnson.
Representative but the next.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Patel Colbert.
Representative bill.
Here thank you.
Representative Dow.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Martinez.
Representative Culbert.
Representative Martinez.
I'm here thank you.
I am here thank you and chairman
last is here thank you we have a
quorum welcome everyone welcome
so in our a virtual room we have
thirteen panelists which is made
up of staff committee members
and presenters and then we have
thirty eight attendees thirty
eight attendees and I'll ask you
to raise your hands up if you
wish to speak on a particular
bill for now please lower all
your hands do you have a of.
An expert witness representative
Thompson thank you it's my hash
the.
And Mr speaker can you raise
your hand within the zone we
could provide your name easier
thank you Sir and we'll bring
you and anyone else besides
Maisch.
Representative Ferrari maybe
join us issue conditions and and
the committee she's a co sponsor
but she's presenting elsewhere
sounds good thank you so much
representative Thompson for
joining us this afternoon I will
turn it over to you regarding a
house bill two hundred five okay
thank you I'm N. M. excuse me if
I call you Mr speaker it's hard
to make the switch when we're
virtual so Mr chair House Bill
to I use the Bill endorsed by
the interim tobacco settlement
revenue oversight committee
which I co chair and the long
and short of it is to prohibit
the sale of flavored tobacco and
that includes menthol and people
say well why are you doing that
well the reason that we're doing
this is to keep young people
from beginning two years any
kind of tobacco products that
includes smoking cigarettes
cigars chewing tobacco and
vaping and we know from research
that dot flavors are very
attractive to kids and and the
there is research that shows
that they the sellers of these
products are targeting kids with
their flavors and their their
visuals and and included in this
I'm which I wasn't a fan of for
a while is mentale and and I and
and I've heard from a lot of
people that use menthol but what
I've learned Mr chair is that
menthol is put into back drugs
essentially to make that taste
of tobacco less awful so that it
kind of dead in your throat and
tongue and so you don't feel the
sting and that the.
But it's it's just a way to help
people who are not regular users
of tobacco basically to get them
addicted to nicotine and so this
bill Mr chair it's all about
protecting you and and saving
money the cost of tobacco use in
terms of health care and lost
work productivity is that is
massive and Mister chair I do
have an amendment it's it's a
very simple amendments.
You're on a quick second a
commitment.
I I move the amendment for
discussion purposes.
Can I get a second second thank
you Representative a I just want
to go to not.
When we moved it
but but at your leisure
representative incorporate them
into your presentation at your
okay okay that that's pretty
much my presentation and that
really the only that what the
amendment does this strike that
you health and Human Services
Committee amendment nine ten and
eleven and those are all
essentially
on at the the very end of page
seven and the top of page eight
and it just puts back in
it is illegal.
For a person under the age of
twenty one years to purchase
tobacco with more for any person
to sell flavor a flavor tobacco
product so it I'm not sure which
version you're looking at that
was we did the amendments and
and now so I don't know if you
have the amendments in context
or whatever but but essentially
it's it's we we accidentally
took out the part about it being
illegal to sell to a person
under age twenty one which is
current law
But Mister chair I will say the
reason we we were kind of
playing around with that is we
do not want they use to be
penalized and we don't want that
that's that that.
The the clerk in a store to be
put to be held responsible we
want it to be the essentially
the person who purchases the the
flavored tobacco to be sold.
Thank you very much and and Mr
seat that used to add anything
at this time.
Yeah.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee my name is more
interesting I work for the
American heart association and
we like to think representative
Thompson and Representative
Ferrary you know for bringing
this very important legislation
thank you are you will have a
lasting health benefits for New
Mexico youth and adults
Mr Chairman chairman you know
flavored tobacco is the gateway
product for long term and often
times in a lifelong nicotine
addiction no more than ninety
five percent of the middle and
high school students who use E.
cigarettes report using play
would drugs you know most high
school students who used E.
cigarettes use fruit meant
mental and you know sweet
flavored products you know in in
New Mexico one in three high
school kids are using you know
E. cigarettes that about thirty
seven thousand six hundred kids.
About thirty four percent were
high school kids are using and
also lemon thousand middle
school kids in New Mexico are
all are also using you know E.
cigarettes you know which is
about thirteen percent of our
middle school so we we we
believe this is a serious.
You know epidemic and more in
our state and as you know like
you know what more than eighty
percent of the you who have used
tobacco products started with
the flavored tobacco products
and and and and the tobacco
industry is it's a well known
fact you know they target low
income and communities of color
no for example the cigarette
company Newport frequently runs
price discounts for menthol
cigarettes in neighborhoods with
more minority residents and low
income.
And also in store advertising
for menthol cigarettes is more
common in neighborhoods with
more minorities and low income
communities and you know that Mr
Chairman American Association we
we commissioned a poll in twenty
nineteen that was conducted by
uh research and polling here in
Albuquerque and sixty two
percent of the registered voters
in New Mexico no support banning
flavored tobacco.
So with that Mr chairman thank
you for the opportunity to speak
to you and the members be glad
to answer any questions thank
you.
Thank you and before we go to
members of the committee let's
go to the audience with a of
fifty attendees.
What all those folks who wish to
speak in favor of the bill those
folks those proponents of the
bill but and raise your hand at
this time.
And what we'll do is we'll
With our software system we
allow you to speak and then you
you're on mute yourself.
So that's far we have three
people for.
Speaking in favor so when we
start Donna up soon followed by
Samuel yet though I got about a
minute half.
It thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Dr don
Upson I've been a permanent
position in Albuquerque since
nineteen ninety five.
In the US we're losing as many
people to tobacco related.
Premature deaths every year as
we've lost in the first year of
the Covid pandemic.
And most of those people started
smoking when they were kids.
As mentioned the use of E.
cigarettes has gone up
dramatically in the United
States one third of our New
Mexico high schoolers are using
E. cigarettes and the use of
disposable E. cigarettes has
gone up a thousand percent
thousand percent from twenty
nineteen to twenty twenty among
high schoolers and four hundred
percent among middle school is
just in one year.
And as representative Thompson
mentioned flavors are what
enticing kids to use E.
cigarettes and twenty twenty
more than eighty percent of
people who use E. cigarettes or
using flavor drugs to the FDA
ban on pre filled cartridges
that are flavored.
Excluded menthol in tobacco and
all that happened was that most
kids change to those flavors and
mental is particularly dangerous
it makes it easier to vape and
smoke.
And it has disproportionately
and adversely affected
underserved communities
especially African Americans
LGBTQ people pregnant people and
the poor since the nineteen
fifties the tobacco industry has
targeted those groups with
menthol and and lower.
Stick with us reception we're
gonna take the clock off I
usually put on the clock when
there's you know fifteen twenty
thirty people
so we're gonna take the clock
off give everybody a couple you
two minutes or so but by all
means finisher of finish your
your thoughts on this bill and
and go to move the clock from
the screen thank you.
Thank you Mr chair.
So mental has been.
Increasing their impact on US
smokers in the total cigarette
market is now thirty five
percent menthol.
So I applaud the person Thompson
four and colluding menthol in
this bill it's extremely
important another worry some
point is that it's just been
announced or or recognize that
how far
make sure the cigarettes has
resumed online sales of fruity
flavored E. cigarettes claiming
that the nicotine in their
product is not tobacco so it's
another thing to to be aware of
if companies are going to invade
the FDA regulations thank you.
Thank you very much Samuel yet
though followed by Joanna.
Strother.
Going on mute yourself.
Hi my name is Samuel yet till
and I represent southwest United
that to know veterans I served
on the USS Abraham Lincoln
station and ever Washington from
October nineteen ninety seven
through October two thousand one
as any for damage control petty
officer and firefighter I'm here
today because I oppose H. B.
twelve I I wanted to alert the
committee members of the fact
that many of my brothers and
sisters that served in the
military also part of the
recovery community they have
changed our lives for the better
and many of them have treated
drugs and alcohol for coffee and
tobacco as I'm sure you are
aware mythos service are the
spirit of choice in communities
of color regardless of how we
personally feel about coffee and
tobacco please don't create a
burger for folks are ready and
the delicate balancing act in
life by turning otherwise legal
activity it to any legal one and
even if smoking flavored tobacco
itself would not be a crime you
create a burger for people in
recovery by forcing them to
utilize the underground market
or travel to Arizona or Colorado
to purchase mythos directs and
ball is deterring underage youth
from smoking is the goal why
don't we that's an education to
achieve that goal it would be
money much better spent thank
you very much.
Thank you Sir and I
Let me thank you that was in
opposition let's hear from those
folks who are in favor of the
bill or who want the bill to
pass or want us to vote yes on
the bill this year from those
folks first then we'll hear from
opposition but thank you
appreciate your service will be
a good time up in the Puget
Sound Johns Strother followed by
Claudia wrote wrote us.
Well yes good afternoon Mister
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Joanna
Strother and I am the senior
director of advocacy for the
American lung association long
association strongly supports
ending the sale of all flavored
tobacco products including
flavored E. cigarettes menthol
cigarettes and flavored cigars
the long association works on
behalf of thirty three million
Americans including more than
two hundred and fifty thousand
New Mexicans living with lung
disease like lung cancer and
COPD tobacco is one of the most
addictive substances flavored
tobacco is especially effective
at attracting and an addicting
kids research shows that ninety
percent and percent of current
use E. cigarette users use
flavored E. cigarettes and
flavored products are the entry
way for young people to start
using tobacco and that includes
mint and menthol the long
association also remains
concerned that thirty seven
point five percent of the use in
New Mexico use tobacco products
the station we're going to thank
the sponsors.
After the show around ending the
sale of tobacco products very.
Our efforts thank you.
Thank you Mr other.
The US followed by John I'm
sorry thank you the large.
Background noise you hear me OK.
Tell the Senator to.
What are
center quite and you put
yourself.
Thank you
right wonderful god please
address the committee.
Hi yes.
I'm good afternoon my name is
gladiator that I am the director
Southern region for the campaign
for tobacco free kids we are the
nation's largest nonprofit non
governmental advocacy
organization so we devoted to
reducing tobacco use and its
deadly toll by advocating for
public policies to prevent kids
from using tobacco help smokers
quit and protecting everyone
from secondhand smoke we support
the concept of labor policies
New Mexico is not alone in this
discussion states and localities
across the country are having
similar discussions to address
the you the sacred epidemic.
New Mexico youth E. cigarette
usage is much higher than the
national average rate as was
mentioned by my has earlier
where one in three let me say
that again one in three high
school students to date in New
Mexico are using E. cigarettes.
Labour policies have a dramatic
impact on reducing tobacco among
youth I would definitely help
curb the long term illness
disease and death caused by
tobacco addiction across the
state prohibiting the self labor
tobacco products including
menthol cigarettes and flavored
cigars and E. cigarettes is a
critical step that will help
protect New Mexico kids from the
unrelenting efforts the tobacco
industry to hook them to a
deadly addiction.
As we are dealing with COVID has
many states and localities are
dealing with ways to make their
communities safer and healthier
now is not the most important
time for us to take long held
and make one healthy priority.
With that I want to thank you
for the opportunity and hope
that these discussions continue
to happen to protect the use in
New Mexico thank you.
Thank you a gill Galarza
followed by Bill Jordan.
Hello Sir I'm not sure why
logged in as a supporter
matching opposition but I'd be
more than happy to provide what
about no Sir if you don't mind
good and lower your hand and
then raise it when we're taking
opposition thank you.
Mr Bill Jordan followed by
laurel McCall Klasky.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Bill Jordan with
New Mexico voices for children I
want to thank the sponsors for
bringing this bill forward this
issue is personal for me because
my father passed away from
emphysema he was a heavy smoker
I know you've already heard of
the tobacco use and vaping are a
very serious problem for our
young people and therefore for
New Mexico you for learning
anything these last eleven or
twelve months it's the
importance of good health habits
and good public health policy
this is good public health
policy because we know that our
young people are targeted by the
industry we know the big tobacco
will fight to get their products
into the loans of as many New
Mexicans as they can the
deceptive advertising in the
industry is played out in
courtrooms across the country
for decades and yet they still
to see they still find ways to
target kids of color with
creative flavors and packaging
we're hoping that this year the
legislature will support the
health of our young people and
banned flavored tobacco products
this year.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr Jordan laurel
McCloskey.
Good afternoon Mister chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Laura McCloskey and
executive director of the
chronic disease prevention.
I also oversee.
In New Mexico ally Council
tobacco the mission of the New
Mexico our accounts in tobacco
is to advocate for proven
tobacco use prevention policies
there statewide partnerships to
improve and save lives reducing
commercial tobacco use we'd like
to thank the sponsors for this
bill and we support the ending
the sale of flavored tobacco
products and E. cigarette usage
recently along health policy
brief issued that spoke of how
mental folks kids and keeps
adults addicted and how American
lung association and other
national partner supports
removing medical and flavor
products and E. cigarettes as
over eighty percent of black
Americans to smoke use them and
it targets health thank and
equities throughout our state
information so thank you for
supporting this policy we
support protecting our children
and representing those in our
state thank you.
Thank you very much anyone else
wish to speak in favor anyone
else wish to speak in favor we
now of fifty five attendees okay
those who wish to speak in
opposition or wishes to vote no
on the bill please raise your
hand at this time.
And then we just do a quick
count.
So there's more than twenty
folks in opposition so we're
gonna go up a minute a half
timer so set up the time and a
half you don't have to take the
home and a half.
Try not to duplicate your
Not to duplicate your a your
arguments.
Welcome everybody and this is
one of the advantages of the
virtual setting is that we can
have more people participate
electronically Gregory Conley
followed by two managers.
Good afternoon Mister chair
members of the committee my name
is Gregory.
I currently serve as president
of the American vaping
association a nonprofit that
advocates for policies that
recognize the continuum of risk
with nicotine and tobacco
products in order to reduce the
number of adult smokers because
smokers smoke for the nicotine
but they die from the tar and we
need to begin recognizing this
for that reason we're we are
urging you to oppose H. B. two
oh five prohibiting flavors
especially non combustibles will
simply lead to more adult
smokers continuing to smoke
small businesses being
devastated and sales being sent
to black market unlicensed
sellers on platforms like
Snapchat you're also going to
step on the toes of the FDA
which is currently reviewing
vaping products in the only
authorized the continued
marketing.
Products on the market today if
it determines that each product
is a quote appropriate for the
protection of public health so
the same FDA that just gave us
COVID vaccines your going to say
we are banning drugs even if the
FDA says these are appropriate
for the protection of public
health.
Banning marijuana and arresting
people for selling at that was
once a position that would have
gotten sixty two percent of
support a positive poll did not
make it any better when you look
back in history and you see the
ramifications of those actions
we need adult conversations that
recognized a continuum of risk
not just politics for you take
advantage of a deadly pandemic
to make it harder for adults to
quit smoking please oppose H. B.
twelve I think you.
Thank you Tim underuse followed
by Dave Hancock's thank you very
much members of the committee
for this opportunity to speak to
mattress for Americans for tax
reform while well intentioned
policies need to be based on
science and evidence and not
simply a motion anecdotes and
unfortunately a large percentage
part of this bill is based on a
misunderstanding of the science
which conflates deadly
combustible tobacco with
lifesaving reduced risk tobacco
alternatives there are now
hundreds and hundreds of peer
reviewed academic studies out
there on the benefits of
switching from electric to
electronic cigarettes according
to the United kingdom's
government analysis of the
studies these products and
ninety five percent safer and
more than twelve thanks to the
directs and more than twice as
effective as any other nicotine
replacement therapy adults of
primarily change from smoking
today's more safe product
through flights this is what the
evidence showed overwhelmingly
but the evidence also shows it
doesn't actually affect kids
that's why when San Francisco
banned flavors there was no
change in what children's use
was but adult use went down and
adult smoking went up so there's
no impact upon youth uptake but
it will in short more people
will smoke and die from deadly
combustible tobacco in terms of
the mental band not only will
these disproportionately affect
minority populations and create
do if anticipate issues with law
enforcement look at what
happened in Massachusetts they
tried it there was no change in
smoking rates people both things
across the border and the state
lost seventy million dollars in
tax revenue in six months please
look at the evidence as outlined
in what they find out reason
initiatives thank you.
Thank you Dave Hancock's
followed by Jared in a jar.
Thank you update some of the
former director State Otis in
the New York state comptroller's
office and I've spent my career
assessing and evaluating the
success of government policies
and programs for the like you
know RJ Reynolds is paying me
for my time but these are my
data and opinions banning all
flavored tobacco sales will cost
the state thirty five billion in
tax revenue annually businesses
will lose more than a hundred
thirty five million in sales
resulting in job losses lost
wages and even shuttering some
businesses the first eight weeks
after Massachusetts banned
flavored tobacco in twenty
twenty the Commonwealth lost
more than twenty five million
dollars in tax revenue and
there's no evidence that the
ban reduced smoking rates
Somebody's already mentioned the
FDA so I'm going to skip that
portion that I was gonna going
to discuss
But that is an important thing
that that your your flavor band
is going to deny New Mexico's
current smoker the opportunity
to switch to drugs that'll
improve their health and finally
a flavored tobacco billion here
will be a hit to your budget
that may harm a central
government programs and because
real business losses in a time
of historic financial crisis
without reducing smoking ban on
flavored tobacco products is an
imprecise tool for achieving
your objectives and with a high
price tag it's far too costly to
yes thank you for your time
thank you very much are followed
by Brian.
Low tech.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee chairman is our
behalf of Swisher international
this bill is certainly well
intentioned keeping tobacco
products out of the hands of our
young people is definitely a
great goal that we can all
support
but this was already addressed
at the federal level recently
when they increase the age to
purchase tobacco products to
twenty one so this this bill
wouldn't prevent kids from
buying tobacco products because
they're already prohibited from
doing so
adult consumer should be able to
use legal drugs even if we
disagree with their choices and
and for these reasons and those
already stated we respectfully
oppose this bill.
Thank you Brian photo tech
followed by Missy.
Thinking tends.
Welcome.
We get the morning Mr chairman
good afternoon my name is Brian
for it can I testify on behalf
of the national association of
tobacco outlets I just find
opposition house bill two oh
five as there is no rational
basis to believe this
legislation would benefit public
health or accomplish anything.
It will harm New Mexico
businesses that are
disproportionately owned and
operated by first or second
generation immigrants and their
families I encourage you to
stand up for them and oppose
this bill because of the
pandemic gas stations and
convenience stores have suffered
significant losses in both fuel
and in store sales these are
already suffering in this bill
would magnify that are my
driving adults to purchase from
out of state and from illicit
markets banning menthol
cigarettes has been a dismal
failure in Massachusetts since
menthol cigarettes were banned
in Massachusetts menthol sales
are up ninety percent in New
Hampshire in twenty nine percent
in Rhode Island cigarette tax
stamps sales are down almost
eighteen million stamps in
Massachusetts and up eighteen
point eight million in New
Hampshire and Rhode Island the
only things the Massachusetts
flavor ban has accomplished is
devastating Massachusetts
retailers fuel illicit markets
and driving sales out of state
for these reasons and many more
outlined in a letter you
received from our executive
director we encourage you to
oppose this bill thank you.
Thank you Mr Stewart Cooper
joining us miss Missy thinking
ten followed by John Thompson.
Good afternoon chairman my S.
system members of the committee
my name is miss content I'm a
small business owner in the
state of New Mexico and
president of the New Mexico
smokefree Alliance and I propose
HBs to I contrary to what we are
being told a committee meeting
since the session began flavors
are not geared towards children
moderating was invented in two
thousand three by Chinese
pharmacist Hon late because he
was a heavy smoke grenade lost
his father to lung cancer due to
smoking it was to help adults
get off of cigarettes without
all chart other chemicals in
cigarettes every single thing
that we put in our mouths has a
flavor Weatherby food drinks or
alcoholic beverages as adults we
like flavors it doesn't matter
what it is and as adults should
it be our choice as to what we
as adults want to put in our
bodies isn't that what a large
part of the session is about my
body my choice whether it be
abortion issues on marijuana
issues which by the way making
flavor marijuana products is one
of the most popular ways to
intake it yet no one is going
after those flavors I've been
trying to understand how blue
raspberry or lemon lime more one
of the players which I have been
told by my sources are some of
the most popular flavors are
different from blue raspberry or
let the money make labor
according to the FDA ever FDA
regulations that were dropped in
twenty sixteen we're not allowed
to advertise we're not allowed
to have pictures of any kind of
our boxes are bottles and we're
not allowed to compare flavor
explanations to children's
cereals candies or name brand
items we are why are marijuana
flavors okay yet tobacco tobacco
flavors are not thank you
chairman my **** and committee
members.
Thank you Mr intent up John
Thompson followed by Ron brown.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee John Thompson
registered lobbyists for
for the smoke free alliance
madam chair Mister chairman I
apologize.
This this mostly appliances that
nonprofit trade association of
local storefronts Mr chairman
and and they've been good
partners in recent years we we
work alongside the performance
in two thousand nineteen to pass
a tax and again in two thousand
twenty to pass the tobacco
products act which raise the
purchasing age to twenty one and
implemented a regulatory
structure Mr Chairman we stand
in strong opposition to this
measure because quite frankly we
don't think it will work and for
the reasons stated I think it's
worth noting the internet Mr
chairman of the proponents noted
that that one of these major
companies just begun to sell
these these products on the
internet we have no jurisdiction
over out of state companies that
that do their commerce on the
internet Mr chairman so we would
ask you to consider that and ask
you to consider tabling this
bill and let the twenty one
restriction come into effect and
and begin to work thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you Ron brown followed by
Alexia but until.
But in other Mr brown.
We're Mr run and then you miss
but that's it it was a second.
Welcome Mr chairman committee
members I apologize for being
technology challenged here.
Mr chairman my name is Ron brown
as mentioned I run a small
business called latitudes in Rio
Rancho and we're speaking in
opposition I employed twenty
five people here and I wanted to
give you some sales figures to
give you an idea of what it
would how would affect a small
businessman here in New Mexico
in twenty twenty are tobacco
sales were eight hundred eleven
thousand dollars of that almost
forty percent were flavored.
Which would equate to roughly
three hundred and twenty five
thousand we would lose those
sales on most adults are not
going to switch.
There are.
Reference for brands they're
just going to change their point
of purchase so for myself Mr
chairman.
Those customers are going to
leave here and they're going to
go to the the the the.
Pueblos of Santa Ana force India
to purchase their cigarettes of
the three hundred twenty five
thousand dollars gross receipts
I'm gonna lose profits my
employees are known as profit
sharing.
It affects a small businessman I
think it's important for the
committee to as John Thompson
just said allow the
the the twenty one age to take
effect it's working well with
the the alcohol the the ABC is
now in charge of tobacco they're
going to have strict
enforcements and sting
operations make sure that we're
following guidelines we we scan
every single ID I think it's
just important to stand back and
allow this to happen and and.
It's hard enough as a small
businessman and I know there's
more there's more challenges on
the horizon for us this is one
that I think we can avoid and
still keep these flavors out of
the hands of children Mr
chairman I appreciate your time.
This Balenciaga followed by
Christopher.
Hello hi Committee members my
name is Desiree Valencia and I
am a board member with the
Latino educational fund the
course of my professional and
personal life I have learned
first hand about the dangers in
a way that has really hit home
this new trend of baking and the
use of E. cigarettes is doing
nothing more than creating a
nationwide health academic that
we literally cannot afford to
see to date more than forty
deaths have been reported
nationwide due to vaping and E.
cigarettes H. P. two O. five is
a great time to address the
serious health issues facing our
community get health work late
one part it doesn't consider the
unintended consequence is
banning mental in communities of
color for the Santo is as high
as eighty five percent in some
areas.
Are we to believe that
communities of color work from
one day to the next stop using
cigarettes and switch to play
for tobacco.
I don't believe that this is a
reasonable expectation I further
believe that should this bill
become law.
It will create an underground
economy that will lead to more
unnecessary interactions between
law enforcement and communities
of color.
Is this something that we want
at a time when tensions are so
high.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you Chris for take up all
by Robert pull.
Hi once again with neighborhoods
board I oppose this bill on
retention of.
Consequences pertaining to the
community of color thank you for
your time.
Thank you Robert.
Robber pulled followed by Tom
Hennessey.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
the committee for allowing me to
speak today I would first like
to say that I am a small
business owner in New Mexico and
New Mexico native I own a small
the distribution company and we
only carry products that have
done the FDA PNC a application
process and we only sell to
licensed reputable retailers.
And I believe that we need to
allow the twenty one carding
process.
To be enforced and to be
utilized we're trial college
work for nicotine I believe that
banning flavors would just push
people to buy out of state to
buy to the black markets and as
previously mentioned
manufacturers will find other
avenues and other tobacco free
alternatives to circumvent
regulation.
In short also doing is hurting
the taxable income and taxable
revenue for the state and again
I would like to the state to
make a more.
Tax on these products I believe
it thank you very much for your
time.
Thank you Tom Hennessy followed
by.
Hi Raj.
Hey Corey.
Thank you Mr chair my name is
Tom Hennessey with rural oil
company and I'm also the
president of the New Mexico
petroleum marketers association.
We sell cigarettes and other age
restricted products to adults
New Mexicans around the state of
New Mexico we chart everyone for
all tobacco purchases and do not
sell cigarettes to minors.
If the state bans these flavored
tobacco products it will not
take them off the market it will
just shift the point of sale
from locations that are licensed
and regulated by the state to
locations that are not flavored
tobacco products will easily be
accessible to consumers just
across the state line item on
tribal lands.
Metal cigarettes and mint
flavored smokeless tobacco
account for about twenty five
percent of our total tobacco
sales New Mexico tobacco
retailers like us will just lose
these customers
will simply lose the tax
revenue.
Tobacco customers also purchased
gasoline snacks drinks and other
items if we lose their tobacco
business we stand to lose the
rest of their business as well.
For this product band or any
product band to be effective it
needs to happen at the federal
level so that the product is
removed from all retail
establishments.
I respectfully stand in
opposition to this bill thank
you Mr chairman.
Mr on how much.
Thank you very and rubber and
Richard my annals.
Good enough on mute yourself.
Welcome Sir.
Yup we can hear you.
We can we can thank you thank
you Mr chair funding from the
county I'm not the type of
medicine okay thirty four we
he can find that you need and we
operate says for cemex.
I propose House Bill School I we
were staff is more concerned how
fast what this friend.
Well
our our cigarettes out of thank
you and what is your.
I see this.
And sixty five percent of
artifact are ourselves what are
the factors our like a lot of
the medical I.
Are you I would like to.
Samples that the force what
makes us for the.
The.
For the first with the most
important part
of.
We are at that we emphasized our
staffing and making life harder
for our for
artists of the loss facts I also
and also what what what what
what what I consider one.
Fifty four and then bring it and
I.
As a result the local level
significant well so what thank
you for the it is for this
effort hi.
Last week this once we hello we
comply with all applicable
federal.
With respect to five
our employees are well trained
and we we enforce and reinforced
I make sure that such products
will be.
And so forth what not political
parties.
Thank you.
Thank you Sir and Mr Robert pool
have you spoken.
Yes I did thank you very much
thank you your name still on top
Richard my nose followed by mark
and time.
Fana grease we should be and
again it's prevent you from
vaping at all we must also agree
that we must do everything to
and the death and disease of New
Mexico adults every year from
smoking cigarettes.
In other jurisdictions that have
prohibited flavors we have seen
specifically in San Francisco
that they've seen an increase of
thirty three percent of the
group of respondents have
increased their smoking rates
since the ban is gone to affect
and I'll just touch on the FDA
PM TA process Mister Connelly
spoke about this earlier.
In the discussion of the
appropriate for protection of
public health respondents or
applicants must prove that their
products will not be used by
miners and also will be
appropriate for the protection
of public health for adults so
anyone who's gone through the
lengthy process of submitting
these.
Applications spends hundreds of
thousands of dollars if not
millions to submit these
documents to the FDA and we will
be for closing on them in New
Mexico if we are pushing through
a flavor ban without considering
the expenditures of these New
Mexico businesses that have
actually applied for those
applications that is why I'm so
fine it is.
H. B. two zero five and we thank
you for hearing us today.
Thank you Sir Mr Ruben Bach up
followed by Keefe.
Can you hear Mr chairman.
Mr Baca wants yet we sure can
welcome.
thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee my name
is Ruben Baca and the state
executive director of the New
Mexico petroleum marketers
association I'm also a contract
this for the grocers
association.
Representative about over four
hundred stores right now.
When we start talking about
selling to use we do not sell to
you we don't have our time as
the youth we all use the we card
system we don't allow any
advertising whatsoever inside of
our stores.
I'm just like to say that I'm no
smoker my two kids are non
smokers because I taught not to
smoke so I think that's the
proper way to those little
personal responsibility and the.
Are you gonna do with this bill
is change the point of sales
thank you.
Thank you Sir Keith followed by
Scott Scanlon.
If you could on mute yourself
key followed by Scott Scanlon
thank you Mr chairman I
apologize Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Keith Gardner and I'm a
registered lobbyist for off the
court distributing.
Although the impetus of this
bill has been stated to stop the
sale of tobacco to children one
of the additional consequences
of passing this act would make
it illegal to use group up.
This is particularly insensitive
to our Arabic and middle eastern
community allowing just or the
smoking of shisha is a very
important part of their culture
is more than just popping she
show or sipping tea this is
where ideas are exchanged
meetings are held and sports and
politics are discussed it's a
way to literally and
metaphorically ex excel the
troubles of the day Google on
just take very seriously the
implementation of measures to
prevent and stop the sale to
those under twenty one the
product is sold in lounges where
you must be twenty one or older
to enter and further based on
how who could is smoked it would
be difficult if not impossible
for a child or a young adult the
height or not be known to
smoking hookah since the water
pipes that are more than a foot
tall and take fifteen to twenty
minutes to set up not something
you'd see somebody trying to
hide in a backpack these are not
products being marketed to those
under twenty one for these and
many other reasons that you've
heard so far we ask you to vote
no on H. B. to all five thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you Sir and and Mr Marty
analyst for did you speak
Richard money analysts.
No Sir wasn't all I didn't get
the opportunity forgive me
forgive because you're you drop
down that's my my apologies if
we can ask of Mr street style
into to be in the matter of the
in the batter's box Richard
please thank you so much Sir
appreciate your time this quick
as possible my name is rich
merry out awesome the retired
assistant director with ATF I'm
here in Washington DC I'm
currently a professor at
Georgetown University and a
member of the international
association of chiefs of police
and the police executive
research forum what I want to
talk about very simply is.
A ban on flavored tobacco and
creating a prohibition is going
to create crime we have to
understand what we do so public
safety.
Loses its value to the community
and it must be part of the
public health strategy of
putting an underground market it
puts these tobacco products in
the industry got thanks
organized crime.
Being sold on street corners for
as much as two dollars for both
cigarette work street corner
bugs in making sometimes five
thousand dollars every seven
well every couple hours the some
of these products is much the
solar products it also proved
presents a great difficulty for
store owners because the kids
are getting from these people
that are using ID's they're not
taking about a look at how old
you are where you're coming from
so these kids have an the
ability by tobacco products in
these flavors from anybody who
is out there so finally it also
creates more work for the cops
are working out there because
you're gonna have to point
something that's never been on
the plate before in definitely
negative interaction with the
police because instead of
serving and protecting their
more serving and harassed I
thank you so much for your time
and I appreciate.
Thank you Sir Scott Scanlon
followed by Richard.
Stroke.
Thank you Mr chairman Scott
Scanlon registered lobbyist for
Bowlin travel centers in
Boland's is a New Mexico
corporation it's been around
since nineteen twelve we have
seven stores in New Mexico and
the two stores in Arizona in our
stores are along interstate ten
interstate forty and so most of
our many of our customers are
truckers and tourist and so
first off we
we sell tobacco products to
adults the state law New Mexico
is that you have to be over
twenty one to purchase these
products we only sell to adults
but what we've seen especially
during the pandemic Mr chairman
and members of the committee is
when we ban on the purchase of
of various items and Arizona
doesn't what we've seen is that
those trucks those those
terrorist in the cars drive
right through New Mexico and
they stop in our stores in
Arizona we've seen it over and
over
whether it's high gas prices are
fire works or probably in this
case flavored tobacco products
so
we believe that that this bill
is bad for the New Mexico
economy and we urge you to vote
no on this bill thank you Mr
chairman members.
Thank you Robert Stroop followed
by Chris falls on.
Welcome Sir good and on mute
yourself.
Can you hear me now we sure can
what okay sorry about that thank
you Mr chairman members of the
committee for allow me to
address you today I fully agree
and and endorsed everything said
in opposition to house bill tool
I today as as a retailer I'm
with director of operations for
the circle K. stores here in New
Mexico we operate seventy eight
stores throughout this great
state and I think exception to
the notion as retailer of
flavored tobacco products that
we that we target used to
purchase these products we are
was a responsible retailer we
spend a lot of money on mystery
shops to ensure we are selling
this product to those of legal
age I in addition to
the as was mentioned before in
addition to the lost revenues
that we'd be suffering at as as
a as a local business
I just saw really what I'm
looking for to is ensuring that
that all businesses here in New
Mexico a plate on it and even
playing field many of us just as
it has been
Mentioned earlier that the these
it.
That the lost sales that we
would have these customers would
be one to tribal lands and also
across state lines to make these
purchases which would.
No less than our revenues and
also a lesson the tax
money that that the state could
Receive as well also during the
ongoing COVID nineteen pandemic
now is not the time for the
state to consider banning cell
of mental to cigarettes flavored
tobacco products flavored cigars
pipe tobacco and flavored
electronic cigarettes retail
stores have already lost sales
due to high unemployment rate
and people working from home a
further decline to tobacco cells
due to the ban on flavored due
to the stand would it lead to
lost jobs lost jobs and
eventually closure of of stores
this is not an exaggeration
but a very probable outcome
outcome retailers would not be
able to replace these lost sales
tweet urge you to say no or vote
no to this house bill today
thank you very much.
Thank you Sir Mr Burciaga auto
followed by Gil.
Google ours I believe you spoke
and Kane please.
Was on a welcome.
And our thank you very much on
Chris Bazan and I am the
registered lobbyist with always
is vape and CBD.
Mr chairman we want to just make
sure that the committee
understands that always is C. B.
D. at vaping CBD has been a
great partner with the
legislature we work very close
with the stakeholders with the
newly passed law and that the
non that a lot a lot for the age
increase
and also all the other
restrictions that we work
together on the passage of that
with this body with this
legislature on the top of that
Mr chairman members of this
committee want to make sure that
any misinformation here it is
clarified okay at always is vape
if you go to any of our stores.
Under age okay the age of twenty
one we have that no one under
twenty one is allowed even in
front of our stores.
It's not the environment is an
inside we have some high very
high standards when we met with
the members of this legislature
during the interim
working on passing this new law
we find you guys all the systems
that choose for vape and flavor
and you can see that is our
systems that I'm not attractive
to under age especially for high
school kids like was mentioned
by the opposition on the top of
that maybe not and Mr chairman
and members of this committee
There is no access for those
products high school students or
under age let's put that way the
access that online buying from
China you go online right now
open your computer you can buy a
box in the lever that in your
house so that's what the problem
is but in our stores in our
state looking for on the
economic development business
corners perspective under the
jurisdiction of this committee
our businesses under age has not
place inside of four stars we do
not sell that for high school
students that is a mis
information that I'm Mr Chairman
in Endicott we asked if I needed
to to vote against this piece of
legislation and thank you for
your time.
Thank you Sir Kayne Greece
followed by New Mexicans Alice.
yes.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is came
away some see always the CDFA
a small small business here in
the state of New Mexico we only
about forty one New Mexicans I'm
here to testify in opposition of
HB to apply
let me mention that not and
money is spent with bigger
products get their biggest costs
the legally I'm social sources
such as neighbors friends family
members and other legitimate
sellers on social media networks
I know it's hard to grasp the
benefits of harm reduction when
it comes to making but there's a
one hundred twenty thousand
adults in the state of New
Mexico they choose flavored pods
Labor Day drugs over the more
harmful combustible cigarettes
we are one of the small
businesses who actually applied
for that the application we
conducted a survey that was
submitted to the FDA which
concluded that roughly ninety
two percent of Mexico papers all
papers will return to the more
deadly combustible cigarettes
they're paid labor of choice is
prohibited some resort to buying
on the black market and even
worse someone actually trying to
make it at home on their own and
that screams public health
crisis all over again.
I will not stop online sales
either.
This bill will only kill small
judgment license businesses and
New Mexico and create a massive
black market similar to the one
in Massachusetts let's learn
from their mistakes please
oppose XP Joel thank you.
New Mexicans Alice followed by
Mr Galarza for a final comment.
Mr chairman of the members of
the committee of hospital to go
I this is Bernalillo county
sheriff Manuel is also third
welcome sure good afternoon
thanks for having me I just want
to speak in my opposition
against house bill two oh five I
just from a practical public
safety stance.
Basically what we have here is I
would be for up Smitty the state
amending the state this bill to
look at maybe holding the people
that are accountable that are
selling to people that are under
twenty one that are in the
business either administratively
or criminally on the other side
of the coin I don't believe
that.
Your that we would try to ban
something that is a legal
substance that everybody has the
right to use and create a black
market that we create another
burden on public safety would be
an issue for me add or possibly
pushing him into using illicit
drugs because we are a minority
majority state I believe there
there's a high risk for the
people of the state and I would
be in total opposition to that.
Thank you Sir for joining us Mr
Galarza welcome back do you want
to any final thoughts.
In opposition.
All righty any final thoughts Mr
Garcia your hand is up.
Is he as he is able to speak.
All right wonderful thank you
everyone thank you all public
commentators up.
For commenting on this bill
really appreciate you joining us
this afternoon.
let's go to members of the
committee.
We're still processing all that
information.
Members of the committee.
Representative Baldonado.
Those.
The best.
Yes.
Representative was not and what.
Okay Mister chairman and and and
and representative Thompson
thank you for for presenting a
bill today
I was put on a bill and and
health committee of the day and
and I'm not on that committee
but I was in front of that those
in front of me so I heard this
whole bill already in it those a
lot of things in there that
bothered me Mr chairman and
Representative Thomson and and I
think that the
The folks that articulated their
their opposition to your to your
measure today said at all I
don't I I can't add to what
they've what they've told us I I
completely and totally agree Mr
chairman that by banning these
products you're simply gonna
push the demand to some other
place some someone else is gonna
make the money on it and it's
occurred to me that were.
In this session we're trying to
with the hard work of of
Representative Martinez trying
to to legalize cannabis sales in
the and and recreational sales
in the state of New Mexico and
identifying that is eight a
prime source of of tax revenue
Mr chairman that that this
measure we're in front of us
today would actually.
Sort of offset that I don't know
if the numbers are accurate but
it sounds like maybe even to the
point of out of half of of what
would be expected to come in on
a recreational cannabis also I
contend that that that market
will exist whether we banned
those are not I think that Mr
chairman I think people will
continue to smoke they may not
get their their preference in in
flavor but they're still gonna
they're still going to buy
cigarettes maybe they're not
gonna be menthol flavor to what
not Mr chairman and you know and
a lot of the committee today you
know
I there's a lot of things are
bad for us eating too much sugar
is bad for us consuming too much
caffeine can be bad for you and
Dawn you know at that point
should be just banned everything
that's bad for you and and were
make decisions Mr chairman and
Representative we we we go out
into our day and and we we we
choose to do this or choose to
do that and those things have an
impact on our lifestyles but we
are in adults and and people
make those choices and I
understand that you're you're.
Underlying motive in this which
is to be noted is to is to try
and prevent children from being
hooked on a life of of tobacco
use whether it's it's two were
or vaping or cigarettes I know
that
Many of the folks that we are
from today are recovering
addicts or or or they've been
down that the harder roads per
se in and have have prevailed by
by beating an addiction but
maybe they picked up some other
addicts maybe the drink of
monsters are red bulls all day
or maybe the.
You know I have a secret once in
awhile just to calm the nerves
or whatever it may be and so I I
feel like this this measure is
some.
You don't.
Not necessary we're we're
already in a federally Roddy not
allowed to sell cigarettes to to
children are to people under the
age of twenty one which is on.
You know something that I think
this body five four to five
months they can pass the bill
almost at the same time that the
federal government did the same
thing so
Mr chairman and and
Representative I I I could ask
questions but I know the the the
the debate and so I've already
flesh that out and so I at this
point
will
Complete my comments and and let
others in the committee ask
those questions but I do thank
you for for being a bill for
today thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
Fajardo.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative I'm just my
own clarification so what is a
good but as far as tobacco
products what is exempt from
your legislation.
Mr speaker I'm sorry Mr chair
and representative part out in
we passed that last year a
definition of tobacco products
so all of the includes bait
cigar
chewing tobacco traditional
cigarettes we have a definition
in state law and all of those
would be flavors would be banned
in all of those.
So Mr Chairman representative so
we have a so your your bowl in
my understanding from your
testimony as you're trying to
prevent.
teenagers or beat anybody under
twenty one from
using tobacco products is that
my understanding is that the
intent of this legislation
Representative.
Mr Chairman representative part
of that's correct and the
research also shows that if
people do not begin to use
tobacco in the early years they
won't we've all heard the
reserves about immature brains
and and and all of that so if we
can keep people from from
starting and flavors are what
get kids to start then we we
have research that shows that
they will not become lifelong
users.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
representative would you
consider adding language in your
bill to include marijuana so
that we don't have any flavor
marijuana project
products being sold.
misters Mr chair and
representative part of we can't
outlaw something that's already
outlawed we don't have any it
may be when it comes time if
that cannabis bill passes then
that maybe something will look
at but we can't write a law that
says if this happens then this
happens we have to wait for that
to happen first well Chairman
representative of the we have we
have we have medical cannabis.
And we have
the what you call those the
gummies the edibles.
So we I mean.
You know so it's it's not
illegal to have cannabis in our
in the state.
So would you consider adding
language to exclude any flavored
cannabis and your bill.
It's just Mr chair and gentle
lady that that's the medical
marijuana program and and that's
not what we're attempting to to
regulate at this point.
I'm madam chair would you I mean
Mr Chairman representative would
you consider putting flavored
alcohol.
And your bill.
Mr chair and representative this
is not about alcohol this is
about tobacco only.
Madam Mr Chairman representative
it's it's it's basically it's
the same thing I mean it really
is the same.
I'm here to grown adults.
That they can't do something
that's basically what this does
anybody under twenty one already
in the and we know that this is
a legal in the state we know
that people smoke it regardless
we know that thank you under the
age of twenty one is a legal and
people drank regardless I'm so
you're picking out one day and
not you know addressing
everything which I have a
problem with what you're doing
is you're taking something away
for me as an adult.
And you know I I liked involved
in when I called I'd like to
have a good cigar.
It's something I enjoy it
doesn't happen very often you
know every six months or
something like that I'd love to
have on the status of our and my
question is why why why is that
why would you want to take that
away from me Representative.
Mr chair and representative.
As I have stated it is to keep
kids from beget from starting
and Mr chair there was a lot of
talk about all the tax dollars
that were lost the cost in
health care costs alone in the
state annually around tobacco
use is eight hundred and forty
four million dollars that
Medicaid portion of that is two
hundred and twenty two million
dollars and we all have known
someone who has died of lung
cancer or who has suffered with
emphysema and COPD that's what
we're looking at we're looking
at the health of you and this is
a way that has been proven to
decrease their beginning and and
in I heard all the testimony
that we don't sell under twenty
one.
A third of high school students
are vaping they're getting it
somewhere.
Thank you Mr chair
representative don't answer my
question why are you sending me
as a result from having a
leveraged all.
Mr chair and representative we
are we are using this vehicle to
keep kids from beginning to use
tobacco and the research shows
that.
Flavors are what attract kids
and allow them to become
addicted to the nicotine in
these products.
But that Mr Chairman
representative your bill doesn't
have you're not excluding me out
of this law.
I'm a fifty year old woman.
Why can't I labored cigar when I
went to.
Mr chair and representative as I
said it this bill is attempted
to keep you from starting we are
not outlawing tobacco we are not
outlawing any of the products we
are just outlined flavor that
and the flavors are are
intentionally put in to attract
kids and to get them addicted to
nicotine.
Chairman representative what
you're about what you're saying
you want to DO and what this
bill actually does are your in
there too and I really think.
You're not on the same page
you're not.
You're saying you want to do
something but what you're
actually doing something else.
You're taking my ability I have
eight years of our when I want
to away from me.
You keep talking about we want
to prevent young young people
from doing that but that's not
what this bill that doesn't do
that at all.
Because you done in law that's
already in statute it's already
taking care.
So you're do you any.
To help.
All it does is take me.
And it takes my writing ability
well that's all this bill does
it doesn't do what you choose.
And so so because of that I can
support this.
And you're saying one thing but
your bill does something higher.
And and it's it's sad that you
wanted more that was a but we do
want to make those laws that
let's have that conversation but
what this lot.
It takes my my ability away and
so and I can't support that
thank you Mr chairman.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
representative Thompson great
see you on the zoom again.
I I have a couple questions and
and a few comments you said that
in the previous committee there
were amendments made it to take
out of the bill wasn't criminal
penalties are or can you go
through that again please I miss
that first part of the
presentation.
Thank thank you Mr chair and
representative Martinez so what
what we were intending to do and
we we didn't quite get it done
was to not penalize the year and
not penalized the person who has
a flavored tobacco products the
people that we want to penalize
and it's civil penalties are the
sellers and the and that was
what the amendments were about
was getting the language just
right so that we we do not want
to make a sixteen year old who
was in possession of a flavored
tobacco product a criminal we
want to put the penalties on the
seller.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr chair
and representative I I I like
those changes I made the mistake
my first session to.
Sponsor a bill that dealt with
criminal criminal penalties
and it was a very good bill is a
very good issue that needed to
be addressed but I I feel like
any time we go into criminal
penalties whether it's creating
new ones or enhancing current
ones.
It's a land mine between the
dust the PED's the criminal
justice reform advocates and law
enforcement and everybody so I'm
glad you did that so under your
amended bill
it is illegal punishable by a
civil fine is that what it is to
stoop to to sell.
Labor tobacco products but it's
imposed not on the clerk it's
imposed on the store owner or
the distributor was imposed on
Mr Mr chair and representative
Martinez it is imposed on the
the owner for lack of a better
word the person who purchased
the product to be in the store
to be sold by the clerk stopped
there is no flavored tobacco
products in the store the clerk
cannot sell them if there are
they are there illegally and it
was the person who are who want
them to be sold in the store who
will be held and the penalties
range from losing your and
losing your license to sell
tobacco for gradually longer
periods up to eight basically a
death penalty in terms of cell
at having the privilege of
selling tobacco products.
I am fine.
Got it.
I'm in Mr chair representative I
and I don't I don't I don't know
that this question pertains to
build but just out of curiosity
and maybe maybe the chair can
just help me with this but you
need to sell I know I know that
to sell alcohol you need a
license obviously we've had
plenty hearings on the hosts to
sell tobacco products do you
need a license
did you know that Representative
is yes Mr chair and
representative Martinez we
passed that bill last year up
until that point we didn't have
license and not not to get
really wonky but but at I
service that co chair of the
tobacco settlement revenue
oversight committee and every
year we get millions about forty
million dollars from that
settlement but every year and
although we're still only I
think fighting two thousand nine
monies that tobacco companies
come back at us and say you are
not collecting all the taxes
that you need to to be part of
this program and the reason we
weren't is because we didn't
know who was selling tobacco
because we didn't have licenses
so now we have licensing and
that that's a new I believe that
began January first got it thank
you Mr chair representative for
that clarification and you said
one of the bigger penalties here
would be you losing your your
privilege to sell tobacco
products.
Is that is that correct
representative correct Mr Mr
chair and representative got it.
Got it okay.
let let me let me shift gears a
little bit
in terms of the the public
health arguments so Mr chair
representative
One of the reasons are maybe the
main reason I heard for this
bill is to
to to ensure that young people.
Are not some how targeted.
By these industries
because we know that.
Some of these flavors can be
used to to
to target young people get them
to start using it as they it
doesn't taste as bad potentially
and so then that becomes part of
the habit that thirty years
later.
That adult is non smoking is
that is that is that a fair
representation Mr speaker Mr
chair and representative
Martinez that's a that's perfect
can.
the as you know Mr chair
representative
you know I I.
Part of my part my work is is
yeah I'm I'm not a public health
expert at all but part of my
work is rooted in public health
social determinants of health.
theories and philosophies and
and and I I get I get these
different
years that I think we can impose
on substances that we feel can
be harmful whether it's tobacco
all called cannabis
Whatever it might be right and
so I think taxation is a piece
of that I think H. overuse is a
piece of that with tobacco we
learned the lesson of really
clamping down advertisements
right because when I was growing
up yeah you had a cartoon
characters selling tobacco
products right in.
you know it is what it is right
I mean I I.
The I I think that public health
experts would argue that it was
advertisement targeted at young
people intentionally and and I
think many courts actually found
that hence the reason for these
tobacco settlement funds here
and and elsewhere.
How do you
How do you balance.
because we heard this I think it
was a public comment
We did do a tax increase and and
granted you know tax increases
are always.
You know the other three three
sides to the coin there's house
Senate and governor right and
and.
I believe everything I believe
about tax policy but that didn't
mean the Senate agrees and
believes.
So but but needless to say we
did do a tax increase in the
last year we did this this age
thing right where it's now
twenty one and older
Is is there a reason we are here
discussing a flavor ban did
those two other
Those two other strategies not
work yet do you think or Mr
chair representative.
Mr chair and representative
Martinez they they will be part
of the solution this is this is
a multi pronged issue and we're
attacking it from as as I stated
with that the costs in health
care I'm and that doesn't talk
about the pain and suffering and
the loss of productivity I will
was on a task force a
legislative task force a few
years ago that looked on looked
at this the cost of tobacco use
in to businesses and there were
so many things that were
discussed there that that we
would never think of like how
many more breaks tobacco users
take that non tobacco users and
when they when they are addicted
to nicotine how their
productivity goes down as bait
as their need for nicotine goes
up I'm in you know throughout
the course of the day if they
haven't had a smoke for an hour
then they spend time thinking
about when they're going to get
so so I'm not it yeah I don't
think it's fair to say those
haven't worked although by that
third out of high school
students are using tobacco
products shows that we have a
long way to go and this was just
one more one more way to to
attack that.
I I understand that Mr chair
representative and and again I
think from a public health
perspective you know I I think I
think a lot of these things make
sense right and and I would add
land use and zoning and I would
add things like hours of
operation are.
Although I will also say I think
sometimes we
You know we've got to make sure
that we keep it in the context
right in in community organizing
we always talk about the world
as it is in the world as it
should be right and obviously we
all have our understanding what
the world is it should be should
be but we're also in the world
as it is and we've got to be
realistic about the context one
example where that I can think
of where we're public health
kind of went a little overboard
was back in the day when they
decided to have this quote on
like an undertaker licenses
right and that was thought to be
a way to control
access to the substances and
thirty five years later my
goodness we have a huge problem
on our hands and thank goodness
for the leadership of what guy
goes and
and gentleman Maestas and and
others who have been working on
this liquor license reform thing
but it it really had an
unintended consequence so you
know I I think for me I I
totally get I totally understand
I understand where this comes
from I understand the philosophy
behind it
I do think that you know at the
same time we've got a we've got
a.
So long as tobacco is legal
you know and and perhaps that's
like a federal law that one day
will have to come down I said
this on the floor on the
cannabis bill like cannabis is a
lot less toxic than any of this
stuff I don't think there's
certainly give it science
sciences that would disagree
with me on that point
but until we if it ever comes to
be I doubt it would be but if it
ever comes to be that federal
government comes down hard on on
tobacco and says no more tobacco
you know I feel like it's always
going to be a balancing act
between
prevention and creating a
culture of responsible use I'll
go to resent the hard as simple
right a cigar every time in golf
right I mean I I I don't know Mr
chair representative I don't
think you're golfing three times
a day I doubt it
it's probably just a a few far
between right and and to me
that's a culture responsible use
right it's that glass of wine
and a Sunday afternoon with your
with your family it's it's that
microbrew on a Saturday after
you take that long bike ride
it's an edible cannabis edible
to be able to relax at the end
of the night after a long day of
work and and a good night's
sleep
that's a culture responsible use
verses I think what we've
created with alcohol for sure
but also with
Without with the tobacco right
in tobacco use being such an
addicting
a substance.
One thing that and and all and
with his Representative and and
Mr chair one thing that comes up
me was which part of COVID right
about.
If if you are an adult if you
are a fifty year old woman or a
fifty year old man.
and you've smoked.
You know since you were you know
twenty five you know you had
kids and life is stressful and
you started smoking which
I would rather you small
cannabis because it won't kill
you these not as quickly as
tobacco but
you know given that cannabis is
not a legal substance that maybe
started smoking tobacco and so
if you're fifty years old and is
looking for twenty five years
and you smoke menthol cigarettes
we're not gonna tell you that
you you can't right
arguably you can go across the
state will get some in Texas
but but we're telling you that
you can no longer buy menthol it
and that's you know again the
world is should be that that to
me that kind of.
Kind of makes me feel
uncomfortable.
Having said all that resentment
and Mr speaker Mr chair Mr
speaker.
Mr chair I I truly appreciate
where you're coming from
representative you know you you
definitely are one of the
leading voices on on these
issues up and have been for some
time so you know then
you know I I'm I'm sort of I'm
sort of in between on this one
right now but but I do want to
thank you what I want to thank
you for for your work on this.
I think that it is important I
think it's an issue that
deserves.
And not just a.
About your.
Thank you to.
Not not just to this specific
bill Mr Mr Chairman
representative there really I
think this is gonna be a work in
progress and and again it's
going to include regulations
taxation land use zoning
eccentric xetra.
But I I hate I think you put a
lot of hard work into this and I
think that this is something
that this committee certainly
should be looking at and and
looking out through you know to
with a fine tooth comb I think
it deserves that much from from
this committee so thank you Mr
chair and and Representative I
think those from my questions
and comments but if if nothing
else maybe I'll put my hand back
up here in a little bit if with
your indulgence Mister chair
thank you.
Thank you Representative
Powdrell Culbert thank you Mr
chairman I move to table house
bill two oh five.
I'm thank you I will acknowledge
you I will go back to you but
there's further debate and we
don't want to cut off debate
Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr chairman I I was
also going to move to table.
All right just a few comments
and then we can take that motion
one is thank you representative
Thompson I know this means a lot
to and I think that
We really need to take a hard
look at other costs not just the
human cost I'm thinking of the
folks that I know that have
passed because of lung cancer.
Just the human cost the
governmental cost the cost of
productivity our economy smoking
tobacco has far exceeded any
social cost of any other drug
including our kind of drugs.
On the damages done to our
community and our state
The.
You know vaping was wasn't
necessarily illegal but vaping
was not regulated until.
Until a couple years ago thanks
to your leadership and others so
we regulated the device and we
regulated the industry what we
need to go back and regulate the
content the content of the of
the chemicals
someone said in in support that
tobacco is addictive I don't
believe tobacco is addictive.
But nicotine sure as heck is a
nicotine is the most addictive
drug to a human person
More so than crack cocaine or
you know whatever so it is
highly addictive and the cost of
an audit one additional
cigarette.
Is so low relative to the or the
or the joy of one additional
cigarette.
As as it relates to the cost of
one additional cigarette is so
low plus the addiction the
people go years and struggle
many times and can't overcome it
but I think we need to take a
hard look at the levels of
nicotine in these products I
think going from eighteen years
to twenty one years in and of
itself was like revolutionary I
think we kind of lost track of
that what what a tremendous.
Law that was to change you know
I ten years ago twenty or so
that have been impossible so
we're definitely headed in the
right direction I just
prohibition is.
Is difficult from a public
policy standpoint because of
the.
You know because of the
unintended consequences but more
importantly it just doesn't get
to the heart of the matter which
is that nicotine itself
and then even though I Santa
dodal Representative of members.
I know personally folks who have
quit smoking cigarettes which
kills you because of these babes
now granted these chemicals in
the vapes.
Maybe harmful but I don't
believe there's just no way they
can be as harmful as combustible
smoke in your in your loans but
I that's where I'm coming from
Representative so you'll know so
we have continued conversations
on this bill seeing no further
debate Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Thank you.
Mr Chairman.
Our motion to table house bill
two oh five.
Mr chairman you muted.
Thank you Representative
Baldonado so that's a motion to
table it's a non debatable
motion there is no further.
Hands up with regards to the
committee members so gently to
order is please call the roll.
Chairman Representative
Baldonado yes to table.
Representative Dow.
Yes No yes to table.
Representative hello yes.
Representative was passed.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Johnson.
No and I would like to explain
able please no to table.
No to table and explain able
please thank you.
James R. Pirtle Culbert.
Yes the table thank you
Representative that have the.
Representative the.
Representative us.
AS to table.
Representative Johnson.
Representative.
Yes.
I'm sorry no to table.
Table.
Unbiased as.
And and yes so thank you
Representative stick with us
stick with us for a moment
Representative Martinez to
explain his boat thank you Mr
chair for the for the extra time
Mr chair representative I think
this is an important
issue and and I don't think
that.
you know today's result or
whatever should put up a
painting by any by any means I
do think that you were on the
right track with
with you removing those criminal
criminal penalties from the.
I'm getting a lot of feedback Mr
folks complete.
Thank you
I I think that you're on the
right track I think you're
removing the criminal penalties
that were in the bill originally
I think is a is a big step
forward.
I voted no because I believe
that the conversation needs to
be had but obviously we have a
committee process is that needs
to.
Take place
I'm I'm the piece that really
like gets at me though is
Representative Fajardo brought
up like.
I'm having trouble driving in my
mind.
Why we should tell her that she
cannot have that flavored cigar
anymore you know if somebody
told me I can't have that.
Peach flavored hard seltzer
anymore
not that I dream card sisters
sometimes they're low calories.
you know that that that just
kind of it's kind of a weird
concept I guess is what I'm
trying to say I get the youth
access I get that but the the
concept of telling a fifty year
old woman that you can no longer
have the a strawberry flavored
cigar or whatever
if there's something that
logically just falls off for me
so hopefully this is not the you
know I I will not hopefully I
know that this is not the end of
your work on these issues and
and I look forward to whatever
new iteration of this comes
comes to be thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative.
Thank you Representative thank
you Mr chair members of anything
else representative Thompson are
thank thank you thank you all
righty great.
Great hearing depreciate
everybody will now go to
Representative Lujan.
And
And let's see if I who do wish
to
The if you Representative Lujan
she's not in the in the attendee
we go to Representative Senator
Ortiz Pinos been wishing
patiently I think Representative
Lujan is in another committee
let me just glance at the public
attendees will go back to
Representative Lujan Senator
welcome welcome center great to
see you we're gonna go with
Senate bill one hundred twenty
two non pharmacists use of
insignias and who would you wish
to join you at the up in the hot
seat Senator.
Mr chairman thank you and and my
extra weight on this the woman
who who brought this issue to my
attention I think is here a
moment get to us she's a
pharmacist thank you at if you
can raise your hand in the in
the in the so wonderful we see
you there.
And a welcome and with that I
will turn it over you senator I
Senate bill one hundred twenty
two.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee the
issue and one twenty two is one
that we.
Attempting for a couple of years
now I think you saw it last
year.
And the issue really is this
the status of the owns and
operates the Duran central
pharmacy in Albuquerque it's in
my district as where she came to
me was that I think and she you
for a couple of years ago
started a coffee shop next or
pharmacy she calls it remedy and
the the longer they came up with
was a the R. that we seen for
prescriptions with a little
extra retail.
I am the co chair.
But she was informed.
There's a lot in this in the
state does not permit.
The use of that are ex symbol.
For anything other than
pharmacies.
So as you look into the matter.
Then realize.
You see that are ex symbol all
over the place and so on
spas yes on
certainly on cannabis dispensary
medical cannabis dispensaries
it's so you know for people who
have the medicine that they
think of.
We'll help you with that what
aches you nails you all of those
use that are ex is widely uses
almost become like the barber
shop pole.
When you see those stripes.
Meeting times I was supposed to
be just for ourselves is
everywhere now issues into much
more widely and and so I'd like
to to talk about the bill we we
brought it in in the Senate this
year including the concept of
the apothecary which is
similarly prohibited our law as
as as it currently stands and
yet we know there is in
Albuquerque least an apothecary
bar there is a deposit you're a.
The cat in the store against us
we're we're attempting to change
the law to make it possible for
people to use that are
acceptable and then we're plus
we Kerry without running afoul
of the law I'll turn it over in
the status.
Welcome status.
Hello thank you
chairman and members of the
committee again my name is Mona
Gaddis and I'm the owner of
Duran central pharmacy in
Albuquerque I am also a
pharmacist and have been for
over thirty years I the past
president of the New Mexico
pharmacists Association and I hi
I implore you over fifty people
in my community and our justice
Senator Ortiz the Pino said the
R. X. symbol is units is used
universally to signify a remedy
for wellness I've seen this
symbol on granola bars oatmeal
exercise equipment even on
dispensaries it is even used on
trails in Bernalillo county and
the pharmacists Association uses
it in its logo I don't I it just
signifies health and I don't
believe anybody that uses the R.
X. symbol is being confused with
selling drugs and so I would
like to eliminate that some old
statute it's from the nineteen
eighties and as he said it has
been amended to for the word pop
the Kerry as well because there
is an apothecary lounge in
Albuquerque thank you for your
time I appreciate it.
Mr chairman
we
also mention it is a radical to
the the pharmacy board does not
have any problems with this
legislation.
Thank you know interesting bill
it just.
Deletes the word apothecary.
My assistant up ran down the
hall to deliver a document but
let's go to the audience and
let's go to those who are in
favor.
Of Senate bill one twenty two
what and raise your hand who's
in favor.
Raise your hand within the
there's at ten attendees with us
right now.
Anyone in favor all right great
let's go to those in opposition
those in opposition to Senate
bill one twenty two and there is
no one in opposition great that
works out because we couldn't I
can let you in
Representative Powdrell Culbert
thank you Mr chairman and and
Senator I'm a little bit
confused.
To say the least.
Are we.
Trying to separate the two being
used together.
Or eliminate one
the other.
Mr chairman and and
Representative roads over the
the bill last year the and and
real we should we need shared
just feels that little symbol
that are acceptable.
In the Senate this year
direction remember I think it
was in the Judiciary Committee
there was noted that the word of
politics area similarly banned
in current law and so they added
that.
To the items that would be
deleted from the law prohibiting
their use so as a stand at this
motion those who produce we all
right or Mr Gaddis is part of
the show for for the apothecary
lounge to use those terms of
assuming.
Just so Mister chairman and and
senator.
It's just so that they can be
use where ever they want to be
used if they want to be used
separately that's fine or if
they want to be used together.
That is fine in that defines her
so that sounds to me like you
have more this is that is that
you have to businesses under one
roof and you're trying to
separate the two internal.
Mr Chairman just respond to that
one.
I'm.
I I actually have two separate
businesses and they are not
under the same roof but it's
really just a matter of using
that logo that are X. in our
logo and like I said there's
lots of companies that use that
logo and it it as it stands now
we cannot use that logo and I
had special permission by the
board of pharmacy to extend my
use of the logo Intel the law
could be changed and so now if
if we can get this law change I
can use the logo at my coffee
shop and our explorer can use
the logo on their granola bar
and with the amendment the
apothecary lounge can use
apothecary as the name of their
business or for instance that
there was maybe it's a little
breakfast place that wanted to
call themselves the apothecary
cafe they could use that as well
if this are were to pass.
Okay thank you miss garrison
Senator so I can do pot roast
barbecue with our ex on the end
of that's what I decided to do.
You Mr chairman and
representative will only
apologize for review is helpful
there is no.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you senator.
Members of the committee with
the past.
Second.
We have a motion for a do pass
by Representative Baldonado we
have a second by Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
I.
I love that that's a top ten
word apothecary the only time
I've ever heard it uttered is in
the.
The academy award winning movie
Shakespeare in love with that
apothecary had some tough stuff
in that movie.
Well gently call the roll.
Chairman.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Dow yes I'd like
to explain why the.
Representative
yes.
Yes.
Johnson yes.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Powdell Culbert
yes.
Bill yes.
Madam chair to get on yes
chairman.
Yes and so centered welcome good
to see you you have a do pass
And we'll get the committee
report out.
You very much Mr chairman and
committee members forth with
thank you Sir Representative we
Tara L. Lujan welcome welcome
you Mr chair who do you need to
who what are who's your experts
that we can bring in the I have
any up shuts the Senator left
Representative Dow to explain
her vote forgive me
Representative Lujan you could
give us a minute thank thank you
Mr chairman at it was just I I
really don't have anything
explain on the I just wanted you
know that my sister in law runs
an apothecary so if you would
like to try some products from
an apothecary also yes.
Right all right.
Representative Lujan now who do
you wish to be who's your expert
witnesses.
Justin green and heather chamber
if Mr green and miss Chandler
can raise their virtual hands so
we can find their names quicker.
Justin green.
And Mr Chandler they're both in
the committee room there's seven
attendees of.
Out in the audience and
Representative Lujan please
proceed and I believe you have
on amendment.
Yes.
Mr chair.
Why don't we address that
amendment in your presentation.
Okay members of the committee
move the amendment for
discussion Mr chair and I'll
second that of see no objection
what you're welcome to address
the amendment along with your
bill and that we could take
action.
Thank you.
Okay so.
This.
This bill HB are first well
thank you for it is my first
time in your committee Mr chair
members HB three forty nine
expands the definition of false
advertising inspection.
Five seven dash fifteen dash to
and M. S. eight to include the
use of intellectual property
trademarks logos Munoz our pride
partnerships in marketing
without the permission of the
creator owner or authorized user
on the amendment
simply on page two line for a
would strike the word and and
insert in lieu of their of the
word or
To on page two one seven four
the word Munoz it would be
inserted brands were requests
and after the first occurrence
of the word or would we insert
it like Mrs for and the third
amendment to be on page two one
eight eight strike the words for
you.
So the importance of this bill
is it we have two good reasons
why this is important this bill
is important to millions of New
Mexicans that buy products and
services on the internet and
want to buy any authorized maybe
at direct source but most
importantly the this bill is
important to the thousands of
New Mexico small businesses that
find themselves listed on dozens
of internet sites using their
logos or brands menu and and the
like this is emerging problem in
a number of states are taking
action into our
Such legislation California
Louisiana have adopted laws in
the last year and New York Rhode
Island and Virginia are looking
at it now I went to California
and act their lost seventy five
percent of a popular pop forms
listing removed for lack of
authorization at the heart of
this is the internet practice
practice of scrape data to
populate website for customer
Lead generation these companies
will then offer items mostly
mostly restaurants at this point
but artistic crafts
You have their products online
have suffered from this as well
and that that I'm gonna turn it
over to expert witness Mr green
to expand thank you Mr chair.
Welcome Mr.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee members and thank you
to the sponsor for bringing this
forward I I saw as a sponsor
mentioned this is an emergency
problem on the internet where US
companies are able to just
create a software routine they
can just suck up the information
based on your website and your
product list your brands your
likeness is your and
republishing are for for re
marketing purposes where they
take a percentage of it or put
different prices on and do it
without your permission and so
in the world where you know we
can't chase every every lead on
the internet it's almost
impossible to get permission to
chase down all of these folks
that are doing this of the three
major our food.
Representative Maestas sometimes
has given me I was communicate
with the vice chair thank you no
problem so all right in the the
three major I venture capital
platforms in I have started to
use this as their lead
generation to get people to say
for instance want what shows up
on a great Santa Fe brand and
Chile joints they will put the
brand and the names and the menu
up on their website but they
have no intention of serving
them because the restaurant even
will say we don't want to serve
them but they will use the brand
up there because there's no
mechanism to be removed from the
internet in a very timely and
very easy way to do this this is
a statewide issue this is a
national issue this is emergent
because of technology and this
is our chance to New Mexico to
to take to address the issue
in other states they've done
very directly to to take on the
third party delivery platforms
for restaurants in our solution
we decided to expand the are the
definition of false advertising
to to include the use of our
intellectual property so as
opposed to a new law it is
expansion of the false
advertising in statute to to
make sure that we
I'd get permission prior to
using these things
this is non consensual marketing
and this is you are restaurants
should or restaurants or
merchants in New Mexico should
have that the protection of the
state for just a mom and pop
brand that doesn't go through
the national patent and
trademark office to protect the
brand to protect their local
brand and not have it you served
on the internet a lot of times
this is used as a bait and
switch tactic where they will
offer something but they know
that they're not going offered
and in fact they will end up
switching you to a different
restaurant or to a different
merchants or so on and so this
can happen.
The restaurant which is the most
common practice but it could
happen with a hardware store
that you could put the grand
you know home depot up on your
site and then and then go buy
something from an inferior
location and so on or a
different product and so there's
very little protection for the
consumer consumers get confused
and we hope that this law will
expand that and reduce this
I stand for questioning and miss
miss Chandler it has some
examples from our southern New
Mexico she is an owner operator
of a third party delivery
service that is very compliant
with this is the best practice
but she is down in Las Cruces
and Alamogordo and I'll pass
this on to her right now thank
you very much.
Thank you Mr curry.
This chancellor.
You need to self.
I'm thank you SO much Mr
chairman and the committee for
letting me speak today I'm gonna
apologize ahead of time for my
scratchy voice I have a
competitive cheerleader and I've
spent the weekend screaming so
I'm kind of losing my voice but
as Mr green said I
Representative locally owned
small third party delivery
service in Los crucis is as well
as Alamogordo
on basically Dona Ana as well as
Otero County and I have
personally spoken with several
of my at local restaurants that
I worked extremely hard to build
personal relationships with in
order to to be able to offer the
delivery service that they have
especially during this pandemic
when it's vital that they have
the service and I've had several
these restaurants tell me
that they've got these larger
markets coming are these larger
delivery services coming in and
Using their menus are upping the
prices they're not using
accurate menus so many
restaurants have COVID exclusive
menus right now because they're
only doing Kerry outs and
the customer complaints are
coming directly to the
restaurants not to those other
platforms and it's giving a bad
name to the local restaurants
that have no control over this
and supporting this change and
this bill
will we'll not only.
Properly reflects the hard work
that I as well as other small
delivery services put in to
build those relationships but
it's also going to enable our
restaurants to the.
To maintain their good names to
maintain their ability to
control the food that's coming
and out of the restaurant to
control the people that are
coming in and out of their
restaurants I'm here in Los
crucis we have several
restaurants that have
decided to use my service
exclusively because they trust
me they know me I'm here in the
community and when you've got
these larger services coming in
and just.
For lack of better word bashing
their bad name by providing this
poor service it's not fair these
restaurants that are doing their
best your find in a time when
everything is so up in the air
right now so I again thank you
so much for letting me speak and
I hope we can almost to pass
this so that we can keep these
restaurants opening keep these
restaurants being able to use
their names the way that they
see fit.
Thank you Mr Anders.
Representative did you want to
add anything.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and we stand for questions.
Thank you Representative and we
had about a five minute
attendees so go to public
comment if anyone is here to
speak in opposition to this bill
this is house bill three forty
nine please raise your hand.
And if you are here to speak in
support.
Of this bill three forty five
three forty nine please raise
your hand.
All right we have no takers from
our attendees committee.
Representative Culbert.
Thank you madam chair I move
into.
Thank you.
Thank you we have a motion for
it to pass from Representative
Powdrell Culbert I suspected
that and the second from
Representative guy a ghosts.
Madam secretary would you call
the roll.
I do pass on H. B. three forty
nine without an amendment
because we did not receive an
amendment.
Well thank you madam secretary
for pointing that out we're
gonna have to backtrack group.
Representative Lujan.
You said you had an amendment
you through the amendment can
you give us the points yes
point point two zero three eight
point eight point one.
I repeat that Representative
Lujan.
L. three two zero three eight
four.
Point one.
Two zero three eight four point
one yes okay that way because I
don't have it madam secretary
did you receive it then I did
not should I call up stairs and
try to get
a copy now but they will give me
one of I can request it.
All right hold on just a second
madam secretary hello
Representative Lujan.
You say that it was changing one
and to the board or.
What
is.
Was there anything else on the
amendment.
Yes there is there are two other
things on page two line seven.
Before the.
The board then use it would
insert brands were requests and
after the first occurrence of
the word or would insert like
Mrs for.
To read strike the words four
years.
And if you need the number it is
point two two zero three eight
four point one you're correct
madam madam chair thank since we
are schools of those amendments
twenty four hours
I think it does today sharing
that correct Representative yes.
Chair representative if I.
I think I could just you and
Representative could take care
of the amendments and
judiciary's would not have it is
the otherwise we have the ball
over.
Madam depreciate that I would I
would accept that.
I mean they're they're minor
madam chair right
Representative.
There are minor but we don't
have them so what you have on
the table and what was actually
moved by Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Representative Lujan Hey is a
motion to pass not pass as
amended but a motion to pass so
you'll have to resubmit your
amendment in judiciary and have
them adopted at that time.
You do that thank you thank you
and thank you is our as for
clarifying.
That we have on the table is a
motion to pass house bill three
forty nine.
moved and seconded so please do
call the roll.
Thank you madam chair so I have
a motion by Representative but
and a second by Representative
goes to to pass H. B. three
forty nine.
There were no.
Yes.
Representative Dow yes
Representative well yes.
In Los yes Representative
Johnson yes.
Representative units yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
yes.
Apple yes.
Madam chair for you all.
Yes.
Yes this is excused.
So
know.
House Bill three forty nine so
not amended.
Thank you thank you madam chair
thank you committee presented
the committee thank you very
much.
Thank you committee we are
adjourned until one thirty on
Friday.
