One seventeen
the sponsor has asked to roll
that particular bill so if you
are here for house bill one
seventeen it will not be heard
and wait for sponsored to ask us
to
put it back on this schedule so
we are also waiting on
charleston he will be coming in
to give us an update
so when he gets here we will we
will refer to him but in the
meantime I patrick if we could
take role.
Representative and you know new
present representative dunkin
here representative hernandez
representative lender
representative little here
representative lunch trump.
Representative martinez
representative.
Here.
Here.
Thank you madame chairman
members of the committee.
House bill one fifty nine is a
committee substitute relating to
gaming removing a louble game in
expenses from the net take
calculation for non profit
gaming operator licensees.
Making the existing required.
Distribution percentage for
charitable or educational
purposes permanent.
Madam chair
i'd like for my expert witnesses
to introduce themselves they'll
be doing most of the talking
today madam chair do you want
them.
Every time the questions ask go
through me or can they answer it
directly.
Would like to move.
Madame chairf if we could give
our expert witnesses a chance to
introduce themselves and.
You could set over here on this.
I'd.
Good morning I michelle you know
I am stuff counselor for the
gaming.
The.
Yeah.
The license.
They.
Yeah.
My apologies to the committee
it's excuse me sorry
I was just I was just saying
there is confusion on the the
perception of where they're were
eliminating money for the the
post in the largest to pay their
bills in fact the the rules
currently written for the game
of control board transfer the
money directly to the post and
directly to the lodge where
their governing boards in their
finance boards pay all their
bills so there's no change in
what they receive whatsoever
every penny stays the same on
that regard.
Madam chart and members of the
committee if I may this this
gives the
the non profits more control at
the local levels is what it does
is just
we have had a lot of feedback on
it and I hope we do a good job
explaining and get through
through everybody and how it
effects.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I believe our expert
witness might be better at.
The.
Thank you
their section that reverts back
for the
changing the charity percentage
from twenty percent back to
sixty percent that's right off
of a net revenue so if you had
to give sixty percent right off
the top they're not going to
have any money left for
operating expenses and no very
little money left for charity
expenses so that would have a
very big impact around the state
because these organizations I do
a lot of local charity light of
local scholarships they patriot
pan voice a democracy
scholarships for the students at
the different universities
and is this unlimited the number
charities they do currently they
do close to two million dollars
a year on charity so it's a it's
a great function for charitable
gaming
with the allowable game expenses
the way it's currently in there
it lowers the amount of charity
and
you know and i'm an auditor will
match any audit to any number
but we'd like to see the charity
amount restored to the where it
was prior to any changes last
year and is going to be almost
hundred percent it's just like
point nine percent difference
and I could really bore in
confusion of numbers if you wish
but a I think I can give you
some examples.
Madame chair with that was stand
for questions.
Thank you madame chair repres.
The.
One of your experts explained
the me on page five
starting along twenty.
The impact that this will have
on veterans organizations.
Full reason for existing is.
Do it exactly what.
It seems to me you want to lower
the amount going towards
charitable educational purposes
can you explain the me that need
to go from sixt.
Mannem chair representative
martinus
the act was written twenty five
years ago and has been at sixty
percent pretty much that whole
time originally was eighty eight
percent.
June fifteenth two thousand one
the gaming control boardness is
prior to all of our ten years
there adopted
a formula two redistribute of
fines to allow the post of the
largest expenses to pay their
bills because the act does not
have any provision for that it
just covers the gaming
attacks the
charity amount and the
distributor lease percentage so
they may knew they had a problem
because no one could afford to
maintain a game room because the
machines take a lot
electricities of payroll you
have licensing fees of paper you
have a lot of expenses
associated with it so they came
up with a formula and the
formula
that was in use inside june
fifteenth two thousand one
through the last
till june of this year
basically eighteen point nine
percent or of net revenue after
tax was the charitable amount so
we were trying to codify actual
practice into the legislation so
they match because we knew our
rule did not match the of the
act itself and that was an issue
it was allowed to go on address
and I really appreciate our
border senior staff in our legal
staff to really address this
because it's it's about time we
get into alignment and right and
the practice that these clubs
have been practicing i've been
there almost twenty years the
whole time i've been with the
agency.
The.
It's going to free up more up.
In indirectly yes but it's going
to be like one percent they pick
up charities going to be one
percent less point nine it's
really in material of that right
that point we're just going to
keep everything.
If approved the same outlook as
intended and then if in the
future or any time you know that
you know the legislation allows
station legislators excuse me
decide you want to change
percentages that's not on our
college your call.
The.
If if.
Well
take in that language out we're
leaving the percent that percent
is as though
it is a break even it's the
other allowable gaming expenses
that gets attracted out first
before charities calculate it so
when we subtract that it's one
of those loan complicated mass
problems from high school where
you had the printer season yet
to do the parentheses first were
subtracting out a distributor
payment and in other expenses
which lower right now.
Were like eleven or twelve
percent in charity once they do
the charity distributor excuse
me to distributor payment out of
there so this reduce and charity
and
it was a unintended consequences
because the latencies haven't
used allowable game expenses
since twenty thirteen twenty
fourteen
thank you.
Thank you madam chair.
So this allows for an incr.
And the amount that they can de.
Madam chair on representative
martinez it.
It does allow for a little bit
more money to go into the
operators for their operating
expense but it also with the
second half of the years.
Keeps it from reverting back to
sixty percent the charity until
that can be addressed in the
future if our post in largest
were forced to pay sixty percent
of the older revenue off the top
they would be in direct rates
many of them would forward
except the biggest ones.
Thank you my last question
madame chair
panel
have the veterans organizations
being a part of the conversation
since this will directly.
Madame chair represented
martinis yes I have a a staff of
three auditors and a work very
close all the licensees better
exam for terminal
most of the gaming managers and
accountants understand there's
really no difference in the the
bottom line to them but we are
just trying to cotify everything
and make sure all the rules are
correct and
beyond you know who words
enforceable and it's on record
so no one gets chorechained in
the futu.
Thank you.
Thank you
I think I understand it why
you're doing it what you're
doing and and but I just have
two questions while one question
actually
line number nine on page two
twenty four in each.
It's somebody write this that
just really like.
Difficult or is the reason you
stayed under twenty five percent
and then on page three yeah
section two you get one and two
tenths percent to the.
Jockey.
So you need to stand or twenty
five percent.
Is that their reason or did
somebody just get creative with
their numbers here adam chair
representative dumping
that is a a part of the the act
that was changed by the racing
commission and down I do believe
they have another bill coming
forward that clarifies it a
little bit better than I can I
don't know if i'm the chairman
can do a better job thank you
madame care representative
dunkin last year it one under
his house built through three
six as I recall the racing.
Industry was running their own
portion of that bill and some of
their language in the percentage
numbers is what they worked out
on their own week we really
didn't have an input in and why
they're not using round numbers
I don't know
obviously their version of what
they did has had repercussions
on our side of the bill and
that's why we're trying to get
everything adjusted return to
that question I don't beginning
of us know why the reason
commission uses odd numbers
thank you manager I was just
curious why the numbers
representative harper would love
this this is his love
thank you.
A madam chair representative.
Have.
The.
Madame chair representative
little the revenues flux you
like to wait from year to year
and location in the state
we.
Obviously during coverage
revenues displimented and then
they close there is nothing the
nonprofits have pretty much
recovered as a whole but not
evenly some different areas of
the state geographically they
suffer a little more in and
other areas of the state they
dirt they're doing better so
the revenues are consistent with
the few years before the
pandemic however overall
revenues have been decreasing
for in the twenty years i've
been with the agency because the
client tell it many of these
organizations is aging out and
you know it's decreasing thank
you
thank you.
And will be over.
And.
The.
Manager representative little I
don't know the answer to that
this point there's always other
options you know there's
membership requirements there's
a lot of limitations on these
game rooms so that could be
something that could be easily
revisited and I just in
accordance with our corporation
with the veterans and fraternal
organizations.
Thank you.
Work.
Man of chair represented little
none of the nonprofit licensees
with the game rooms at a closed
after covered we just had a two
closed recently and that was
membership limitations and it's
internal if you don't have
traffic the foot traffic you're
not going to be successful the
changes were proposing or
hopefully to keep them open
longer because we're limiting
the charity to wear the practice
has been for the last twenty
years at twenty percent and were
keeping the charity consistent
without someone trying to right
run through a light of inflated
expenses trying to lower the
charity payment which can be
done in was done in the past
thank you.
Thank you madame chair
representative only one question
does this change anything with
the racing the resignos and that
in far as their percentage is
from the bill before
madame chair represented me no
so the so that group is is
that is bad with this no
building.
Madame chair representative
mason yes it doesn't affect a
metal I just want to make sure
thank you.
Videos on the committee have any
more questions.
I I just want to clarify one
thing so on
question.
Thank you madame
so I was wondering
thank you for your c.
The whole.
Madame chair representative
little this has no impact on the
compact this is already in our
existing I statute so the
answers now thank you thank you
and I very good question thank
you for asking it are anybody
else okay
the only thing I wanted to cause
the substitute was a little
confusing and so I wanted to
make sure that everybody grasped
it and I just wanted to say that
the the original was never met
to apply correct to non profits
and and then what could you
clarify that just for me.
Madame chairman members of the
committee i'm when the original
bill passed a house bill two
fifty three last year it
included along with senate bill
three three six they were joined
together in the same statute and
a time limit was put on to where
i'm all the changes in the
entire statute which was only
supposed to have plated three
three six
it got it for your time limit so
now we are going to have a
situation where this is going to
revert back from sixty twenty
percent to sixty percent which.
That's a big reason for this
this adjustment and I appreciate
that thank you for that response
and I think I just wanted to
make sure that the committee
understood that this was to make
it cleaner and to clarify that
point so thank you okay what's
the will of the committee.
So there's a whole better land
let let me have passes to
another.
Do not pass on he won fifty nine
but I do pass on the house
commerce and.
Thank you
patrick to call.
Representative and you know
yes representative dunkin yes
representative hernandez yes
representative lender yes
representative little yes
representative lunch trump
representative martinez
yes
representative mason yes.
Representative matthews
madam vice yes and madam chair
yes manager final teleten yes
votes zero no votes.
You have a department thank you
thank you madame turned members
of the committee have a good
afternoon
k
all right our next bill will be
he fit
he eighty three.
Thank you representative are you
ready I think
i'm sure yes madam sure with me
today I have no sacket she's
with the economic development
department
really half of the committee
could be up here for this bill
since how hot of books are on
this bill which is great
house bill eighty three
essentially extends the angel
tax credit that is already in
existence we had a more robust
bill last year that would make
their fund refundable or make
the tax credit refundable it no
longer it doesn't have that in
this version right now the until
tax credit is allowed for early
investors into companies in
their earlier stages when
they're most others trouble may
break etc and these are for new
mexican
folks presidents who pay new
mexico taxes this essentially
would offer them a sixty two
thousand five hundred dollars a
tax credit whenever they invest
in our new mexico companies at
this very early stage and
adjusting in all this bill does
is extend that tax credit until
twenty thirty I think that's all
that really really want to go
over this alternative nor if you
have anything to add thank you
think representative thinking
madam chair members of the
committee the economic
development department
supports the extension of the
santa date on the into
investment tax credit we see it
as a successful incentive to
have new mexicans put new mexico
dollars into new mexico
companies at their earliest most
vulnerable s.
If I may actually just close out
many other states have the
comparable tax credit to this
one it's up to twenty five
percent of the investment that
an individual has made into a
company on there many other
states that have something
similar and I think you've all
heard me rant about this before
but when you look at a map of
great places have a start up
we're surrounded arizona
colorado texas oklahoma and
there is no reason the new
mexico should be this black hole
and a lot of the policies that
have gone through this committee
is shifting that and i'm happy
to say that we're seeing that
change and in that wages people
are making in the the start ups
that are coming but at the same
time we want to see that
continue so with that i'll stand
for questions
thank you representative do we
have anybody in favor of this
bill okay
well to start with you right
here if you could stand sit your
name and.
Thank you.
Thank you.
They.
The.
Thank you next.
Anybody else
and it
in peter yes okay we've got
somebody on zoom.
Devolve west phone.
Good afternoon man sharing many
members i'm to far west fall the
executive vice president for
policy and programs for the
greater turkey chamber of
commerce and we do support
senate bill eighty three because
it simply extends a good program
the angel investment tax credit
will only go for five more years
you know and so this will make
it right until i'm sorry till
december thirty first of twenty
thirty that's what we want under
this program and a credited
investor who makes the path by
investment can apply for a
credit on the exceed twenty five
percent or go over sixty two
thousand five hundred.
That means what we're talking
about here is helping the small
and medium businesses that are
enough of babbrick of our
state's private sector economy
this still has bipartisan
sponsorship for a very good
reason and the economic
development department says it's
gonna enable the continuation of
an incentive for bit new mexico
tax payers to invest in new
mexico businesses many folks
talk about encouraging
investment new mexico to
diversities by the economy but
this tax credit walks their talk
and we encourage the committee
to extend this good program for
another five years thank you.
Thank you anybody else you know
anybody in oppositio.
Members of the committee
representative matthews
thank you matter of chair thank
you presenters
and this isn't why I
hit my button but I believe I
was it nor a sackets baby shower
many years ago and
i'm so impressed now you're here
appearing before I really aged
legislator
but that's no worried
I I did have a couple questions
I did want a little bit of
context
is a usual extension period five
years or does that
is at times it's smaller it
larger or less
madam chair representative
typically the amount of time
that we set to sunset so as you
know and we always put sunsets
on tax credits if we feel that
they're not being successful or
utilized or driving the ins what
we want to do that since it
gives us the room to stop so
that's that piece of it
different time lines allow for
different things so if you're
testing it maybe you want it for
three years for us we want to
really allow those start of
cultures to thrive and so that's
why over five years i've not
really seen tax credit sunsets
go beyond five years so I think
that's why we went with it with
a five year old that one for
that reason thank you
representative madame chair.
I'm curious on page three line
three it talks about two million
dollars being the
I think the maximum.
The.
To million dollars in angel
investment credits per calendar
year that is the
I just wondered that is as I
read this it means as a total
amount of.
The.
That's the total of the credits
how much does that.
How does that relate to the
amount of money that's invested
in the numbe.
Madame chairman had it to my
expert on this they just feel
like her respect from ed might
be helpful
madame chair representative
matthews thank you for the
question you are correct that is
the total allowable amount of
credit expenditure in stat in
statute that is not being
changed in this bill that has
continued we have not in
previous recent years met that
limit we have not come up to
that limit so there isn't
currently a need to
increase that.
Thank you madame shared.
Is there is there a goal to
increase that over time because
it seems to me if you're if that
grows then that means we have
more angel investments right so
i'm wondering.
If if.
If they're should be and I was
trying to tell the angels what
they should do but
if whether it would be good for
the economy if
that was a bigger number and
there was more effort put in to
expanding that
madam chair representative so as
the the tier d text revenue
department has seen it it's only
been used to have up to about a
million dollars that's mostly
really so there is room for
growth within where it now the
build it myself in
representative hernandez ran
last year would have increased
that cath because it would have
been a refundable credit tax
credit and big and refund of me
is essential if your tax
liability is less than the the
refundable tax credit you the
available to you then you would
get the rest in cash and so we
assume that had we that been
able to go through that would be
increased this is not that bill
national gun and that much
detail apologies manager but for
this we will leave that that
allows us the growth we can do
in that time period and again in
five years if we see hey this is
really working on to continue to
that we can look at it.
Thank you representative and
presented for that nor for that
answer madame chair.
How many angels are there.
Madame chair representative
between two thousand twelve and
two thousand eighteen
the credit was used
applied to three hundred and
fifty five different individual
tax credit claimants angels as
we referred to them many of
those are repeat so they weren't
they were far more than three
hundred and fifty five claims
but the credit but for
individuals who were claiming
the credit that is the number
I know the new mexico angels are
group has over has I believe
more than that in their ranks I
don't want to speak for them but
there is a growing community of
angels than we want to increase
that of course because it's new
mexicans putting new mexico
dollars into new mexico
businesses.
Thank you miss and madam chair
is do we as a legislature have
to do anything to help you grow
this credit in this organization
other than approved the
extension.
Thank you madame chair think you
representative you know I think
there's a lot of different
elements to expanding both the
pool bonds for north it are in
the state and in the pool of
investors new mexico for a long
time as had an issue with having
more you know more available
capital and that's kind of
always the thing that we want to
see more of so
not a speaker representative of
her name is an eye but stay too
next year we'll see
but we have been working with
the angels very often on you
know how we can we utilize this
tax credit to really get that
moving but I will say that you
know not my conversations and
you know nor if you want to try
men to be great in my
conversations really expanding
the upskilling possible the
entrepreneur on claims that we
have started communities like we
see it central new mexico on
those elements because big
difference and I will say what's
what is great about the new
mexico angels is you see them
across the state I think this is
a fairly good representation
from what we've heard today
madam chair but you really see
folks down all weight lost
cruises all the way to santa fe
and across the board so you know
again they they're pretty open
about those pieces I don't know
if you want to add to that nora
better chair representative to
echo representatives or others
comments new mexico has far
lower available venture capital
than other states we ring forty
s so that underscores the
importance of this credit
because we need any available
additional available investment
for those early stage companies
that is possible
I would say we are have as
represents rator mentioned
additional things in place and
in progress that are were going
to grow that ecosystem so
expanding the strategy science
and technology office at the
economic development department
creating an office of
entrepreneurship et cetera more
to come I hope but yes we
certainly appreciate the support
for initiatives like that.
There my second
apologies sorry I apologize
representative better
manager I see it a little angel.
Thank you in this.
Thank you manager.
You know
sometimes in the state if.
Bills tax bills already.
When they make.
Thinking that i'm sure I think
you represent it if you know I
think when we have we look at
our tax packages overall and we
look at how we're investing in
encouraging investment I do
think there's a balance approach
I do believe that this bill is
one of those balance approaches
and I in particular for for
husband eighty three you know
this is something we worked over
the summer for awhile on with
the angel investment groups
because we wanted to see a more
getting more robust opportunity
here but you know this we want
to see more investment we want
to see them the growth of how
many individuals are investing
and really use up that to till
or so again I think if we're
going to be having a balance
approach we need incentives that
will encourage us kind of
investment.
Have there been any studies
done.
Yeah thank you madame chair I
think representative this is the
hardest part about attracting
angel investors is that you were
entering into a business at its
earliest stages and it really
can go either way and so you
know to serial investors you
know I almost want to say thank
you because you have to go back
and try it again what you'd
begin to notice is with these
investments people become almost
experts in industry right and so
they understand these these
aspects better so we can see
more of that expertise growing
we know that will be overall
beneficial for new mexico and we
have a wonderful investors you
know we worked a lot wish with
sherman
who has wonderful you know
started cultures and and and
regions really where he's made a
big difference and we've seen
this kind of take off and you
know it's it's not lost on the
mature and I hope you have the
committee that we also hear of
individuals who are working from
the developments we see in the
labs and turning those into
private ventures that are
profitable for themselves and
for the state so you know I
think those are some of the
learnings we've seen I don't
know if you want to add any more
to that from your experience ed
think your representative
mountain representative dunkin.
I don't know if there is a
specific number I can give you I
can tell you that you can see
the results of these investments
in the community in the sort of
ecosystem has been growing in
recent years there are folks in
across the state I must added
it's not just an albuquerque who
have really been putting in the
work over the years to grow the
angel investment equal system
that start up ecosystem we are
seeing the results of that to
reference what representative
match you said I would I would
love to see in the future and
need to increase the cap on this
because there are so many
but to reach that point it is
critical that we extend the
sunsets we can preserve the
credit if we were to lose it
that would be a big turnoff for
invest.
I'm going to take that as a no.
Probably sixty six percent of
the.
The.
I'm all behind this.
And it fascinating that in the
state that we want to do this
with open arms on the other side
of this we want to kill.
Yeah.
Thank you representative
representative martinez.
Thank you madame chair
representative in i'm sorry
could.
The.
Madame chair presentative this
is a nora sacket she's with the
economic development department.
Thank you for that I have just a
few questions on page one line
nineteen through twenty one.
A taxpayer who files an amexical
income tax return is not in the
panel but another taxpayer is an
accredited investor and makes a
qualified am.
Could you explain them me a
couple of things number one.
How do they become a qualified
investor.
And number two.
What what is considered a
qualified investment.
Think about i'm chair think
representative i'm i'm happy to
start and i'll hand it over to
my expert i'm so in a credit
investor is is as it is exactly
credited and it's actually
defined on page for
lines ten three thirteen.
Um.
Sorry it starts online ten and
it goes down
and I it's actually mad i'm sure
representative when I when we
initially hit introduced this
and and I will say you know this
was initial introduced by
representative james colbert I
want to give full credit where
credit is dick shoes and
excellent leader on this one
anywhere there but there
wouldn't would have a credit
investor is one that that has
been recognized and gives a
significant amount of their
income to this the the intent of
that is to ensure that they
again are moving towards
becoming experts in that field
and work were increasing in
cultivating a culture of
smart investments right it's
not.
The.
With the intention is is to
avoid any sort of fraught right
that if my dad gives me a large
chat I can't say that that was
an angel investment because he
just is he has actually gone
through some sort of credition
to ensure that that he he's
doing this right and that that
it is for this intense purpose
not just so I can buy a car for
myself the anymore thank you
manager madame chair
representative it is a process
of minister by the taxation
revenue department to do exactly
what representatives right of
said to make sure everything is
above board so investors who
wish to claim the credit apply
with the taxation of revenue
department to have all that
information checked out as do
the businesses that want to
receive the angel investment so
typically you know those
businesses are working with
folks who are angels in the
community they say hey I want I
invest in your urgenting start
up
make sure you get registered
with a taxation revenue
department as an eligible
recipient of injural investment
so both the business and the
investor i'm go through an
official process with the
taxation and revenue department
and that is already in place and
it's not being changed by this.
Thank you madame chair
the other question I had is this
so you have to be in new mexico
taxpayer in order to take.
But advantages were not
attracting.
Outside money with this
think you made i'm chair think
you representative question
after my own heart arm so yes it
because because it is a non
refundable tax credit that means
it could only be against how
much you're paying in taxes to
the state of new mexico so that
is why it has to be non
refundable week I would love to
try with you about kind of some
of the internous and a lot of
our conversations on expanding
that to be a refundable tax
credit because then you could
attract outside invitals again
we tried that last year
independent.
We've tried three times and and
that did not go through our
biggest concern at this point is
that we would lose this tax
credit that already existed is
already helping to drive them
and so that is why we narrowed
this bill because it does expire
this year so we want to make
sure that it does continue
onward but I I hear you're
concerned.
Thank you madame chairman
representatives rudder.
I understand correctly
there's a rule.
Or a policy that will not let
you extend more than.
But I think you requested six
years on this I mean it is there
is what is the reason it didn't
either go longer or become
permanent thank you madam chair
think representative in the tax
committee in general and and the
tax policy principles that are
followed in that committee stand
there all tax credits have an
expiration and it is good policy
truly because you don't want all
tax credits on the books that no
one's using and it's just kind
of taking up space and it's and
and it's taking up resources and
it may not be serving the
purpose so all of them have that
expiration
in you know while it could be
difficult to come back and still
be concerned that you may not
have this good fact tax part in
the future
I first think agree with that
policy that again we want to see
this grow and mature and then
we'll have to come back in five
six years and and and have to
defend this again and say we
need more money for this we you
know however that may be so
that's just a basic principle on
the tax committee thank you
manager
made return representative so is
that the maximum amount of time
that you're a lot ago or or is
it not a concrete policy.
Thirty was a nice round year
thank you madame jerry
yeah there is there is no set
number and it really should be
guided by what the intent is so
again we we looked at thirty as
being a time to continue to grow
this program I don't know there
is more you want to add to that.
Thank you madame chair
representative I I appreciate
the answers.
Thank you representative
representative mason.
Thank you madame chair
representative and I may how
long is this program better in
effect so for this at the fifty
year was that the five year old
three year to start with
madame chair representative this
credit was originally inacted in
new mexico in two thousand seven
two thousand seven.
Do we have any records of how
many businesses that
have taken advantage of this
exceeded how many
that is a good question I have a
number that are between two
thousand twelve i'm sorry madam
chair and representative between
two thousand twelve and two
thousand nineteen
there were two hundred and
twenty seven individual
businesses that received angel
investments that angel investors
claimed their angle investment
tax credit for
those two hundred and twenty
seven
early stage businesses of this
type that do
technology research and
development it is a difficult
field so many many
will many fail however you know
in my line of work we like to
say that sometimes they need to
fail its an inherent part of
developing technology
it also helps encourage sector
growth frankly in new mexico so
for example in boston is known
for it spile science and biotech
sector so when one fails there
are many other companies and
start ups that those employees
can go and work out that's the
end of goal is to have a
thriving science and technology
sector it does come with
inherent failures I would have
to check with the taxation
revenue department to see if
they have a more specific number
thank you for the answer manager
spot start up
businesses as the whole no
matter angel or not a level
very few succeeds in all what
they I mean that's.
Maybe all we're doing better.
I heard this word critical and
urgent all of this in the
different test amount easier
than why we need the extend
there's butter the only thing
that jumps out at me is where
we're not even hat we have not
half utilized this plan so far
they nine hundred thousand.
Out of the two million
the reason
they were not.
Fully I mean we all agree that
we want more capital.
Have not done that is not
attracting more money into their
system
our fall to their fault
thank you manager think you
representative for the question
I I think that's a valid one I
think there's a lot of bills
that a lot of us have been
working on to address that that
hold we have here but it comes
down to a lot of times a lack of
capital that we see in the state
and so on you know a couple
years ago we were able to create
a venture capital fund out of
the animate the new mexico
finance authority which again
that's the next stage after
angel that you get more money
from their right and so when you
are developing out this the the
the life of the timeline right
of a business you we want to
show them at each stage that
there is more that they can get
out of new mexico now that bill
that legislation was just past a
couple of years ago and so we're
still seeing animated beginning
the to distribute those funds
making sure they're heading
folks you know sic the state
investment council also is
charged but to invest a small
portion of their of their
billions of dollars of
investments in new mexico and so
again that's that's putting more
into the to the ecosystem my
fear with this is that you know
as mentioned there's a handful
of states that not happen
about half thirty one year about
half thirty one states how some
sort of tax credit for angel
investors and if we lose this
tool in our tall box to attract
to keep that money in our state
then we lose the people that are
already investing in our state
and that would be a tragedy we
want to see that grow and this
maintains at least that can't
thank you representative chair
are there any performance
requirements given on the
businesses that are fight do
they have to employ one two
four.
When the ideas the higher
morning mexico.
Our people into our work forces
there anything that says
of any
that they have to hire anybody
or.
Performance requirements.
Manager representative again
the the objective it here is not
necessary to limit their ability
to grow into it limit what they
can do I think the great thing
about angel tax investor
investor is that they not only
are investing their money but
they're investing their
knowledge and and they're
accessed to more capital access
to people on there they're
engaged partner and so from that
idea right if you're having new
mexico investors investing in
that sense that would be the
idea however there is nothing
nothing that's tied to require
them a certain number of
mexicans be hired madame chair
representative or anything like
that and I look ignore once at a
little bit more madam chair
representative that there is an
aspect of that that is part of
the certification that the
taxation and revenue department
does for certified recipient
businesses there is a
requirement that they maintain
their place of business and new
mexico that they hire in new
mexico that they have a majority
of their presence and tangible
activities in new mexico they
have to do that certification
every year so if things were to
change and they no longer have
the majority of their activity
and new mexico they would no
longer be eligible so there is a
mechanism to ensure that we're
prior focusing it is only for
new mexico businesses that are
making an economic impact here
thank you for the answer and I
didn't I didn't see it in
here in anywhere I don't think
it may have been ambitious
there but we do
that that answers my question it
but that's the whole purpose of
investment in the mexico is
that.
Hopefully the body that is the
growth is i.
And only the last
night said I mean the whole
aspect of this thing.
They were all want more
investment we want more business
we want like mark said we feel I
feel about them we were very
antibal.
We keep adding.
This in this requirement in this
r.
To me as a sp.
On the smaller business to pay
for.
This that and the other but the
only other thing does you feel
that
they are starting to
III have started business.
Other kind like this at this you
feel that these people with the
tech are they.
Are the having a better unfor
then it's.
Established in the.
The.
One gets a credit one
thank you madame chair think you
representative I think that's a
great question especially
because it gets the heart of why
we've been investing more and
entrepreneurs as you know and as
you said you know it's very
difficult to turn up a business
but there is a correlation
between you know one percent
increase in start ups in the
state it calls a one percent
corollates to a one percent
decrease in poverty and in this
side poverty state like hours
again that was correlations
aren't bad in that sense it is
difficult to navigate state
resources and and getting your
tier your licensing you're all
those pieces it can be difficult
for an entrepreneurs and so I
would say that again when
someone starting out and not
established and doesn't have
those you know financial
statements they don't have that
on the credit that you need to
build over a long time it is
hard for them to get even on
that same footing
and nor i'm happy to have to you
but i'm again I think this gives
them an opportu.
Madame chair representative the
only thing I would add is that
the eligibility for for the
eligible businesses it does not
have a time in business
requirement so they have to be
doing technology research and
development they have to be
below I believe it is a hundred
employees
but I know several
technology they still call
themselves start ups because
they're at that early they're
still an early stage but they've
been in business for many years
so there is sort of a there are
range of of companies that are
maybe not brand new and also
have been around for a bit
better still developing their
technology that can take
advantage of this look like that
reps and madam sure if I may
want to think just I know your
question about the new mexico
entering their here that is on
page five starting at a line
seventeen so hopefully that also
allays minutes.
The.
Thank you thank you
representative thank you madame
the other questions from the
committee.
Chair I move a
second ever do pass on a second
call.
The.
Representative and you know yes
representative dunkin yes
representative hernandez
representative lender.
Representative little
yes representative lunchtrum
representative martinez.
Representative of mason yes
representative matthews.
Madame vice chair yes madam
chair
madame chair final tell his ten
votes yes zero votes.
But we ha.
Our next bill is he eighty one.
Yeah.
Madam chair of all this has been
passed out co.
What is the committee.
What I would like is for if
it's.
Yeah.
Amendments representative martin
is at all.
Met amcher can only.
Yeah.
I know you to think and I
appreciate that I think we are
back though on on the bill here
let's start with what is the two
o two number.
The.
Or the members to attempt your
number is
five three zero.
Second.
Thank you
so we are.
Yeah.
Is that better.
Not better kind of better
than more better
it is very distracting.
Okay so all start again we are
here today to introduce a house
below eighty one the gun storage
tax credit this bill aims to
create a small tax credit uhm
for the buying of guns
throughout new mexico
last year this body
passed house bill nine which
requires gus safe storage of
fire arms throughout the state
or the facing of
you know potentially stiff
penalties
our first start was we are
imposing an unfunded mandate on
people within new mexico and
this bill aims to make it so
that more new mexicans are not
criminals
the other glaring portion of
this is we also want to protect
people families children
from gun balance unnecessary
unnecessary gun violence
it's a bipartisan bill common
sense approach
we do you have an amendment as
we said to to seven five three
zero point two
after reading the tax and
revenue
analysis and talking with uh the
policy department
they asked for these two changes
which is essentially to.
Sorry part two of this amendment
is to take out the department of
public safety from having to
certify every receipt which in
our initial bill was there and
insert that they may promote it
rules governing essentially a
definition of white a gone safe
would be.
And then line one is just
removing some additional pieces
where that referred to dps
certifying every receipt.
The.
With that w.
Is there any opposition to the
amount.
Then it's adopted.
You have something
representative.
Okay
thank you thank you okay.
We are already to stand for
question okay I want to know if
there's any one here in favor of
the bill
sir.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
This.
About in favor.
Do we have anybody on zoom
okay anybody in opposition.
Anybody in opposition.
Anybody from the committee.
A representative of mason
thank you madame chair thank you
representatives the only
question I have like him I am
also
and I I didn't briefly read this
bill real well.
Is it simple to get the money
you'll like he said we're
targeting
but what do I need to talk about
target are the one to three gun
owners they bother don't have a
secretarian in the counter to
father taxes
can they just turn in a receipt
on their tax bill to get the
credit they have to jump about
the hoops
madam chair and representative
so when we initially started
the on this path we were trying
to get a refundable
transferable.
Credit so that the ffls could do
it with the cap
we figured out that because
there is a cap you as an ffl as
an effort fell if the if you if
someone came in bargain safe and
you gave it to them you know
free with the transferable tax
credit out the door then if the
capitality been hit you would
not be reimbursed for so we took
that out now you know part of
this will be done through rose
by tax and revenue department
but it should be as easy as and
this is the part we we were able
to put in harris
submitted receipt fell out of
form and it will go either to
your tax burden that you already
have or you will get a
it is refundable which we will
have a different convo about
intax
it will it will be refunded also
if you are already getting money
back or you you know it is more
than your tax.
And so it should be that simple
that thank you madame here
though that was my main concern
on any of these things we passed
the money there but how do you
get it
and like myself we do not sell
guns I stracted supply
all those places sell emologies.
Would be nice that they could
just.
Whoever seller that could just
say
here's four hundred dollars
after you're gonna give me box
and take it.
And matter representative we we
did start this and the reason
that it is so low funded as we
wanted to see you strategical
pilot programs see if anyone
would take advantage of the
program
and if we see that it is running
out quickly if we see that a
whole lot of people are taking
advantage I would love to come
back i'm pretty sure my co
sponsor would as well and try to
get that that that number raised
but one of the things that I
truly believe in here when we're
spending money on something I
want to make sure that it's
working and that we're not just
funding something in it sitting
in you know a bank account
somewhere so that's why this is
starting out you know this way
and hopefully if we can bring
this back and and get it funded
that it will be that easy to
just to just have that happen
but that would need to happen on
at a inner later.
That would be my my wish that
because of most of the people I
think of the need to take
advantage of this but not that
then that's my observation with
mark people in my district to
get.
Market platform out of black
for
ninety percent of my customers
will not
unless they give it to their
wife thank you pletement thank
you representative matthews
that's good
thank you madame chair I think
he resented.
This is such an interesting idea
is very article
s legislators that come up with
the representative just say
madam chair I I kind of had the
idea but i'm not very good with
commerce and taxes i'm like this
is the idea I need someone to
help me with it but I think it's
AAA good idea for a lot of
reasons right madam chairman and
uh
and you chose your your co
council
so.
I'm curious about.
The disapplied to the resale of
a gun cabinet if you bought it
from.
Representative this would be for
new gun saves purchased at a
physical location sorry a
business that is physically in
new mexico
we did also take out online we
didn't want this.
And online sales either
if we're gonna be doing a tax
credit for something like this
we should al.
It would be for new new guns
have sold me.
I am sure
representatives when I look at
what a secure gun storage means
one of the items we when I think
of a gun safe i'm thinking of
one of those black things but
all
and it don't burn down if the
house.
And managed here but a gun case
and then it says anything that
can be on only by means of a key
and i'm wondering.
But you know I know guns like a
long thing like that and i'm see
it thinking of a gun case of
something you could carry around
and it is at with smart by that
so madam chair and
representative so for instance I
you know I have several guns.
But you know I have a gun safe
that is bolted to the floor in
the garage which is the one that
you are thinking of it's the
tall bigger holds several guns
most of like my families
inherited guns and old shot guns
and rifles and
but I also have next to the bad
have a very small.
Um.
A very small gun safe that works
off of my fingerprint or a
keypad or a key if I need it to
about a hundred and fifty bucks
that is in case I hear somebody
shuffling around in the house or
window break or something to
that other effect I can get into
that quickly
I believe that that would be
technically a gun case or
something that you're going to
be able to take to the range
that also has a lock on it or a
keypad or some sort that is a
small travelling device as long
as somebody can't get into it
and it is designed for gun
storage that is what the
definition covers and this is we
will likely be changing this
definition just a tad to match
the definition of what was an hb
nine last year but we are
working through whether or not
that will be required on the tax
and revenue department side
yeah they they reach out as to
dps and ask we are talking with
both of those departments to
figure out if the definitions
need to change slightly to match
the bill that passed last year
so we don't have multiple
definitions of the same thing
and statute.
Thank you representative managed
here
but in my understanding
correctly the gun case could be
something that you put the.
I don't know and represent if it
would be
a gun case technically would be
a traveling moulted place you
could have it in the house you
have in the car it would have a
lock on it so keep add
fingerprint key to keep that gun
sa.
Which your question here is I
believe why the definition of
change is kind of happening at
the moment or potentially
happening at the well
manshire representative i'm just
sort of curious it seems like
somebody breaks into the car we
simply take the gun case and
then bust it open some way that
is.
Madame chair and representative
yes I could see it in your way
as well
this this bill is supposed to
more be towards home or
permanently installed in the car
gun saves not necessarily.
Manager representative wonder if
if maybe that should be.
And then manage here
I noticed that in the comments
dps says we have no clue how to
do this
and madame charin representative
this
this amendment that we passed at
the very beginning takes takes
deep it takes that concern away
from d PS it takes them out of
it except to essentially define
what a what a gun sake is it
just that's then promoted help
in the raw making process so the
initial bill had it where they
would have to certify every
receipt that came in for this
tax credit which is a huge
burden I believe on both dps
anti ard armed to be going
between departments and in
talking with both of them this
was the fix that was found as
they.
Tax and revenue department is
them to to qualify and define
what a gun safe is arms of the
dent they can do what they do
on.
And chair representative.
Yeah.
It is dps is out of it to your
dears in it
and I understand it's going to
be regulations but i'm just i'm
just wondering.
The.
If they say well you know just
sending the piece of paper and
certificate or something without
really be.
Would that be a good way to do
this
madam chair and representative
the the in the bill it say that
a proof of purchase of receipt
something to that effect plus
the form that tax and revenue
department is going to create
the rules is what would be
required if tax and revenue
would like to do it a different
way we have not heard of one.
When I am open i'm sure they're
i'm sure they're listening if
i'm open to have that
conversation if they would like
to.
And man i'm sure represented my
last question is.
With having and I just I don't
know the answer to this and i'm
sure people have gone cabinets
which are locked
does it have any impact on your
home owners insurance and your
liability insurance.
Adam chairman representative I
don't know the answer to that
but I actually would love.
If I could add one thing back to
the caring in the car I think
one thing that we got to
remember about the law that
passes you could still be liable
if a child's in a car with the
firearm and it's not safely
stored so I think if it's locked
even if it's in a box that could
be stolen you're still also
protecting the child that could
you know grab that gun in the
vehicle so I just wanted to add
that ma.
The manager I just have one
question on the aggregate
amount.
Was this
number arrived at after
discussion with to rd or dps.
Representative it was a number
of that we both came up with
that were we believed would show
that the program.
It was a measurable amount that
which other.
I'm not too much
at the you know average price.
Markets it's a good amount.
Thank you madam chair in this
this.
The five hundred thousand is it
how is that going to work as.
Tax committee.
It's not a it's not a
deposit into a bank account
correct is this just a set aside
amount in the overall tax
package.
Madame chairman representative
yes if we happen to get through.
Yes it would just be a part of
the.
The.
Thank you madame chair thank you
representative.
The.
Representatives rato
I think about i'm sure I think
representatives I and I
apologize representative martin
is made of just ask this how did
you come to the seven hundred
fifty dollars
madam charing madame I share
we
it was just a whole bunch of
online research to see what
what an average guns if goes for
we looked at a whole bunch of
sites
relating to in our.
Several of the local efforts.
Generalized amount that could
cover both a small single single
or double gun saves plus kind of
an entry level you know.
Six guns which is a lot that
were my family guns that had
been passed down from you know
the eighteen hundreds that I
don't want.
You know.
But still
and so it was a what could we
get that would hold a hand gun
up to four of the longer gardens
and they all kind of came you
know we got some.
But we also got some that you
know.
Um and this was kind of the
number that.
Between.
Where they could go and have at
least a couple of options.
Based on what if it in your
house based.
There there's different reserve
and things that you.
Well.
If you're.
And.
Deterf.
The.
Think you manage her thank you
for that explanation that's
that's very helpful to kind of a
color i'm a make a statement and
if you want to respond to it as
well I would welcome that and
then i'll have a question
i.
I just haven't seen a lot madam
shared and I was in a lot of tax
credits that fully effectively
would take the one hundred
percent of the cost off i've not
seen that in order to speak you
know every single tax credit
does that but that's a little
trick that's a that's a bit of a
hurdle for me to get over you
know again I want instead of
good behavior when it's a device
or our folks to do the by thing
that's a little bit difficult
with that said and if you want
that my old means please do arm
i'm just curious that there's
any data on what percent of gun
owners have done seems already
you know like you know if that's
a common thing that that aspect
of as well.
When I was talking to some of.
Trying to aggregate that.
So trying to get an accurate
representation of w.
Would have been tremendous.
Madame chair representative just
just the idea that i've not used
to total cost being yes.
Or I found out i'm.
Style you know sixty thousand
dollars and will convert a
closet into a crazy unsafe and
we didn't feel that a tax credit
from our statement or two you
know if you can afford that.
We are trying to reach.
Low income people that are
single gun owners people who
you know would rather go by
another gun then by a gun safe
because the react I mean the
reality of it is.
Yes if you have the money to go
and you should maybe buy a gun
safe and that that is up to the
individual owner of that on.
And so this is just the
incentive that if you are going
to go s.
Probably pick up a unsafe
because guns are getting stolen
guns are getting used.
Children are taking the guns at
a house.
We
can affect that in a positive
wa.
Thank you representative that
that is helpful
and one one comment to that I
think also we're looking as he
said about the people there's so
much crime going on right now
and I think people go out and
they want to buy one fire for
protection but when it comes
down to whether they have the
money in this day and age
inflation without as to go spent
three hundred fifty on the guns
they they're going to choose to
buy groceries or something else
and so this might actually
incentivise them to actually you
know put that gun in a safe
because it's not going to cost
them you know so that was also
kind of the thought behind that
matter thank you madame chair
think you're presented out and I
have one more question again it
might be a parallel one but I I
feel that your expertise might
help with this as well
I know another states that if
it's a student in a high school
is using their dad's truck and
they have a gun safe on the
truck and there may be a weapon
in there but that is protected.
Is that okay or is that still
not okay to drive that vehicle
on took us for campus i'm just
curious because that
share I don't think you can
bring a gun onto a school campus
but I think more the obviously
in a doll.
I think we're thinking of the
situations that
you get out of your car and you
leave your ki.
They reached the glove box and
find your you know revolver that
you keep in there and and some
the bad happens so thank you
manager think
thank you representative of
representative done
venture.
So
there's six hundred and sixty
six people.
And my hope is.
When we first heard this my
first thought was to
table this but we're not in tax
committee so can't
but
so my my hope is that people
that don't ha.
Manager.
Less than what we need.
Thank you representative
representative lending german
thank you madame chair think.
To hear more about it and tax I
think it's a a really valuable
way to think about gun safety in
a way for those of us that are
going owners and thank you for
being a responsible one I would
like to think that that I follow
most footsteps because I I own
several.
To be responsible and try to.
But my question is I know that
people that don't own fire arms
but by safes because they have
valuables
would they be
increasing on this program.
In a value where maybe perhaps
should we have to show that we
own a firearm I know it's a bit
much but i'm just thinking about
madam chair and representative
you are absolutely right I
started to go down that path and
the kind of burden of proof to
require somebody it seems like a
tough left if you have an idea I
would love to hear it but yeah I
I agree with you that that there
is kind of no way
to
require like accurately require
you know a receipt for your
firearm or you know before we
passed red flag laws and all of
that it could have been transf.
I have had since fixed but
you know that there's there's
just the burden of proof as
quite a bit on trying to get
someone to find a receipt or
fight hey send us a picture of
your gun doesn't quite do it
I thought it out for two or
three seconds
but I do love the idea because
you're right someone who's just
buying a five hundred dollars
safe for their home absolutely
could take advantage of this and
and I appreciate that the answer
because the last thing I want to
do is consider continue
incentivised those that have the
means have something babel
enough to want to put into a
safe to just give them a taxed
credit and then further more
those of us that are can recall
that and I don't know if they
sell even more but I never might
my grandplease to have one where
it was a glass front gun case
these eligible do if they still
saw them are the eligible even
if they're.
Regards to a gun safe that made
out a steel madam chair and
represented that I didn't even
think of those cause I haven't
seen one in a while
when I walked into calibers and
obviously they didn't have
anything close it was you know
had a metal box with the keypad
and the fingerprint scanners and
all of that stuff uhm so i'm I
don't know if this would be
covered but
I will get clarification of the
for you before tax cause I
didn't to be honest I don't even
think of that those were a thing
anymore but you're absolutely
right there thing in my world.
Thank you representative
lunchton.
Just a minute I have I have a
couple of questions
so with the amendment it looks
one of the questions I had
before the minute if dps was
going to be supported but then
you moved it to TRD is that
correct yes madame okay and so
with but it sounds like dps is
still going to be administering
the rules
manager they will be a port
apart of administering the raw
soul
when talking with secretary boey
he still said that he was open
to defining what are gone safe
was
which I think is kind of
important.
So that's what this does that
lets them be a part of the role
making process instead of having
to certify every receipt.
So then.
Who would be in charge of
administrating and compiling the
report madame chair tax and
revenue does go back to just
okay
yes which in the tax and revenue
sorry manager in the text and
revenue department analysis
that I read in it you know how
they change but the first one
that came out it did bring up
most of these rules as well that
it would be more difficult for
depeat for
tax and revdps for dps to do the
receipts
which is where this came from
the the tax and revenue
department actually asked that
or in their analysis said that
they would love to have the
reporting take it out but how
are we supposed to have know if
it's being used or not without a
report so
that's why that portion was kept
in okay thank you representative
and based on that is that how it
will be measuring success madame
chair absolutely does that
report i'm hoping to get one
after the first year of use and
we can see if it's working not
working and kind of make the
past forward from there
and an item when it just give
hypothetical
absolutely question so if
somebody
goes out buys the same
gets a tax credit and then sell
the safe on ebay I mean is that
something that
I mean do they have to show you
it is there any type of re
evaluation that they still have
it or
please yeah madam chair that's
that is another thing that it
came across the what if
um
again i'm not sure how we do
that you know in six months we
ask them to take a picture of it
installed in their home you know
and then the burden on trd to do
that or dps or home ever we
without it it becomes again very
messy like.
The you know do you actually
only fire
this is you know this is a bill
trying to solve a problem in a
innovative different way and
hopefully it does what we are
intending it to do but the
guarantee of that you know with
anything you know what we could
give a solar tax credit to
somebody and then six months
later they take him off and sell
them to somebody else or send
him to the recycling house I
mean it's it's hard to to make
it too it's hard for us to
verify that any tax credit we
give is being used for what it
what we intend to be used for
over an extended period
and n I appreciate that they
appreciate the answer
I would think that most people
would not do that I think most
people who have again
they're they do want to they do
you want to make sure that
they're family friends and love
ones are safe and so that in the
twenty safety intent yes I do
that so thank you there's been a
model that's one more person
thank you yes
you're but just to bring it
together something josh that are
really sorry representative for
native
reference and it and and
representative went his concerns
about m that glass front more of
a display case and manamed her
representative you mentioned
earlier that there may be
changes to definitions in the
built to match what am was
described in household nine last
year the safe stored which I
think just my cursory glance I
just went back and looked at it
I think and if we
adjusted the language of the
bill too much house think that
would take care of a safety like
a a gun case or then safe the
purposes of restricting access
would help a clean up that
language as opposed to
displayed case so I I
i'm.
Definitely support this bill and
I I will be voting for it but I
would like to see just a little
bit of language clean up a head
of tax madame chair and
representative thank you for
that and chairman then take it
ready for unamendment.
I know everything thank you
anybody else before we so we
already had a motion for a due
pass and representative it would
be do pass as amendment as
amended.
We have a second.
Representative and you know yes
representative dunkin
yes
representative hernandez
yes
representative lender yes
representative little yes
representative lunchton
representative martinez yes
representative mason yes
representative matthews.
Madame victor yes
madam chair yes
madam chair the final tally's
eleven votes yes zero votes now
already better
than committee.
Already and with it that
