Chairman.
Representative Dow.
Representative R. O..
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Hernandez.
There.
Representative Johnson.
Press.
Representative Martinez.
Here.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Serrato here.
Representative Dow.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Hey folks.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Vice chair Figueroa.
I'm here.
Chairman I just this I am here.
Before we complete the role of
J. as in the attendee room are
are pardon me Representative
Powdrell Culbert is in the room.
Mr chairman if I may.
Representative Dixon we want to
be moved over to.
To panelists please thank you
Sir.
So Representative Powdrell
Culbert is a the light orange.
J. P..
This.
A billion times I've been trying
to do it as well.
Okay.
Maybe that could be why.
Both of us are trying.
The one now this is been a thing
that I've been dealing with on
everything limited it doesn't
let me promote them quickly
click with fifteen hundred
something it's crazy.
So we will marker is up.
What we marker as a here and and
and we have a quorum so thank
you all for joining us.
The let me just ask you a
question if we do public comment
what would be able to move
people as a panelist and back
toward an attendee or that be
too difficult do you think.
Given what we just learned with
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
A little bit difficult what
we've been doing and other
special other hearing but I
would an existing one is just
give permission for the
attendees to talk are you
talking about someone who's
actually presenting.
No the presenters we want in the
committee as palace but I'm just
for terms of public comment it
being a panelists would allow
them to turn on their cameras
being attending we'll just hear
their voice right.
So.
Well
we can definitely do it it just
will maybe take a little bit
longer just because like I said
you have to click million happen
on think I even got.
Representative Powdrell you will
up work on that when there's I
think there's gonna be several a
lot of public comment also if
you could disable the chat.
Thank you.
All right welcome everybody Cook
thank health keeps building we
get our introductory session on
Monday we introduced our our new
committee our new committee
secretary as a new Montoya I'm
in room three twenty seven we
also have minority analysts
that's new to the committee that
did get a chance to introduce
himself.
And Alex have you to say a few
words about yourself and.
What brought to this committee.
Again thank you yes our before.
By myself I got a note from
Mr harsh you need to be let in.
Thank you.
We will do that.
Okay sure.
My name is Alex it is eleven New
Mexico for about three years
now.
Hi this is my third session
working as an analyst and
graduate of the graduate school
of public and international
affairs at the university of
Pittsburgh I'm originally from
Michigan.
And before I moved out to New
Mexico I spent about.
Twenty five years working for a
variety of think tanks.
And journalistic outlets in
Washington DC including the the
heritage foundation and I was
editor of consumers research
magazine for four years.
Awesome thank you Sir tremendous
asset for this committee
appreciate you and then let's
Margo Representative Fajardo was
present as well she was in the
attendee room we're taking the
role Representative Chandler
Representative Harper house bill
sixty seven Representative
Harper by all means please.
You have the thank you yes thank
you.
Chairman and members the
committee it's great to a see
you on my little screen.
Representative Chandler may join
us
she.
She asked me to take point in
case she's not here what she did
want to let everyone know that
she's grateful for the
opportunity and and hopefully
will join us later so.
House bill sixty seven
let me before I go and can I
have my two experts brought in.
I have.
David K. then.
And Miss
Merion Johnston.
from Sandia labs in from Los
Alamos labs.
We'll get them in.
Thank you okay so what are
coming and I can I can the
introduced the bill so this will
be familiar to many of your
services.
The technology readiness gross
receipts tax credit.
it's not new
we actually passed this
Legislation unanimously out of
the house and I think the Senate
had one dissenting vote the
governor signed into law so this
is it this is a thing that we
have right now in the state.
and if your call what this does.
is essentially leverage one of
our great resources of the state
of New Mexico our national
laboratories.
so what's this what's this tax
credit does.
Isn't allows our laboratories to
help in developing drugs help
with economic development in the
state of New Mexico and how it's
structured is.
our business can apply for this
and it's reviewed by
not just from experts from
Sandia and Los Alamos but also
economic development folks are
involved in the process is a
great team that reviews
these these are businesses that
apply and if they are selected
they get a hundred fifty
thousand dollars of.
Help from the national
laboratory from a from an expert
from a researcher that can help.
Business develop that product
and why this is to report you've
all heard of the the the value
of deaths right I mean you
probably know this very well on
this committee when you have a
product your great idea and you
develop it you've got a proof of
concept is that what this works
we can we can do it getting it
to a product that's actually
manufacture bowl and and
repeatable and and you know you
you have to process value yes.
And I I know us personally right
I had a.
No anthrax detector that and I
went through
I won't I'll Pacific it on
myself here but not all the way
to prototype and actually being
deployed in Afghanistan.
And it was it was a serious
challenge to get through that
that value yes and so this this
helps New Mexico businesses that
are leveraging Senator
technology are lost almost
technology takes that amazing
resource and protect our cross
evaluate us to a product.
So that's that's what it does
and there's kind of a phase in
was like a three year pilot and
and roughly half a million
dollars credits each lab to
cover the cost of those
scientists helping people out.
So what.
What's happened since then.
you know we're we're we're in
the second year kind of a year
and a half in this this program
there's been eleven businesses
that have been selected and
qualified and this has resulted
and in ten licenses
and to cooperative research and
development agreements traders
source start to see the fruits
of us but it's really in the
beginning stages.
so why we're here in front of
you now what this bill does it
does two things.
First thing if you remember we
tried a brand new funding
mechanism for this tax credit
and it was the suggestion was
instead of over tax credits
which are just kind of write off
on your on your taxes we would
start all I got Fund like a
holding fund and.
For more we go into it.
And then that fund I would would
reimburse the labs for further
cost and it was a I thought was
a clever idea was when
ideological right yes we should
try.
Well I'm not all clever ideas
are you know end up being right
in the end and it actually was
very challenging for the tax
revenue department to implement
this.
And it actually took about a
year and and actually the
programs and in my view kind of
a year behind because of the
challenges starting this brand
new structure we have done
before.
And so talking with the
department and with the labs and
economic development and folks
we we decided that you know that
clever idea probably.
You know we're we're we're
basically striking that out of
the stature going back to the
way we do offer other tax
credits which department
understands knows how to
implement.
The first thing it does we we
get rid of this holding fund.
and just administrative like all
other tax credits.
The second thing it does is
I mention that this was a three
year pilot and we're already
halfway through the the second
year really we we just need a
little bit more time we need
more time to figure out you know
To to show if this is actually
feasible worst continuing or or
what it what the impact would
be.
And I love how this was set up
was set up in a very
transparently there's a search
party neutral.
Group that actually assesses.
And and provides the data what
excellent performance data and
they report back to the TRD to
eating and the former
legislative committees so so we
will get the data
but we we need more time.
And so the second thing this
does is it extends this credit
out for ten years from now and
the reason we did ten years
because of the tax committee
whenever we have a twelve we
always include a sunset and ten
years is what we typically put
off.
So those are the two things this
does.
removes that that's a
interesting idea fund and just
makes it like every other tax.
And then gives it ten years so
that we can come back and see
how do this actually play out
was good transparent data and
evaluate it with that Mr chair
if David or merry and would like
to add anything.
Please.
Our.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
I just want to say thank you all
for for you hearing this and
further discussing this
we are very excited about this
program and my colleague here
from Lionel considers this as
well.
This is been amazing we've seen
that there's a really strong
appetite for this kind of
program in the state so the
short time that we've that we've
been working on this program.
yeah we just an incredible
response we're really excited to
see this move forward we both
work on a similar program is
much more scaled Mexico small
business assistance that's also
Mr tax credit and it's been it's
been really affect our in a
really positive are why we think
this is the ways scaled up and
provide even bigger returns for
the state for the companies and
for workforce so thank you all
for having us and and what not
speak about this.
Thank you Mr.
We can hear you.
Sorry I was W..
I wanted that we look at this as
an investment by the state of
New Mexico to really help
diversified economy and grow the
high tech cluster and growth in
the state of New Mexico at the
end is that we really think of
companies that are starting and
by licensing or partnering with
the national laboratory to
commercialize
technology into products and
really grow our community and
our business structure.
We hope that you support the
bill and thank you very much for
your time.
Thank you Representative Harper
schnauzer chairman I'll just the
finish with two quick
at first it just I'm I know
everyone here knows it but I was
gonna stated I am I am an
employee of Sandia but I have
not ever benefit from this
program and and most likely will
not ever I really think it's a
great idea to help New Mexico.
Raul this you know this this
area that we have that we really
have a leverage for a long time.
The second is I was reading
through the FY are
and.
TRD and LFC recommended
something that we had thought of
that I think is a great.
Right addition to the bill so
members if you want you can go
to the bottom of page three on
the FIR it says.
we we essentially have about two
million set aside in this fund
that were we're getting rid of.
And they TRD LFC recommends that
we include language in this bill
that reverts that money to the
general fund.
And I I think that's a great
idea of talk and I've spoken was
the the folks involved with this
legislation I agree as well so
Chairman I'd I would consider
that a good amendment so we
might want to incorporate in
your committee.
Never questions no thank you
very much for those comments in
a citizen legislature we bring
all of our expertise and Sandia
laboratories is certainly
present this so we're gonna go
to members of the public we want
to thank everyone for joining us
virtually.
please get used to your zoom
technology and what you got and
raise your hand if you wish to
speak in favor of of house bill
sixty seven and we'll give folks
a minute to do that.
But in raise your virtual hand
if you wish to speak in favor of
house bill sixty seven.
I don't know if you guys can see
there's a number we have a.
Fifty attendees joining us.
And.
Okay great so we have several
hands raised we're not gonna do
a timer today group give each
other give folks about a minute
or so.
And I will announce your name
and then the.
The I. T. folks will you're on
mute.
And you will address the
committee and I'll just go in
that order that the hands were
raised Mr Thomas Stevenson.
Welcome.
Good on mute yourself as well we
on mute you on our site and you
on yourself on your side okay
hopefully you can hear it out.
Mr chairman members the
committee at thank you for the
opportunity consider house bill
six seven my name's Tom
Stevenson I'm the CEO all right
powder we are a local company
based in Albuquerque New Mexico
with technology licensed from
both Los Alamos national
laboratories and universities
Mexico and we're one of the
recipients of the trigger
program gone through that
process and we thought it'd be
extremely useful for us in our
business and has also but we
Wallace it's early yet it has
given us data and information
which is been helpful in
securing follow on investment
for a company which we believe
will ultimately provide us with
the opportunity to build more
customers to be able to build
our customer base for our
exporters multiple of more jobs
here in New Mexico so so we're
extremely supporter the activity
and specifically one thing I'd
like to highlight is that the
sugar program allows the
opportunity for a larger pool of
money which is critical Madam
said small business assistance
program which is a great program
have this really allows for a
deeper project more involvement
from the staff of the national
laboratory they have a more
meaningful impact for the
companies that sell.
Thank you Sir.
Thank you Peter Hastings.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
Thank you Mr Mr Chairman Madam
vice chairman members of the
committee I'm Peter Hastings I'm
a vice president of regulatory
affairs for kairos power we're
headquartered in Alameda
California but we have a
substantial presence in
Albuquerque New Mexico I will
apologize in advance I'm having
some network problems so if you
lose is maybe one of our lead
test engineers are Gareth what
caught is also on the line and
construction I provided a letter
of support to each of the
committee members via email
earlier today.
All right the gentleman was
inadvertently removed from the
zoo we apologize Sir we will get
back to you a good and raise
your hand and we will grab you a
after this next beaker William
Kurtz.
Mr Kurtz you have the floor.
Thank you can you hear me.
Yes okay
thank you chairman and members
of the committee my name is
William Curtis and I'm the CEO
of IR dynamics and we're a nano
technology company based in
Albuquerque
we produce
a coating that makes windows in
homes and commercial buildings
more energy efficient and our
glass coatings incorporated a
unique nano scale material are
nanoparticles that we produce in
our lab here
assistance from Sandia national
labs through that TRD our
program has been central to our
development of the scalable
synthesis method and
commercialization for our
product and so I thought I would
just give you a really quick
example
a real example of how Sandia and
the center for integrated
nanotechnologies helped our
dynamics so depressed to achieve
our our performance
characteristics we had to
generated particles that are in
the twenty nanometer range and
to give you an idea of what that
schedule looks like if you could
line up three thousand of these
particles next to each other
that's about the width of a
human hair so these are too
small to see with any optical
microscope or any microscope
that are dynamic songs so
through this program we are able
to use what's called the
tunneling electron microscope
which cost I think the one we're
using is about four million
dollars seven eight million
dollar one as well so for small
company it's impossible for us
to be able to see the morphology
the size the shape of these
particles during the development
process and that's critical for
us to understand our scalability
and to bring this product to
market so we're super grateful
for this program and that we
were selected to be.
Part of the G. R. G. R.
assistance in twenty twenty one.
And I'd like to say that we
supported wholeheartedly and
this is a I think a very
effective way for New Mexico to
support advanced technologies
that are being developed by
small companies inside New
Mexico thank you thank you thank
you Sir those about two minutes
fifteen seconds all all tell the
speakers when they're at one
minute
but it's not a hard and fast.
Stop Mr Hastings apologies
please join us in a Mr comments.
well thank you
I'm provided a letter of support
to each of the committee members
via email earlier today in your
this is welcome news that email
on the record to summarize
briefly we support the bill our
company emerge from a deal we
sponsored cooperative research
initiative and so we're well
versed in the value of
leveraging national lab efforts
our mission is to enable the
world's transition to clean
energy with the ultimate goal of
dramatically improving people's
quality of life while protecting
the environment we've
established substantial
development testing and
manufacturing efforts in
Albuquerque there essential
components in the development
and deployment of our clean
energy technology which will
result in a in a demonstration
reactor in twenty twenty six and
commencement of commercial
deployment of that technology
beginning in twenty thirty.
Anything that supports
innovation supports the
transitioning of technology from
labs in the marketplace and
supports New Mexico leadership
in clean energy technologies and
good thing so we fully support
the bill and thank you for the
opportunity to comment.
Thank you Sir Tony Pena.
Yes my name is Tony Pino and I'm
the president of sandy of
biotech and we're fortunate that
we're just now flying and
wanting to apply for the trigger
program we licensed the
technology from landlords
agreeing for us and protein we
also land license that
technology from the university
of New Mexico that is
complementary to the technology
we license from Landel we have
been able to commercialize our
product from and take the
technology to a next level but
we need more support to make our
products more robust and we use
a green fluorescent protein
that's used in biomedical
research we can detect cancers
and many other diseases and help
our in.
Help scientists do the research
they need to develop drugs and
treatments and our employees
here are graduates of New Mexico
tech in in University of New
Mexico and as am I and we really
will benefit from this program
we're looking forward to it if
it stays in place to.
Thank you.
Thank you Sir Erica Montgomery.
Followed by Jen Weber.
You Mr chair thank you
representatives my name's Eric
Montgomery I'm a registered
lobbyist for el Paso electric
but I am actually here today
wearing the policy side share
half for New Mexico idea which
is the economic developers
association for the state of New
Mexico I just wanted to say that
we stand in strong support of
this bill recognizing that this
bill is an essential piece of
the entrepreneurial toolbox
with in New Mexico this provides
an opportunity for as you've
heard from those that spoke
before us.
Four for me that's
this gross jobs this group is
investment this was opportunity
within New Mexico and it should
be continued thank you.
Thank you general number
followed by Jennifer since
about.
Great thank you so much Mr chair
at the time to be here good
afternoon my name is Jennifer
Weber and I am here
Representative need the New
Mexico chamber of commerce in
support of house bill sixty
seven which extends the
technology reading that's gross
receipts tax credit the chamber
believes that the development
and expansion of New Mexicos
economy requires a multifaceted
approach to provide support and
appropriate incentives for new
existing and expanding
businesses large and small rural
and urban established and
emerging businesses and
industries.
The chamber supported the
legislation that created this
credit and while the technology
readiness gross receipts tax
credit has had some success and
allowed New Mexico's national
labs to assist and support small
businesses in New Mexico
extending it and making changes
will allow it to be more
effective and will continue This
needed assistance and support we
ask for your support for house
bill sixty seven thank you.
Thank you Jennifer since about
followed by Jason Espinoza.
Mr chair madam vice chair thank
you so much for your and members
of the committee I'm sorry thank
you so much for your time today
my name is percent of a and the
CEO of the New Mexico
manufacturing extension
partnership and we are a local
nonprofit that assists are small
manufacturing companies
throughout the state of New
Mexico we stand strong support
of house bill sixty seven and I
wanted to speak just a little
bit you for some great examples
today wanted to speak a little
bit about what we're seeing in
our small manufacturers this
bill and this program are giving
our small manufacturers that
whole that they can actually
participate in technology
commercialization of the
laboratories before this program
existed if they license the
technology or wanted to
commercialize something they
were completely on their own and
so we are seeing interest from
companies and from our
generational family owned
companies throughout the state
that are actually taking an
interest in licensing and
commercializing technology that
we believe they wouldn't have
otherwise if this program wasn't
there to support so we need to
pass the date of this bill today
this program can reach its
potential and get access to all
of our businesses.
It's a great competitive
advantage to our small business
small businesses throughout the
state thank you for your time
today.
Thank you.
Mr Espinoza followed by B. W. R.
host.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico technology council we
stand in strong support of the
legislation I'll keep it brief
but as you guys know the program
really does foster the
successful transition of lap
technologies to New Mexico
companies to produce high value
goods and services to grow the
technology based economy here in
New Mexico and we stand in
strong support thank you for.
Thank you Sir.
B. W. R. host please state your
name and where you're from
followed by the.
Dirac.
My name is Matthew and as I
speak to you from the COVID bed
so I apologize
we've been able to benefit from
the trigger program for our
disinfecting robot from build
with robots and being able to
use this in terms of creating
the next generation disinfectant
will have this will hopefully
keep New Mexico and the rest of
the country safe the to the
program actually was
instrumental in allowing us to
license the technology from
expanding it because it wasn't
quite right but the trigger
program maybe so that we could
potentially converted to what we
actually needed to be able to
move this forward we hired
twenty four people we have six
contractors in the last year and
a half and said the our
partnership there's been a big
part of that so thank you very
much please continue this
program because it's a huge
benefit for the state and the
small companies here.
Thank you Sir hope you feel
better.
The M. we have Casey.
On Lara dirette followed by
management sciences Inc.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members and thank you
for pronouncing my maiden name
very nicely Sir
I am with new space Mexican the
CEO and right I represent over a
hundred space companies
operating here in New Mexico our
vision is to grow the space
industry from New Mexico for the
nation
I wanted to just say you know in
dealing with and Representative
our space companies there's sort
of three legs to the stool for a
successful company that you know
we keep coming back to almost
like the the three parts to a to
a fire first needs you the first
is that is the IP the
intellectual are you know the
intellectual property the idea
the original concept next is the
money the investment in the
funding and then the third is
the work person you space
Mexico's trying to kind of help
with all three of those areas
and when you look at the tech
readiness G. R. T. program it
actually hits two of those three
areas that helps with the
intellectual property and ideas
coming out of these federal labs
and it also helps with the
investment New spacey Mexico
works really what has worked
really well with Los Alamos
National lands and Sandia
national labs and to help point
the companies to to these
federal resources and many
companies have been able to take
advantage of that and be able to
you know go to the next level in
this commercial space industry
so I just want to say we support
this tech ready tech ready next
year T. program we hope that you
will continue it I know the bill
taxed out for ten years by state
forever it is a great asset
asset to grow our tech economy
here in New Mexico thank you
Sir.
In committee and thank you for
joining us from Paris.
Management management just
followed by Roy month the bun.
Thank you chairman my Estes I'm
can you blame on management
sciences we're small business
that is smoking focusing on a
technologies to and has the
safety and solar arrays through
the connectors we have a current
license was Senate technology
sandy laboratories excuse me for
technology that we believe is
going to help us improve our
technology and we are currently
to tear G. R. recipient and we
are benefiting from and to be
able to work with the scientist
that developed the technology
that is going to help us and
they are helping us to assess
how this works and putting it
together we're not a scientist
in this field of their
technology so this is helping us
greatly to be able to talk to
them and we have.
Do you believe this gonna help
us to improve and enhance
manufacturing jobs in New Mexico
as well as administrative jobs
and we.
Leave this help other companies
as I said we are current
benefactor of this
tax benefits at the current time
working the Sandia and we do
support this I thank you for
your time.
Thank you Sir Roy Montalban
followed by at Parma.
Thank you chairman madam vice
chairman committee members I am
the CEO of a science and
technology start up here in New
Mexico and I strongly support
house bill sixty seven
I've been the recipient of some
amazing work with flannel in the
amnesty program and I just want
to point out for the committee
members that the trigger program
is actually keys not just
because you know it's value in
and of itself but it is also can
be a kind of gateway program to
federal credit
type of situation which is like
both of those in conjunction are
are pretty huge for small start
up so I just want to say I hope
that this program continues is
extremely valuable and I think
that New Mexico should
definitely be known as a as a
unique place among the fifty
states to start up a science
technology company thank you
very much.
Thank you Sir add parmesan.
Yes Mr chairman and members of
the committee my name is at
Parma I'm the chief science
officer of reading even radio
isotopes a start up company here
in Albuquerque New Mexico.
Even radio isotope supports
house bill sixty seven.
We are licensing technology from
Sandia national laboratories to
build medical radioisotopes
facility near hobs New Mexico.
We also have participated in the
pilot program at Sandia national
laboratories we found this
program to be a great benefit to
us to get access to expertise
said Sandia and Los Alamos that
otherwise would have been
difficult for us to to have and
also the quantity of the funds
that's allowed for the
businesses the hundred fifty K.
allows you to have a significant
amount of time from the experts
thank you so very much.
Thank you Sir anyone else wish
to speak in favor and when it
was which is speaking opposition
good and raise your hand in the
soon.
Thank you all for being here
members of the committee.
Just got my attention up
physically or or.
Raise your hand within the soon.
Representative said at the.
Thank you chairman I did a quick
question for the sponsor you
walked us through a little bit
of how you were looking at
shifting the bill are shifting
the current how how the how the
tax credit against is realize
can you explain again I
apologize I didn't fully
understand.
chairman and Representative
Serrato thank you that's a great
question I I went through it
quickly because I don't wanna
one's eyes to glaze over
but
how nearly every tax credit and
our current code works.
Is the recipient of that credit
when they're doing their taxes
basically.
Puts a line in there that says
you know this is how much of
that credit I'm applying for.
and we're we're essentially
moving to that structure here.
What structure before again I
see was a clever idea it was
really designed to try to help
the general fund.
What is originally put together
was an independent fund in our
general fund you know we have
hundreds of different
independent funds.
And there would be no
appropriation from the general
fund every year into this fund.
And then that fund would be used
to reimburse the labs for their
employees times helping these
these businesses.
And so the the order was well
this this could be a way to
maybe if you're having a really
bad year you can turn off the
spigot to that fund and and then
you can help the general fund by
not having money go into the
into this fund.
no I I actually thought of the
right of the LFC idea but when
you look at the real impacts
here there's a million dollars
for landowners million dollars
for Sandia that's two million
dollars total in one year
turning off that speed is not
gonna save us during a budget
crisis right
so so that's why I think you can
make sense just administrative
all the other tax credits.
And and and and go to something
that's.
the tax department knows how to
do very well
that you just want to do that
that does that answer your
question yes thank you very much
in the Mr chairman and now one
other question I had has that
one million for each of those
been fully utilizing the past or
because the program is still
growing you know you anticipate
to see it get the or.
Chairman and representative role
that is a awesome question right
we we should be thinking about
that is this is one million and
offers it too much
and and that the correct answer
is we don't have
the data to give you a good
answer on that yet I mention
that it took about a year to get
this fund set up and so the
folks that came here today and
New Mexico there are the program
I'm just barely barely got their
their help authorized.
We know that there's a lot of
people the pipeline
we always a lot of interest no
interest is going to grow.
personally I think a million
dollars for each lab is a great
place to start.
and we start looking at the data
from that search party
independent group and we can
decide
I'm I'm pretty sure that one
million three eight you get
called up quickly Bill B. that
our decision to say.
It is this something that's
really beneficial which we may
be interested.
Thank you thank you chairman
will have.
Thank you any members of the
committee.
Thank you Mr Perot.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
sponsor for bringing this back
exciting bill and the public
testimony actually answered one
of my questions which is what
kind of collaboration and
appetite for this have we seen
so we have a substantial
evidence into her public
testimony today to address that
question some circle back to the
what happens to the money that
was put into this fund
and do you want to make the
amendment to report that money
to the general fund in this
committee or is that something
you plan to do between now and
your next committee.
So our chairman and vice chair
Figueroa thank you excellent
question
Since these funds did calm did
originate from the general fund.
It makes sense to me that they
would go back there.
and now being structured as a
tax credit
you know like everything else
it'll come from that general
fund revenue so so that's the
right thing to do with it if we
don't do anything I think that.
Money just sits there and.
It's still wonders what it's
doing right so so we need to
revert it and I'm I'm very open
to a your suggestion madam chair
chairman we could do that here
in this committee I I did not
have a member prepared I said I
just saw that suggestion this
morning it was illustrate what
with all the parties involved to
get their concurrence
we can do and what may perhaps
an on the fly amendment here
but it goes to house tax revenue
next we can also do it there
whatever you and and the
committee decide I'm I'm happy
to do.
Mr Chairman
Let you think about that while I
circle back to a couple other
things that the committee and
Alice's brought to our attention
which is on page six line one
there some references in the
bill to the Department and it's
not really clear what department
that it so page six line one.
That annual report in writing to
the department the Economic
Development Department and the
legislative committee.
Okay so what was the department
yes so that chairman and vice
chair figure a great question
and you're not the first one ask
these kinds of questions
So this section of wall
section seven
is is all tax coat.
so you'll look through all of
the all the statutes and the
section referred to the
department and it is the tax
revenue department yes okay
yeah.
Yeah.
Right question.
Thank you thank you Mr chair and
thank you Representative that
was my assumption but it's good
to to be certain.
I really excited about this bill
and I don't want to hold it up
Mr chairman.
You want to try and do an
amendment on the fly here.
Thank you madam chair I was
hoping to but I'd prefer not
You know Representative Harper
is committed to us to to doing
that language between now and
the next committee so if if this
bill does receive a do pass a
Representative Harper if you
could up send the money back to
the general fund.
For all the money should be in
my opinion in the general fund
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you Mr chair then my one
final question is the ten year
sunset through the Mr chair
representative I'd rather see
that as a five year simply
because I believe in five years
we're gonna come back with
enough evidence and data that we
don't have right now that we
will say we want to expand this
and I don't want to have to wait
ten years to stop and look at
that data and a five year sunset
would force us to do it and make
sure it doesn't fall off the
right here so right right are so
that is my suggestion to you to
consider also as you are
considering amendment that's all
from me Mr chair.
Thank you.
So thank you Representative
Figueroa so that's not up for
motion at this time but a strong
suggestion to our sponsor.
All right great thank you and
gentleman if I can just maybe on
one eight one brief comment that
so
I think chairman and chair
Figueroa I I completely agree
with you we're going to probably
in Brian's three years we're
gonna have some amazing data.
one thing I do like about how
this bill is structured and was
really structure be transparent
a lot of our tax credits are not
transparent.
Structure in a way that annually
we get reports back not just to
the Department but also the and
also to rest up in the interim
and LFC.
And and so I know we did an
annual report from a similar
program from lapse every year
and I love to look through it
and see what's happening
we're we're not have to wait
very long I think we'll see some
good stuff even next year coming
out.
Thank you.
Members of the committee.
The comments for I before I I
entertain a motion so what are
look on page eight
Representative Harper may be
clear so we're repealing seven
dash one dash six point six I.
and then repealing not a statute
but a bill that was passed house
bill two fifty five twice
amended back in two thousand
twenty so lost twenty twenty
chapter twenty two section
three.
So I'm not sure what's going on
I'm trying to find I on the I
found the lost twenty twenty
chapter twenty two so that's
just cleaning up the statute
there was a delayed repeal and
twenty twenty four we're doing
away with that kicking this lot
of this bill into effect July
first and and and and caring
four for the next ten years so.
Chairman that's that's exactly
right when I saw those I was
scratching my head as well but
if you describe exactly right
house bill two fifty I was this
bill from last year.
and this is this is essentially
just cleaning that that up okay
fantastic.
Yeah I was gonna drop a tear
when the when the sponsor makes
this read the read books.
All you've got.
Thank you for that.
Members of the committee.
Representative part of thank you
Mr chairman I move a do pass
motion with the promise that the
amendments will happen in the
next committee thank you.
That motion we have a motion for
a do pass by Representative
Fajardo a second by
Representative Figueroa.
Is there any further comment.
And.
With that we show our.
Call the roll I think instead of
a no opposition I would just
call the roll for the fun of it.
Okay to pass for now.
House bill sixty seven.
Representative Dow.
Yes.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes.
Representative goes yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Martinez yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Serrato yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Barack.
Yes.
Chairman Mr yes you have a do
pastoral helper
And obviously you'll get those
that amendment ready for tax
thank you so much thank you I
really appreciate it and wish
you a great rest of your
afternoon.
Thank you all if I may make a
few comments I want to thank
everyone.
For being here are our friends
up from the labor community
another leader statewide the
expert witness and the sponsors
have chosen to withdraw at this
time and and for ever a house
memorial nine looking forward to
the conversation but I know that
the word got out a couple
minutes ago and I want to thank
folks for sticking around is
there are problems we need to
solve their problems we just saw
with efficiency video to
increase our capacity in various
governmental agencies and we
need to to in fact streamline
certain processes so we can
build stuff here in New Mexico
so we can get out of this twelve
year the Great Recession
pandemic phenomenon so it's
gonna take all of us at the
table I know that the sponsors
of this bill are tremendous
supporters of
those sponsors that we're here
today are tremendous support of
organized labor the words on the
page don't depict many of the
concerns I've heard the past
couple of days so does not hold
up does not hold it against
anyone because there is no
contradiction between a strong
organized labor movement and a
strong strong
economy because they go hand in
hand they are they are not
contradictory they do not oppose
one another they go hand in hand
so let's hopefully we can work
on some of these issues this
spring and summer up whether
from a practice standpoint
provided some point increase
capacity so that we have more
inspectors in the state any
members of the committee.
All right we appreciate
everybody being here and not
just mineral line is been rolled
till mid April of and then and
we will be adjourned at this
time thank you very much.
