Madame vice chair here and madam
chair here and i'm sure you have
a
already i'm already being called
to the next year so i'm going to
pass the price here thank you.
The power is mine everyone
currently we're waiting for the
sponsors.
We need sponsors here so you
want to text any of your
colleagues present your bills.
So
we have a couple texts out to
build presenters and whoever
shows the first we will
recognize.
Thank you everyone we have with
this right now each b two four
Thank you matter chair and
members of the committee
house bill two forty eight and
what this bill proposes to do is
eliminate the income limits that
apply to the social security
income tax exemption and this is
personal income tax so
I can start with the proposition
that i'm tear that
we already at parallel deduction
time people's social security is
taxed and then when they
are retiring it is text again
and that's the only instance I
know of where we tax something
twice and so it's it's kind of a
principle of I think it's good
policy not to tax and come
twice.
So a little history moved here
in twenty twenty two
are the legislature provided
that people who pay person when
come tax could exclude their
social security income from
personal income tax but only if
they're adjusted gross income
fell below a certain limit and
so there were three limits one
was for a married person filing
separate return it was exemption
of seventy five thousand for
people
a
failing jointly hundred and
fifty thousand basically doubled
that amount and then for single
individuals a hundred thousand.
And so what this bill would do
is just eliminate that cap or
that limit.
So with what's happening madame
chair and members is
the federal government raised
social security I think it was
three point one or three point
two percent.
And what that is doing is
creating a bit of a cliff effect
so people are afraid now they
have a little extra income and
they're afraid they're going to
lose their new mexico exemption
because they've tripped over the
line and have a little more
income than they used to.
And so I call it a trip wire and
it is it is a factor
people if they don't calculate
just right and have a little
additional income come in they
could lose the full benefit of
that exemption.
And so we'd like to eliminate
the app I just removing that cap
again it's that workers money
already been taxed once and the
medicare
new mexico even though we made
this change in twenty twenty two
we are still classified as a
state that taxes social security
income and that is a deterrent
to some people to move to the
state they course consider many
factors if they're thinking of
remove in retirement but this is
indeed for many people are
concerned and so I just would
ask the committee to uh pass
this bill and would have become
a state that is known for not
taxing social security at all
thank you very much
thank you and with with that we
take some questions
anyone here in favor of each
beach forty eight.
Is there anyone online.
Carl sometime.
For your comments in favor
yes may I thank you madame chair
members of the committee on
carlos santa president ceo other
than a mexico business coalition
we stand in a straw support of
this bill house bill to forty
eight and really appreciate the
sponsor bringing this there's a
couple of things going on here
one eight years I think that
this was just an oversight that
we didn't include inflation to
be getting within the original
legislation and so this would
correct that the other thing is
though my statement is always
less is more when there's less
taxation we actually produce
more revenue for the state and I
see that based on what has
happening in other states that
we see that are excelling a when
they reduce their taxes and
especially sources security tax
that is already a taxed
product for our employees then
people flap to that state and we
need that kind of revenue we
need that kind of growth in the
mexico and so we support this
bill and we hope that you will
as well thank you very much
thank you sarah fitzgerald.
Good afternoon madame chair
members of the committee i'm
served for sterle with the
greater all cookie chamber of
commerce here in strong support
of this bill this is more than
just a break for seniors
although that is important this
is also really correcting the
disincentive to relocate to new
mexico just created by being one
of the very last days to tax
social security income removing
this cap is also a win win for
employers and employees because
many of our vibrant people over
the stainer returning age
thunder longer ticket financial
hit for participating in our
workforce in an intributory
economy the legislature made
some great privacy twenty twenty
two and we urge you to finish
that work thank you.
Thank you is there anyone else
online so no one else in the
room and known else online is
there anyone in opposition in
the real to two forty eight
seeing no one in the room is
there anyone online in
opposition
think you know it's time to go
to the committee other questions
from the committee.
Representative
that is included on the record.
I'm sorry
I can't you think it sometimes
don't write that down take that
to the bank
and madame chair madame bush
chair representative so this is
this is another bill first we
did the colours that was your
first bill right
a matter of chair represent
matters the other was to have an
index for inflation right yes
thank you and madame chair
representative
if we pass this we don't
we would need
would we need the fet the first
bill
matter chair and representative
I believe we would not need this
bill but I don't know which one
might make it through
and last year when I presented
these ideas with representative
arms strong we just said i've
got version and version be you
know which one do you.
I think the one that
I said people had a preference
for one or the other so we're
just bringing both.
Representative do you have a
preferences to which you would
prefer be passed
out of chair and representative
matters I I would like to see us
live the cap completely and just
make a clean break of it and it
would really enhance our
reputation as a place to retire
I think because again where were
on the list of states that still
do tax social security and if
people bother to read the little
footnote which most people don't
they would realize you know we
we have this three part way of
looking at it and so I think
this one would be my preference
and manifest your representative
how do we tax military
retirement is disp.
Presentative.
Well let's see it's been a long
time since I was on the tax
committee that's if I can
remember
that we do have in state law and
exemption for military income
but I believe it has a sense
that after three years someone
else who's on tax might be able
to confirm that you have to.
So we have the test six yeah
she's right yeah and then we
were looking at an extension of.
So
many representative
it would seem that what we're
doing is we're moving toward a
situation where no retirement
income well let me ask you a we
moving toward a situation where
no retirement income is taxed
what about
private private pensions for one
k money
I already
all of that what i'm kind of
trying to get a feel for
why we are with for example
you're picking social security
as the
as the one you want to change
and i'm wondering then if
there's a sequence of i'm not
suggesting you're planning there
for ahead but
that
we're moving toward a situation
where.
So that's a great question thank
you representative
so it's my understanding that
well some states don't tax
return income at all and there
are many of them have ins for
retirees uh sometimes the
property taxes are higher than
so one we are the other the
state is going to get tax
revenue in this case i'm just
looking at social security
because it has been text already
and again I just don't think
it's fair to people to to take a
second cut at that but as far as
I know matter chair and
representative again the expert
is sitting next to you and new
mexico still does tax for a one
k distributions and other things
like that this is the only
example I know where it's a
double tax and um
representative just to finish
the thought III don't really
have any thoughts about or plans
to try to eliminate all text
retirees
but this one just seems to be
like a sore thought.
And
then most year
representatives that approach in
assess question but is there any
is there any study in the in our
state or other states that
attracting a lot of
senior citizens is a good
investment for the economy
or the culture or a state
yeah
and represent a math you so yes
there are studies on that topic
retirees bring a lot of things
to their communities are one is
usually life and work experience
and some of them become
community volunteers I know a
lot of people who in their
retirement are busy you're doing
volunteer work then they were
when they were working for pay
I think they enrich us
culturally as well we know that
in many cases grandparents were
raising grandchildren and so
they have that role perhaps in
many cases as well but I think
it's in some ways and here's how
I look at it
and all use myself as an example
my husband and I work very hard
for many years and the idea was
always to save to say for
retirement and now that we're
both retired were just.
With a low store in buy stuff
that we don't need that the
bottom line is were more free to
spend because we say for
retirement and then in retireme.
So I I think there's that
dynamic as well
and chair representative thank
you I did I would note that
there's a number of
individuals sitting at this
table who are volunteering their
time to see that the stable and
the representatives
and.
More question but i'm not sure I
do let me just think for a
second
this would become mad share
representative what it went when
would this take effect
out of chair and representative
the bill specifies the january
first of twenty twenty fourth of
this year to this tax year this
would apply if it gets all the
way through twenty
january for starts january
twenty first of twenty twenty.
Thank you that's other
questions.
Single for the questions they're
motion.
Well it's happened
representative and you know
him
representative dunkin
representative hernandez
representative lender yes
representative little yes
representative lunchtime
representative martinez
representative mason
representative matthews yes man
investor madam made a mister no
but i'd like to explain my vote
madam chair
final tally is seven votes yes
one vote now so you have a do
pass on your bill and my
explanation right road is I
always appreciate your work on
this issue I know that we're
continuously trying to have the
diversified tax base I I do like
your other bill better for this
reason but I could look in your
next committee thank you all
right thank you much
that was quite loud I have the
power everyone less you forget
how says looking who we have
right now
it folks wouldn't work to get
representatives for two eighty
here
believe you have representative
of date we have happened here if
you'd like to
present each b seventy one that
student loan bill of rights.
A matter of charge you
and it was here I do have an
expert he's here via zoom
thank you and what's the name of
your expert
winston
once I can be done when okay we
do have him on here and ready to
go
since very knowledgeable
as its house bill seventy one
I think we all know about the
student loan dead crisis that's
facing our country today i'm
gonna give you some pretty
shocking facts new mexican
students and graduates carry a
debt load of over seven point
nine billion dollars browse
don't have access to affordable
and appropriate repayment plans
no extra has the second highest
student loan default rate in the
country
no defaults car stressed in
financial consequences that can
impact careers and keep them
with from being financially
stable.
The way that this debt prevents
hard working mexicans from
buying houses saving for
retirement starting to business
or story and families I know
that personally myself so the
initial of the browers blame
marriage and children because of
their student drat burden and
non servicer issues not been
addressed and payments for over
two hundred and thirty thousand
new mexicans will resume this
fall after three point five zero
have resumed after three point
five years throwing everyone
back into a broken system with
that I will defer to my expert
who can explain the bill.
Western let's unmight like
winstons if you can explain
can you hear me yes great
alright thank you madam chair so
my name is the record is
thank you madame term members of
the committee
so the chance it had to find
support really be seventy one my
name is winston and bringing on
a legal director of the student
power protection center a
national policy organization
focused on student long debt
prior to joining the sppc I was
the student on amber's men and a
financial regulator for the
state of new york and was
illegal services attorney before
that helping low income student
on bar was such from these
perspectives I asked about today
I will be brief and want to just
add a point or two of the
context from the representative
about the state of student debt
and then I walk through the bill
at a high level
i'll just add that you know i'm
sure you're aware that you hurt
from the representative for
having a lot of changes to the
federal student line system
because in lots of confusion and
distress for bars across the
country as well as the new
mexico one other status sort of
further complicate that is since
two thousand twenty so not that
many years ago one in two new
mexico bar wars have had their
student modem service or change
in a voluntarily as companies
have left the market and in
student and servicing arena has
consolidated so there's just
been a lot of confusion and this
is generally an under regulated
market which is to say that
there are some federal laws in
general clickability that apply
but otherwise it's under the
states to pass was that
specifically regulate student
loan service in a private
student box so having said that
turning to the bell it is a long
document but in any of the pages
are dedicated to the routine of
regulatory provisions
to division needs when it
supervises in the industry so
the bill centre does three
things and i'll talk about each
of them briefly it licenses the
student loan service in industry
it provides consumer protections
for private student wombarders
and it lays out the fide's
authorities and tools to
supervise the industry and
educate bar was including credit
and ombudsman wrong.
So again i'll briefly describe
each of these and more detail
first licensure so until twenty
sixteen no state license student
one services it was under
regulated and were still seeing
the harms now from that time
when there were fewer
protections states started to
license these private companies
and now mexico would be the
twentieth state to regulate
student local services it is
well what and states
constitutional right to
supervise non bank financial
institutions like student loan
services their licenser for
example your mexico already
licenses check cashes that
collectors and money
transmitters student button
services are no different.
The bill's first sixteen pages
or so are the routine provisions
required to bring any industry
into the divisions of her site
this is things like the license
application.
Pages sixteen to twenty then lay
out business practices that are
specific to student long
servicing this includes things
like how overpayment should be
applied or how payment should be
applied across multiple loans
our complaints should be handled
and how account transfers from
an old service to a new service
should operate he just twenty to
twenty three then lay out
consumer protections which
essentially prohibit license
service or some engaging in
unfair to saturday practices
which is a common prohibition in
star financial services
protections and from failing to
imply with the business
standards that I just mentioned.
These business standards and
consumer protections are nearly
identical to those already in
place in nineteen states.
The second part of the bill
relates to private student wines
this is roughly pages twenty
three to thirty five and so
there are problems with this
market that had been well
documented by state in federal
law enforcement and what this
section does is address those
problems specifically oh
highlight just a few major
points the bill would meet some
protections that already exist
for federal student loans for
private student loans namely
that if you have a permanent
internal disability which is a
specified arm which is to find
in the bill how to determine
that that that prevents you from
working in from our earning and
income to pay your loans you can
be released from your death
again exists for federal student
loans already next co signers
are often overlooked for the
growing population of private
student loan bar words the bill
would ensure that cosiners that
people access to loan documents
as the primary borrowers and
they receive people treatment
are often lenders locked our
counter release program so the
bill insurers that win those
released terms are fairly met
that the bar worked the
consigner can get off the loan
unfortunately there been
documented instances of post
signers to be in capped on loans
even when they meet other
requirements to be released so
the bill addresses that finally
the bill would prevent lenders
from putting someone out private
student on letters from putting
someone in default for any
reason other than on payment if
your current on your loan you
shouldn't be put into the fault
just because of some technical
violation might not updating
your contact information or
something like that and this
part also like the service in
part includes protections
against unfair to set up to
practices which again is common
for financial services
regulation the final section of
the bell is about an
administration on oversight and
runs pages thirty five to fifty
six here to its mostly running
animal authorities given the
director of the financial
institutions division to ensure
that they can do their job and
it's not particularly specific
to student launch servicing a
couple things to note is that at
the bill doesn't power the
director to monitor the industry
and collect data and service
which is lenders.
Including investigations as
needed that they'll allow the
director to enforce violations
and administratively and and in
court the bill provides for a
product right of action if bar
was right can't be enforced that
they are meaningless rights and
I know for my time and
government at the state cannot
go to court for every individual
violation that's just not how
government enforcement works so
private enforcement is important
the bill creates a student long
ombudsman this role is a point
of contact for new mexican bars
we need help with their loans or
interacting with their render or
service they handle complaints
and do average and education the
ombudsman supports the directors
marketing and market monitoring
efforts and will issue an annual
report to the legislature on the
divisions work and will also
join and national coalition of
state based student long
ombudsman so again I know the
bill is long and covers a lot
but I hope that this was a
helpful breakdown and
explanation of its correct parts
and i'd be happy to answer any
questions about the bill itself
or the state of industry
oversight nationwide thank you.
I mean i'm sure we do have an
amendment to offer to do soon to
two seven to two seven one seven
two point one i'm sorry to to
eight one seven two point one
give some of the work.
Response to the one i'm seeing
here is two to eight one seven
two dot one correct madam chair
i'm sorry I was i.
My desire got the better of me
so we'll give the members a
moment to look at it would you
like to explain the amendment
sure madam chair members of the
committee this is simply a few
changes that were requested by
the regulation in licensing
department to use the process of
licensing if this were to be
implemented.
Is there can we get a motion.
Is there any discussion on.
Do you want to is there any
opposition
you have an amendment though
there's an art to that the
chairwoman has I apologize i'm
not
there alright thinking out here
i'm still wondering where you
get a pink gavel
and with that will stand for
questions thank you is thirty
one in the audience in favor of
this bill has everyone.
Even to play field and have some
read course when something
happens to the administration of
their love you know all of their
own so we do as
the communities.
Thank you.
Also thank you madame chair
members of committee john the
futes with the new mexico
federation of
mexico federation labor cil
for all the reasons
we stand and strong support of
this bill and just that you know
workers in this base tremendous
amount of pressure financial
largely just with ray like built
where making meat all you know a
lot of folks deal with student
debt that is a huge dresser in
their life and putting guards
rails putting things like this
in place to hopefully take some
of that stress away we'll lead
to.
So for those.
Thank you there is anyone on
line in favor of this build we
have worth pom gardening.
Evening madam chair my name is
more bond gardener i'm returning
the next to a center on long
party we stand in support in
this bill I just want to know
that any new next came with
student loan decade test the
fact that calling loans are
restaurant with a student
extremely frustrating experience
at a borrowers are up and give a
confusing conflicting
information and back in the two
significant arms the bar I can
just say and it totally that I
have claims who ended up paying
tens of thousands of dollars to
that they didn't need to pay on
their loans i've had bars to all
because of information that they
were given on their loans that
was misleading this bill would
do so much to just clear up some
of their confusion and how far
were you are just trying to
understand their loans into the
right thing
new mexico early monitors other
consumer financial markets the
license ever see mortgage
lenders that collect yours check
casters money to president of
his bottle enders
this build with certain being
lie with with the sort of
regulation that we already do it
financial markets for those
reasons we asked that you
support this pill
thank you check of
the afternoon madam chair
members of the committee i'm
taking the helmet deputy policy
director in mexico voices for
children
we stand a strong support the
bill
was student and impacting a very
high rate of mexicans we agree
with the sponsor that consumer
protections for the right
borrowers are critical to
preventing abuse and
mismanagement by student on
services so
get we stand strong support of
hb seventy one thank you so much
everyone else online support
is there anyone in the room in
opposition seeing no one in the
room and opposition is there
anyone online in opposition
to is there anyone that has any
questions from the committee.
Representative lenstra
thank you manager right now like
comment that I wanted to make is
that yes gosh it wasn't that
many years ago handful of years
ago where we had had a bill in
front of the budget committee
regarding student loan issues
and as I dug into it
particularly the federal loan
program it was one of the most
creditory processes i've ever
seen in terms of what the loan
amount was and how much a borrow
would have to pay back
incredibly predatory
not not sure about these private
lenders but I know what that
that particular program.
Thank you representative
representative leasing.
Just a few questions you know.
All.
The.
But I did that
first of all what they can
stretch me with when I was
reading them.
Analyst is report or your
supporters in the police the
boat upon it but I don't know
financial institutions at all
listed only list of supporters
of this legislation and that
where we're going to for the
money.
The financial institutions
matter in chair representative
mason can you clarify your
question about where we're going
to for what i've just looked at
it in list the supporters of the
ball but I don't see any
financial institutions by
experiencing anybody
that is listening to
legislation.
That rude now did you talk to
any of those about this
legislation madam chair members
of the committee i'm gonna defer
to my experience so he can give
you more of that history on the.
Thank you manager in minutes of
committee for the question
in mexico would be not aware of
any financial institutions that
have actively supported eighty
seventy one but I will say that
given that nineteen other states
have already been active
licenser and oversight bills for
this sector at these
institutions i've stopped acted
we opposing it in other states
as they you know after the first
couple of years I think the
writing was sort of on the wall
so to speak and they started to
be treated the way that other
financial services institutions
are treated so the main trade
associations which do not want
services for instance the slash
day
you know it is aware of these
bills they monitor them I don't
think that they are the practice
of actively in the door scene
supervision bills but they are
no longer actively opposing them
in my experience
and if I may add madame chair
members of the committee I mean
we didn't have anybody standing
up and active opposition here
today but I I stated there was
no offer not nothing with
opposition
representative madame chair
representative
I guess I didn't I didn't.
I tried reading some of the
categories over my head a lot
but
the loan that is this about loan
forgiveness for so.
Madame chair members of the
community i'll make it brief
comment and then my expert can
add details but I know this is
more specifically about
protecting borrowers rights loan
forgiveness is program was
offered by says some the federal
government depending on the type
of loan that you have but this
bill and no way guarantees going
forgiveness to just guarantee
this that anybody probably who
would qualify for forgiveness
has the right to pursue it
should they again qualify and
i'll defer to my expert to add
any details
thank you madame chairman is
many that is exactly right in
this spell in the you know safe
again passing laws substantially
some of this bill in twenty
sixteen before alone
cancellation and forgiveness
wise a major policy topic and
exactly as a sponsor said to the
extent of congress has enacted
legislation that allows for debt
cancellation in such as public
service loan forgiveness
teachered long forgiveness
folks who do to their armed
military service can get
benefits this make sure that
services are appropriately
administering those cancellation
programs that it does not itself
extend any sort of cancellation
administratively legally or
otherwise.
Thank you thank you.
The what other questions
are medicare representative will
this type of legislation back it
actually.
Will levers be less.
Incident the makes student loans
the private industry with this
though with these new
restrictions
thinking manager represented it
may send I and again I will
defer to my expert for
additional details but many of
this that loan servicers are
national companies that have
contracts with the federal
government to service such loans
and so they can't I I believe
excluded people in one state
versus another based upon worth
their based upon but i'll defer
to my expert
before we go on that I don't
care representing the clarify a
little bit the private and
lenders at all
will it if.
I was way before we had any
loan.
Hello we went to college we
needed alone we went through our
local fighting alone
you know in the conversation.
And i'm not in older lots of
different agencies that don't
just
but if I some
needed that extra two thousand
dollars to finish out with with
the local lenders being less
likely than her enter student
load a great
thank you chairman
representative mason for the
clarification in that now I know
what you're asking so I I don't
believe I had any conversations
as a cosponsor with any private
lenders about any hesitance you
but i'll deferred it my expert
so he can confirm.
Yeah thank you madam chairman of
the committee it's my experience
this already insures now it is
my experience that community and
local banks actually don't do
student loans very often not at
all
and in the jurisdictions that
have passed these private
students yesterday from the
servicing the private student on
provisions of this bill we had
not seen any meaningful
significant change in
availability of practice student
for those days thank you
representative well
they are.
Any time we go to regulating
things I guess I have a little
problem with that I grew up in a
different we didn't
they the stood loads we got were
not played student
we were your parents was
whatever we went to the back and
borrowed body
collateral.
You know that that my education
wasn't the collect
by.
Credit history record was
michael for getting a love
but the
I guess the only problem I have
with any of it in I think about
it every time when we think it
will that loans and the problems
with loans
any longer they were taken
we go we read a paper we agreed
at the terms of the loan.
We side and get the money or we
don't agree that the turn for
the loan so it outside it
so that it seemed like we're
nearly getting the into the
situation now we're a lot of
students.
Get loans.
That planning to pay over the
first place then I don't wanna
the celitate that that minds
that if you get alone with all
you should go into it and other
circumstances you are what's the
budget it's they get this I book
you know I mean there's always
provisions for all of that other
world but if they're working and
done what they're loan was for.
That
the
listen to the rest of the bite
about a lot of things about it I
like I want everybody treated
fairly.
And but I don't know my idea
fairly in yours may not be
thank you thank you
representative little
yes my insurer like to move or
do you pass with a few more
questions on the table
from there a representative
thank you thank you manager
thank you representative just a
couple questions
where is the where is f ID of r
on this and are they supported
at man chair members of the
committee I don't recall seeing
that information I don't have a
firm from the mobile different
in my expert who i'm i'm sure it
does very thorough
and thank you madame chair and
members of the committee the
only substantive the f ID had
mean reserves is the added that
was just added yet a minute to
the am to the bill and that was
just a technical added the
basically said we typically have
applications do by december
thirty first and november first
originally said that it was true
just moving the gold post for
wind available is sorry an
application is considered timely
or made
otherwise they have put forward
some staffing fiscal estimates
but substantially I believe our
support of the data that they
have formally taken a position
but they didn't have any other
access into the concerns
thank you
ma'am share representative
in the f I talks a little bit
about the fact that this mirrors
quite a bit of
federal law and my question is
and i'm trying to kind of
understand what.
What
gap what
if federal law is going to cover
a lot of these loans the student
loans and so my question is
what we're looking at stay
players only are we looking at
particular institutions
where does this beat in with the
federal work election that's
what i'm asked
thank you managed her
representative matthews so i'm.
Why would say is this bill
creates
on a state revolut the ability
to hold a loan servicer
accountable
there's more of a nexus between
a state of office with an
umbedsman someone that you can
call on the phone if you have a
problem and get answers to
versus federal law which is out
to share a personal story if you
don't mind it's quick manager
members of the penny I had six
different promisery notes and
they were sold to nineteen
different.
And so i'm trying to find a
person a human being to talk to
you on the phone mark madam
chair members of the was
impossible to do I was able to
do it eventually after the
thread of a last suit but many
people that I know who have been
in in this position and i'm sure
representative matthews it's the
same thing with them I mean the
only way you can get attention
for any issue related to these
types of lounge especially if
it's you know default by no fall
to your own or some other
technical issue is by either
having the resources to file
last year but what this bill
does as it creates a a method in
a past for people to be able to
find the loan service or hold
them accountable and get an
answer essentially thank you
representative for that answer
madame chair
is there is
it covers public and private
loans would how would it impact
if at all
institutions like CNN our
community colleges are public
colleges
i'm assuming most of those are
are
part of federal or state long
programs not as opposed to a
private lender but if you could
just sort of explain that I
appreciate it thank you manager
members of the committee so i'm
every year from the further
federal loan system you're
required to fill out a piece of
paper that essentially qualifies
you for the longer for more
alarms and by that piece of
paper they determine the
capacity the amount that they're
going to offer you and i'm
depending on your there's things
like income limitations if you
qualify for specific special
montas say if you are from the
military or have a disability
you you can apply for.
Different loans that they will
tell you qualify for
you also for those people that
are depending on whether another
package is an after them will
have to go to a private loan
service scenario which I also
had to do I had
to take out a small private loan
just to cap make sure I had
enough money to cover you know
that entire year because you
also have to figure out living
expenses but materials so that
that's how the system works and
you have to certified you have
to send that and that's a
federal form then goes to the
federal government and that it's
farmed out to the loan service
or whoever that maybe I see
thank you very much for that
explanation that help you
understand how this fits
together some questions I have
thank you madame chair think
representatives we have a
representative dunkin
big manager
just one question two parts of
it and mexico education
assistance foundation has an
ombudsman as well as the us
department of education as
borrower services madam chair
and representative
strong need to have new mexico
another ombudsman
thank you madame chair
representative of dunkin I mean
my answer would be yes
not just from a policy
perspective for my own personal
perspective you can have an a
federal ombudsman you can have a
borrower assistance program but
it's still the same problem in
that you can clup pick up a
telephone and call a number and
wait for four hours and then
have them hang up on you six
times
so having a state ombudsman in a
smaller pool for new mexico
residents will just offer that
additional level of assurance
and I guess and again and and
additional level of access to
help.
Thank manager
thank you so we have a signal
for the question
absolutely representative one
thing I wanted to say also that
i've seen and we've all had a
kid that's done this is when
they need that gap financing
they go to credit cards which it
makes it worse
and if you had that kind of
solution where at least they
could call and help get some of
these things worked out I think
would go along way but we've
seen tremendous credit card
doubt with students that don't
even have jobs and you wonder
how in the heck do they even
qualify for these things because
you're supposed to show an in.
We have many many.
Thank you I think you're senator
I think it's a helpful
constitution
we do have a motion on the table
from representative little for a
due pass as amended as that
correct is there a second.
The.
Representative and in order yes
representative dunkin yes
representative hernandez
representative lender yes
representative little yes
representative lunch.
Representative martinez
representative mason
representative matthews
yes and i'd like to explain my
answer
to most you're out yes
yes yes
man investor yes.
Madam chair
and madame chair the final tally
is nine boats yes as zero
representative yes they are the
only thing i'd like to add is I
think this point out these kinds
of situations point out how
important financial literacy in
our schools is to help people
understand how to avoid these
kind of situations and how to
deal with them when it occurred
and i'm really
I voted against the school thing
the school graduation
requirements because financial
iters he was not in there but
having taught it CNN I know how
students can make just credibly
terrible mistakes that infect
them all the lives so thank you
for bringing this forward thank
you representative you pass as
amended
everybody so I look at the
request of the sponsor we're
going to go ahead and roll each
b two eighty i'm it does look
like we have that and it
memorial on for friday afternoon
but that looks like all we have
so far the tourist three o seven
we have so two rolled bills in a
house memorial otherwise
