Manifest year madam chair
manager you have a corn thank
you already
we will die right in vice chair
please begin the medicare woman
thank you committee for this
time he seventy one the public
finance accountability act
essentially does three things it
courtifies the executive order
that was passed back in twenty
thirteen under the republican
governor that requires fiscal
agents to be up to date on their
auditing before receiving
capital outlay at two it creates
the public finance
accountability fund to be used
to support these energy is to be
in compliance with this act and
ensure that the auditor up to d
and three it funds that
she just give you a brief idea
we know there is more than three
billion dollars an unencumbered
capital outlay funds out there
that people have not been able
to use and they're not serving
our communities whether you live
in an urban part of santa sanita
or roll part of torrents county
they're just not so this bill
will specially help the rural
communities get up to date on
their audits and and receive the
support they need to catch up it
also insurers that they can
spend the money that they have
and get it in the communities
faster
as you can see in some of the
analysis that should have been
passed out on the activities of
this fund have already
essentially started the office
of the state auditor had a
special appropriation last year
the memories for five hundred
thousand dollars to assist local
small bodies to get back on
track think of a secure land
grants those folks to get there
on its back up today and because
of their work in the community
this resulted in two point four
million dollars in capital
outlayed being put to use the
community that's a three hundred
eighty one percent return on
that initial investment again
being directed right into our
communities
and I with that I have my
experience chris hall are he's
with the state auditors office I
think in the in terms experience
he were happy to be open to
questions now thank you
already thank you
is anybody here in favor of this
bill.
Anybody on zoom
okay anybody opposed
to okay let's open it up to the
committee
representative martinez
thank you madame chairman
representative sorrado.
I'm actually shocked at this is
an inplace already other than
the executive order.
Do you know currently how many
grandes are auto compliance I
think you bound i'm trying to
think you representative can I
hand that over to my expert.
Madame chair representative I
don't have the exact numbers
that we have
we've estimated that based on
it's hard to get a track of
we've looked at dfa's compliance
tracker.
Based on that number of.
Estimates between seven in ten
percent of that or.
Ten percent.
Other entity.
Thank you in madam chair in my
opinion any time more dealing
with publ.
Unfortunately being in
government for as long as I was
every time we sent a dollar out
the door to an organization
whether it before capital outlay
or a contract I made sure that.
That organization had been
audited because we are charged
to make sure that
every dollar of public money is
accounted for so standful
support of this bill and I I
really p.
I think you would representative
deacon.
Sure two quick questions for you
are there any cities over fifty
thousand that have funds out
there that don't have audit
thank you madame chair and
representative it's funny
welcome to the state capital we
are out of date we are
anticipating that the city will
be coming up to date by may of
twenty twenty three and have a
twenty twenty four and have
their twenty three audits and by
then is the hope there and I
have been very explicit with my
city regarding my deep concerns
about that and that again in my
district I represent the
southside airport road area and
the eastern part and we need
those dollars directly in there
and not enough of my dollars
that I put out their husband
which is partially why I want to
see this going to a fact that we
are saying in our state laws
that this that we believe that
anybody should be up to date and
especially for those smaller
communities that need that
additional help I mean sometimes
you can get an auditor way out
there you know that they can get
that edge that they deserve
thinking of chair so you're
saying the city of santa fe is
out of it madam chair
representative yes.
The.
Wow.
You know for their smaller
communities manager the smaller
communities I could almost bite
off on this for a city the size
to not be.
I don't even I don't even want
to go there
because of that
the second question in so
if we do this which two years
from now which to say they don't
get right back out of complaint
thank you madam chair I think
representative you know there's
a few things I think we should
consider so one aspect of this
is the fund that helps those
other organic other other cities
entities get up today which I
think is an important aspect
your point that should the city
missing not still be behind you
know I believe that is in our
hands is legislators to
understand that our dollars are
not being used as we requested
them and we all know there's
been a discussions of further
actions that may take place on
those ways and again I I mean
again that's for us to make
those decisions
on as legislators and what we're
investing in and i've been very
clear with my city on that i'm
happy to talk to you offline
about the little more than I
think my expert has anything to.
Representative I would simply
add that is primarily.
It's not primarily solely.
Entities.
This is for primarily as as
representative said there are
entities that are out in rural
new mexico and they can't get.
And so what we're trying to do
is cluster these entities and
higher auditors to go out and do
four five.
I p accountants these auditors
to go out and then your second
question as far as any entity
they get back out of compliance.
You're not up to date with your
audit.
And if I made just briefly cause
I think you would find this
interesting chair representative
on the bottom of three and the
top of four it expresses how the
the other will deal with audits
that have material weaknesses
and significant deficiencies and
essentially that this fund the
intent is to help them get back
on track and then on on page
four it talks about that it also
insures the granty i'm not read
for a moment the grant he shall
have demonstrated the
satisfaction of the agency
making the grant that it has the
count accounting methods and
procedures to expensive rant
funds in accordance with
applicable law and I think
that's a really important aspect
because it's it's about getting
these dollars back in as soon as
possible
so thank you membership so let
me get this straight so sanity
will not be getting any of this
money
it's just for the rural parts of
it okay so let's say they get it
two years they're out of
complaints again are we going to
come back and ask for another
million dollars to get.
Madam chair president of you
apologize who's the day in that
sense it's just anybody in a
sake year small small tiny
village.
Madame chair representative I
that's not our certainly the
intent is for this to be.
The.
And for us to get these entities
into compliance and then help
that's another part of the
offices larger overall mission
is to help.
And so ideally no.
Thing manager i've got a really
good way we can redirect that
money to anybody that's in c.
Manager that's all
thank you representative ma.
Thank you madame chair you
representative.
First question this millions are
not in the budget says the
report thank you madam chair
think you representative i've
been assured that it is we
checked it and that it wasn't in
the budget as I understand the
understand by our bill and now.
Thank you madam chair think your
presentative i'm i'm happy to
follow up with you and there
will
I hate appropriating money
that's not even going to get
appropriate.
And the course of one problem I
have with it
a little in that you know I
understand the whole
concept is good
but
I guess i'm very skeptical
that the
that this will actually
rectify the problem
you know the communities he was
talking about I have one in my
district that has a problem with
it a little town you know they
are I don't know what the column
was or southeast the mexico
economy called that thing that
takes care of our counties you
don't are capital that way they
can't go in and ask them and
they have went in and helped
this town already
will negotiate to do.
So with double dippen with this
bill shouldn't those that in
every section have some with a
column pogger whatever that
supposed to help their counties
and cities with their capped
alloway prospects thank you
better chair think you
representative i'll i'll speak
briefly to this a little bit and
then i'm happy to hand it to my
expert a little bit more but to
your point you know with the
five hundred thousand dollars
they've already put to use
already you know I was there to
meeting you know the auto
wonderful auditor did wonderful
job of getting against a second
as a local communities in the
north that together to talk
about the difference that it's
made and what we're seeing with
the others office is seeing is
there are cities and they're
they're entities I should say
that are years years out of date
on their audits and so this is a
big tool to catch them up on to
get them back on track on from
my understanding and i'll let my
expert go further you know the
the mission of the cog is a bit
up router and so it's not just
for capital outlet really is you
know other grants are they
private or public etc on that
they have access to specialising
in the capital outlay process
which is such a unique new
mexico thing and the auditors
ability through the auditing
statute really allows us to get
get back on track make them
financially responsible and help
them
navigate some of these details I
don't know if my experience at
anything.
And share representative I don't
have a lot to add just that you
know this is a lot of this
stuff.
Is about making sure that the
capital outlay m.
In place so that you as
legislators know.
And so and then the other part
of it is helping those entities
who are behind get caught up so
they can get that capital out
there I don't I would not say
that carg is probably d.
But this is I wouldn't call it
where I would just like that and
thank you representative out of
chair
I know an archaic they do help
it in the few minutes.
Another thing why are we
notified like tomorrow we're
getting our ca.
They ought to scratch anybody
that's not compliance with these
graduate after left with it
is that you're all sad if they
if we scratched them off the
last and they knew they would
not get any money you'd thank
their police and get through
audits though
thank you madame chair thinking
representative I will be honest
with you I would love to have a
nice long conversation with you
about santa fe and my agreement
with your sincere concerns and
my repeated conversations with
them and that particular and so
I do believe that we are moving
in the right direction is is my
hope and I believe that there is
a bit of consequence why I feel
what this bill does is a bit of
care
and stick if you're out of
compliance there is incentive to
get back on track rate or also
not getting the money that's
coming to you and that since
that's the that's a stick but
the care it is is if you are a
community and need they will
help you get that
yeah
there I guess goes back to my
roof problem is creating another
fund.
No way you could track all the
funds that the mexico has for
everything at all
you know with them
they like I said I agree with
the concept.
And I know people in some of
these small communities
you'll have to drag them through
the.
I don't know that if I
would thank if I would knew I
would not get several be and I
was capital outlay you would
thank your city government would
about two years of that they
would figure out.
No one that you are not eligible
with that compliance with the
bigger ones that the little ones
I guess what i'm saying is i'd
like to see in there where there
was a capital in the size town
that and I don't see that in the
building or anybody
the way the build written
anybody not in propliance in the
state in the mexico is eleven to
use some of these thoughts
that correct representative.
Manager representative
there may not be language in
this
I don't believe there is
language limiting specifically
but in the definitions I think
it does talk more about local
public bodies but certainly I
can tell you the way it is being
done and put in practice right
now there was an entity.
Suddenly need to have an audit
who did not have to h.
And they asked for our
assistance.
And our response was essentia.
More politely and genially but
you just got seven million
dollars.
This is for the people who are
you know their annual budgets
are forty thousand dollars year
but four hundred thousand
dollars a year
you know I just have a problem
when it doesn't state in writing
that it limits them I know you
probably won't you set in here
today in her but he loves me he
said that any of these chairs a
year from them
and what they're their concept
without direction with the.
I don't really have any other
questions
thank you representative battles
here
thank you representative.
Thank you madame chair.
Um
I notice i'm page three it at
the bottom of the page section
for subset seven paragraph three
talks about a case of a grant he
thought is not required to have
an annual.
The names of the people but
but are what kind of entities
are not required
on its in order to get capital
think you madam chair think you
representative so this is all
based on changing the audit at
in the statute and so in the
auditing act there are
especially really really small
entities that are not required
to have an audit and so of the
one that i'm looking at there's
like at the beginning it says
that if a local public body has
an annual revenue calculated on
a cash basis directly expense at
least fifty percent of or the
remainder of a single capable
hour outlay award it is exempt
from submitting and filing
quarterly reports etcetera
etcetera and i'm i'm happy to
show sure this with these i'm
not just reading it but
beautiful so will agree
exactly but so but it is
outlined that there are some
that don't but they are still
required to have some sort of
review just not a formal audit
process I don't know mister how
wants to continue on that.
Yeah thank you for that answer
and madam chair
representative
my other question
because I I was a grant rider
for period.
We always had to provide
audit and for now provides a lot
of times very expensive to do so
forth
but what my question we weren't
doing capital outlay generally
what we were doing was services
as substantial size contracts to
provide services and
I
is it is it a common rule that
it for service contracts that.
The.
Think you made him sure think
representative of this bit out
of the scope of this build but I
will say my experience dealing
with federal grants etcetera
like like those
offer times you do I mean every
federal grand I know you needed
an audit to the up to date I
will say though that I mean in
my experience I often see
entities coming to get capital
outlay before anything else and
we really want to ensure that
they're using these funds in the
expedient so it it's a little
bit outside of this period
and then i'm sure represented my
last question
at least a berlio county
the and I don't know is
necessarily the auto requirement
but it's a it is so hard to get
money from the from the
governmental initiative that has
to be the fiscal agent and then
to and and i'm sure they're
checking for the audits and so
forth the process takes
incredible amount of time it's
incredibly difficult to get
moving into a project that you
were hoping to have you know
going within a year or so is it
could well be two or three years
and I don't know.
That there's anything here that
makes it wors.
But if there's any way that we
could speed up those processes
it would mean.
Project
and the organizations able to do
the job they want to do because
it is just that that is a
bottleneck.
That all you're questioning
representative yes okay thank
you all right representative of
lunchtime.
Thank you madame chair header
couple questions and be
primarily for the audit office
the state auditor says an
example issues.
What are your.
Yeah.
Madam chair representative when
you when you say you are
recourse to me my recourse or
the entity receiving the fine.
It seems to me that there's it's
just thank.
That that's my impression in in
some cases with communities
because then they find another
fiscal agent to run money
through
that's what's happening with
the.
As fiscal agents for the smaller
governments because either they
haven't done an audit where
they're in trouble with audits
or something
manager representative I would
say that the recourse is this is
part of this it's what's been in
the executive.
And it is the fact that they
have.
So if you're audit isn't in
capital out like if you're out
it is but you have significant
witnesses or material material
witnesses or significant
deficiencies then you would have
to prove to the granting.
Or.
But it's still up to.
You've got a s.
So that would be sort of the
recourse or approve a fiscal
agent so the difficulty of
getting here that they're still
being rewarded even you know
because the bob then takes a
responsibility in the cogs great
I mean because their stuff is
fine but it's the community
other thing I wanted to ask you
as I had had understood out of
sure that we had a tear.
Is that correct
madame chairman representative
i'm sorry what was that we have
a teared system and when it
comes to audits based on the
size of the community.
But it's always been curious.
And you see what an auditor has
to test there's not a heck of a
lot of difference between the
city of albert.
When you look at all those tests
that have to be done it seems to
me that
it doesn't make sense I don't
know any and a sake yet as an
exam.
But i've just curious what that
to yours to looks like and then
the last thing madam chair
on the ground is the idea that
the money would be provided
through the state auditors
office and the state auditor
within higher the cpa to go out
and help them is that how this
works
madam chairman representative
yes that is generally how we've
been doing this so far as i'm
not generally.
Hired ipa's.
Smaller entities there with a
reporting and I would add that
certainly
let's say in a secure the.
Last.
I think when you're looking at
water and sanitation districts
that actually provide a service
and actually
collect revenue and actually can
raise revenue fees it becomes
much more complicated their
small budgets but they have a
lot of authority and whether
it's also.
I I agree with this I think this
needs to happen it's just today
I want to make sure
the order t.
That highe.
And it
just the way the money is
awarded and contracts are re.
One year takes a long time to d.
Basement or they've got boxes of
paperwork that nobody's looked
at for.
It may not be able to get it
gathered up so that I think that
would be fair though.
Thank you representative
does anybody else ever question
I have just a few
so I I do like this concept I
does this only apply for state
agencies.
Representative
sorry
the pleasure at the fiscal
agents that are carrying through
the funds so so it replies in
the state agencies that are
working with those fiscal agents
yes that that helps I get madam
chair for clarification in
particular so I read and i'm
profit and
I just wanted to to throw out I
just completed our audit and I
do it every year and it runs
about ten thousand dollars and
so I just wanted people to be
aware of how expensive auditor
and we're a little agency
my.
So I know many times capital
outlay is given to a fiscal
agent and then it goes down to a
non profit because I I know i'm
getting all my capital
atla request and so
i'm wondering where the
connection is there I apologize
thank you madame chair no it
would be the fiscal agent and
and the state agency so for
example if you I don't know had
sewer lines in the city of santa
fe that you were very concerned
about the ran through
emergency for example then that
would be this would affect
directly relationship with the
city of santa fe and that will
those so ended would be part of
that process to make sure that
this.
If there were
no any any lacking information
or anything like that
that wouldn't engage the
auditors office I would say okay
that was up okay thank you
what is the will of their
committee
second ever do pass in a second.
Representative and you know
yes representative dunkin yes
representative hernandez yes
representative lender yes
representative little yes
representative lunchtime.
Representative martinez yes
representative mason yes
representative matthews
madam vice chair
yes madam chair yes.
Manager final telling his eleven
boats yes zero votes now thank
you reserve a due pass
sorry about that
before we we conclude the
meeting I just want to my do we
will have
bills on friday I know that
they're the schedule has
somewhat changed so please
review the golden rod to make
sure you know what bills are and
that there's still some move
been going on on that so please
review there's also an
invitation on your desk and that
is still happy site so if you
can make it i'd love to see you
