Representative Duncan.
Senator and this is.
More Representative Lente
Representative little.
Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez you
Representative Mason
Representative Matthews.
That a vice chair here Madam
chair you have a quorum already
thank you just Senator have
present thank you madam chair
Senator for ninety one years ago
we fail to catch a transfer that
yes.
General fund law enforcement
protection fund of for payments
to firefighters are a retention
Fund and so this transfer has to
happen in order for the fund to
be stable is payable and if
anything happens the premium
taxes were paid.
In the presentation thank
Guessing there's no at.
from the Rhode Island no one's
online already let's go to the
committee Serrato the first
thank you madam chair thank you
Senator I just was click here I
see the you out of the work
health and here it seems to be
related to twenty two million
dollars transferred over to the
law enforcement action fund that
is the oversight you talk about
being addressed is that correct.
Right but the H. two thanks to
the only thing I'm seeing that
it shifted on this is that
online one pages to the other
word at the rate and thirteen
thank you.
This ensures that their health
insurance is also coverage it
were my reading that.
the the it's a premium taxes
paid for the life health and
casualty rate in Thailand should
supply law enforcement action.
Thank you madam chair thank you
very Senator so that means that
we're adding health to make sure
that is included in there on the
twenty million will cover that
ensures ornaments background
this is an agency thank you.
Everything else on the committee
representative added.
I.
Other questions.
Right.
Representative.
Yes Representative Alcon yes
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lente.
Representative little yes
Representative Lundstrom yes.
Representative Martinez yes
Representative Mason yes
Representative Matthews yes.
Madam vice chair yes madam chair
yes madam chair is final tally
