This.
Members roll call is.
Roll call is closed we have a
quorum.
Members please rise for today's
indication offered to us by the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane.
Let's bring.
All right thank you for the gift
of another day included for for
the gift of life.
Or grateful that we have the
privilege of living.
In the state and national we get
to govern ourselves lower.
But with that comes great
responsibility and so we pray
lord for your wisdom.
Regretful that you give your
wisdom generously to all who
pass so we do ask for that
deceiving as we seek to do the
people's work and.
We pray that your spirit leading
guidance to to make decisions
for that truly are best for the
people of New Mexico good one
list of our our families and
loved ones lord who sacrifice so
that we can come in service
place.
Would prefer natural blessing
upon them and the lord also one
left up our our state police
officers and National Guard to
keep a steady watch for us your
are here in the capital
preferments blessings upon them
as well we love you to press and
we pray amen.
Thank you John Representative
Johnson would you please leave
us in the pledge of allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America
and for which it stands one
nation under god indivisible
with liberty and justice for
all.
And there's an easy sell would
you please leisure and saluting
New Mexico's flag.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo Mr
speaker good afternoon Mister
speaker and members of the house
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objection it is so
ordered I would like to have the
first announcement of the day.
To try to put everyone in a good
mood.
What's the other name for
Sunday.
Funday Monday Sunday funday the
house of representatives.
Will not meet in committee or on
the floor.
Sunday is a day of reflection in
a day of rest.
We will not be here on Sunday.
we will meet they'll be to I
think fairly brief committee
meetings on Saturday morning I
will convene the floor on
Saturday at twelve thirty PM and
we will get our work done in the
heading home with nothing
happening at the capitol on the
house side on Sunday so enjoy a
day off and the staff very much
deserves it and.
Some of the members do as well.
Is getting right the so please
plan accordingly Jennifer chose
it into terror do you have an
answer I do Mr speaker thank you
good afternoon
Body I just want to take.
A few minutes this morning and
thank the Los Lunas school
board.
For voting to have in person
learning in a few days.
Mr speaker they're reacting to
the needs of their families.
And their children and I think.
Are a model decision for all of
us to follow.
on.
Kind of a more somber note Hey
of.
What's last night the news
report.
That was disturbing to.
Myself and many members of my
constituents of call.
Reacting to the of.
Governor's use of her
discretionary fund.
And I think the body needs to
look at that
Mr speaker
You know while
Many New Mexicans have been.
Hunkering down stay on out of
work.
In some cases standing in long
lines that they have called red
lines.
And to get groceries and
pharmaceuticals.
We learned that the governor's
using taxpayer money on lavish.
Supplies.
And.
Mr speaker I would hope.
That
our constituents.
The.
Live the lives that the governor
has.
And we need to make sure Mr
speaker.
That we get this government and
this.
On me in the schools open.
And they need I mean our kids
deserve.
The right of the school day I
don't know about you guys but I
am just being bombarded with
telephone calls from all over
the state outside of my
district.
Send Representative we heard you
say this we heard just say that
and we agree with yeah we need
to get schools often so Mister
speaker my
My desire and in the hearts of
many New Mexicans are to get
kids back in school as quickly
and safely as possible and I
think we could follow Los Lunas
and have it all done by March
twenty second as they will if we
wanted to thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen we should
also congratulate the board of
education Santa Fe public
schools for voting to have in
person learning
there is in person learning
happening today all over Santa
Fe County
they've that they made that vote
I think within about six days of
the governor's announcement at
their next regularly scheduled
meeting.
and I think it's a very good
decision I share the governor's
disappointment that APS has not
done so nine of the governor's
expressed great disappointment
that you have a group of school
district has decided not to
return students in the classroom
she says a publicly and I agree
with her that that does the
Albuquerque public school board
that did not make the right
decision on that.
next year the gentleman from
curry county Representative
Crowder thank you Mr speaker Mr
speaker it's with a heavy heart
that I must inform the body of
the passing of former state
representative Holly Patterson.
The passed away late last
evening.
What was a the representative
from district sixty three which
at that time many years ago
covered currently in Roosevelt
it was unique district compared
to what we have now Mr speaker
he was the minority whip from
nineteen sixty five in nineteen
sixty six in the minority floor
leader from nineteen seventy
five to nineteen eighty four.
what Patterson was reelected
eleven times he served for
twenty two years in this body at
the end of his service he became
a lobbyist for the dairy
producers of New Mexico and was
very active in this building
even after he had served his
twenty two years is a hometown
is in Clovis.
And in one of the things that he
was probably most proud of is
that he was one of the founding
members.
And belong to the cavalry
coalition from nineteen seventy
nine to nineteen eighty two.
And for those of you that are a
little younger than some of us.
The cavalry coalition would was
a bunch of agriculture related
representatives and senators
that came together and fought
hard for their the rugged life
that they live the ranching life
the the small communities to
rural communities and I just
wonder bodies and all that he
had passed late last evening my
my last real memory of what was
we had a Republican second
Saturday breakfast we have those
every month for the Republican
Party of curry county.
It is quite.
Passed into his eighties and
then into his nineties.
I'm much more small in in frail
through those years and and it
seems like his cowboy hat got
bigger and bigger and bigger
because he was getting so much
smaller.
But he still would be the first
then at the meeting.
He would always greet everyone
with a smile.
And he will be greatly missed in
current county thank you Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker I'll I'd like to ask
if we could have a moment of
silence as of the members please
rise for a moment of silence in
recognition of the way for a
representative point at us.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The general.
Mr speaker Mr speaker this is
Representative Anderson if I
could say a few words about my
friend way past the gentleman
from Chavis Lee and Roosevelt.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
of.
What this was was a man who
simply of.
Maybe all of this in a citizen
legislature.
Look at him with respect that of
this this model works and worked
in nineteen in the nineteen
sixties when Hoyt was first
elected it worked in the
nineteen seventies when I was
first elected and served under
the weight of who is our
minority leader during my four
years of the first two under
speaker Walter Martinez I was
thinking of how many speakers
white served under as minority
leader and I certainly know if
there were at least three
speaker Martinez same person
seven.
And avoid of just brought such
a.
A wonderful clean added to.
Never
spoke ill of a fellow member be
they of his party or another
when we would lose his temper
you would not know what on the
floor and I just think a not
only eastern New Mexico but all
of New Mexico lost a real leader
gentleman who who the rate of
mice the citizen legislature
that we all still serving today
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen next we have
the gentleman from.
Colfax curry Harding Quaid
results and we go and you
Representative Chatfield.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
prices they also to remember my
friend of former representative
point Pattison I met for with
him three days a week for many
years when we would come over
and Representative the
agricultural interests of the
state of New Mexico and I look
to him for advice and wisdom for
for many years and in the run up
to about would see me at the
various meetings can around the
state dealing with water with
agriculture in the various
things that we deal with us and
like say when we were with the
legislature was in session I
would I would meet with him and
others from the EDD community of
three days a week and he was all
he was a source of wisdom.
And always a respectful and he
will leave a big hole in a lot
of our lives thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you gentlemen next to the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln Representative my part.
Thank you Mr speaker I to rise
to recognize the service of
Representative point passing to
not only curry county but the
entire state I had the privilege
of growing up with his children
Roger who was a year older than
nine Melinda was a year younger
or two years younger than I am
Melinda was very good friends
with my sister and they were.
Together most of time and and so
I got to know Representative
Patterson through those
interactions and I can tell you
that that he was a very humble
ma'am and one that everyone.
Enjoyed being around and as
recently as ten years ago Mr
Pattison was still engaged in.
The events that affected his
community and and when we were
dealing with some issues in
eastern New Mexico on the
purchased in he was fully engage
the met with the myself and
others from from southeast New
Mexico to help develop a
process of of protecting that.
Written species and at the same
time allowing eastern New Mexico
to thrive so I rise to to
recognize the tremendous loss
that we are suffering as a state
because of of his death but also
rise to.
It knowledge is tremendous
accomplishments for the citizens
of curry county the citizens of
New Mexico thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen next
generation Chavis
representatives all.
Mr speaker thank you very much
it makes my heart hurt to hear
about Representative T.
Patterson Patterson of.
It is always he always put a
smile on my face whenever I
would see him out there in the
audience whenever we used to
have audiences in the house ag
committee his words were.
Always will receive that may
cause he spoke what was in his
heart and he spoke with truth
and people paid attention to
what he said Mr speaker and.
I know that
Quite a blow to curry county and
it's quite a blow to all the
agricultural producers and our
state thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you there's further debate
the gentleman from curry de Baca
Waterloo date Roosevelt in
Senegal Representative Zamora.
Thank you Mr speaker I do rise
in memory of heart Pattison.
He and I developed a
relationship when I started
running for the seat he was the
first one that donated money to
buy campaign and encouraged me
to run to work for the people
the state of New Mexico
meeting him developed a
friendship he was a very humble
and nice person and from the
stories I hear from the other
representatives that's what he
carried himself in Santa Fe.
How to be standing up for or
Patterson today thank you.
thank you jealous further debate
the gentleman from San Juan
Representative Strickler.
Thank you Mr speaker
Hi Patterson was a was a great
philosopher
When I served on the tax
committee fifteen years ago he
was he always attended our
meetings
even though it was a it was a
specialist in agricultural
matters he was always there he
always had some words of wisdom
for us on the committee he's a
pro business and pro family
gentleman and really really
going to miss some of these kind
of what will Rogers of a of my
early experiences here not
really looked up time and
god rest his soul thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you gentlemen.
Other.
Members who wish to make a
comment about Representative
Pattison gentlelady from
Bernalillo Representative
Stapleton Mr speaker I have a
statement to make about Mr
Paterson and then I have another
statement sold after all a bit
then I'll come back would you
please come back to me but Mr
speaker.
This was a very close friend of
my first treasurer for my
campaign drew cloud from
Carlsbad.
And.
Mr speaker was the father of
Linda Stover all of county clerk
in Brunswick county and Mr
speaker Linda Stover is one of
my closest friends and we used
to have all the G. plans house
with white Pattison and I can
tell you Mr speaker he had a
great sense of humor and he was
a good man and I don't know him
in a political sense I know came
outside of politics I'm I would
say Mr speaker
Yes the level he's done his job
on this.
And he was always always very
very good to others people he
didn't even know and so Mister
speaker I have condolences to
his family and his friends and
may god bless his family and may
his soul rest thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
next to the general man from
Bernalillo Representative ring.
Thank you Mr speaker I rise on
another matter is that right.
Let's let's see if we've got
folks that are there if we do
have a few members on the board
with a request to speak so we
just speak up if you've got a
comment.
In remembrance of the late
Representative Pattison.
Very wrong we'll go back to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Stapleton and
then Representative every Mr
speaker and members of the
house.
More about open in schools.
Ladies and gentlemen of this
house to target because the
public schools I think it's very
wrong because Mr speaker members
of the house teachers do not
want to go back into a classroom
without ventilation.
I want to go back into a
classroom
I agree some schools.
Some schools have students.
School have eighty thousand
students and we have to put them
Mr speaker members of the south
and what.
Want to go back to.
The vaccination.
That
is.
If.
You just have the vaccination
that would probably be back in
the classroom.
Speaker and members of the
house.
The public schools.
I'm so we're moving forward with
the best that we thought we.
Children in Albuquerque thank
you Mr speaker members of the
house thank you gentle lady
next to the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative every.
Thank you Mr speaker I rise to
make a point of personal
privilege your point.
Mr speaker I rise to speak about
our Albuquerque public school
and I'm encouraged by the
governor and PED trying to get
our students back into the
classrooms.
Many constituents and other
parents across Albuquerque have
contacted me and so I wrote a
letter to the
president of the APS school
board that's Dr David Piercy.
And in that are you dressed to
issues one kids back in the
classroom into allowing sports.
Those are the two main issues
that the parents had contacted
me and I agree with the gentle
lady from Bernalillo county I
think that we need to move our
teachers forward in getting
vaccination so we can get the
schools open.
But in the response from doctor
piercing yesterday said force
first this board makes decisions
for the best interest of all
students we went on to say the
major appearance across the
district agree with our
decisions.
I don't feel that's a correct
statement.
I have had very few parents
contact me saying that they
accept or in or agree with the
current of way we're teaching
our kids most have said we need
to get back into the classroom.
I would also note that even the
center for disease control has
noted that children have a very
low.
right of contracting COVID.
So that's encouraging.
With the LFC they studied of
student success across the state
and determined that students are
a half to a year behind.
I just got this number from APS
and it is that last year there
was eight thousand students
failing.
And this year it is sixteen
thousand students and APS
failing.
I hope that our board members
are listening and they can open
up APS soon thank you Mr speaker
and members of this body.
New Mexico the gentleman from
Colfax more at Rio Arriba and
Senegal Representative Montoya.
Mr seeks Mr speaker and the body
Listening to the referential
words today of the passing of
Representative holy Pattison and
the passing of the beloved
Representative add some the lan
I want to offer a short song
it's a historical song a low
I pass this to my mother by her
great grandmother.
And it's it's light it's in
Spanish I would like to perform
for short verses also in English
so that we can all understand in
honor these two fine gentlemen.
The title of the song is love
fiesta those any monies the
festival of the animals.
This question on that is whereas
low yes it looks on the money
list here okay we go set down my
list when will we would see New
Hope PA.
It was the duty to see the judge
to see what all of the animals
do I saw them making tasty
tamales just one donkey in one
centipede second verse eight
gonna hold the note the the even
the sweat of a long day look up
of planting it do you love food
I love down below the.
A lovely rabbit arrived so late
but he played the clarinet.
Along with the donkey who played
the jewel third first.
In lower the other rooms because
of the loan novels get itching
at our levels they would be
willing Kelly is very low of a.
In the corner of the beautiful
garden of very squeaky voice was
heard it was the voice of a
violation that was played by a
giant wrap.
Final verse.
Yes yes those yup double on this
the little makes you gun Sierra
data that own their own vassals
what through go see you but I
know.
Now the festival has come to an
end in the beautiful Mexican
style.
It was ended with the nasty
fistfight between for fleas and
one large pig.
That's the end.
Thank you for indulging me that
was in place of my song that I
was going to put had prepared
for my first that would pass but
listening to the words in the
loss I figured I would offer it
to these fine gentlemen thank
you for indulging me argue back.
Thank you gentlemen next to the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Romero.
Thank you Mr speaker and good
evening everybody so I rise in
support of the gentle lady from
Bernalillo talking about
Albuquerque public schools as
you all know I'm a teacher at
Albuquerque public schools mice
kids go to Albuquerque public
schools and my wife teaches in
Albuquerque.
And I think the the gentle lady
from Bernalillo.
Representative instance there
you.
The gentle lady had mentioned
that Albuquerque public schools
last night just voted
unanimously to open up when the
district is in the green which I
think is the right decision I
think we all in this chamber in
around the state really want to
see our students succeed and we
want to get back to the
classroom and what I keep
hearing from the members is when
it's safe Mr speaker and body I
represent.
And I teach in
the zip code eight seven one of
five and eight seven one two one
and those two zip codes have the
highest levels of COVID
transmission with in the state
and our families our students
have been directly impacted in
so many ways my wife teaches in
in the zip codes as well and.
Our our students lives have been
upended in so many different
ways it's it's incredibly hard
to explain and I think when the
Albuquerque public schools made
the decision to remain an hybrid
it was with the zip codes in
mind in our diverse Albuquerque
public schools constituency and
it was certainly well received
by the community that I
represent the decision by the by
APS to open up in hybrid wanted
screen has allowed our students
to compete also in sports which
I heard the gentleman from
Bernalillo also referenced on
but they've really capped the
safety of our community members
and our teachers at the
forefront and I think that US
currently on this platform and
working remotely as we have for
most much of the session is is
for safety and that's been
certainly our number one concern
here and it was certainly
something that the APS school
board had in mind with our
students one thing to note also
members is that going hybrid
what we really need to give it
up to our teachers and our
students across the state
because it's been such a year of
flocks working to up and the way
we've known everything the way
we've done schooling and our
teachers and our students have
been doing a tremendous job job
in wrestling with that in by
going hybrid is another way of
turning the classroom upside
down in doing something you in a
very short amount of time so I
think I'm more school districts
around the state truly deserve a
round of applause and deserve
not to be admonished in any sort
of way for the decisions that
they have the ways in which the
decisions that they've come to
make with what they've had
available to them because across
the state our our.
Teachers and our students are
doing tremendous things and it's
our responsibility and certainly
I mean yes the chair of the
Education Committee take it very
seriously that we really look at
all of the issues that are
plaguing our students not just
the perception of learning lost
on but also the mental health
and well being of all of our
students and that's one thing
that I can say our school
district at the Albuquerque
public schools has been doing a
tremendous job in living up to
the outlines of what we passed
as a body two years ago the
attendance for success act you
know actively searching for
finding in providing services
for our students that had not
been accounted for throughout
this time so I think all of our
students all of our teachers and
our community terror deserve the
utmost respect and certainly our
school board and do not deserve
that sort of a management thank
you Mr speaker.
The gentleman I think I
certainly agree with you safety
first and I think it's a great
announcement that we've had from
president Biden that the plan is
to have invoke to the defense
production act and the federal
retail pharmacy program with the
goal of having every educator in
the country vaccinated by the
end of the month that is a
phenomenal step in the right
direction and we want to make
sure teachers are safe and
healthy because without safe and
healthy teachers we can have
good results in the classroom.
Right next to the general is
really Representative Sierra.
Thank you Mr speaker I just want
to add that just what you said
if we have to we have to think
about the teachers to and I
haven't been vaccinated I don't
have any underlying conditions
I'm just old but once we've been
vaccinated me ordered twenty
water gentle lady you're not
old.
You don't anyway thank you Mr
speaker but
We we need to not only get we
need to get everybody in the
school vaccinated that the
teachers administrators that the
the cafeteria workers the bus
drivers the custodians because
they are all around kids and in
the classroom I had up to thirty
five kids in a classroom I'm not
sure how hybrid going to work in
trying to social distance with
even half of the class but we
are trying and I'm very proud of
our school board they and our in
our APS because the survey
doesn't ask the teachers.
When are you ready to come back
in in most of the said when
we've been vaccinated when the
people the schools have been
vaccinated
what it is about safety we have
to make sure everyone is safe
it's it's so important we do so
much as teachers and educators
we give so much time and energy
and everything for schools I
can't wait to get back in meet
my sixth graders that I haven't
met yet I've seen a question we
come in every day they're all
excited to be in the classroom
with them is going to be
exciting but we APS has approved
plans for the district for small
group learning they're gonna
within hopefully two weeks when
we go green they should have ten
thousand students back in small
groups so we're moving that way
we are working on it it's just
gonna take a little time but I'm
just say I am very proud of APS
and school board because they
have put teachers and educators
first as far as safety thank you
Mr speaker.
Thank you the gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
Families Marley on.
Yes.
Welcome back to nonsense.
Generally squarely.
The next order of business
messages no objections so
ordered clear to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house the Senate that the
Senate has passed Senate bill
seventy seven.
Senate bill one oh six.
Senate bill two twenty three
Senate bill three forty one
Senate bill three sixty seven as
amended with emergency clause
and requested the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk Mr chair.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four as amended and
request the concurrence of the
house respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk this is really
interesting.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
committee report.
Hearing objection disorder clear
to read.
Was.
Mr speaker Education Committee
tomb is been with us bill one
sixty three has had or creation
report same with recommendation
that if do passed respectfully
submitted G. Andrés Romero
chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
committee report your adoption
of the federal committee report
on house bill one sixty three
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
It.
All this was may to the point
that the.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too it's been referred Senate
bill one thirty one has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that a do
pass and that's referred to the
taxation and revenue committee
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
commute for production C. will
commute work on Senate bill one
thirty one all this favor please
signify by saying aye.
All this was may three point
that.
Mr speaker agriculture water
resources committee to miss been
referred house bill one seventy
seven has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that I do not
passed but that house
agriculture water resources
committee substitute for house
bill one seventy seven do passed
and then referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Derrick J. Lente
chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we are
on in the option of an
unfavorable committee report on
house bill one seventy seven but
a favorable committee report an
agriculture and water resources
committee substitute for house
bill one seventy seven all those
in favor please signify by
saying homemade food.
Well maybe food.
Let's let's make me point out
that.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to is been
referred house bill one fifty
six as amended has had it under
consideration reports in with
recommendation that you passed
respectfully submitted Patricia
A. Lundstrom chair unanimous
consent that the queen of Force
right to gather act fund single
vote reflected in the journal so
they rectified individually
hearing objections work
directory.
House bill one eighty four as
amended.
Do passed as amended.
House bill two eighty seven do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Patricia A. Lundstrom
chair.
Reduction Mr speaker transaction
a favorable committee reports
and house those one fifty six as
amended one eighty four is
amended into state eighty seven
as amended all those in favor
please signify by saying hi.
The state committee pleasure
that.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too is been referred
house bill two fifteen has had
it under consideration point
same with recommendation that I
do passed as amended
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
UNM's.
The job option we're adoptions
reporter has to to fifteen as
amended all those in favor
please signify by saying hi.
His name reports about.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee tomb is been referred
house bill two thirty five as
amended has had it under
consideration forcing its
recommendation that I do not
passed by the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill two thirty I do pass
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Move adoption for rent option an
unfavorable committee report on
house bill two three five as
amended but a favorable
committee report on Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill to thirty five.
All those in favor please
signify by saying aye I.
This was may committee point
that out.
Mr speaker your local government
land grants and cultural affairs
committee to miss been referred
Senate bill twenty has had it
under consideration reports it
was recommendation that it to
pass and that's referred to the
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
respectfully submitted Miguel P.
Garcia chair.
Speaker mopar got a report that
called me thank you centers in
the the tunes of refer to the
committee and Senate bill twenty
to around four for the DSE
stating continental.
In order for the S. out of the.
Mr speaker your local government
land grants and cultural affairs
committee to miss been referred
Senate Indian rural and cultural
affairs committee substitute for
Senate bill two seventy three
has had it under consideration
point thing with recognition
that it to pass respectfully
submitted Miguel P. Garcia
chair.
Speaker well about look better
but May Day the sun was in the
shown the report the the economy
day and circ subsidy percent
ability seventy three to four to
go see
see for the no.
And for this a difficult.
Mr speaker consumer public
affairs committee to is been
referred house bill three fifty
two has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that it do not
pass that house consumer and
public affairs committee
substitute for House Bill three
fifty two two passed and then
referred to the appropriations
and finance committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Liz Thomson chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
Granted the option of an
unfavorable committee report on
house bill three five two but a
favorable committee report.
On consumer public affairs the
substitute for Bill three five
to all those in favor please
signify by saying hi.
All of this was nay reports
that.
Mr speaker labor veterans and
military affairs committee to
it's been referred Senate bill
fifty one has had it under
consideration forcing his
recommendation that it to pass.
Respectfully submitted Eliseo
Lee Alcon chair.
The speaker Dr report you're on
and option of stable committee
report on Senate bill fifty one
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye I.
All this was nay reports that.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
I move that we go to the next
order of business introduction
of legislation.
No objections so ordered.
to read.
Senate Senate bill seventy seven
introduced by Senator Kernan and
act relating to higher education
creating the regional two plus
two pilot project to establish a
seamless transition from
community college to university
and measure student and
institutional outcomes Senate
bill seventy seven.
Senator seventy seven having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Education
Committee.
Senate bill one oh six
introduced by senator schools
and act relating to driver
education school surely bonds
increasing the required surely
bond for driver education
schools Senate bill one oh six.
Senate bill one of six having
been read twice by title is
referred to the commerce and
economic development committee.
Senate bill two twenty three
introduced by senator Candelaria
an act relating to taxation
amending certain distributions
of cigarette tax revenue
authorizing the issuance of
revenue funds making
appropriations authorizing the
New Mexico finance thirty two
issues certain additional
revenue bonds the University of
New Mexico hospital in the
comprehensive cancer center at
the university of New Mexico
health sciences center.
Acting incorrect references to
certain laws caused by the
partial veto of lost twenty ten.
Second special session chapter
I section one making
appropriations Senate bill two
twenty three Senator T. twenty
three having been read twice by
title is referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
Senate bill three forty one
introduced by senator Neville
and act relating to community
schools making the community
schools fund subject to
appropriation by the legislature
Senate bill three forty one.
Senator three forty one having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Education
Committee then to appropriations
and finance.
Senate bill three sixty seven as
amended introduced by senator
survive this and potentially
leading to the constitution of
New Mexico creating an in an
independent constitutional
revision commission pursuant to
article nineteen section one of
the constitution of New Mexico
making appropriation declaring
an emergency Senate bill three
sixty seven as amended.
Senate bill three sixty seven as
amended having been read twice
by title is referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four as amended and
actually to utilities and acting
the community solar act
prescribing requirements for
community solar facilities
subscriber organizations and
subscriptions prescribing
requirements for administration
of the community solar program
providing that renewable energy
certificates associated with
these community solar facility
are the property of the
qualifying utility providing
exceptions for native community
solar projects directing the
public regulation commission
commission to adopt rules to
implement a solar a community
solar program allowing the
commission to establish and
collect from subscriber
organization reasonable
application fees Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill eighty four as amended.
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute percent ability force
amended having been read twice
by title is referred to the
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee that's the
state government elections and
Indian Affairs.
House joint resolution thirteen.
Introduced by representatives
Rod Montoya Eli Lewis and
Townsend a joint resolution
proposing an amendment to
article four section five in
twenty three of the constitution
of New Mexico to provide that
each regular session of the
legislature shall not exceed
forty five days to change the
day on which each regular
session of the legislature shall
begin to remove the restrictions
on bills that may be considered
in even numbered years and to
change the date that loss of go
into effect after the
adjournment of the Legislature
how straight resolution
thirteen.
House joint resolution sixteen
having them.
Will sixty is a fair number
please call six.
House joint resolutions
thirteen.
Having been read twice by title
is referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
House memorial twenty three.
Introduced by representatives
Rod Montoya Johnson Allison and
blue immoral urging the federal
government and the New Mexico
congressional delegation to
collaborate with the New Mexico
Indian nations tribes and
pueblos increased investment in
infrastructure and reduce
poverty among native American
populations House memorial
twenty three.
House memorial twenty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the state government
elections and the Indian Affairs
Committee.
House memorial twenty four
introduced by Representative Dow
a memorial requesting the public
education department to study
and develop a new at risk index
for the public school funding
formula House memorial twenty
four.
Estimate twenty four and then
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Education Committee.
House memorial twenty five
introduced by Representative Dow
and Baldonado immemorial
requesting the legislative
education study committee to
study the budget and funding of
school choice house memorial
twenty five House memorial
twenty five having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Education Committee.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business hearing no objections
order gentlelady from credit
this year the announcement.
Thank thank thank you Mr speaker
yeah I just I stand in rise just
to applaud the folks across the
state who last March without any
idea what COVID was and without
any access to vaccination.
Went to work and state work our
health care workers are grocery
store clerks are utility workers
are home care care providers are
field workers farmers and
ranchers our trip our truckers
and our delivery service workers
are law enforcement officers and
Mr speaker I want to
particularly applied at our
child care providers.
And the.
Tens of thousands of folks in
child care and those youth
mentors and rec centers who from
March third twelfth of last year
without any access to
vaccination without any
understanding of what COVID was
got up.
In classrooms with two teachers
and twenty children.
Care for our children so that
are essential workers could keep
the state open and keep others
safe and healthy.
We knew nothing about the virus
they showed up when we were
ready.
They're showing up when we're
yellow.
They've been showing up in red.
They show up when we're yellow.
And they cared.
For others our family members.
They make sure that our teachers
and our bus drivers and our
support staff are said that they
have a warm homes that when they
turn their Evans on they can
heat and cook their food and
they did that without
vaccinations without
understanding of the virus
because of our child care
providers and because of a
recreation centers who have been
operating for over a year.
Without vaccination and without
full understanding of COVID with
children twenty children in the
classroom.
Chairman outcome refer to some
of the places that were open as
Guinea pigs if you want to refer
to child care centers who have
the same demographics other
school teachers in our schools
support staff as Guinea pigs
thank you you've demonstrated
that we can serve children and
that we can safely re open with
the standards and guidelines
that having given to us by the
governor.
And I think that there's been a
lot of demonstration in a lot of
people have taken risks to to
keep us warm and to keep us
healthy and I just want to say
thank you for that.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business third
reading of legislation no
objections so ordered.
Karen start with item ten Senate
bill two gentleman from.
Finally just senator sent limits
here are you ready on that item.
Mr speaker will you give me to
that point the record reflect
all action necessary for placing
Senate bill two is amended with
an emergency clause on final
passage is been taken gentleman
to explain the bill.
Mr speaker members of the body
Sen bill to wage liquor license
renewal fees of for the next
year this is just sort of good
will to our liquor license
holders who have struggled
during the pandemic now without
stand for questions see no
debate the gentleman to close Mr
speaker I move the Senate bill
two as amended do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill two as amended with
an emergency clause the vote is
now open.
All up.
Generation Chavis I've never
received credit Cassegrain folks
you got your requests button
request to speak button.
So.
Mr speaker I would like to have
my vote removed K..
The gentle lady if you're
president if you present you
must vote.
General of the clerk to call
those without a recorded vote.
Representative Anderson yes.
Representative Anderson votes
yes.
Representative Cook.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Thomson.
Those close by a vote of sixty
four in the affirmative zero in
the negative Senate bill two as
amended with an emergency clause
has duly passed the house.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe
Representative Romero are you
ready item thirteen yes Mr
speaker we get to that point for
the record reflect on action
necessary for placing House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill one eleven with
an emergency clause and final
passage has been taken
gentlelady to explain it all
thank you Mr speaker house bill
one eleven modernizes our
housing policy we have.
Thankfully come to an agreement
with our partners in this with
industry the housing
associations can continue to
keep their housing with the two
hundred million dollars coming
in from the federal government
to be able to make rental
payments with that Mr speaker I
would like to yield to my co
sponsor the gentlelady from
Dona.
Generation here Representative
Rubio.
Thank you Mr speaker and
Representative the gentle lady
from Santa Fe will you yield.
So kindly on to my friend from
done and I think it's.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I just wanted to
just be brief and just saying
that
as folks have been talking about
the last year and what COVID in
the anniversary of what's to be
the first the first after the
first year
of of surviving this little
pandemic so many in New Mexico
have also been trying to just
stay in their homes and I'm just
incredibly grateful to
Representative role metal and to
all of the advocates who have
been part of these conversations
over the course of the year when
we ask people to stay home we
were also risking a lot by the
fact that so many might be
victims because
our our leaders at the national
level did not have a plan to pay
us to stay home were to pay our
small businesses to close so
that we can get past this moment
and there's a lot of risks to
that and that and and one of the
risks was of course the Marshall
care and so this is a way to
address a lot of that and I am
grateful to have been part of
this this partnership so that
thank you very much and I go
back to the general.
Thank you Mr speaker with that
will stand for questions.
We have further debate the
gentleman from the Lancia.
Thank you madam speaker
Bensinger the general ladies
please you.
Thank you Mr speaker action of
yield to the gentleman from
Santa.
Lance you madam speaker my
apologies Mr speaker Valencia
that's fine thank you thank you
gentle lady
I'd say a few questions I can
have a lot but this up this bill
Madam speaker generally this
bill was much larger a few days
ago is that correct.
Mr speaker gentleman we've been
working in partnership with many
many advocates including the
apartment association originally
spoke out against it who is now
in favor of this bill.
Thank you madam speaker
generally for that I I do
appreciate the fact that I
recall that the the title itself
was running into the page too so
that was doing quite a few
things that still does quite a
few things madam speaker gentle
lady
The I'll start with some.
With page three right at the top
lines one through three
talking about residents portion
of the rent payment can you tell
us madam speaker the only what
we're trying to do with that
that part where we say we cannot
charge a late fee for the total
amount and speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen for the question so
what we're trying to do here is
when we have renters that are
requiring a subsidy such as a
veteran who may get support from
the federal payments and so what
we want to do is that if there
payment portion is state five
hundred dollars of the thousand
dollar payment five hundred
dollars coming from the veterans
fees are only attached to their
portion that they're responsible
for not the veterans.
Assistance so that it's relative
to in fact their portion of
their contribution and not on
any subsidy.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady so with regards
to a property owner property
manager that's entered into a
lease with with this individual
you've just described that's
receiving some sort of how
housing subsidy I'm I'm most
familiar with section eight in
in regards to.
To housing vouchers madam
speaker and gentle lady who who
enters into that leases it is at
the residence or is it the
federal government that's paying
that housing subsidy and
speaker.
Mr speaker gentlemen if I
understand your question
correctly the resident enters
into an agreement with the
landlord and so the landlord
obviously has to adhere to
guidelines in order to accept
payment in agreement with the
that the tenant who would be
applying for at not only rental
assistance but of course housing
with that landlord.
So madam speaker and gentle lady
the the contractual agreement is
between the landlord and the
tenant only is that correct
madam speaker gentle lady.
I'm sorry Mr speaker gentlemen
are you asking whether or not
there's and and situation in
which there's
and and an additional agreement
or one that's just between the
landlord and the tenant Madam
speaker gently let me be a
little more clear I guess I'm
I'm not being clear but what
what I'm getting at is the lease
agreement is between the two
individuals as between the
landlord and the tenant
regardless of where the the
payments coming from the the
landlord is expecting let's say
that rents a thousand dollars a
month madam speaker gentle lady
that landlord expects a thousand
dollars a month in this
situation coming from two
parties one probably directly
deposited into their bank
account from the the the program
that this the folks are on and
into some questions that the
president is responsible for but
but indeed the lease agreement
the contract is between the two
parties is that how you
understand that Madam speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman thank you
for the clarification so the
idea is that the agreement is
with of course the entity paying
the authority or subsidy or the
voucher with the tenant and of
course paying directly to a
specific landlord.
Thank you madam speaker gently
so.
In my experience with with
section eight housing
That person that's receiving
that housing subsidy they signed
some sort of agreement with
section eight agreeing to
certain parameters whether it
has to do with how many people
are part of the lease and living
in the home or whether or not
they can abide by the terms of
the lease agreement Madam
speaker gentle lady what if that
individual.
Violates some portion of of
their agreement say they they
begin.
A meth lab for for whatever you
know this is an extreme example
but say they they start selling
drugs are manufactured drugs in
the home and they've broken that
contractual agreement and
they've lost that's housing
subsidy does your language here
provide for the the owner still
being able to to charge the full
late fee to that individual the
thousand dollar rent not just
their portion Madam speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman absolutely
this does in fact keep all of
this sort of damage issues that
you bring up in relationship to
contractual agreement intact in
the case that you talked about
with an extreme situations such
as that all of the protections
remain and and the bill as in in
statute as far as ensuring that
landlords can recover any damage
costs Mr speaker gentleman.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you gentle lady
this this portion of of the bill
still gives me pas in that.
There are situations where we're
landlord does need to to indeed
charge that that late fee on the
madam speaker gently and with
that I would move house floor
amendment to House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill one eleven and madam
speaker that amendment number is
point two two zero four six nine
point one and it has been passed
out to the body here.
Let's give it a minute to be
posted gentleman.
Gentleman to explain the
amendment.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you generally the very very
little to the amendment all it
does is remove the strike
through on online to of page
three.
And then removes the the words
underlined words residents
portion of the rent payment
simply restores the bill.
To reflect the original law.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo is
this a friendly amendment.
Madam speaker this is an
unfriendly amendments for the
reasons previously stated we do
not want to burden a landlord
with the subsidy of with having
to have a seat attached to a
subsidy they're already
receiving support with for their
portion of rent this is what the
fee is meant to be but assessed
at and so we feel strongly and
with the apartment association
other landlords that this is
fair and we would call this and
friendly thank you madam
speaker.
There is debate on the
amendment.
The gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentleman from Valencia yield I
will yield madam speaker.
Thank you madam speaker I have
just a couple quick lines of
questioning
so
Madam speaker gentleman from
Valencia can you explain to me
what the purpose of a late
payment is.
Let me let me spending state
that if I want to present a late
fee thank you thank you madam
speaker and gentleman from San
Juan so as a property manager or
landlord will use of a late fee
to encourage all current and
correct the current payment of
of the lease agreement all.
The they're able to currently
charge up to ten percent of of
the monthly rent amount and and
many landlords won't even get
that high in a lot of times all
if I charge a late fee and I can
do a hundred Bucks madam speaker
I might do twenty five just to
kinda you know ease the ease the
burden I'm not trying to put
people out but it but in in the
same regard they.
When when rent is not paid on
time U. S. actively are harming
the owner by not giving them the
funds that they wrote in a
timely manner there by putting
them in the decision many owners
Mr on madam speaker and
gentleman all.
Make a mortgage payment every
month on those rental properties
most didn't most homes are not
free and clear and so when rent
is fifteen days late and an
owner has a mortgage grace
period of fifteen days they it
gets to be a puts people in a
pension so that's the purpose of
using that late fee to
encourage.
Timely payment Mr speaker Madam
speaker.
Madam speaker John from Valencia
in that example of a landlord
not owning a rental free and
clear but having a mortgage
attached to the dwelling.
if if that payment from the
tenant the overall role payment.
Is barely sufficient to cover
the mortgage payment and I'm
unable to make my mortgage
payment M. I. assessed a late
fee by the mortgage company and
in most promissory note
arrangements.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman indeed mortgage
companies don't typically give
the flexibility that you're your
friendly neighborhood landlord
might you're slapped with a late
fee and it's to the the maximum
amount that was in agree to in
your mortgage payment are you
mortgage documents originally
signed.
The
There's no appropriation of that
based on the fact that you
rented to an individual that's
on a section eight housing
program madam speaker
government.
Thank you madam speaker and.
Well understand what the done
online bills trying to do and
trying to protect of the
residents maybe the qualify for
lower payment.
I do have concerns that if we
restrict what that late fee is
in and again which is not always
a penalty it's actually used to
help cover mortgage payments
that what you're gonna see as a
result as most landlords they're
going to cover this risk one way
or the other they're not going
to dispute this risk and so one
of the ways you're going to see
that they cover this risk is by
increasing the rent.
Or getting out of the room
rental business all together
either one is a bad results for
tenants.
And so I think the ten percent
makes sense an underlying
current statutory law and for
those reasons I support your
equipment.
Thank you Mr John from San Juan.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you madam speaker of a
gentleman from Valencia County
you'll.
Yield to the gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln.
Thank you Mr madam speaker and
gentleman.
Gentleman in your questioning of
the sponsor at I believe I heard
her say that in your
hypothetical.
That you would be able to
recover the entire late.
Garcia did I hear that correctly
and then then speaking German if
if indeed the entire on state
that section eight housing
didn't make their payment as
well then you could assess the
entire late fee obviously as
opposed to two parties at that
point miss madam speaker and
gentleman
the the point with with this
amendment to remove this mostly
is the fact that it's it it just
adds to the layers of things
that owner is having to to track
in terms of the attendance.
Residency you obviously they've
already done several more things
by accepting a section eight
housing in the beginning madam
speaker and gentleman sectioning
has requirements that not all
houses will will meet those
standards and so there are other
things that go along with that
so that answers your questions
on that gentleman from Chavis.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
going to the point that that I
think you were getting out was
that if the lease was our.
Breached due to in your example
selling drugs from the premises.
And lost the.
Los the amount that would be
paid by another entity.
And you asked would you be able
to assess the full late fee on
the amount of rent due and the
answer was yes.
But without this ammendment.
I don't see any provision in
this bill that would authorize
you to receive the full late fee
and your hypothetical would you
agree with me Madam speaker and
gentleman I would and I do
appreciate that clarification
indeed you you the language
still rates residents portion of
the rent payment if we do have
in the past this bill on the
speaker and so madam speaker and
gentleman I was surprised at
your based on the response of
the sponsor again you.
This was not a friendly
amendment because a friendly
amendment or the amendment.
Does exactly what the sponsor
indicated would be the result of
the breach in that one instance
and so I I thought the the the
answer and the amendment went
hand in hand and that you would
need to believe.
The end sort of language and you
would need to restore the
deleted language which is
exactly what your amendment did.
Madam speaker and gentleman
thank you for bringing this
anymore I think that follows
through with exactly what the
sponsor indicated would be the
results so thank you Sir thank
you.
Is there further debate on the
amendment the representative
from the Lansing County thank
you madam chair the kind
gentleman from Atlantic county
please yield Mister speaker I
yield to my partner from
Valencia County thank you madam
speaker thank you pandemic I'm
so I'm reading the bill and I'm
reading your amendment.
Residents portion of the rent
payment
madam speaker and kind gentleman
do you know what that even
means.
Madam speaker generally if
you're referring to the to the
to the separate questions is
that your question madam speaker
the only Mr speaker okay
pandemic the part in the bill
residents portion of the rent
payments and says let me go
further so I can ask my question
correctly so.
So I have a renter.
And part of his rent is being
taken care of three family
member.
now what I as a written as a as
a property owner have that in my
contractor in my lease or have
any knowledge of that Madam
speaker kind gentleman and madam
speaker generally I'd like to
see your your point there that
opens things up that I hadn't
even realized but indeed if you
had not necessarily a housing
subsidy but a family member
subsidizing that individuals
rent Madam speaker gently you
may at the beginning have signed
a lease with both parties or
have done a personal guarantee
from that third party that was
helping with rent then speaker
internally but many times those
things come about you know
throughout a tendency and may
not have been agreed to in the
beginning and madam speaker and
gentle lady that would make this
even that much more unclear.
Thank you madam speaker and so
if I had a trust account and
that account was paying my rent
and that trust account ran out
of money or expired.
And that portion residents
question is in this isn't her is
it as in this legislation.
And that is not paid in time
with with this now affect that
Mr Matt Manisha Madam speaker
kind gentleman.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
based on the the the basic
language that the bill offers a
committee substitute offers it
would be unclear as to who's
responsible Madam speaker.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman so I understand what
the Sanchez trying to do I
really do I understand that
she's trying to make sure what
if I am getting any type of
government subsidies or
government assistance and if
that payment is late I am only
responsible for my questions I
get that.
But that's not what this
language does what this language
does is it doesn't matter who
pays it doesn't matter where the
money is coming from.
If that money is not paid on
time I as a landlord can collect
on.
And that's what the problem is
and so the language is that in
this bill is it's it's too it's
incorrect so all you're trying
to do is correct the language so
it doesn't matter where the
money is coming from if the
money is late the landlord can
charge a late fee madam chair
Mister.
Madam speaker kind is that
correct thank you madam speaker
internally that is correct and
to my point earlier the lease
agreement indeed that's because
early is with the individual the
section eight or the a or
whoever's helping with the rent
is not party to that contract
and so the from the owner's
perspective he or she is two
thousand dollars per month and
on day ten they choose to assess
a late fee they should be
entitled to assess the thousand
dollar late fee if indeed the
entire rent has not been paid
and speaker gentle lady I'm
thank you madam madam speaker
and gentleman I'm not too
familiar with it with the
government subsidies but yeah I
know that your property manager
here you have a lot more
knowledge about that than I do
how often are these late.
Mr doing how often are they miss
that last I'm just figure kind
of have a these are these
payments late.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
section eight
In my experience they pay on the
second of every month like
clockwork it's deposited into
your bank account I've never
experienced madam speaker
deleting the VA or any other
housing subsidy like that but
there was an speaker Julia of a
program a few years ago that I
work with for an individual that
was based out of Albuquerque and
I forget the name of which is
our membership but they they
basically ran out of money in
that program and madam speaker
gentle lady and that individual
they were in the pain the entire
rent for that person.
In that individual was faced
with trying to figure out you
know where to find
help with rent equipment because
only and eventually they bounced
through the section eight
program but that was a perfect
scenario speaker massacre daily
of the program ended abruptly
without much warning and and at
that point this individual could
have been.
And and what of by by the
property managers you know
obligation responsible for the
entire event whether it would
have been being paid by someone
else or not that person's on the
least and that should be not
only the the late fee but
entitlement should be sought
after from that individual that
they that they entered into a
contract with speaker gentle
lady.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you madam so aged just for those
reasons alone me being a
property owner myself meeting in
it's going into a contract with
an individual not knowing where
their money comes from not
knowing what
plans are are agreements they
made with anybody else I can see
I could get in trouble with
something like this and so the
language okay and like I said I
understand what the Sanchez
intent was but this goes a
little bit too far and it's
unclear and we have to go back
to the original language because
that protects everybody of text
me as as a property owner I have
several properties they're more
engaged it's my investment it's
my retirement it's important to
me I had a renters that would
they moved out it cost me
thousands of dollars in order to
prepare that property and so I
want to make sure that those
rent payments on time because I
have a mortgage I have to pay
that and I'm going to get
charged if I don't make that
mortgage payment on time so with
that thank you madam speaker I
think a kind gentleman thank you
delivery is there further debate
on the amendment.
Seeing an.
The gentleman from the.
Thank you Mr speaker.
From Valencia.
Thank you madam speaker I will
yield to the gentleman from the
lead just one quick question
chairman.
And these so
as to range from six to always
come directly from the
subsidizing agency or
altercations with the total
payment comes into the hands of
the tenant was responsible for
making the right.
Madam speaker and and gentleman
from late.
We we keep talking about the
section eight program that
indeed they do directly pay the
owners typically through a bank
draft directly into their bank
account there are other programs
I do not know that is because
I'm and if there are some that
actually put the money into the
hands of the tenant and there by
the tenant and being responsible
to make the payment that I don't
know if those exist Madam
speaker.
Okay.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you Jim.
That gentleman to close on the
amendment thank you madam
speaker thank you generally and
and and the debate in but my
intent with this is this to.
The something that's you know if
it's not broken don't fix it to
me that this this late fee peace
in our unintended relations act
is is doing its job massacre I
would I would submit to you that
many many property owners and
property managers focal even
charging a late fee when someone
has had a a death in the family
or an illness especially in this
in age of time with with COVID
nineteen minutes speaker I've
done that many times and I they
could bring tenants after tended
to bring him in here to tell you
on Madam speaker and testified
that we do indeed waive late
fees all the time and so I I
believe that the original
languages is sufficient in the
law that we have today and I
urge the body to support this
amendment.
Gentlelady from going and.
Thank you madam speaker I move
to table.
We are on a motion to table
house floor amendment number one
to house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill one
eleven with an emergency clause
the vote is now open.
The clerk to call those without
a recorded vote.
Representative Cadena.
Yes to table.
Yes Representative votes yes.
Representative Johnson yes to
table Representative Johnson
votes yes.
Representative Lujan.
Yes.
Representative will
Representative Lujan votes yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
All.
Representative small.
Representative Thomson offset.
Representative small boats yes.
Representative is yes.
By a vote is thirty five in the
affirmative and thirty in the
negative the floor amendment has
been tabled we are back.
We are back on the main bill
gentleman from the Lancia's you
still have the floor thank you
madam speaker Mr going to move
on a little further into the
bill well not too much further
just down the.
Bottom of the page three madam
speaker and gentle lady are.
You.
The an online twenty five.
And then going on to page for
three lines.
One two and three
and I see what you're trying to
do here madam speaker gentle
lady in in that it's not
something that I'm in
disagreement with it we already
are supposed to give a receipt
of some sort of to folks when
they.
When they pay rent then speaker
gentle lady what happens in in
modern.
Property management is the
lion's share my tenants pay
online and and they receive
electronic payment already so
we're talking madam speaker
gentle lady about in my business
about twenty percent of our
tenants pay with either the unit
will bring cash and.
Or money orders and madam
speaker gently attack this is
it's it's it's a receipt within
itself so we don't mention that
hearing or you don't mention
that in your committee
substitute the madam speaker and
gentle lady in your language
you're you're requiring the
owner resident to provide a
written or electronic receipt
thanks to the amount of the
payment today the payment of
residence name manage that what
you're trying to do you're
trying to make sure that an
individual is credited with the
amount of rent they've paid
there's not this.
Five days later the owner called
in sick I think it your rent
with you and get my Irish
speaker I paid my rent but I
will submit to you that.
In my operation
Madam speaker gentle lady we
have a drop slot.
And it's a pretty rare occasion
as because that I'm actually at
the office when a tenant drops
by to bring the rent so.
Probably ninety nine percent of
the rent that's dropped are
brought to the office in person.
Is placed in the slot at some
odd our typically of the day
madam speaker generally a lot of
these folks are working swing
shifts and things of that nature
the show up at eight o'clock at
night drop the rents are done
they're happy for the rest of
the month
Mistakenly what I've.
When I don't another piece of
this magic abilities that you
see a written.
All electronic receipts I guess
in my mind I'm thinking if it's
a written receipt I show up at
the office in the morning madam
speaker gentle lady and I sit
down and write out four five
receipts or however many
receipts of cash for money or
were dropped in the evening and
then I proceed to hand write out
letters and address them place a
stamp on it and mail them a
receipt because that's the only
way I think I'm gonna get them a
written receipt and also made to
the other piece of this is.
Many of those individuals that
pay with cash or money orders do
that primarily because they
typically don't have banking
accounts and that's what they
choose to do there's there's it
takes all sorts of people that
make this world run and some
people just want to have their
cash in hand and by a money
order and that's their
prerogative.
But many of those folks madam
speaker gentle lady also don't
use email or plug into the
system so to speak and so tronic
we see would be on something I'd
have to to sit down and draft an
email some sorts and I guess
attach a receipt that I can
generate out of my software
program and
What what eight want to propose
madam speaker gentle lady is is
a indeed another amendment and
it's not to to to strike what
you're trying to do is just to
simply enhanced Madam speaker
gentle lady and what I want to
do last week and I will move.
House floor amendment number one
to house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill one
eleven and it has been passed
out the number Madam speaker.
Is point two two zero four seven
two point one Madam speaker I
believe I know the body has it
on the floor here.
Would you clarify the number
again Representative I'd I'd
love to do that madam speaker
point two two zero four seven
two point one.
Genentech's plan the amendment
thank you madam speaker the
amendment simply aims to add in
some language that would give
the tenant.
The option of still coming by in
the middle of the night and
dropping their rent and not
having to try and meet the
landlord there the property
manager there at their office at
some you know daytime hour when
the manager might be sitting at
their desk on what we want to do
madam speaker and gentle lady is
not after the.
Online for after the word name
is insert provided that if the
resident makes a cash or money
order payment by leaving the
payment at a drop box or similar
unintended device that is used
for collecting rental payments
the owner shall not be required
to provide the resident a
written or electronic receipt
madam speaker what this aims to
do is give the tenant the option
is still dropping in the in the
drop box many of these tenants
are already doing this and they
trust the system and and rent
gets paid in the state in the
home that bothered by by late
fees or anything of that nature
madam speaker so the amendment
would simply just take this
proposed language that that of
the gentle lady from Santa Fe
wants to add on to the section
of your tenant relations act and
just makes it a little more
amenable to to all parties
involvement of speaker.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe County
is this a friendly amendment.
Madam speaker thank you
gentlemen we clarify in this
bill that we are asking for cash
and money order payments to have
a paper trail or an electronic
receipt trail
that is what the bill does with
your amendment it does not
provide that protection for
somebody who is paying cash or
who is takes away that
protection unfortunately so this
is an unfriendly amendment
Madam speaker and gentleman.
Is there debate on the
amendment.
Representative from San Juan
County.
Thank you madam chair with the
gentleman yield Mister speaker I
will yield to the gentleman from
San Juan gentleman here in Santa
Fe I ran a casita and it's a
kind of a vacation rental and I
get my invoices I guess and I
have a mailing a check.
And I don't I don't receive our
state around eight one I'm gonna
cancel check so and when I do
not I do think L. the ordinary
this is kind of customary
practice and I've been reading
this casita for the last eight
years and I have a real good
relationship with the you know
with the with the chair and and
she's she's very good about
resolving this place for me each
and every year so I really
appreciate that and I pay my
bills on time so
So what you're just trying to do
is just make a little easier
ministration on on on on the
landlord and Mr Madam speaker
and and gentlemen is that is
that.
The gist of it Madam speaker
gentle lady it's it's it aims to
to make it easier on the tenant
on and and the landlord you know
like I mentioned you know people
are coming going every direction
you have tenants that you know
are working odd hours and and
late night shifts and kids at
home and someone wants to get
home and they swing by the the
rental place and they know that
they throw it in the slot and it
gets credits the account madam
speaker gentle lady and
gentleman and everybody goes
about their business this just
simply give them the option of
still dropping that thing off
without worrying about getting
of you know a piece of paper in
the mail if it gets to them ever
this is a receive different
you know and and that's what
we're trying to do with this
with this ammendment Madam
speaker and gentleman.
Thank you.
Madam speaker and and gentleman
also
I have personally I have some
executive rooms and and
Farmington and we use a manager
that takes care of it for us and
so he collects the rent and then
and then reimburses us less a
commission in this sort of thing
so
this is not an unusual
Order business
especially those operating maybe
hundred units serve you know a
large number of rental
properties and and whatnot so
I think it's a good amendment to
thank you madam chairman Madam
speaker and and gentleman.
Thank you John there's further
debate on the amendment the
gentleman from Bernalillo Santa
Fe Torrance and Valencia
counties.
Thank you madam speaker the
speaker Tallman this tell many
of thank you Mr that'll yield to
the gentleman from Santa Fe.
Mr Kirk gentleman
I appreciate that the point
you're making about the the drop
box
but I I still think it's
important to have a receipt have
a paper trail so Mr Chairman why
wouldn't a landlord especially
in management company deals with
this routinely
when the you know the coming in
the morning or Monday morning
whether it is or something in
the drop box why not right
now the receiving in the mail.
Thank you thank you madam
speaker and gentleman
Because that's how we do it now
that the this is a standard of
practice most landlords will
take a take a receipt take the
of the rent come in and and and
post that.
That rent to the the correct
account for the tenant and so
they can go about enjoying their
their their tendency
madam speaker German the the
actual on having to to write out
the strict this receive mail at
office another step in the day
and things are I I anecdotally
I'm sure people could could tell
stories of of you know the
landlord has my rent heating
give me credit for speaker
gentleman but that that's not
something that goes on in in in
a manner that's that's out of
control in the business and and
so the the amendment simply
allows that tenant is to still
have the faith that they're
meant their landlord is
receiving the grant opted off in
the slot at ten o'clock at night
and on the way home Madam
speaker.
Mr Chairman
You know I got to see the.
Argument because that's the way
we've been doing it
Is really persuasive to me I
mean I think the point of
legislation is to do things
better and I think this this is
an issue
you know I could I could see
your you under the existing
language that what it does is
required the landlord to send
the receipt upon
send the receipt upon receipt.
Of the wrecked and I don't think
that's too much to ask.
I think that's the that would be
a good practice so the thank you
madam speaker thank you Joe.
There's further debate the
gentleman from all those
counties leader Townsend.
Thank you madam chair of the
gentleman yield thank you madam
speaker I will yield to the
gentleman from Artesia.
Thank you Sir I was just sitting
here thinking about.
This debate M..
Is I am.
I'm sensitive the to the fact.
Of people being able to.
Let their lives stop by after
work drop in the mail box come
and then I got to thinking.
If you pay your electric bill do
they send you a receipt.
Madam speaker and gentleman a
lot of people will pay their
electric bill of the gas bill
with the money or the know Nancy
if you don't get a receipt
mailed back to you that
And then I.
Just start going down the list I
mean.
Yes I a.
Have a professional services and
they send me a bill.
Hey at hi I mean very seldom in
the world today.
Is the provider required.
To send.
A receipt
It just seems like we're going
back about twenty years I mean.
So we have all of these
processes now we're.
And I know you probably use them
I don't but there's all of these
apps that you can use where you
can just pay off your phone and
and.
It just seems like to me what
you're asking for for.
Promotes quicker transactions.
and it's something that those
are renters will.
Will respect.
When you.
just a money order.
Is there a copy of that money
order that you can retain thank
you madam speaker and gentleman
money orders come in all shapes
shapes and sizes the United
States post office does money
orders Walmart.
Dollar general all these places
retailers money orders are are
sold and yes indeed that
individual purchasing the money
or is given a back up or or
The carbon copy in and indeed in
in in.
In many cases I've seen more
money orders been lost and they
use that receipt to go back to
the provider and and clean those
funds and they have to go
through a process madam speaker
and gentleman but indeed they
have they do have proof of
payment honestly from the
landlord but they do have
something that they generated
the the funds to to make that
payment.
Well I think that's exactly
right
Madam speaker and gentleman I
think you're.
Your amendment is a good
amendment because it's it is.
Good for both parties it makes
sense and I can't think of many
instances today.
Where a.
Statue has been imposed in a
transaction that requires
outside of the contract.
A separate document to be
created and see up.
For really no reason so I think
you got a good amendment I think
both parties of.
Evidently have been using it for
years successfully the drop box
works for those working families
and I'll be happy to support
your amendment thank you Sir
thanks Jim.
Representative from Lee County.
Thank you madam speaker this is
gentleman from Valencia yield.
Thank you masterbuilt sent the
kids to the other gentleman from
Lee County.
Thank you Sir you know as I
listen to the debates and I I I
think back.
I just I'm thinking through.
How my ninety three year old
father deals with.
His bills.
And madam madam speaker and and
gentleman.
He writes checks.
If you want to order something
offline one of those kids order
should.
Yes he he doesn't do that and so
I I I I just find it interesting
that the in to to.
To build off of.
Minority leaders comments
Madam speaker and gentleman.
I'm not sure I understand the
concept here so.
That maybe the maybe madam
speaker and gentleman you can
help me walk through why why
this in any part to be
unfriendly amendment.
Thank you madam speaker and and
thank you gentleman from Lee
I think believe what the
sponsors of the bill are trying
to do here is is not is not a
bad thing you know if somebody
wants a written receipt they can
make accommodations to make sure
that that happens when they when
they turn over I mean if someone
desperately wants that receipt
maybe they shouldn't drop it off
until someone's at the office
and and madam speaker and
gentleman you know I I.
I'm a small operation I don't I
don't have staff I don't have a
receptionist anybody sitting
there all day that I pay to hang
on and and collect things and
answer phones and so in my world
administrative for the I'm I'm
out of I'm here today I've been
here you know the last forty
five days when we've been here
and my tenants appreciate the
fact madam chair Madam speaker
that they can drop their rental
with confidence knowing that
that we pulled out of that
little box and.
Posted to their account and so
what we're trying to do with the
amendment is honored.
The bill's sponsors desire for
Britain receipts to evidently
evidently this is a big problem
administrative here I don't I
don't see it's not a problem my
office maybe property managers
all over just telling folks
never got to rents are you still
in the inbox
I don't I don't think that's the
case then speakers on and so on
to amend that section of
language and and still honor
what they're trying to do but
still give that tenant.
The opportunity to to drop there
then I think is is a is a good
idea.
Well I agree madam speaker and I
agree gentleman and I will
support your amendment thank you
thank you gentlemen.
Is there further debate on the
amendment.
Thank you madam gentle lady from
Otero thank you madam speaker is
the gentleman from the let's see
I yield thank you madam speaker
I can finally hear my neighbor
of these plexiglass and mastic
we can't talk over here so we
can hear now thank you I will
yield to the gentle lady from
Otero county.
Sh thank you madam chair up.
And kind gentleman from Valencia
I just wanted to point this out
that
I I'm sure you know where I work
so I work in the county
treasurer's office in Cherokee
county and just to let the share
with the body at the top of a
property tax bill it says
clearly printed.
That the copy of your canceled
check is your receipt so there
is no requirement for our
government agencies to Senator
receipts are I'm kind of having
a hard time with why that would
be an issue any other instance
thank you thank you madam
speaker and and generally fall
into the
The language of the sponsors
want to add to the bill indeed
only only speaks to money orders
and and cash because of.
Standard practice in the banking
industry here your check is your
receipt because you have you'll
get it back in the mail like
used to back in the day but you
get an electronic skin on your
on your statement or in your
your online statement so it
speaks only to
To the idea of what a resident
paying cash or money order and
so
it going back to the idea that
we this is this goes on all the
time and and and we need to just
allow it to continue to go on
yes somebody does want that
receipt that should be incumbent
upon that tenant to ensure that
they get a receipt.
I thank you chairman and and
madam speaker I agree I mean it
should fall the burden should
fall on the actual.
Percent paying that that
payment.
Thank you madam chair thank you
John thank you gently the
gentleman from curry county.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
general fund from bless your
pleasure thank you madam speaker
I will yield to the gentleman
from curry.
Thank you John
I I did on until the end of
December a substantial number of
storage units and we had a drop
box right outside the door.
And we would have folks drop off
payments to be an envelope with
cash in it in a number written
on their we assumed was the unit
number we would occasionally get
a payment it would request
receipt my manager would print a
receipt and send it back to them
they would give us an address or
something Senator.
But what we found out is that a
lot of the tenants that we
received a cash or money order
and in the drop box.
The payment was brought by a
friend because it was a military
man stationed overseas.
Or it was the family member it
was a a daughter or son of
someone that it rendered or our
mother and father the path of
someone if you'd read.
We had no idea where to send
that receipt.
But if they requested it we
Senate if they didn't request
that we posted it but did not.
Sen received and and we on the
the first second third first ten
days of every month.
We would have anywhere from
fifteen to twenty to.
You know for them would have
three four five we have dropping
its every day the first ten days
or month so I have.
Really only have one question
gentleman in this language on
page four the juror mending is
that what is the consequence if
you don't.
Find a receipt I have not read
all the bill I've read this
piece of it but what what is
the.
It'll do for not sending a
receipt.
Thank you thank you madam
speaker and and gentleman I
don't believe there's any
specific penalty to that that
part of of with the generally
these are trying to add to this
section of law but I would I
would defer that the if there
was a complaint it would
probably go to the real estate
commission and then they would
they would reprimand or have a
discussion with the with that
property manager if that
property was managed if it's if
it's an individual I don't know
where the recourse would be
maybe the magistrate court Madam
speaker and gentleman.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
Madam speaker final question it
is fairly simple.
What guarantee do you have as
the landlord.
That they received the receipt
if you mail it to they have to
confirm and send you back a
receipt we got your receipt or
how does that work don't and
madam speaker and gentleman
that's not clear and in the
section the through attempting
to add as well and and you make
a great point you know I I know
that I dearly love the United
States post office but there are
times when that piece of mail
doesn't get where it was
intended to go and and to that
point then speakers on many
tenants Miller they're renting
as well not just using the drop
boxes so they rely on some other
means of delivery that's maybe
even a little more risking
inside in a box at the building
that that is owned by the you
know that the office that
manages our property so.
Mr speaker John I I completely
understand that statement we
would oftentimes receive of a
payment in the mail it was
postmarked six months prior and
and so like I can see where that
does create a problem but I I do
see that this bill as written.
Prior to your amendment.
It's a tremendous burden on the
property owner earlier the
manager.
And not the ten no
responsibility on on the tenant.
Especially if you do in fact
mail receipt comply with us you
have no way to prove you mail
that receipt so Mr speaker and
madam speaker and gentleman I I
stand in support of your movie
I. I've been in a similar
business and and what you're
doing is logical reasonable
practical I think it's a good
amendment four sporting thank
you madam speaker thank you Jim
there's further debate on the
amendment the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
Thank you very much Madam
speaker will be gentleman well
but the general idea.
Thank you madam speaker I yield
to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo the judiciary here
judiciary Senator.
Thank you very much speaker and
gentleman.
I guess what we don't understand
is why.
The problem is with sending a
receipt after the fact.
And but let me just say if
somebody pays by check does this
Rick does this apply to that.
And madam speaker gentle lady no
the the the language that's
proposed in the committee
substitute are only addresses
money order or cash payments
okay so you wouldn't have to
worry about people who pay by
chat so those folks who said
well I've got my council.
Because state that works let me
tell you what my problem is.
It is that some of these
individuals specially on section
eight housing.
Have to prove to someone that
they have paid the rent.
Have to prove it to a probation
officer or parole officer the
court you can see why do cases
they have to be showing the the
workers in CYFD that they are
complying with.
There are
Obligation to hate for their
housing and I know because I've
had a client who got into
trouble with her research and
she didn't have any proof that
she had paid it and.
You know we are talking about
trying to stabilize families and
there are so it seems to me that
the requirement to have the
lamb.
All our send a simple restate by
the by the mail for those
particular clients and only for
money orders or cash.
Is a small.
A small efforts and and quite as
the the gentleman from Santa Fe
mentioned a good business
practice.
What that I just think people
are failing to understand how
incredible this.
Agreement was between all of the
landlord associations the
apartment owners and the
advocates for
The tenets it was just
remarkable how many hours they
put in to coming to this
agreement this seems like such a
minor
a landlord a business person to
provide.
Somebody who is in section eight
housing opportunity to prove
that he or she has not the
obligations that maybe first of
all that we all take for granted
we for House but you've got
you've got folks who are really
living on the edge and perhaps
learning for the first time
financial literacy and all you
need to do is send them a
receipt so I stand in opposition
to your amendment and I hope you
can understand them.
What I'm saying it's not just
about your convenience it's
really about people having to
prove something to someone with
authority over his or her life
thank you very much Jim thank
you madam speaker intelligence
would submit to you that I do
agree exactly with you that if
indeed those folks to require
that receipt then they can
simply make that request to the
land order property owner to
have that receipt to make proof
payment to the program or
whatever introduce us for that
payment thank you madam speaker.
There's further debate on the
amendment the gentle lady from
house Representative Ortez.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentleman from lance yet to seal
thank you Mr doll yield to the
gentle lady from ****.
At thank you.
Madam speaker and gentlemen the
gentle lady from Bernalillo said
pretty much everything that I
was going to say you folks who
are paying cash or money order
you need a receipt and I'm
having a hard time
understanding
how in the record keeping the
book keeping that a property
manager or property owners doing
me a favor if you receive a cash
or money order through the drop
box or in any way you know
you're gonna have to record that
he meant through whatever
bookkeeping that you're doing
and oftentimes you know you can
you can immediately actually
enter in that you know that
amount generate a receipt I I
just don't understand why that
so onerous for for property
owners I don't I don't have any
property so you know I'm not I'm
not doing that but you know I I
think you know the this
legislation was crafted with
folks you know with folks in
line and protecting the rights
of of renters and ensuring that
they are not.
you know that there that they
are not taking advantage of that
they're able to produce the
receipts that are needed for the
state agencies or or what have
you
and in there because there are
bad actors there so I guess I I
still I'm having a hard time
understanding how that is so
challenging you know on the part
of the property owner even with
even with a lot of properties
can you like me a little bit
more on that.
Thank you madam speaker
generally from yes so in teacher
correct most most managers use
for the elaborate software
systems and those generate
receipts they they generate the
money requested this money does
I don't print a receipt for
everybody to Vigil but I would
submit to you madam speaker
gentle lady my office we manage
internal hundred twenty
properties maybe thirty or forty
of those pay with
Cash and cash money order in a
month
it's it's a pretty rare day
anybody ask for we see I I don't
even I can tell you the last
time that someone said I have to
have a receipt for this you know
to go show my probation officer
who member and so again this
section of Law sentences.
Has been working for all the
years it's been placed into law
this is simply a piece that
no I don't think it needs to be
changed at all Madam speaker
gently but in light of trying to
honor what the sponsors are
trying to do is add in
disability for receipt to be
generated just simply give that
tenet that option to still in
the.
Drop it off at ten o'clock at
night on the way home from their
swing shift so they can get in
bed with their little kids and
and enjoy the rest of the
evening or whatever it may be
and so madam speaker the only
it's a simple amendment it just
leave the door open for folks to
continue to to to do what
they've been doing for all these
years.
At.
Gentlelady are you done.
I'm sorry and madam speaker and
gentleman but does it in the
bill right now it it as far as I
I'm reading it it says that you
don't it's not that you have to
do this immediately correct find
a receipt for cash or money
order.
Madam speaker internally I think
you're asking if it if it tells
if it's telling us to do that we
see immediately no I don't make
it that way either.
So madam speaker and gentleman
it seems to me that you know
just in the regular course of
business that this you know that
this can be done providing
receipts for cash or money order
can can be done on a timely
basis you know and and perhaps
even at that you know the
leisure of the property owners
long as it's it's done and and
and given that that's it seems
like it seems like it would be
too much of a problem I I think
that we have to.
We have to think about the fact
that not all property managers
and not all landlords are as
fastidious or as your is
honoring so at that's it seems
to me that that's what that look
this legislation is about is to
ensure that we're protecting the
rights of those of those renters
and creating you know good
systems of accountability
recordkeeping for for both
parties thank you I yield.
Thank you.
Is there further debate on the
amendment Sam Nunn the gentle
lady from Dona Ana.
Thank you madam speaker I move
to table.
We are on a motion to table the
house floor amendment number one
to the house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill one
eleven with an emergency clause
the vote is now open.
The clerk to call those without
a recorded vote Representative
Cadena.
Representative Lente.
Yes.
Representative Lente able to
yes.
Representative Lujan.
Yes
Representative both yes
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Martinez.
Yes to table Representative
Martinez folks yes.
Representative Terrazas.
No Representative also is what's
known madam clerk Representative
Kevin I yes.
Representative what's yes.
This short.
This is just your.
By a vote of forty two in the
affirmative and twenty four in
the negative.
The floor amendment has been
tabled we are back on the main
bill gentleman you still have
the floor thank you madam
speaker and
Moving on the page I towards the
bottom gentle lady.
You You strikes language in you
that in the statement.
Thank you talking about at the
end of the tendency is if I'm
not mistaken and what you're
wanting to do is mail
some sort of notice it says Hey
we've spent your deposit money
are allocated to deposit money
towards these repairs is that is
that we're trying to do their
madam speaker gentle lady.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen.
I'm looking at the bill with you
on page five.
Your question.
Will immensely gradually up to
my mackerel question really is
you're asking for.
The typically what goes on and
what happens in current and
current statutes now is the
landlords obligated to mail a
closed out statement that says
Hey we we've used a deposit for
this so we've given your whole
deposit back and that's due
within thirty days of the into
the tendency in it it reads now
that is mailed to the last known
address of that individual and
many not many but there's a fair
amount of tenants that will just
up and leave in the middle of
the night and the only its
address you have for them is the
place that you're renting the so
you mail it to that address.
And you probably get it back a
lot of times and the letter goes
in the file or whatever and
typically those are the folks
that have left you a lot of.
Fun things to take care of and
cleaning and all that sort of
thing so you use their deposit
so.
What you're what you're saying
here is that if the tenant
provides an additional address
and email to that address but if
they don't find unit is not is
are we still located Mila to the
last known address is not
obligated to do anything on that
speaker gentle lady.
Madam chair madam speaker a
gentleman I believe you're
correct I mean we're just
looking to ensure that the onus
is on the but the landlord
understanding that if there is a
payment involved would like for
the person who did rate that
of the deposit to receive their
money back and that the effort
is made to ensure that they
receive it back and again if
it's just a statement of Madam
speaker gentleman then yes of
course they would receive their
statements on the bill that they
were sent or if the itemized
receipt based on whatever.
That
damage deposit or what Madam
speaker John.
Thank you thank you madam
speaker and I think the the
language in there is really just
clean up to what we currently do
and it it just sort of thousand
down a little more I'm gonna
take you to page seven.
And and talk about paragraph
either Madam speaker gently so
currently there's a penalty of
twenty fifty dollars able to the
resident in current law who who
mandates that that that two
hundred dollars that how does
that look at me where do we or
is it a judge or someone this is
used you can do this director
the tenants from fifty dollars
and speaker.
Madam speaker just one moment
I'm speaking with our expert.
Madam speaker gentleman the
court is in fact responsible as
the delegating power that
ensures that those payments are
made thank you madam speaker so
madam speaker generally they
they tenant that those they've
been wrong would have to
actually go down a magistrate
and spend seventy seven Bucks to
file and thirty five dollars to
have documents served in order
to get in front of a judge to
get this judgment in hand is
that correct Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Madam speaker gentleman that's
correct in the sense that I'm
not sure what the fees are as
far as filing for recovery funds
but if there's and again it's
talks about improper with
holdings in this case
we just want to make sure the
course the judgment is followed
through with and and as you said
it's that's madam speaker
gentleman.
Thank you Mr gently do you have
any data as to how often this
occurs how often a landlord is
found to have improperly
withheld
a deposit.
Thank you madam speaker
gentlemen apologies for the
deposit I'm speaking with my
expert as far as hard data this
is unfortunately extremely hard
to obtain because the it is not
common practice within these
courts to take that data however
madam speaker gentleman this is
been reported by numerous
advocates and groups that talk
about you know what's going on
in the court systems currently
and unfortunately this is
happening at very commonly aware
this is a standard sort of
complaint that is made and
result and speaker gentlemen
from the information from folks
on the ground that we've been
working with as far as what
we're trying to resolve here
Mister speaker miss madam
speaker gentle.
Thank you generally thank you
madam speaker you know in in
practice I could give you you
know anecdotal you know stories
as well
it's it's probably twenty five
or thirty percent tenants state
they think you kept much of the
deposit it's just human nature
they they'll they'll come back
and say madam speaker you know
at.
Better than you think I did an
except for except for a lot of
times only go she with the
agency okay well using this I
think that will give you a
hundred Bucks more you trying to
go seated out stay out of the
courts and I guess my point is
that.
For them to actually collect on
this they have to go.
Through the efforts of of trying
to file a case and in this you
do take the three more or the
award up to twice the amount of
property with help and so just
to give the body perspective if
an individual had a thousand
dollar deposit and and that the
judges.
Determined that the landlord
improperly withheld the entire
one thousand dollar deposit
you're saying that that that one
would have to give that tenant
two thousand dollars that would
be that no speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentleman again we're
just trying to improve the
process in in understanding that
this is been a common issue on
the ground between landlords and
tenants in order to clarify this
and of course just streamline
the process and being able to
resolve these issues through the
court system understanding that
this has been a problem
Madam speaker gentleman this is
what we're trying to fix.
Madam speaker and only in my in
my I prophetical if it was
deemed that a landlord
improperly kept thousand dollar
deposit within the have to pay
out two thousand dollars that I
read that and speaker gentle
lady.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman as we've as it
conferred with our experts
typically the court practice
that is in the judgment that
you're discussing is actually
trouble the the amount of that
is with child this actually just
levels that off to two times
that amount and puts it into
statute understanding that it is
a judgment made by the judge
understanding that this is a bad
actor that we're discussing and
withheld funds from their
tenants and the judgment has
been made and this is in fact
what we're trying to put into
common practice which is
typically actually usually above
this amount as we understand it
like I said trouble the amount
typically so this just clarifies
that and makes it so that the
judgment is consistent when
their judgment is made.
Thank you gentle lady and thank
you madam speaker Mister chair
if if I could ask the gentle
lady for the bodies of knowledge
who are your expert witnesses
today.
Thank you madam speaker I'm
working with Karen Myers with
the City of Albuquerque.
Thank you.
Thank you John I move on from
that section
The page eight section do.
you change the work three to
eleven days written notice this
has to do with non payment of
rent is that correct Madam
speaker and gentle and.
That's correct
Madam speaker gentleman.
Speaker gentle lady so just
don't you know walk you through
a for the body's perspective and
in terms of the three day notice
of nonpayment of rent.
If I as a manager or landlord if
I post a three day notice let's
say on the fourth of March as a
representative on the first.
And that for the March happens
to be a Thursday and speaker
dealing my magistrate courts
locally in Quincy County they
tell me that I can't count
Thursday as they want I can
count Friday is the one Madam
speaker billion and I can't
count Saturday it can't count
Sunday and then let's just say.
Maybe it's not March fourth
maybe as we get more there's a
Monday holiday and administered
only.
And and the courts are closed
and so the one was Friday day
two is Tuesday the three is when
the state so I can't file on the
courts to Wednesday then speaker
generally what this is the
meaning that.
So that scenario I just
described going for eleven or
more days madam speaker gentle
lady.
That's incorrect Madam speaker
gentlemen eleven calendar days
from the date of non payment.
So Mister Donnelly I don't see
the word calendar there can you
tell me where that is.
Madam speaker and gentleman it's
in the court rules that stays of
course start with its more than
ten it's common practice that
it's calendar days through the
AOC.
So madam speaker telling did you
save more than ten is that what
you said Mr personality that's
correct you madam speaker and
gentlemen if it's more than ten
days the common practice through
the court is that it's calendar
days.
So madam speaker generally is
that with the number eleven was
chosen is that just was that for
that purpose to get the on tens
of the point of then indeed
recognize anyone not simply to
say the word calendar there and
and that way it's clear to
property managers and owners
speaker gentle lady.
Thank you Madam speaker
gentleman for that question for
that question specifically this
was we were hoping for fourteen
days to be quite fair this was a
negotiation between ourselves
and advocates in trying to
extend that this is about
getting landlords rate in
getting their payments and
making sure that all land that
tenants can of course make the
rent payments sometimes because
they're delayed on work and and
delayed payments coming into
them this allows them to to pay
their rent and so they're
insured sure that they're not
addicted on time solely for lack
of payment this is precisely
what we're trying to fix Madam
speaker gentleman is to make
sure that there's ample time
which three days if you're doing
contract work if you are you
know delivering if you have
three jobs for jobs sometimes
paychecks aren't rolling in at
the same time sometimes you're
getting paid cash madam speaker
gentleman's of this just allows
for that time period and it was
negotiated between advocates of
course we were looking for
fourteen days but Levin days was
the sweet spot with the many
landlords that we discussed this
with
hoping to be able to give that
ample time for payments to be
made so again the eleven days is
is sort of that back and forth
between this agreement that
we've come to on this entire
bill as you spoke Madam speaker
gentleman you know this is been
we've we've wrestled over every
page of this for for many many
many months and weeks and have
had many advocates in the room
and I'll just remind the body
Madam speaker gentleman that we
have basically every department
touching housing Indian Affairs
CYFD the AG's office the
administrative office of the
courts The New Mexico finance
authority all in agreement that
this is an important piece of
legislation in particular
because.
Because we have two hundred
million dollars coming in from
the federal government that has
already starting to hit our
communities to be able to
resolve these issues for lack of
payment this gives folks ample
time to apply for these programs
Madam speaker gentleman to be
able to receive any support that
they may need right now in this
time of of not only the pandemic
but of course in the future if
folks are experiencing hard
times find and distally Madam
speaker gentleman this just
gives this though at least an
additional amount it's time
three days and then you could
get an addiction make sure that
of course landlords get paid but
that folks are kicked out of
their residences solely because
they have can't make the payment
right on that day three and and
then get kicked out madam
speaker gentleman's so in
agreement with landlords and
those who have spent many many
many folks on their that that
their housing as well have all
agreed to this eleven day period
madam speaker gentleman.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you generally for our all that
background information I heard
was a hundred sixty one million
that's coming to the Mexico for
for housing dollars hopefully
that gets to the MFA in they can
distribute it is a great job so
far thank you so going back to
the scenario and you use the
terminology just a minute ago
madam speaker the only that that
someone would get kicked out
after three days but that's not
in the two cases posted three
day notice and then we have to
keep click off the calendar days
of the sometimes five or six
days and then I go see the the
magistrate court and I think and
seventy seven dollars you madam
speaker gently then I have to
hire a process server to deliver
those that the court by only to
that individual story on day
seven or eight by the time we
talk about that the court says
all well we can schedule your
your case and that's usually two
weeks three weeks out.
Before the judge if that tenant
shows up and make a case the
judge may or may not give you
your rate of restitution they
may give them a statement given
seven days or fourteen days to
get out so in reality an
eviction doesn't take three days
it takes usually thirty to forty
five days madam speaker
generally all the while.
Property owner that maybe making
a mortgage payment on that
property is out those dollars
Madam speaker and I'm not
talking about every rental
property being in the ownership
of an investor that savvy and
has a lot of money in the bank
account I'm talking about the
family they got a job transfer
to Texas and couldn't sell their
home and has a fourteen hundred
dollar payment and I tell my can
read it for twelve and you're
gonna pay me a hundred twenty
Bucks a month.
And and you're not making your
payments begin with and so I
would submit to you that the
other side of the coin and the
there are people that are not in
good financial positions and so
taking this beyond three days
eleven days whether the
apartment association or whoever
you work with agreed to this.
I would say that maybe the
agreed to it because I thought
well at least one releases not
fourteen and speaker generally
so that that that that troubles
me to go eleven days and speaker
gentle lady.
on into the bill.
Madam speaker and gentle lady on
the.
Fourteen of your bill the
committee substitute
line twelve.
There's a paragraph in there
about accommodations for a
disability folks
can you tell me what the word
reasonable means in that in that
definition it's as a reasonable
accommodation and I want to know
what.
What is a reasonable
accommodation is it.
Wheelchair ramp or is it a
bathroom remodel madam speaker
gentle gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentlemen as you
well know is the of the person
of the lot this these are well
defined by the courts and of
course within our our laws and
statutes as far as how judges
decide upon what reasonable
means.
So madam speaker generally so
it's a tenant called me one day
and says
They've been renting for me
let's say and they they end up
in a situation whether in a
wheelchair and that will chair
requires thirty six inch door we
struck the house and we have.
Twelve doorways and house that
state and of those ten of them
or thirty inches wide is is it
reasonable for an owner to to
remove thirty doors and lighting
and restraint door openings to
accommodate a wheelchair for
that reason or is there is there
any sort of dollar amounts or
any sort of the eighty seven the
courts that tells me that madam
speaker that someone would have
to actually soon to go to court
and the judge as well this is
reasonable but that's not so can
you put some arms around the
forest and speaker gentle lady.
Thank you madam speaker
gentlemen as it's referred to
federal law it's to provide well
defined in federal law and of
course if we wanted to look at
federal law it would absolutely
be able to tell us what that
would be.
So madam speaker gentle lady is
is it in federal law is it
defined as reasonable as is use
the same terminology or is there
some sort of.
on the way for a property
manager or property under two
games someone's made a request
someone called me we've done
this a bunch of times been
secretly
can we can we get grab bars
installed in the shower that's
to me is a reasonable request
that's not a big you're not
damaging the home you you're
you're you're adding things to
it you're not gonna remove those
but if someone comes in and says
well then stir gently this
bathroom has a full tub.
And I can't climb into the top
to take a shower I'm gonna ask
you to rip out the existing
shower and tub and replace it
but replace it with a walking
types our which could be several
thousand dollars which would be
several thousand dollars Madam
speaker generally is that part
of being reasonable I just want
to have some idea when when a
property managers are.
Senate with this what's
reasonable for them.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman was out of question.
And it was a question I want you
to help me understand what
reasonable means of still after
that the answer to that
question.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen so this is
following the federal ADA
guidelines as you and I will
note that there's guidance
available for landlords on ADA
standards and have been lost for
very very long time and so when
we look at how it's how it's
defined in where it exists this
is federal law Madam speaker
general.
Thank you thank you madam
speaker generally then I would I
would submit to you that you
should remove the work and with
the two words the reasonable and
simply say require or request at
eight am at an accommodation for
disability that we you point
that property manager or
landlord to the federal housing
here you just east of the
reasonable they might think well
that's reasonable to me and
what's reasonable to you as a
property owner may not be the
same standard to me last week
they'll as I feel like you have
some you have some gray area
there that you might want to.
To to just dial it in and not
use that word so that folks just
make it black and whites.
Madam speaker gentle lady
On page seventeen minus thirteen
and you added some some language
there.
you talk about the court
maintaining resource list of
nonprofit legal service
providers Madam speaker and
gentle lady does the to the
courts do this already or is
that something that they're
gonna have to specifically due
for this type of loan
origination Act cases come
before the.
Madam speaker gentlemen
unfortunately it's not common
practice throughout our court
systems in New Mexico that you
would find
you know support for for not
only legal services but of
course rental assistance which
is available around the state
minister gentleman the
administrative office of the
courts again endorses this
portion of the support that they
would be able to be a resource
for those who are facing any
sort of legal situations with
their housing and so we just
think this is good practice
because of the resources that
are available on that they
should be available at the court
systems and again the courts are
in agreement with this madam
speaker a gentleman.
So we could only
so will will the administrative
office of the courts.
Get guidance to let's be clear
this is probably mostly metric
or networking magistrate courts
throughout the state District
Court very rarely sees any types
of these cases of us are
escalated through all previous
filings in the magistrate court
so they thank you guidance and
tell them you need to post this
information out for folks in the
give them that list or they is
it incumbent upon you know the
individual judges teller courts
and courts they hate what figure
out you know what are what are
the options been speaker gentle
lady for people to to seek funds
I mean obviously I mentioned the
mortgage finance authority
earlier there are other avenues
a lot of times I've gotten texts
from from the church from from
the individual that attends a
certain church and they'll
they'll help them out with rent
and so is that is that what to
expect from the OC a map and a
speaker.
Speaker gentleman exactly a
sitting here on the track of
exactly what we would like to
see is common practice
throughout our court system of
there already were already
working with the courts I think
many municipalities counties as
such are already trying to
improve this process and again
just is as universal access
points across the board we would
like this to become the common
practice so in exactly the way
that you describe madam speaker
gentleman.
I think that's a very useful
resource for those folks Madam
speaker doing I think I speak
for probably every property
manager in the state right now
we have been approached by folks
that can't pay their rent
because of COVID situations and
have directed them to the MFA
and other resources and have
been successful our offices
received a project from from the
mortgage finance authority
parental assistance and so it's
not a bad idea to to make that
information more available
Mexicans only I know I'm getting
the body really tired and worn
out there thinking it's time for
dinner and all that good stuff
but I'll come to my last
probably my biggest problem with
your billing speaker gentle lady
is if we go to section
Eleven it's a new section that
you want to add it's on page
twenty one and it.
And since the next on page
Mexicans only but.
I understand what you're trying
to do here is and to give
everyone a picture of what I
understand you have to
individuals and maybe have an
individual on a property manager
and speaker generally the been
entered into an agreement and
let's say that agreement
started.
On.
March first of last year twenty
twenty one and R. twenty twenty
and sorry Mr Dillon and has it
was a one year agreement and
that that leases ran it's course
I did what I was supposed to do
as a manager owner the tentative
what they were supposed they pay
their rent they they did
everything they needed to do.
And the lease ends and that I've
got to give them a thirty day
notice on my property owners As
hate my grandma's fallen ill.
She's got a big medical bill I
need to sell that house at one
two three on street that you
manage for me can you give the
tenant I noticed I give that
tentative know this thirty day
notice on at the the first of
February saying you gotta be out
by the end of February first
March on can I and do do that
with and this is all under the
the guise of the public health
order on a state and so is that
something I can do the way your
bills written or not.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentleman was just
confirming with my expert so
this is specific to the fact of
the moratorium for non payment
of rent
madam speaker gentleman's what
you described I don't believe
would be covered under this what
we're talking about with the
emergency order situation that
we're currently in which also
speaks to the urgency of this
bill Madam speaker gentleman as
you well know you know landlords
are protected under current law
as far as their interests with
their properties so this is
speaking solely to the
motivation for not terminating
due to non payment of rent.
So madam speaker and gentle lady
I make that whole scenario in in
my service at that time and paid
all their rent they paid the
last month the rent there
they're not in arrears in any
way shape or form but let's say
they stop payment in December
some of the last time I
collected rent so the only
January beverages couple
thousand Bucks.
The leases run its course I've
done what I was supposed to do
they've mostly done with the
Expos beat but what we're
supposed to have done other than
maybe make the last couple
months of rent can I then give
them what thirty day notice
terminate the lease with all the
same scenario I've got I've got
a need to sell my house so they
can help monitor does.
Excuse me thank you madam
speaker thank you gentlemen so
my understanding is that this is
ensuring that they are not
seeking to evade the moratorium
within this the context of this
specific situation and what you
described
Madam speaker gentlemen it
sounds like they would still be
liable for that rent we're just
speaking about the moratorium
specifically I'm speaker John.
don't generally the moratorium
has to do with the missions
this scenario is not any big
issue this is two parties madam
speaker gentle and agreed upon
contract it's a still those
obligations and one party who
simply needs to do something
different with their homes or
property that they rent.
This this scenario which would
impede them from doing what they
need to do with the way I read
it now speaker generated.
Madam speaker gentlemen
I believe what you're asking and
what just to clarify on that
point Mr gentleman the the point
of the matter is to ensure that
the that the landlord does not
invade the moratorium and that's
what we're clarifying here being
that we are in an emergency
situation so what you described
I believe is correct
understanding that many many
people have been in very dire
Situations and of course there
with with all of the ability to
make a whole that landlord we
want to make sure that folks can
shelter in place.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady if you still work part and
referred to the more trying a
couple times now can you
describe for the body what the
more top moratorium is that
you're speaking or tell me what
what what is that moratorium and
speaker generating.
Thank you madam speaker a
gentleman so we have to
moratoriums in place right now
in the state of New Mexico
there's a federal moratorium on
federally subsidized homes and
there is a state moratorium as
issued by the state Supreme
Court that is they are both
currently active in our state
and of course the federal one is
across the country ensuring that
folks who are sheltering in
place can state sheltered in
place that's what the market
moratorium means that you cannot
effect based on non payment of
rent.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady so you just described to us
that the more point has to do
with the fiction once again
madam speaker only the scenario
we're talking about in this
section of the bill.
The committee substitute.
Has nothing to do with the
election.
It simply has to do with an
individual that owns a property
that has entered into an
agreement and has fulfilled
their side of the deal Madam
speaker gentle lady and is now
deciding to do something
different with that property.
Madam speaker gentle lady
I want the body to be very clear
about that because I know a lot
of seven seventy members in this
in this room or whatever they
may be right now.
There are many of us that on
rental properties and use the
word shelter in place well as we
could only.
Are you giving us the
opportunity idea that the
shelter in place includes them
paying rent we're trying to
payment we're trying to find a
subsidy to help them payments or
any request for the property
owner there that says.
You know you can stay in place
for so many days of the if you
don't talk to MFA in trying to
get some some money that their
background help me understand
that madam speaker gentle lady.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen yes in fact that's
precisely what we're trying to
do is ensure that everything
that's been put into places been
it can be utilized and this like
you said extends that
opportunity for folks around the
state to be able to make their
rent payments talk to their
landlords about their situation
financially and ensure that they
can keep a safe and stable home
this is what this it is seeking
to do of course with the
understanding the emergency
order and be able to make whole
those landlords and those
tenants so that they can stay in
that home.
Thank you Mr speaker telling a
little bit later in the program.
you talk about.
The owner being able to.
You give an exemption for for is
as long as they they can do this
as long as they're going to use
that to move back into the home
and secretly or and and and
occupies a primary residence.
In the state or for the.
The personal user of of of the
member of the owners immediate
family madam speaker don't
estimate to be mom dad siblings
kids is it that broader is
immediate family smaller than
what I've just described madam
speaker gentle lady.
Madam speaker chairman I think
that's correct you know
immediate family we have
I have my immediate family
includes my grandmother
sometimes my aunts and uncles so
I would think believe that that
was what.
Thank you thank you generally
travel up a little bit I think
the last ten seconds or so I
missed but I think you're
talking about your family and
and you I think you answered my
question by saying yes it would
include even maybe a sibling or
something of that nature Mr
jolly
so let's take this scenario
number what type of medical
Senator that's because I want to
flesh this out as we could only
I'm a property owner and I and I
have a home that I need to.
To do something with and I take
this maybe I'm I'm a little bit
underhanded in this and I say it
tell the tenant at thirty notice
releases expired
you know any job within the
month best because knowing I'm
gonna move into the house and
what's to say if I move in there
for a week asking for the only
and then I proceed to call my my
realtor which I am as well
minister delayed and put the
house on the market and that
next week is there any else any
dates or I don't see who's who's
responsible for ensuring that
that individual is living in the
home Mexico late can you help me
understand how we police that.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman I think the good safe
languages exactly what we're
trying to get at you know we
just don't want folks evicted
for no reason and if folks want
to read you know take over their
properties and they are the
rightful owners absolutely madam
speaker gentleman that is their
right so we are just asking for
actors to act in good faith and
and that's really what we're
seeking to do here
understanding that many many
folks have no place to go well
emergency orders are currently
in place and however thank you
be you and I both know if you
are the rightful owner property
are more than welcome to take
that back you must meet your
contractual obligations we're
just giving us protection to
those landlords and tenants who
currently have agreements and of
course with the extension of
this moratorium are giving them
the opportunity to have that
conversation and decide what's
best for both parties madam
speaker gentleman.
So Mister gentleman there there
is not need any on.
Any entity that's being named to
ensure that that individual
actually moved into the home
this it's just silent to that is
that what we're reading and
speakers on.
Madam speaker gentleman if I
understand you correctly if
there is if you're leases up and
the owner wants to move back in
madam speaker gentleman that is
their right the men's regionally
it's if that owner then decides
a week later to sell the home so
and and and do what I'm
describing is that person
intentionally set hand moving
back in you know so that in
there and then put a sign out
front for sale and sold in
thirty days because Madam
speaker gently and present the
that the real estate market is
as hot as it's ever been in most
of the country right now and and
it quite literally means houses
can be.
Is closed and sold within thirty
to forty five days right now so
is that is that's an area where
someone intensely did that are
they going to get in trouble for
this massacre gentlelady.
Madam speaker gentleman I don't
believe so right that's the
right full their rightful
ownership and if they want to be
able to occupy the home in order
to be able to sell it Madam
speaker gentleman that is I
believe covered under this
language madam speaker
gentleman.
Thank you Mr delay and up for
the for the last time an offer
on the house floor amendment
number one to house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
the one eleven Madam speaker
gentle lady and what we proposed
in this amendment is simply
strike.
Section eleven in its entirety
Mr personality.
I'm sorry that's because the.
Amendment number is two two
zero.
Four six eight point one.
Gentleman to move the amendment
I'm sorry I thought I did I move
house amendment number one to
house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill one
one one.
Generating business friendly
amendment.
Madam speaker gentlemen while I
appreciate the debate this is
perhaps the most important
portion of this a piece of
legislation and why it has
Emergency language in it we are
worried about the cliff effect
of eviction and worried that
folks may not have a place to go
following the lifting of our
emergency borders this gives the
opportunity for landlords and
and tenants to talk about their
leases look at renegotiating
look at the opportunities that
exist for making rent payments
that we're currently getting
from in from the federal
government as you stated
numerous times the mortgage
finance authority has excellent
programs that are working the
state of New Mexico included
fifteen million dollars that was
already spent by the end of the
year within the month of
December to be able to make
these landlords hole so that
they were receiving their
payments Madam speaker gentleman
this helps with that.
Fortunate the worry that that
tenants and landlords would be
falling off ensure that in this
emergency situation that they
can make those decisions for
themselves and with their
landlords madam speaker
gentleman's this is an
unfriendly amendment.
Is there debate on the
amendment.
That gentleman from Bernalillo
Santa Fe Torrance and Valencia
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam speaker Madam
speaker Tallman this gentleman
yield.
Williams.
Madam speaker Tallman.
You've a lot of experience
working on for the landlord end
of things Mr chairman due to
landlords like a long term
tenants the state the property
for a long time or do they like
to turn over the tenants.
Frequently administrative.
Madam speaker German in in
today's world with the the VR
vios and are to be in these some
of those it turned over very
quickly massacre gentleman but
but most owners want usually
when your lease is difficult but
up in single family dwelling and
miss madam speaker gentleman.
And madam speaker German so
when your lease service six
monthly Sir whatever if if the
tenant is in there it says that
the landlord often want to sign
another lease keep the laws are
no problems Mr speaker and
gentleman typically if if
they're intending on keeping the
home on rent they would they
would offer an extension
that's always negotiable some
tenants will say Hey up I need a
shorter terms I think I'm moving
into month's massacre judgment
and and many times they roll
into a month to month scenario
after the leases run its course
and speaker down.
So.
John I mean yeah I'm.
I'm doing the thing I I probably
should do is a I'm asking you
questions I think I know the
answers to and I think it's
clear the landlords you know
with investment properties they
want tenant stability and and
there are times at the end of
the lease as you just said Mr
chairman they roll over to month
to month so you know.
Thank you be a property for a
long time with you know without
the benefit of eight
and that's COVID Mr chairman so
so with this provision to me is
getting at is that and and I
think the gentle lady from Rio
Rita said it correctly that the
language in the bill as drafted
is trying to prevent landlords
from quote getting around the
moratorium place saying that
well you're leases expire now
you have to move.
And I think that's entirely
appropriate under the extreme
circumstances of a declaration
of public regency I appreciate
appreciate that part of this
language I think it's I think
it's.
It it.
Sir restrains
believe that certainly the
landlord that houses investment
asset doesn't want to be an
investment asset and it's not
related to the public emergency
and I think it's a landlord is
using the property as an
investment asset that it's it's
resolved us and continue to do
that and not doing in the run
and run around the more it makes
more toward.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
excuse madam speaker gentleman's
got that backwards I apologize I
think I think this is
appropriate I think this is San
Juan which and there's an
exception in here which you know
sort of hardship exception that
is the owner of the property
needs the property to help
themselves or relatives then in
that case thank you they can the
get back me and I appreciate the
consideration and.
Madam speaker gentlemen to your
point of could someone be
subvert that by moving in for a
short time you know you know but
not every every law covers every
eventuality and we do the best
we can.
So madam speaker and gentleman I
you know I I appreciate.
Thanks for your you're also
experience it and what you bring
to this debate I I really do
this language however in the
bill I think it's really good
language.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you so thank them there's
further debate Representative
Strickler from San Juan County.
Thank you thank you madam
speaker will the gentleman
yield.
I will yield to the gentleman
San Juan thank you the
gentleman.
As a practical matter you know
these landlords are.
The lady like to work with our
Janet something that stretches
current practice and and get
business and
it's better to have you know
good good good relationship with
the year with the tenant and I
know the market really has
changed this last year.
the.
The demand for rentals and and
our houses have really shop our
our it's kind of a nation
reeling we need to think of the
you know the shut down of
business and industry in our
state in round round the you
know ram United States so
it's incumbent
For the landlord to use every
tool at their and if you have
federal dollars coming and those
those are taxpayer dollars you
are paying at.
NMSA has this program I would
imagine R. that you're you're
notifying that tenant of this
this are this.
Pretty good program yes Sir it's
a win win for both the tenant
and the and the landlord issues
that was going on right now I I
think I heard the gentle lady
from Senate plated fifteen
million dollars has been
distributed our last in December
alone and a hundred sixty mains
come on our way so
You know we've got a lot a lot
of help out there and in this is
this this language here
Yes yes are you know.
Gives a lamb or a little help
you know as far as protecting
their asset and and making sure
by taking care of them.
The gentleman in in regards to
your your comment about the
fifty million that was.
The best thing we did in the
special session would make sure
that that got into the hands of
men up MFA they had to put some
money and I forget what the
other dollar amount was Mr
speaker.
Madam speaker and gentleman but
And and hopefully that hundred
sixty one million
It is coming soon I don't know
how long it takes you know with
with the the legislation
impassable government but once
it's in the hands of the folks
can get it to the people as easy
process Mr speaker massacres
element I have one tenant that's
been waiting about a month and a
half and and he's making his way
to the the process but there's a
long line in a long list of
people they're they're asking
for help and so you know I I I
feel like that's going to be a
good a good result for for folks
going on the road there are
going to be landlords that are
not maple we understand but
there's also Madam speaker
gentleman a lot of good will
going on I I myself have done
this several times they do it
anyway it's not just because of
COVID you work with people the
no Graham a diss the car breaks
down or whatever you know you
you you take that excuse or
whatever maybe maybe they're
making it up to the building
service whatever but missed
because only work with people
because that's that's good
businesses you point out and so
that's what we're doing.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentleman yeah I know
situation we're my son had a
real property and he had it
rented out as a certain amount
and he
the COVID again and there's some
layoffs and family and so he
volunteer reduce or at by one
third to you know my to help
amount yeah that's pretty I
think that's pretty.
Madam
good people actual renters no
fault of their own lost your job
and they they worked at a you
know reduction and it turned out
that
what they they ended up moving
out they had applied to another
place all volunteer all cordial
and then initially case that
house which so.
any of it so quickly because the
farm to market our standard
rates it's real tight and
there's your house on the market
and then the on record and lot
of demand out there is a lot of
demand for rental properties to
I know you're familiar with the
Albuquerque Valencia County
marketing and I understand
there's some are issues there I
mean there's a real low supply
of houses so I understand your I
understand your your language
there and the.
Appreciate your answers thank
you madam speaker thank you
gentlemen.
Is there further debate on the
amendment.
Seeing the gentle lady from Dona
Ana.
Thank you madam speaker I move
to table.
We are on a motion to table
House learning that number one
to house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill one
eleven with an emergency clause
the vote is now open.
The clerk to call those without
a recorded vote.
Representative Eli
Representative Ely both yes
Representative Madrid.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Representative Thomson yes.
Representative Thomson both yes.
Representative Madrid road yes.
Representative Madrid both yes.
Forty one and a permanent and
twenty five in the negative
requirement has been stable we
are back on the main bill
gentleman he still have the
floor thank you madam speaker
and I do want to thank the body
and up the gentle lady's for for
allowing me to.
Just talking talking us a lot of
questions I really wanted
understands bill better I I do
appreciate the fact that it is
twenty five pages or whatever it
is now on the proposed to.
Thirty three or whatever it was
a week ago I do appreciate the
efforts of the that the
associations and the applicant's
management to do I'm not we're
not heartless with this people
in the in the management
business there are bad actors
none of that there are bad
actors in every in every field
and I personally look at this is
as just more regulations for our
industry massacres LAT and I
will continue to listen to the
rest of debate and I'm
interested to see what other
folks want to ask about to talk
about that a it will not likely
support this bill but I do
appreciate all all the
discussion thank you madam
speaker I yield.
Back to that gentlelady from
Santa Fe County.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen we appreciate your
interest in this industry and of
course this piece of legislation
and and of course as you stated
you know we're looking to help
improve and modernize the laws
that currently exist madam
speaker gentleman and again we
helps three thousand three
hundred and ninety two
households in December the state
of New Mexico did to serve in
exactly these areas to keep
families in their homes I don't
think folks quite understand the
scale of the issue that we're
trying to address here with
housing around the state madam
speaker a gentleman so thank you
for your comments and for your
input.
Madam speaker and gentleman our
madam speaker we do have an
amendment a friendly amendment
that we believe has been passed
out we're we're striking section
twelve from the bill madam
speaker.
Would you give us the two oh two
number Representative.
Generated the two oh two number.
You see when you're looking for
at the moment it is two four
four seven point one Adams.
Madam speaker I didn't catch the
number.
Madam speaker to repeat it is
two two zero four four seven
point one it simply strike
section twelve.
Generating we do explains
section twelve please thank you.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you for the opportunity so this
section that we're striking is
in agreement with our governor's
office and the many folks that
have been working on proposing
this state housing council
because of some of the delays
and and what we're anticipating
and getting everyone appointed
we have agreement from so many
different parties to an act this
council without having to go
through statute madam speaker so
we're hoping that this would
expedite the need to be able to
create a council but of course
it's not no longer needed to be
in statute madam speaker.
Is there debate on the
amendment.
Scene nine is there objection to
adopting the amendment.
Seeing none you have an amended
bill.
Thank you madam speaker.
And we're back on TV with the
gentle lady from the Lancia
Representative part of.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you for that time lady yields.
Thank you madam.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you kind lady first I want to
thank thank you for being an
additional forage you know what.
What's going on in our country
is something we've never gone
through before and I totally
understand appreciate what
you're doing
we have people who are out of
work we're we're one of the only
states that are pretty much shut
down we're one of the only
states have the highest
unemployment because of some of
the decisions that our governor
has made and that is why we're
in the crisis that we're in and
we're doing everything we can to
make sure people are homeless
and so for that reason I
understand exactly why you're
doing what you're doing
are.
Elected officials created a
problem.
And you're trying to solve it
the best way that you can but I
do have some questions about the
bill
so that I can understand that.
Madam
Madam speaker and kind lady if
you would take go to page five
for me.
In the new language.
Can you explain to me Sir.
Sir at least one additional
notice.
Madam speaker and gentle lady so
at getting served as any of us
understand through the courts
are being able to offer of
basically that information is
being served madam speaker
gentleman I mean gentle lady
excuse me.
So madam speaker kind lady I as
a property owner now have to
figure out how to serve
somebody.
If they don't give me the
correct address is that correct
madam speaker time maybe.
Madam speaker generally that
information.
I'm sorry I didn't get that.
Hi maybe we can't hear you I
think you are muted.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
Serving is simply providing the
information to the tenant.
Madam speaker kind lady.
We think that.
Then I think you're still on
your.
Madam speaker gentle lady so
serving paper work just requires
that they provide the paperwork
which is already current
practice to the tenant regarding
the information that we're
discussing in that part of the
statute so serving the
information just merely means
providing the information madam
speaker gentle lady.
Madam speaker kind lady I think
you're wrong the honest with you
I'm I'm not an attorney I know
you're going to law school.
But if I'm supposed to provide
the paperwork that should be
outlined.
And then all that paperwork it
should be explained by need to
electronically find that
paperwork that needs to be more
bill if I need to.
Access server that needs to be
renewable because service.
As a novice I have no idea what
that means.
As a spot pretty owner who
somebody who owns property.
How
one word is going to is going to
end up in in a lawsuit.
Because I'm going to mail it
because twenty year your
interpretation that's just
starting at and somebody else is
gonna say but at the processor.
Madam speaker gentle lady
if you read the entire section
of page five it describes all of
the different ways in which for
us the landlords provide that
information so as far as what
service means that we're adding
to Madam speaker gentle lady it
clarifies every portion of what
the landlord is responsible for
in that on that page.
So madam speaker time ladies so
so you have an email state
mailing statement.
If it comes back then I do have
to hire a process server is that
correct.
Peter committee.
Madam speaker gentle lady if you
read the entire sentence prior
to the owner is deemed to have
complied with the section by
mailing the statement and any
payment required to the last
known address of the resident
and then it continues talking
about the service that you're
discussing the statement any
payment or mailed or returned as
undeliverable with last known
address is vacated the owners
will serve at least one
additional notice so again we
talk about mailing the statement
so in the same vein Madam
speaker gentle lady that's just
talking about mailing an
additional statement.
Madam speaker but that's not
what your bill says and so I
hope that when this bill was for
the fix that language
because it's a sister
that could be texting I mean I
don't know what that means so
I'm going to tell you your
that's that's Labor Day right
hope that you fixed moving
forward
madam speaker kind meeting.
Few more questions.
Twenty two.
And this is a new language and
this is the section reviews
ensuring you a rental agreement
yes we are in good faith six to
take possession of the property
for personal use and occupancy
as a primary residence.
A personal use and occupancy as
a primary residence and a member
of the owners immediate family
I'm madam madam speaker time
maybe you your seven year
earlier debate with our
Representative yes
Representative provides a County
this is the primary pulse rate
your bill.
This is probably the worst part
of your bill.
Madam speaker kind lady.
Because you're not allowing me
as a property owner to dispose
of my property one of the things
that was said earlier is you
know what we're dealing with
people that are having financial
situations people who in prices
things like that but I think
he's a property that I need to
dispose that I need to sell
because I cannot make the
mortgage.
I need to get emergency cash for
something like that your the
language here will not allow me
to dispose of that property.
You madam chair pending.
Madam speaker gentle lady lists
that are question.
Yes can you explain to me why I
as a property owner cannot sell
my property.
Madam speaker gentle lady as we
discussed if there is a need for
the
Owner to take over the property
and and have it for whatever
reason whether it be to sell or
to use it for their own purposes
Madam speaker gentle lady
they're absolutely allowed to
take rightful ownership of their
own property madam speaker
gentle lady so the situation you
described speaker gentle lady
where they need to and have a in
order to just sell it or they
need to be able to keep it bake
it in order for other folks to
look at it that is in their
interest madam speaker gentle
lady this does not prohibit
that.
Can you show me where that is
using members of the house
there's been a request for
I ask unanimous consent that
house for the gentleman to
remove their jackets thank you.
Madam speaker gentle lady if we
go to the line fifteen of page
twenty two of it refusing to
renewal agreement if the owner
in good faith seeks to take
possession of the property for
personal use.
And occupancy as a primary
residence so as far as being
able to look at what they would
like to be able to do with that
from the personal use and
occupancy as a primary residence
of the member if that's their
primary residence and they seek
to to sell it Madam speaker
gentle lady as far as what I
read in this that it is in good
faith that they would be you
know needing to take it over for
their
up occupancy purposes.
Hi Mandy and like I said I'm not
an attorney but personal use
occupancy the word or is not in
there.
Speaker gentle lady is there an
additional question no agency
madam madam speaker time at
highlighted for you.
You're telling me one thing but
that's not what it sets.
And that's my frustration you're
trying to say that you can do
something.
But the letter of the law and
the statute doesn't say that.
So we're.
Something that you know are you
then and you can say everything
you want.
But that's not what's in that
language.
And so that's what I have a
problem it I know what you're
doing timely I understand what
what you're doing.
What you're doing what is the
property owner.
You can't.
Duration.
Dispose of my property.
You can't situation where after
my lease is up after my contract
is up I do with that property is
I see that.
Maybe it's not a family member I
want to move that maybe it's my
my best friend has I went to
school at since kindergarten
she's like a sister to me.
So you can't restraint on the
property.
That's my point time maybe.
This paragraph.
Is too restrictive.
I get what you're trying to do
with the rest of the bill I
understand that but you cannot
tell me what I can do with my
property once the contract is to
fill.
That's the issue I have
committee and I hope that this
bill gets over to the Senate the
language is fixed thank you.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you madam speaker Wilmer
gentlelady from Santa Fe down
you'll.
Thank you madam speaker I would
gladly yield.
madam speaker and gentle lady.
The grant that was just being
referred to I to share those
concerns and I was just thinking
of the property owners to.
I've already committed to lease
the premises to a nother party
commencing on a date certain
budget falls within this time
period they would not be able to
comply with that contract
because the tenant who's
currently there.
Refuses the late and this
provision prohibits the.
Infection with the rail of that
Senate so you can fill your
obligation to Representative
coming up and so that was the
one point that the but I had a
concern with a jail term of page
seven of the bill.
I'm looking at lines six through
just six and seven.
And we decided to strike the
words legislative.
And yet we're putting them what
what are called double damages
would put a man that the of.
Landlords going to be liable for
two times.
The improperly withheld amounts
and
Madam speaker gentle lady would
you consider that as a penalty
on the landlord.
Madam speaker gentlemen are if
you're referring to the top top
portion of that page in section
three you're you're referring to
a letter E. is that correct
madam speaker gentleman.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
yes lines three through seven.
Yes madam speaker gentleman this
is a penalty for a bad acting
landlords who withheld funds
from a tenant
in the in bad faith obviously
improperly withheld as judged by
the judge and of course being
able to ensure that the tenant
receives their payment back
madams Madam speaker gentleman.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
I'm glad you're used to work you
just said that after.
What were the exact words that
you just used.
Madam speaker it's it's as
stated by the bill Madam speaker
gentleman it's about the
improper withholding of funds by
landlord.
From a tenant that is been a
judge made in judgment by the
courts Madam speaker gentleman
if I may correct myself just so
that we're clear.
Madam lady the the word G. is
indicated somebody who
purposely.
Act that they knew that they
were wrongfully withholding
those monies that were a wise
do and I'm going to be the
tenant and so the words bad face
makes sense.
If you act in bad faith that I
can understand having a penalty
provision but your water bill
leading.
And yet you're still penalizing
the landlord now there may often
be an ability for the Senate to
get those monies back but not
the penalty unless they acted in
bad faith or or they are and
bridges in their actions and
this basically penalizes
landowner although the landlord
even if it's just a simple
negligence would you agree.
madam speaker and gentleman I I
wouldn't agree improper is
actually the language that was
proposed by the landlords that
we worked with on the in being
able to clarify this language
bad faith does give of you know
sort of as a standard way too
much of the vague vagaries that
we're trying to correct here
madam speaker
gentlemen so the violation in
particular is the language that
we're looking for knowing that
retention is meant to be in
violation is precisely what
we're meant to clarify here
madam speaker gentleman's.
So madam speaker and gentle lady
you believe that the work
knowing is capturing the.
The intent of the landlord and
imposing that the penalty
provision
that's that's a dangerous road
to go down I'm not sure it's one
of the we ought to be seen very
very much because
You're always going to be
looking at the signs of
hindsight and I would suggest
that.
Probably in many cases it's
going to be simple negligence is
going to be came to be known
because somebody made in the
state of.
Will move on page fourteen.
In on page fourteen beginning at
line eight.
These other provisions
Representative basically set up.
Retaliation.
Retaliation is is the landlord
refusing to to continue away Sir
or do whatever if any of the
following our current and one of
the things is complained to the
gas electric or water utility
company about the functioning or
safety of a mechanical device
number here whatever your.
How is the.
Landlord.
Supposed to know whether a
complaints been filed to these
third parties.
And yes that was a question.
Madam speaker speaker gentle and
forgive me I was just confirming
with my expert so the importance
of this piece of clarification
madam speaker gentleman is just
that in the case that for
instance of the tenant calls
saying the heater isn't
functioning properly they would
call the gas line the gas
company to say Hey can you come
out and check on this we think
the gas line might be
dysfunctional the debt gas
company comes out and red tags
the unit because it's the unit
not the the line in fact madam
speaker gentlemen so.
I.
Hello and just.
There's no recourse for action
for tenants to be able to
problem Mr chairman so this is
just reading that important line
of Natalie communication but
accountability for instances
like that where it is of no
fault of the the whether it be
the the gas company or utility
that we're just talking about
this in this hypothetical that
the that the landlord would be
have to come and fix the the
unit that would be
dysfunctional at that time and
speaker gentleman.
Madam
speaker and gentle lady you may
have started gone over this
earlier but to whom are you
speaking sure thanks for.
Madam speaker gentleman it's
Karen Myers with the City of
Albuquerque.
Thank you madam speaker dollars.
You would agree that simply
complaining to one of these
utility entities doesn't
necessarily result in a red tech
and certainly may not even
result in the landlord knowing
about that complaint would you.
Madam speaker gentleman's so the
point of being able to create
this protection is if they
retaliate against the tenant if
they find out.
No that's not quite right yes
the landlord tries to
tries to evict the tenant for
non payment of rent or whatever
this provision.
Is a defense that allows
attended the state you're
retaliating against me because
on X. Y. Z. good I called the
gas company and complained about
X. Y. Z..
There's nothing in the bill
there's nothing here that allows
the landlord.
To overcome this presumption.
That's the way this is written.
That in and of itself is
evidence of retaliation Act
according to its very
definition.
And it just seems to me that a
simple compliant.
That's filed by a tenant to a
gas company Electric Company a
water utility company.
That does not ever get noticed
to the landlord that still can
be used against landlord and is
evidence of retaliation.
Randall didn't know anything
about of the the bill would
presume that that landlord has
now retaliated against whatever
and therefore forestall any.
Conviction that I read the bill
correctly Madam speaker and
gentlemen if I may just clarify
on that point if you read down
to page fifteen
which clarifies exactly what
you're discussing in the case
that it in precisely the
hypothetical that you described
the landlord was not informed
that this call was made and in
fact that they can't go to the
tenant cannot prove that they
made that call that's
affirmative defense for the
landlord to ensure that in fact
they were not informed of that
red tagging it wasn't their
responsibility and so there is a
protection for the landlord to
be able to create that defense
if you look at page fifteen.
So I see that that the locals
what.
We want to make sure that
landlords have that scenario
that you described on speaker
John.
Well let's look at the language
and you pointed out so let's
pointed out to everyone.
The waterproof for any action or
affirmative defense under this
section shall be that the
resident shall be required to
prove that the resident has
engaged in the contact protected
in this act in this section.
So that would be the filing of
the complaint with the utility
company.
The owner name landlord shall
then be required to articulate a
reason for the action that is
not protected by this section
and the residential Graham be
required to prove that the
reason given by the owner is a
pretext for retaliation
prohibited in this section.
So the owner shall then be
required to articulate a reason
for the action that is not
perfect but the definitions
definitions of filing the
complaint by the terror is all
that's required.
There's no other action is a.
Madam speaker and gentle and.
You madam speaker and gentlemen
as we have wrestled over every
letter in every word of this
with the various landlord
advocates date not only read
this to be precisely the way
that I just described the of the
hypothetical that you described
in response that the action or
fermented Defense is clear that
this is precisely what they
would be able to use in this
situation where madam speaker
gentleman they needed to clarify
that they didn't receive a call.
That Things read that they there
may have been a red tagging with
that however this one this Madam
chairman from the different
groups that we worked with
landlords in in clarifying this
language read it in the way that
I've described in in not
affirmative defense.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
certainly hope that a court.
Testing this will will
Given the latitude your
suggestion but the words on the
paper do not and that is a
that's a concern to me I think
you're going to these are we
gonna dress but I think the
words on the paper.
Pose a tremendous problem for a
landlord let's move to page
seventeen.
And specifically
Working on of winds eleven and
twelve Representative general
whether twelve.
The the concern has been
expressed as a.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
Canaccord extend the trial on
possession for repossession of
the property to the landlord
indefinitely and allow the
tenants to remain in possession.
Madam speaker gentle and based
on the facts of the case they
would have to I have a finding
of good cause the understanding
that whatever the situation
would be they would make that
determination in the court at
that time so it is requiring
that
That that the facts confirm that
madam speaker gentleman's.
Or madam speaker gentle lady.
Your bill.
Takes out the requirement for
the court to promptly act on
this matter and basically allows
the board.
The bottom finding a good call
support may continue the dative
hearing on action for
possession.
And there's no time for its so
the concern of landlords is that
this could be continued for.
An indefinite time we're
certainly at a time to be on
that that the they would provide
reasonable.
I did skip over one thank you
madam speaker and gentle lady on
fourteen and that arose during
the discussion with the
gentleman from Valencia County.
That was the ADA requirements.
Alliance.
Twelve and thirteen.
No that's not right.
During.
John R. Madam speaker and gentle
lady when you have a discussion
regarding their
disability questions that the
gentleman from Valencia County.
Was annunciation we talked about
reasonable accommodation and he
said you know having to remove
or widen doors things of that
nature and I believe the
response was that it was federal
law.
And madam or Mr speaker gentle
lady the.
Of.
Welcome with disabilities act I
don't think requires.
Landlords to retrofit.
Their facilities.
automatically doesn't.
To my knowledge madam speaker Mr
speaker and gentleman know your
it does not.
Madam speaker gentle lady
generally when you remodel.
That's when you get into the ADA
requirements and bringing things
up to code and bringing that
ends up to the ADA standards
what happened.
But I believe in in the bill
in the example was that a tenant
makes a reasonable request.
And the gentleman from Valencia
was trying to get what is
reasonable at any mention left
hand bars by the toilet or in
the shower were reasonable but
replacing thirty doors and an
apartment may not be reasonable
and and yeah I think your
response was just leave it the
federal law on and I just wanted
to point out that I don't think.
The federal law really addresses
that and and we really are I
think his question was what do
do what is the intention of the
sponsors of this legislation
would grappling with the word
reasonable what are reasonable
request of the chairman that
would be covered by your bill
that would force the landlord to
make those accommodations.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you general at being able to
the described what's on the
federal uh website to be able to
talk to you about this so
they're essentially under the
fair housing act their design
and construction requirements
that for cover properties
irrespective of the requirement
to provide reasonable
modifications so the reasonable
modifications that we're
discussing is assigning and is
an accessible parking space
permitting intended to transfer
to a ground floor unit adjusting
a rent payment to schedule to
accommodate when an individual
receives income assistance
adding a grab bar to attendance
bathroom.
So that would be considered
reasonable madam speaker Mr
speaker gentleman in these
occasions that you're discussing
so as far as being able to
address those issues as it seems
that there are you know
reasonable accommodations
examples and of course just
information that is easily
accessible as to what that would
mean a understanding that we all
live under federal law Mr
speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker gallery
thank you I think that's what
the gentleman from Valencia was
grappling out as well what was
the intention of the sponsors
were reasonable I I guess I wish
the language was maybe a little
better but if you're satisfied
with the complications that goal
of and I Mr speaker and gentle
lady I do want to thank you for
the many of the changes to this
bill that you made I know I was
barely got taking their all on
some things but I do appreciate
the distance of this bills come
maybe as it gets over to the
center of your consider some of
these comments and maybe talk
about some of the language
address some of those concerns
Mister speaker July thank you
for right.
And there's further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Eli.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe County
time you'll.
I would gladly yields thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from Santa Fe.
I do agree that there's a lot of
the the
owner tenant relations act needs
to be updated in this does a
good job of accomplishing many
of those things.
One of my concerns that I I
don't know has been articulated
jobs
and also tried to articulate the
best I can is not a time that
that the changes to substantive
law is going to cost in order to
get in on being sent out of the
unit.
And so let me provide a little
background so that we understand
sort of the induction process
support not familiar with that
so typically.
If a tenant messes a monthly
payments the owner has an
obligation to serve a notice of
nonpayment opportunity.
And under existing law the
tenant has three days in which
to make that monthly payments
Mister speaker July from Santa
Fe as discussed discuss that
changes the the time bring to
cure the default from three days
to eleven days is that correct.
That's correct Mr speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe
so if that notice of nonpayment
served in the in the tenant
doesn't come up with the rental
payment.
Then the owner is then permitted
to go out of state match record
that they could also go to
support but it's also reason
not supported file an addiction
action.
and then the tenant has
typically fourteen days in which
to file an answer and then I am
hearing is scheduled from the
from the court.
And the court hears evidence
from the owner to call here's of
instrument Gen next session.
And here's the point that hasn't
been brought out today that I
think adds a lot of time.
to to get out of the unit that
is not paying rent.
Under existing law once once the
court enters the judgment
finding yes you tenet you
violated the terms of the lease
agreement and so are you either
need to pay what's due or you
need to vacate unit under
existing law you have three days
in order to come up with that
being here you work that Mr
speaker gentle lady from Santa
Fe.
West thank you Mr speaker
gentleman.
Mr delay and I I think three
days is is probably too short
it's a very quick time frame
but what this does extenze what
the current bill does extends
the time bring from three days
to twenty one days Mr speaker
general is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman and
extends it to eleven days Mr
speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker generally can we look
at page nine.
On line fourteen.
Mr speaker generated from Senate
budget but you know when you're
there.
Thank you Mr speaker generated
so the way I read this senses
that it says that.
It's twenty one days in my
missing something here.
Sorry one moment Mister speaker
while I confirm with my expert.
Mr speaker gentleman forgive me
thank you for that time so this
is in a very unique abatement
situation Mr speaker gentleman
so this isn't meant to be
discussing I think what you're
talking about with that
traditional eviction that you
brought up in in your sort of
scenario this is about abatement
so basically if you read through
it's it's it's ensuring that
Within that the judgment of the
the basement situation of the
resident has not satisfied that
judgment that's when this
basically would come into effect
Mr speaker John and so this is
only about they didn't need to
withhold
any situation any funding at
that or funding for their rent
at that time Mr speaker
gentleman this is specific to
an abatement situation.
Mr speaker generally can you
point me Madam two were in the
bill.
It's only eleven days for a
judgment for non payment of
rent.
Mr speaker gentleman that's
correct in the eviction
situation not an abatement
situation.
Mr speaker journalism Senator
would you just point when we're
in the bill it says that.
So this section you just
referred to Mr speaker gentleman
starting online seven page two
nine.
The president has of beaded rent
first you want to section forty
seven dash eight dash twenty
seventeen seventy so that's just
the the what we're reading the
need that on the twenty one days
Mr speaker gentleman is specific
to the abatement.
Mr speaker gentle and I'm not
asking where did or in the bill
does it change.
Let me preface to questions and
so we're talking about a
situation or right owner has
filed suit not supporter
restitution for for just non
payment of rent.
So we're in this bill does it
say that if a judgment is
entered against the tenants for
non payment.
The tenant has eleven games in
order to ensure that the fall.
Mr speaker gentleman forgive me
it's later in the bill page
eighteen
we had we're flipping through
many pages so forgive me Mr
speaker gentle so at that when
you get to page eighteen
if you look at the amount after
the judgment it's eighteen days
Mr speaker gentlemen
to be able to rectify that
situation after a judgment has
been decided so if you look at
it that that's where that's
where it feels what you're
asking Mr speaker John.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Fe would you mind point me
to the ones on page eighteen.
Mr speaker gentleman you have to
read from lines three through
thirteen
and then to subsection C. to
Look at how that process works
Mr speaker gentle.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
From Santa Fe so I see.
In line for it says provided
that the residents shall be
allowed not less than fifteen
days.
No more than twenty to vacate
the premises.
So is that where you're getting
the time program Mr speaker
gently consent.
That's correct Mr speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker generally so the
court could do them anymore just
say fifteen days so let's let's
say fifteen days.
And so I guess here's the reason
why I'm trying to send
delegations I just wanna make
sure that we as a body.
Understand what this is going to
do and again we're talking in a
non.
Public health emergency setting
just a normal owner Janet
contract.
The tenants bill to pay rent and
so in a typical what's sensible
we sprint is due on the first of
the month.
Many many leases and certainly
many that I've dropped
personally to use we have a five
day grace period meaning if rent
is due on the first you can
actually wait until the fifth to
pay and not have to pay any late
season and late fees are often
assessed after the fifth day.
What this law then does the rent
is due on the first.
And you have to do eleven days
for notice of nonpayment can you
give the five day grace period.
We're now at the sixteenth day
of the month.
Since Representative was due
before I can even file anything
that support.
And then the tenant has fourteen
days in which to file an answer
not support thirty if it's
district or.
And.
Usually you can get a did a
trial in mass or pretty quickly
let's say you go to trial as
quickly as we.
So now you're three weeks down
from the sixteenth day of the
month.
And then when you get a
judgments concerning the
landlord for bells the judgment
vendor that Senate then has
fifteen days and what's to come
up money.
And then also some of the money
within the fifteen day and then
Representative can be then be
executed Bond and that's going
to be removed from the premises
and so after you combine all of
that you know you're looking at
almost two months from the date
of non payment to the date you
can just get it sent out of the
premises.
That is job of time would be
required to clean and making the
remodeling or repairs.
And here's why all that matters
under current law.
You can follow the same process
in the tent would be out in
about thirty days and so this is
doubling the time frame.
And I do recognize there are a
lot of good enough and need
updates and this bill.
But the problem with extending
the time.
To remove the non payment
center.
From a unit is all you're doing
and I know we're trying to help.
Folks that are trying to really
all that we are doing.
Any standing specific with the
time frame is what we're
actually earning.
The tenants across New Mexico
that consistently make their
payments on time and the reason
why state that.
Is if it takes me twice as long
as a landlord as in order to get
a non paying tenants out of the
units.
Even now significantly increased
my wrist as an owner.
And it's going to do a couple
things it may if we as a state.
Garnish your reputation that is
very difficult to get a non
paying tenants out of units.
You're gonna find owners that
are gonna sell rental properties
are gonna be less inclined to go
into the rural market and so
you're gonna have lower supply
of rental units and that is
going to cause a hardship for
any tents.
That are seeking to rent because
now they're less units.
And of course basically going on
there's less units the cost of
rent is going to go up so I
understand what the rationale
areas but I I believe it's
actually going to have the
opposite effect.
Because we're making it much
more difficult to get a non and
Senate now in on COVID
situation.
And I I struggle with that's an
art because I think we should be
fostering a climate where we
encourage.
Owners to be good owners we hold
them accountable we don't we
certainly don't want owners who
don't take care of their
properties who mismanaged their
properties and abuse their
tenants.
But we also need to make sure
that that we were more good
owners with the ability to get
non paying tenants were
breaching the contract out other
units and efficient manner I'm
afraid this puts up a lot of
roadblocks in addition in the
sense of extra time so I'll
include my comments is that
thank you Mr speaker.
And ladies and gents chamber.
So seeing are for the debate
generated close.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
body of for the great debate
tonight and for this much needed
piece of legislation that
Representative Rubio and I have
been working on since March when
the pandemic hit we were so
terrified and worried that many
people across our state would be
unable to shelter in place this
modernizes our housing law and
again has universal support from
Indian Affairs CYFD the AG's
office New Mexico financial
authority you Mr Ross office of
the courts and of course our
landlord association with the
apartment association so we are
very grateful for everyone's
input and this again saves
thousands of New Mexico schools
from the ravages of this
pandemic and worry that they
can't make their rent payments
on time
thank you and I moved to pass.
Final passage of House Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill one eleven is amended with
an emergency clause the vote is
now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call the number
without a recorded vote
Representative Chandler.
Yes sorry about that.
Representative Chandler both
yes.
Is now closed by a vote of forty
two in the affirmative twenty
five negative house Judiciary
Committee substitute Russell one
revenue as amended has passed
the house without an emergency
clause.
Next we will go to item nineteen
generation I'm gonna
representative Cadena are you
ready on that I.
Yes Mr speaker we please get me
to that point the record reflect
all action necessary for placing
House Bill two oh one final
passage is been taken the
generated to explain.
Mr speaker house bill two oh one
is an agency bill and I'm proud
to be sponsoring this with the
New Mexico corrections
department this bill is about
improve public safety for all of
our New Mexico communities thank
you Mr speaker next question.
This debate generation
Bernalillo Santa and Santa Fe
Representative Lord.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
representative will you with a
gentle lady from going on and we
yield.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from all those
counties thank you so much
although I just my all the come
on the big screen.
Mr speaker.
So this cancer my committee not
to long ago so as I was looking
for this bill I see didn't see
any changes in that and when I
look at the first page
Number nineteen.
So when a person has been
convicted of a crime which is a
sense of Pressman authorized and
when they get into sunset and so
basically somebody is sentenced
for current thank you to divulge
sentenced and they get.
Probationary time with a
supervisor.
A little bit further on this.
Mr speaker more Representative.
So just assess the purpose of
operation is to rehabilitate
offenders and guide them back
into society with supervision
kind of goes along with what you
said they're.
Commission and parole program
associations as appropriations
is to assist in reducing the
incidence and impact of crime by
probationary in the community
would you agree that these are
good definitions of what
appropriations is.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm not
sure what you mean by good it's
a bit of a value judgment but
generally that's what
appropriations maybe.
Thank you thank you Mr chair
representative so an example of
this could be that someone steal
someone's property let's say and
they're convicted they're given
a certain amount of time that
time is deferred into probation
once they got four years of time
served but they got a year and
appropriations that would be an
example of what appropriations
is correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady you may
also be serving a term of
probation after you are
incarcerated for a period of
time so this can also be on the
tail end of someone's sentence.
Thank you Representative thank
you Mr speaker yes that is
correct you can also be at the
tail end of they've already sent
to seven's let's set it up for
years they did to get
appropriations to be for X.
amount of care does just trying
to get it so that we understand
exactly what appropriations is.
So if we go to.
Page two.
Line twenty two.
Descended shall automatically be
released from probation if the
defendant is classified as a
minimum on medium level risk.
By a validating scoring system
can you explain that ballot
dealing validating scoring
system to us.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes
I'm again I'm really proud to be
introducing this bill with the
New Mexico corrections
department and secretary of oil
is set up who's been with the
agency over her career and what
the secretary is clarified in
our committees is that currently
the department uses a tool
called compass and it's
validated so we've just tested
for New Mexico population and
they use that tool to assess the
the risk in need to be offender
within the system we haven't
means that school year because
the agency wants to make sure
they retain flexibility in the
case that they need to use
something else as practices
change as as there's something
that they feel will be more
effective in improving public
safety in New Mexico but that's
that's an instrument so you
might imagine like this survey
that that someone is assessment
and continues to be assessed
with throughout their time under
the supervision of the New
Mexico corrections department.
Thank you Representative Mr
chair is there a reason why you
weren't very specific and
detailed because I remember the
committee we had a very long
discussion about the metrics and
she was very specific your
expert witness can you remind me
what the expert witnesses name
once.
Madam Mr speaker and gentle lady
I'm proud today that my expert
witness is the secretary of the
New Mexico corrections
department and her name is
Alicia at the for yet we settle.
Thank you for that
Representative I'm Mr chair she
did a great job explaining but
it took some time it was quite
complicated and it was a little
bit more than what you were
explaining there's a very
disincentive.
metrics that they use for
defining what is going to be a
medium or a.
Minimum risk.
Give me some examples of what a
minimum or medium level this
person might be that would be
eligible for the spell.
Mr speaker and gentle lady like
most correction systems they
want to make sure they're doing
everything they can to both keep
staff and offenders safe within
situations of incarceration in
custody and supervision but also
every day carry that immense
responsibility of holding in
improving public safety so in
the way that it's right in here
NM the minimum or medium level
secure
Status determines how what kind
of risk that offender has well
the weather whether it's in in a
situation of incarceration or
under supervision in our
communities.
Thank you Representative thank
you Mr chair but could you give
me an example like would that be
someone did property crime.
I'm a lot Mr speaker and gentle
lady about the thousands of New
Mexicans that are struggling
with substance use disorders so
we've talked at length about
what simple possession in New
Mexico maybe so someone with a
felony conviction on simple
possession depending on the rest
of their history if they have
any history of violence in the
in prison or in a detention
facility or in other communities
and commitments potentially
without that history of violence
would be likely a minimum
security level.
Okay so step up Mr chair and
representative Mr chair so to
answer to asking that question
again so somebody who did
property crime and stole
something from somebody and then
and nonviolent way that would be
somebody that could be eligible
for this is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
potentially but I can't
speculate without knowing the
charges and convictions and what
exactly Nerio someone would be
facing when US sentenced to the
department of corrections.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker I
apologize I called you Mr
chairman again I do apologize
that so Mister speaker so what
what I'm trying to get at.
Is what is an example.
As somebody who would be
eligible for this using this
metric because it's concerning
to me I want to get some sort of
idea and I want to make sure
that the public understands what
kind of people that would be
eligible for this and you said
people that are not that have
not done a ballots what still
leaves a whole bunch of things
of the like.
That what we know for New Mexico
on fortune was of the highest
crime.
In the nation when it comes to
because of that so was somebody
who stole a car be eligible for
this bill for this halftime
appropriations based on stealing
a car Madam Mr speaker thank you
Mr speaker gentle lady the hours
certainly late so let me try to
figure out where you're getting
at to be very clear any felony
that is a violent felony a sex
crime or felony level do you I
offender would not be eligible
here because they would be under
a lax security level so we are
not including people with sex
crimes people with serious
violent offenses are people with
felony level do you eyes so if
you knock out the state
populations what remains is the
New Mexicans that would be
eligible under this legislation.
Thank you Mr speaker and
represented Mr speaker.
What I'm trying to get at by
asking you this question as a
ccording to the FBI.
Forty one thousand three hundred
fifty property crimes happened
in one year in New Mexico.
And statewide we have the
highest crime rates and some of
the nation's especially when it
comes to properties that so I'm
trying to figure out for the
people.
Is this a good idea is this a
safe side here is
appropriations.
Is to assist in the reduction
requirement to protect our
communities is it a good idea to
release people who are stealing
cars and doing climb back into
committee is that safer for our
citizens.
Mr speaker gentle lady this is
such an important question the
folks that run the New Mexico
corrections department have been
doing this for their entire
career these are blue lives New
Mexicans these are folks that
put on a uniform and a badge and
go into a terrifying situation
every day to try to do their
best to keep our community safe.
And what these incredible
leaders in this secretary and
her team understands.
Is that as we look across the
country states are moving and
bipartisan ways just like we
came out of House Judiciary with
bipartisan support towards a
smarter justice system so that
we can use our resources where
they're best needed so what the
corrections department is making
clear and what we're offering
with this bill is that when
someone has successfully
completed the first half of
their appropriations.
Actually two and a half years of
a five year appropriations tail
if they have somehow
successfully completed that
probation for two years thank
yes if they are minimum or
medium risk it's the assessment
of the corrections department
that their resources are better
use putting more detail and more
attention and more staff time
pointed at the offenders that
potentially are closer to
engaging in New criminal
activity or showing up in our
neighborhoods in a way that
would be harmful so there is
been moves towards this kind of
reform led by Republicans and
Democrats across the country and
I'm proud that our New Mexico
corrections department that
understands this issue
intimately and is committed
fully in absolutely to improve
public safety has said to us
this is the way we improve
safety in our communities across
the state we need to be smarter
about how we use our resources
we need to have the stretched
resources of the probation and
parole division pointed that the
offenders that need to be most
closely supervised.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative and Mr speaker I
so on page the last page on
section three and we also have
to complete their time so from
my understanding this correctly
somebody does half their time
there is a matrix that's years
that's kind of hard to
understand from that a decision
has been made that we shall.
Shall automatically be released
released from probation is that
correct is that what this bill
states.
Mr speaker gentlemen I'm not
sure about the matrix you're
referencing but yes the purpose
and simplicity of this bill is
pretty intentional someone will
be assessed an offender to use
the legal will be assessed by
the New Mexico corrections
department for their risk level
if they are a minimum or medium
risk offender and then
successfully complete half of
their probation term along with
meeting all the requirements of
that probation whether it be
fines and restitution then at
the end of that period they will
be released from probation I
would like the body to know Mr
speaker madam chair if they
engage in New criminal activity
if they show up in the system
again game's over they are back
they are in our courtrooms
they're facing new charges but
Mr speaker gentle lady otherwise
you're you're general summary of
the legislation is is mostly
there.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you Representative friends of
that and and Mr speaker.
So I guess what I worry about is
okay we have a system in place
that works the purpose of
probation is somebody gets.
Out of four years of time for
stealing a car doing property
that they do some time which is
a half of time have the time to
get up for good behavior and
then they get here.
The state appropriations.
And now six months are
automatically backed off and
looking at all this time they
should return to done to be
punished for the crime instead
they're being released.
Let's say six months in a state
that has some of the highest
crime in the nation it's the
best and I love the state but
I'm embarrassed by a crime right
I don't see this is helping with
our anything with the reduction
in the crime I feel like we're
going in the opposite direction
because when somebody's on
probation Mr speaker
Representative when I know that
if they mess up their boom right
back in the system and it's a
did want from them.
I'm in the future and that's
what I'm concerned about what
I'm looking at as we have this
probation that is set up to try
to keep them in line.
The American probation society
says that it's to assist in
reducing the incidence and
impact of crime by probationers
on the community I thank you for
getting the community part of
this because our society has a
right to be protected from
persons who because its members
harm.
I get it that you want to
release these people and give
them.
A special and once they get out
of jail card but that's what it
almost seems like they get a
pass they have done a crime.
They knew it was a crime they
were convicted they still what
car they got some time they get
out and then they're supposed to
still on probation for X. amount
of time based on the crime so
now we're telling and I have to
go back until my constituents I
just a guess what guess what we
passed at the roundhouse we
passed a bill that you know that
guy that's always committed to
crimes in this community
welcomes gets tapped on this
appropriations.
I don't think that's fair
because what I'm concerned the
most about.
Is the people in our society I'm
concerned about the fact that
they're going to know now.
That.
I just got to be safe for six
months.
And I'm done I don't think that
is fair at all I think if you do
work fine.
To do the time so that you don't
do it again that's the purpose
of probation according to the
probation and parole association
that's our own definition so I
don't think it's fair that we
have somebody that goes out
steals cars.
And we have the highest rate of
color sect in the nation.
We have four thousand one
hundred and forty one thousand
three hundred fifty property
crimes one year here.
Medicine high numbers and I
don't think that saying okay
you're supposed to do two years
time to for six months probation
is enough of a punishment so I
can support this when I was in
the committee I cannot go back
to my constituents and say to
them that I agree to a bill to
make it easier for criminals to
we have fans I'm also aware of
how high the risk sentiment
recidivism rate is for criminals
and I don't think this is a
right to have so Mr speaker and
representative I yield my time
and thank you for answering
questions.
There's further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative wanting.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Dona Ana County
send you.
Yes they are to the gentleman
from San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so I just want to
say sort of to get go I have a
little different perspective so
I actually appreciate a lot of
what this bills what I think the
intention is.
I do have concerns what was a
couple of specific words and and
Mr speaker going to Dona Ana.
As I understand this bill I
think what it seeks to do is and
and please correct me if I'm
wrong but what I see sort of the
over arching goal here.
Is to essentially what let's
criticism we were born a
defendant who is doing well on
probation and has trucking along
appropriately.
According to the terms that the
court is set to and I think that
that makes sense to me so you
you create a system where are
your clothes defendants to take
their appropriations certainly
because if they do so there's
there's a chance they could get
off of that appropriations in a
much shorter time for me is that
a fair understanding of the
store what this bill is trying
to accomplish Mr speaker Mr
speaker gentlemen yes.
Mr speaker gentle and some don't
and thank you and and I liked
that premises.
I think our state needs to move
forward in terms of drawing
justice reforms and again we're
we're talking about it but it's
Senator who is
who is tracking along with what
the judges as ordered needs to
happen in appropriations
and and I said if you want to I
think most people would say that
appropriations is different and
saying course racing or fines
and fees because provisions more
restorative in nature so for
example often times economic
appropriations one of the
requirements might be sick
counseling or some type of of
treatment.
as opposed to just putting
someone behind bars so there's a
there's a difference of practice
in appropriations rather than
saying current president or even
a finder's fee.
But but here's sort of my
concern with the specific
language of the bill.
And it centers around the idea
of.
That the defendants are
automatically
As I understand that that stray
shower are medically Mr speaker
gentle lady that that takes all
the discretion away from the
trial judge is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
sentencing judge will still have
their discretion at sentencing
but yes once the person or the
offender is in this period of
probation if they have otherwise
completed the obligations of
that probation and finished half
the time on that probation they
would be released.
Mr speaker gentle at think
that's really the the source of
my heartburn if you will is
taking that discussion out of
the the the sentencing judges
fans
and honestly I'm not sure that
you when you're on probation you
still have fifty percent left.
I'm not sure that we can say
that you actually have medaled
obligation because a lot of
probationary terms for example
they have terms like.
No negative contact law
enforcement on the bars local
all often times include a
requirement of randomly
urinalysis anyways.
But beyond that I I actually
being there there might be some
scenarios where.
Keeping a defendant on the full
term of probation might actually
be the best thing for that and.
And and here's why I would say
that I don't I certainly don't
think that applies across the
board there certainly.
Many cases were ending their
probation early make sense to
me.
But I think there are real cases
where a defendant could really
use some accountability so often
times with appropriations you
have to check in with your
probation officer and lower
courts that don't have probation
officers the defense actually
has to come in and.
And our check in with the court
and and there's a lot of
accountability as a result of
that and I think that might.
Benefit certain defendants now
granted that might be a smaller
portion of the populace is
smaller.
Percentage of descendants.
But when we say shall
automatically I I hear that what
we're doing is is we are taking
into consideration.
Those defendants to again need
that restorative.
Part of their sense to continue
and so
I do have concerns about the the
automatic language because I do
wonder.
Are there scenarios where it
isn't FINS best interests to
continue with that
accountability under the terms
of the probation and so with
that I I do have a dental
equipment offer.
That makes.
Just a chance to exactly what
when I spoke of Mister speaker
when you're ready and you have
agreed to a two number
explained.
Gentleman during the two or two
number your generous point two
two zero four six five point one
and so I do move house floor
amendment number one to house
bill two will work John before
you explain it let's make sure
have staff.
Yes Sir gentleman and have been
passed out on the web page when
the member thank you Mr speaker
so literally all this does is it
says a defendant may be released
in Senate shall automatically.
And again I I really do
appreciate the goal of this bill
I think it does good work in you
know bringing our our general
justice reforms of the twenty
first century but like I
mentioned I I I really do think
there are some situations where
a defendant would actually
benefit from.
Remaining in the probation and
having that checked in not
accountability what the
probation officer or the board
selves and when we say shall
automatically I steer that we're
gonna work those defendants and
so this this doesn't preclude.
I descended from
having their prevention and
early if they they're trucking
along properly all this does is
says look trial judges medicine
for judges you have the
discretion to make that decision
you're the one that could
determine whether yeah this
isn't a difference best interest
or it's not.
I don't know let's see here of
of the sponsor
Sanchez essay friendly amendment
Representative down Mr speaker
and gentleman it is not a
friendly amendment.
It is not a permanent Is there
debate.
Mr speaker it looks like a
Representative Chasey is raising
her hands on the amendment.
thanks gentle lady I'm going to
get to her looking at the gentle
lady from Bernalillo Santa and
Santa Fe Representative war
thank you Mr speaker I'll be
very brief I just wanted to make
some clarification because that
was I'm sorry excuse me will the
gentleman from San Juan please
yield Mister speaker I want to
yield to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Sandoval and Senate
becomes thank you thank you Mr
speaker thank you Representative
so that was kind of one of the
things that stuck out more too
when I was reading through this
I also have Harper about the
word shall also want to make
sure so shall means that's a
command right that's automatics
is that correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady so in the
Los Alamos aborted Tory Mayes
discretionary.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative so Mr speaker so
may is discretionary is that
correct.
Mr speaker generally yes that is
correct.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative there is I bring
that up this because the gentle
lady from Johnny on the
presented this bill have brought
up an important point she had
brought up how we have some
amazing probationary officers
and judges who can use their
discretion and how to use your
discretion in the past and I
think this is an important
amendments because this now
allows industry instead of
making an automatic thing it
screws up the courts the judges
probation officers to say you
know what this is a question we
should be looking at and that
they can use their discretion
would that be correct of this
amendment went through that it
would be more that they could
use their discretion and user
experience make the decisions Mr
speaker Representative.
Mr speaker generating so this is
a lot of the the sentencing
judge need to whether the
District Court are much more to
make that decision and often
times when you're talking about
appropriations they also hear
from the probation officer if if
that court has a probation
officer.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative I I do appreciate
you bringing this bill for
because I think it's the should
be something that should be
discretionary instead of a
command and thank you for being
part I support amendment I yield
my time Mr speaker art there is
further debate on the amendment
Representative gentlelady from
Bernalillo Representative chase.
Thank you Mr speaker is it the
industry speaker.
Will the gentleman yield.
Mr speaker I well we'll to the
generated from Bernalillo.
So Mister speaker gentle in your
amending on page two line twenty
two.
You you want to just change.
Shall to may.
Mr speaker gentle lady so it
would strike out shall
automatically in in place what's
the word may.
Mr speaker gentle when you
talked about the sentencing
judge in the sub.
To.
It says the parole board chair
because the defendant to be
brought before it pursuant to
the provisions this is for
somebody who's been
with parole all.
Mr speaker generally can did you
I'm sorry to say that some of
that's been violent that was
four years no compliant.
The individual is compliant with
parole.
Mr speaker gentle lady also I I
as I understand there could be
appropriations on top of the
parole.
But we're talking about the
fact.
What what we're doing here it
okay we're we're looking at if
it is required to serve prepare
to appropriations subject
subsequent to appear
incarceration.
We're we're saying what happens
there and then it says in
subsection state.
The defendant should be
automatically released yeah
the defendant is classified as
and then one medium level all
the obligations of probation and
has completed one half or more
of his period or her period of
probation so we're talking
about.
Not the sentencing judge being
involved at this point right.
Mr speaker gentle lady that that
is one scenario I would turn
the.
The gentle lady's from
Bernalillo is attention
subparagraph today at the top it
is a different sections well and
so it could be parole but it
also could be a sense and
George.
Well the sentencing judge places
it on probation or parole.
This is.
Her role are appropriations that
has this responsibility here
automatically releasing.
Right Mr speaker gentle and so
it if you are state.
Convicted in District Court and
you're just sense of the county
jail and I don't think the
proboards going to get involved
in not.
This subsection C. is about
somebody who is on probation.
That was done by the District
Court now we are talking about
someone who's on probation.
This is from the corrections
department page at investors
probation and parole.
So there.
The corrections department is
saying look this this gentleman
or this woman has match.
All the obligations of his or
her appropriations.
This man or woman is classified
as a minimum or medium level
wrist what we're going to really
stop person from further
obligation.
It is not about the sentencing
judge having discretion I
believe in discretion I
sentencing judges.
But that's not what you're
talking about something doesn't
actually apply to the purpose of
the bill.
So I guess it's an argument it's
not a question but what.
What you need to realize here as
we we heard a little
We heard some sentiment
expressed that you do the crime
you.
We do the time.
Almost ninety five percent of
people probably more greater
than ninety five percent of
people who are incarcerated are
going to get out at some time.
So the question is do you want
someone in the grocery line next
year.
Who is less likely to recidivism
eight.
Or somebody who's desperate and
was incarcerated longer than any
here she needed to be and is
therefore not as.
As engaged with the community
and not as rehabilitating.
The purpose of this corrections
brought this bill to us because
they realize that they are
spending a lot of money.
Keeping people on probation or
parole who don't need to be on
it any longer and the
legislative finance committee
could back this up.
That you we are spending money
on people being on probation
parole is the longer there on
that the more likely they are to
get in trouble because there are
so many requirements of people
on probation and parole.
I had a client who called my
poster child for appropriations
reform.
He was not.
Violating his probation in the
real sense of the law.
He had car trouble he had a job
that was.
A cash payment working for
landscape company but it was
also being reunited with his
children who have been statewide
to custody you can make your
children to the probation
officer to meet with your excuse
me to the appropriations all up
at.
To meet with your probation
officer because children are
allowed there so if you don't
have a baby sitter if this car
was working he might miss is
appointments once in a while
that's a violation.
He wasn't dealing drugs.
He wasn't committing new crimes
but he was being violated for
his appropriations so that's
what the corrections department
is realizing here is.
That there are a lot of demands
that probation and parole put
upon an individual if you've got
somebody who's really compliant.
They want to let them off early
because it reduces their cost
thank you lower the case load
for their probation officers.
Actually.
Help people re integrate to the
community I'm not putting all of
these requirements on it that's
what the.
Corrections department came to
Representative had once worked
in state prisons and said would
you care this bill for us.
I think you're missing the point
when you think somehow we're not
properly punishing people for
that somehow we don't care
about property crime.
Is not it at all.
I think you're this placing this
ammendment.
The section where you think the
sentencing judge has a role and
that's not the case so I stand
in opposition to your amendment.
Mr speaker gentle I think
there's some confusion I I never
said the that wasn't a question
Madam speaker Mr speaker.
Is is there for the debate on
the in the.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative monthly.
Thank you miss just gentleman
yield Mister speaker I'd what we
owe to the general San Juan
thank you miss before I and
gentleman before asking my
question I believe that
something you were gonna say if
you could answer that question
for me.
Mr speaker and gentleman so I
think there's some confusion
maybe.
With the comments made by the
prior number right in stating
about if you do the crime need a
bit of time in setting up
property damage anything like
that so I I'm not sure what what
that's in reference to I stated
very clearly that I think this
is a good policy I think it's
updating our our criminal
justice reform and even if it's
true that it's not the
district judge or the medicine
or medicine court judge it's it
is the parole board we're still
talking about the concept of
discretion either way so it to
me this is about discretion.
Regardless wanted time of World
War not.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman it's it's a.
But
a little confusing
we just passed out of here a
house bill one fourteen just a
couple days ago.
And the.
The entire.
Discussion there is providing
judicial discretion in that
particular bill and we heard
over and over and over how
discretion was a good thing we
don't wanna put mandates.
In this instance we're flipping
that argument on its head Mr
speaker and gentleman and we're
saying that discretion is
somehow a bad thing but in this
instance Mr speaker and
gentleman
Probation and parole.
are being described as further
punishment.
And Mr speaker and gentleman
it is my experience.
Is that what you're doing.
In both the case of probation
and parole.
I believe that for the purpose
of rehabilitation.
It is checking in in many
instances depending on what the
crime is they there may be a
drug test involved or or other
things so Mr speaker and
gentleman I I think it's
somewhat being this
characterized and
in particular a lot of the the
same folks who are arguing.
For this case.
Are the same ones who talk about
how we need to have more efforts
towards rehabilitation so Mister
speaker and gentleman could you
talk to me just a little bit
about
The purpose of.
Appropriations is the purpose of
probation punishments or have.
The folks who have been
convicted and and have been
released.
Is it is that is the purpose of
probation further punishment Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle from someone
my opinion no
a sense of saying president
refined both those are true to
the nature of appropriations is
designed that's the reason why
for example you have regular
check ins with your permission
our officers.
you have counselling oftentimes
is required of prevention there
there those kind of efforts to
try to I can keep the defendant
from recommitting crimes
recidivism and the the design is
to be restored in nature it's
not to be treated so and again
and again this amendment it
doesn't preclude.
The the what do you want to sit
upon more somebody else does not
preclude them from reducing.
The provision by half they still
have a hundred percent ability
to do that and in fact if what
is been said is true that that
these provisions are extending
well beyond what they need to
run the department of
corrections thinks that an
effective satisfied categories
one two and three under this
bill there's no reason why that
wouldn't but when you say shall.
Instead of maybe what you're
doing is you're proposing
situation where maybe just maybe
it's the best case scenario for
that descended to remain on
probation and your closing that
is a possibility.
Thank you miss right gentleman I
have a personal
story.
To talk about here and there
it's a a a close family member
of mine who
Ended up
spending some jail time and then
appropriations afterwards was
quite frankly as difficult as
it's been described.
The idea that someone.
Trying to keep a job and then
having to find a way maybe not
even having a vehicle or
having are an easy way to to
comply with the terms of
probation.
however Mr speaker and and and
gentleman
what I saw during that time was
it was hard.
It was hard.
But.
In an effort to.
That they were deserving of a
second chance
Doing whatever you can to to
keep the
keep your appointments with
probation actually help with
what was not only
desire to not have to go through
this again so really helped.
With the
at keeping their from being a
real sense but Mr speaker and
gentleman particular case help
with recovery for this
individual and so
this being described today.
As punishment I think really is
missing the point.
are there some folks who
should be able to be released
early yeah I think that is
definitely the case and I think
that
that that should be.
discretionary.
World War
in in the case in the.
In our area there's a a
gentleman who was hired by the
county by the city to to valuate
the risk.
And whether or not there is a
likelihood of the person's
reaction.
so I I can definitely see were
this overall is a good policy
but to say shall I think
takes.
Takes a good idea and and and
and and makes it
Maybe not as good ideas is as
what would be if there was some
discretion ball so it's just
interesting to me once again
That house bill one fourteen.
All we talked about was
discretion and how good of an
idea discretion was all of a
sudden today as we're debating
this bill discretion is not a
good thing and it's just a.
Confusing and I think it's a.
unnecessary to to have to go
down that road so Mr speaker and
gentleman I look forward to
supporting your amendment.
areas further debate I I'm
committed speaker malpractice I
should have gone back to the
sponsor to explain her
reasoning for our.
Saying that this was not a
friendly amendment I'd like to
go back to the gentle lady
Representative Cadena.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman very simply if we
change the NMAA in this bill
says shall we've defeated the
essence of this bill to date it
is possible that an offender
with the support of the
probation and parole division
attempts to go back to the
courts and get an early release
from their appropriations
unfortunately as has been named
that happens in incredibly
disparate way so it depends what
where where years what County
were sentenced and it depends
who you're showing up in front
of and as others have argued and
debated including on the
previous legislation mentioned
there's not a lot of consistency
for the folks doing their best
to move through successfully in
our criminal justice system so
wow that's possible now if we
change that to shall we would
truly be moving forward as we
exist today Mr speaker gentlemen
it's been stated by some that
our criminal justice system
isn't working or or or that it's
working exactly as it should be
I would argue that the crime
data New Mexico tells us it's
time to do something different
and it's time to take a smarter
approach to our justice system
and that's what this is but
certainly if we were to go
forward with this amendment we
with you today with the status
quo and the NMAA in here there
is actually just like a folks
have brought up from my previous
debates it's real that when
we're talking about increasing
sentences I don't want to see
discretion we're talking about a
reduction in the penalties
imposed by a criminal justice
system I certainly want to see
that impose fairly and equitably
and that's what the may in this
legislation shell shell this the
main this legislation
accomplishes.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman aren't is there for
the debate on the amendment.
All right seeing on the gentle
lady from McKinley and San Juan
Representative jobs.
Mr speaker I move to table.
All right the motion to table a
Welsh of the in the affirmative.
Our.
Vote in the affirmative and the
number will be tabled back on
the bill
a
I wrote in the negative and we
will be back on the map.
What long call is now open.
Someone is not new we can hear
you on the floor.
Thirty seconds to the close of
the electronic voting.
But the remaining members.
Representative Chandler yes
Representative Chandler votes
yes.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative get.
Representative Lundstrom.
Vote of forty in the affirmative
twenty for the negative the
amendment has been tabled.
Come Jan one resolved for thank
you Mr speaker and you know I I.
I do want to just inside the
reason for the maintenance
because I I really do think
there is a possibility of of
there being some diplomats out
there who would benefit from.
For continuing appropriations
this is for close now regardless
whether we're talking about the
pro war or someone else in in
and if it's true that it's very
difficult to go back to District
Court in nature.
Our appropriations
shortened.
Then it seems all morning have
you know that the the parole
board the one that has
discretion so with that in your
back thank you Mr speaker.
is further debate the gentleman
from Lee Representative staff.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
determine where the phone dollar
and years you.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from the.
Could you describe a.
The process for which.
Original time your use.
For.
Probationers sentence for
developed.
The regional time.
Mr speaker and gentleman I if I
understand your question
correctly that we would be
coming from the sentencing
judge.
Gentlelady that charge what
prevents.
Determination.
And decided some preventive
Tarin.
Was appropriate for the
probation sentence is that
accurate.
Mr speaker gentlemen in a simple
sense yes.
Generally the point multiplier
stands.
Someone.
And for which were.
All rights at that one past
number.
In all circumstances.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
trusted the expertise of our
public safety officers are
corrections department who have
done this for their career and
their profession profession to
look across the country and
evidence based practices and
best models about how we
actually do something different
try to get it right improve
public safety in New Mexico so
in this I'm trusting our long
bus Forsman offices are
corrections department in making
sure we have the justice system
that is about improving public
safety for all of our
communities.
Gentlelady to general.
Describe for me.
Grant to jurors took
appropriation
Appropriations what happens in
that circumstance developers.
Mr speaker gentlemen I'm not
quite sure I understand the
question.
In general I think what is the
question on probation no
obligated to do.
Once their probationary period
is expired.
Mr speaker gentlemen in order to
be eligible for this really
should this legislation passed
the person on probation would
have to admit all the conditions
and obligations of that
probation and then got into the
halfway mark that sentence so
again based on best practices
and statutory guidelines stated
they meet other obligations and
it would make it halfway through
that point if so far there
obligations were not met they
would remain on probation until
they met all those obligations
at the point after the halfway
mark.
We actually become eligible for
release from probation.
I just I question was for the
generations that are no longer.
Applications once.
Your probation period has been
sort of small what is the
probation we no longer obligated
to do.
Mr speaker gentleman that
depends on the obligations of
that particular enter but very
likely the one that would be
very consistent would be an
obligation to report regularly
to their probation officer.
Mr speaker gentle lady that's
more regular report
Representative staff for tribal.
I like the state of trouble Mr
speaker and gentleman that would
depend on the unique situation
charges convictions of the
person on probation.
Okay.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
That's why.
Minimal location treatment.
Is there does senator right a
whole lot involved for the
appropriations committee.
Except for a periodic reporting
on.
Actuals.
So I guess the question is why
is it so important.
To to have.
On also a lot of advantage to
let the person asked
appropriations one what I have
to do is report and stay out of
trouble.
What is the advantage.
To the collections department.
Yes the council all.
Mr speaker gentlemen thank you
for the incredible pointed an
excellent question the
corrections department is
invested in building a smarter
justice system so that when
there are offenders in the
custody of their department
whether they be folks on
probation or folks
in prison that they're doing
everything they can to reduce
recidivism and make sure that
they're playing their part in
improving public safety across
our communities if we can
effectively passed this
legislation their corrections
department and their probation
and parole team will have the
capacity to more strategically
point the resources of their
department and the division the
offenders that do need a higher
level of supervision of folks
that are slipping of folks that
potentially are on the edges of
criminal activity our
corrections department is saying
very clearly that they need the
right tools and resources to
support people on probation and
if someone successfully
completed that making sure that
they can release them in a
timely and effective enrollment
and use those resources to the
best impact for our public
safety what's really important
is that evidence does not
demonstrated demonstrate that
longer probation terms improve
public safety longer probation
terms with someone is doing well
successfully actually decreased
public safety is really
important Mr speaker gentleman
that we give folks that are
putting their best effort into
this probation term we give them
room and reason to keep showing
up to keep getting on that bus
and taking a kid to I see us so
they can show up at their
probation appointment likely
potentially do a drug test keep
showing up again and again week
after week while they're trying
to make their way back to work
while they're trying to find and
hold gainful employment to
provide for themselves we want
to make sure that if they're
doing all that right we are.
creating passed for them to go
into that next chapter of life
and better using and utilizing
state resources to keep an eye
on offenders that really need a
higher level of supervision.
Generated the vantage.
For the corrections department.
Would be a.
Well I would no longer be
responsible.
For the opportunities of that
dependent that would be one I
hour thank
you there would be some of the
question remains and balls are
not responsible for that person
your story in.
Dollars could be applied to more
pressing circumstances is that
correct.
Yes Mr speaker gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentleman I want to
make sure that we with the
support and leadership of our
appropriations chair and others
that state the budget still make
sure we Fund correction but I
would argue that if we can't
realize cost savings here and we
will that we can point those
same dollars into the really
important recidivism reduction
efforts of the New Mexico
corrections department those
efforts that can be used to
better fund programming and
resources for The New Mexicans
on probation and also provide
that same level of evidence
based programming for folks that
are locked up so certainly I
would state we will see a
reduction in cost but I would I
would but we can continue to use
that in other parts of the
system address the corrections
department to continue investing
back in the order it is a
reduction for a big impact.
Gentlelady Chester more
questions.
For partial comes probation.
And from another crime.
To start the process all over
again from scratch and then
would you describe your process
if a crime is committed while a
person is still on probation.
Mr speaker and gentleman without
knowing exactly yes I don't want
to speculate but generally yes
if someone is engaged in
criminal activity they will be
facing new charges that would be
the same whether they remain on
probation or are or have been
released from probation.
Mr speaker and gentle lady is
that process for identical
whether appropriations is in
effect or not.
Or is it easier to incarcerate a
defendant simply of.
Committed crimes while still on
probation.
Mr speaker gentlemen I would say
eight easier isn't quite the
word but there is a system of
violations that can be used to
pull people into incarceration
our our criminal legal system
certainly has other mechanisms
and tools to pull people into
incarceration if that's
appropriate when they've engaged
in New criminal activity and are
facing new charges and that
would be again whether they're
on probation or whether they've
been released from probation
what's really important and as
my expert has shared in
committees we want to create a
supportive and trusting
environment with our probation
officers that means our vendors
have rules to do what's right
bring their best and move into a
new chapter of their lives when
you have the threat of
violations hanging over you I'd
imagine that and and we hear and
have seen again and again that
that creates an incredible level
of stress and anxiety that often
isn't conducive to someone
that's working to recovery or
someone that's working through
unemployment here management or
someone that's programming and
working on reunification for
their kids so we want to create
an environment for the people
that are doing their best to get
it right to succeed we certainly
have a lot of mechanisms to
catch people that continue to
engage in criminal activity and
make sure that they face their
consequences as well.
The
gentle lady are.
Incisions Representative seeds
threat of a violation.
More provided incentives.
To start on the straight and
narrow.
Calls.
I'm rates.
We are experiencing in New
Mexico.
To to regenerist.
The.
Oversight division will.
People have been secretary
general grows.
And I look forward to the rest
of the divide thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
for your moral change.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative biases.
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
from done that I yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Bonelli up.
Thank you Mr speaker tonight
from going and I'll just want to
thank you for bringing this bill
forward and not and stand for.
and and just let me just get a
little nostalgic if I may but.
In two thousand fifteen Mr
speaker delay from going and
There was house bill three
hundred thirty two House Bill
three thirty two which tried to
solve this problem and we talk
about the problem then what
three thirty two data than what
we're trying to do today.
But a probation officer
shouldn't have a hundred twenty
case files.
Us did standards you know the
the standards in the industry
station of sixty five seventy at
the most I think they should
have forty or forty five.
If you have a hundred twenty
probationers you we have a
tendency of treating all hundred
twenty the same and you can't do
that that's not in the interest
of public safety you have to
focus scarce resources on those
forty or so or twenty or so that
have a higher probability of
recidivism E. this is about
public safety it's about public
safety but the we have no
mechanism in law.
To to focus our scarce resources
on those forty probationers
instead we supervised a hundred
twenty you got two choices you
either double the probation
department's budget I am more
probation officers and put more
people on probation which this
country's did in the nineties
and early two thousands for we
get smart on crime we got smart
on crime and we focus our energy
on those folks that need the
most attention because studies
of so Mister speaker John for
doing as you know if you can go
three years on probation without
any violations the statistical
probability of you violating in
those last two years is almost
zero.
But yet we supervise those folks
in here for a year I wasting our
time and taking on I off the
ball which is folks who who the
gentleman from from Lee was was
mentioning so anyway house bill
three thirty two.
What was a legislative fix this
I believe is and as as executive
fix and much better our
legislative fix was if you want
a month with no violations you
got a month of good time sort of
speak off of year supervised
probation and after two and half
years you went on unsupervised
probation which there's not
really a place in New Mexico law
for unsupervised probation and
Bridget the gentle lady from.
The.
Appreciate the delay from up.
Bernalillo Santa Santa Fe who
had concerns in sepak there was
a hearing that I remember to
this day in our pack in two
thousand fifteen our product was
C. pack but I was a member of
the minority during that session
and and I remember the hearing
in which it passed seven zero
and the chair person of that
committee was was my former
colleague Yvette Herrell Yvette
Herrell of made some wonderful
pronouncements in that meeting
it got through are packed seven
nothing it passed the house
sixty three two zero.
Passed the Senate thirty nine
zero and was pocket vetoed by
the then all honorable governor
who.
Who is still stuck in the
nineties in terms of crime
policy
And and so here we go again in
two thousand nineteen we run a
more comprehensive bill the
three thirty two should have
been on the rocket docket but
instead we rolled into a more
comprehensive bill which had
overwhelming bipartisan support
House Bill five sixty four which
was pocket vetoed by the current
chief executive because the dust
and the AG's essentially.
You know.
Didn't include themselves at the
table and didn't really
participate in in that bills
fruition so I had to do in the
last year we did the bill that
was the way too many cooks in
the kitchen the dust in the
Agee's put in their input and on
this house floor it had
opposition but that opposition
was from my colleagues on my
side of the aisle that said the
bill didn't go far enough.
The bill didn't go far enough
but who did vote for that bill
which was.
Way more extensive this current
bill is all those folks in the
minority who voted yes back in
two thousand fifteen and I can
name all their names but we all
know who they are us and so
anyway here we are this year
this puts the power in the hands
of the probation officer it's
not a a a a thirty day thirty
day thing like we had in two
thousand fifteen but this is six
years in the making as long
overdue I want to thank the
secretary the for you so for her
leadership we have to weed out
all these people on probation
that no business being there of
already stunned their time so
that we can be smart on crime
and focused on public safety and
concentrate our efforts in our
supervision and our watch fly on
those folks with the higher
statistical probability of
receiving using all the tools we
have at our disposal including
the the the the algorithms that
the gently from done done yet I
mentioned so anyway I I want a
little too long as Mr speaker
jollity I hope that those folks
who supported this endeavor in
two thousand fifteen two
thousand nineteen to twenty I
continue to support this
endeavor because there's so many
new folks you know two thirds of
the folks in this chamber today
were not there in two thousand
fifteen when when sure one
chairwoman Herrell of myself and
others.
Yes almost the exact same bill
of sixty three to nothing so
with that Mr speaker I sent full
support long overdue
should have been signed by the
then governor back in two
thousand fifteen and our crime
we would I be lower as a result
thank you Mr speaker there's
further debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
Mr speaker for some reason.
I guess I didn't lower my hand I
was debating the amendment but I
stated my my point in support
this bill at that time all right
thank you generally there's
further debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative.
Their minds are that there is
further debate the gentle lady
from Santa Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Thanks with the gentle lady from
guardian are you.
Mr speaker gentle lady I
certainly able to make a friend.
And gentle lady.
Speaker gentle lady
I served on the parole board.
For a little more than than
seven years and I am I'm in
support of this piece of
legislation and for the body.
The whole process.
This one individual to even get
to be considered.
Four
these changes.
And it seems to me that a lot of
folks not clear on what that
process.
Is in the role that the justice
from sentencing statement
ladies and the process of
getting these individuals to
That level of role to where they
can be trusted.
And so a lot of what I was going
to say has been share but we
have to understand that some of
the.
These folks are in this category
of minimal.
Medium level of security
sometimes they're classified
when they go into prison
depended a lot of times on the
type of crime that they they are
being sent to prison for and so
it's.
Tribal while they're in prison
and just do their time.
And then when I go where Moses
justices sentencing statement
just certain things that they
have to do before they the
considered for these programs
and these particular
individuals.
What was classified as criminals
that are just really a pain in
the ****.
The justice system.
He's resolution that individual
that are just always on the
edge.
And so being able to put in a
program like this based on what
that meant justice and
sentencing statement.
Helps them continue to get the
program that they may in order
to be successful so I just want
to spend said thank god I have
to agree with the gentleman from
Bernalillo good I think this is
overdue and it will reduce
hopefully.
The money that we're having to
spend on our justice on our
correction.
System and hopefully with some
of the other legislation quote
unquote that we passed that
deals with incarceration is that
some of the apprenticeship
programs.
We can get some of those guys
because in some of the justices
sentencing statement it says you
must go in the counselor said
she must be employed.
The impossible sometimes with
respect does the whole job if
they have report.
To their probation officer.
At nine thirty in the morning.
Eight to five now they take
about two hours to go every
point of their probation officer
so I just want to say that
because I think.
That.
The system is is one third of
the folks for.
Should be locked up.
They locked up.
There's another.
There's just I got a call.
There is this group they're
paying them the back.
And sometimes being in prison.
You know let them know how hard
it can really be so those five
years.
Get that prison experience.
And sometimes that makes up
their mind that this is not the
role that I want to go down and
so lady from
And I don't know if you have a
comment or not but I think this
is a a good.
Legislation but those
individuals both male and female
and I've seen them all that the.
Those folks
back to everybody so the judge
will send them to prison.
So that they can get a taste.
I was thirty five year sentence
or twenty five years.
Can be like in a guesstimate
opportunity to make a decision
is this what you all if this is
what you don't want show thank
you Our Lady should bring this
piece of legislation and I do
stand and support.
Thank you Mr speaker the no
further debate the general fund.
Mr speaker embody a move that H.
B. two oh one do now pass we're
on final passage of house bill
two or one to propose is now
open.
I almost forgot to.
But the remaining members.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative had a group.
Representative Pettigrew votes
yes.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Madrid yes
Representative Madrid both yes.
Sixty board permitted and one in
the neck.
House Bill two oh one is do we
passes that.
Well we're gonna go to item
number seven
our house bill ninety six gentle
lady are you ready on that bill.
Thank you Mr speaker yes I am
ready thank you can you get me
to that point.
What the record reflect.
That all action necessary
replacing Bill ninety six is
amended on final passage taken
and it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
gentlelady to explain that.
Thank you Mr speaker this bill
helps us get to ensuring that
one in five folks who require a
licensure for a job here in New
Mexico has a pathway to use that
success through the regulation
licensing department this helps
formerly incarcerated folks
wanted three who have a criminal
record that are residing right
now in New Mexico and throughout
the United States finding that
pathway we've been working with
the real regulation and
licensing department to pull
this through and we hope that we
can get your support tonight
thank you Mr speaker.
There is debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
lane.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe New
York.
I will happily yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker will come
back on the hot seat generated
from Santa Fe I had the
privilege of speaking with the
gentle lady previous about this
bill and I want to say from the
outset that I I support this
bill I plan on voting in favor
of it and so my comments are are
strictly just to just address
just two sections that I that I
see that might have some room
for improvement
so if I could turn Mr speaker
the gentleman's attention to.
And I'm looking at the equipment
in context Mr speaker is that
what the general is looking up.
I will look at that as well
thank you gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker generally
so what the minutes in context
I'm looking on page three.
And there's a subparagraphs for.
Mr speaker gentle lady so.
How I understand this this
section what is what is
attempting to do.
Is
You have someone who's applying
for employment.
And we don't want certain types
of past convictions or even non
convictions.
Even be factored in
to the in the decision making
about employment and I think
that makes sense so what what's
currently already in law is
records of arrests not followed
by a valid conviction so.
If you haven't been conducted
and then there's no reason that
that should be included I think
that makes sense.
And then it adds another one
this is new law now so
subparagraph two productions
that have been still dismissed
expounder partner you think
those reasonable the next one is
June juvenile education so we're
not gonna all mistakes that we
made as as you yes anybody that
I can I think that's very
reasonable but then we get to
perform and I I like what this
is trying to achieve.
I just have a hard time
sort of wrapping my.
My arms around what it actually
means in practice and so what it
says is convictions for a crime.
That is not recent enough and
sufficiently job related to be
predictive of performance in the
position stop given the
position duties and
responsibilities.
so in my opinion I think there's
a lot of subjectivity in their
and and here's my concern with
not making the objective like
for example number two and
number three does a great job of
things either so much wind solar
hasn't if you have a need to
juvenile detention Rudolph
but when we say something like
not recent enough there there's
no definite time frame there.
And so I have concerns about
what does that mean it expected
subject to interpretation about
what this weather convictions
recent or non recent.
And then we also talk about this
concept to being sufficiently
job related to be part of
predictive of performance in the
position order.
And I feel like there's a lot of
subjectivity in there too.
Now I I think this subparagraph
four is good in the sense of
what I what I believe is trying
to accomplish is if you
committed a crime your
conviction it was it was a while
ago and it's completely
unrelated the job you're
applying for.
Then I I I agree there's no
reason to check considered us
for the job applicant is that a
fair assessment and some
programs for Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentleman I believe
that's correct.
And Mr speaker gently from Santa
Fe again I I I think that's a
good goal it makes sense to me.
And and let me kind of sure
maybe a little background about
why maybe I have some concern
with the specific language used
so I've done municipal attorney
work for number of years.
And a lot of times are are
municipal court we will get a
request for certain files to be
produced
And
even with the end of the season
resource department you know
they have an applicant and so
they'll they'll make a request
other state agencies or maybe
our police department is doing a
background check and so don't
make a request other state
agencies.
And and here's my my spear with
the language as drafting some of
her for.
Is the person that receives the
request.
To ask do you have any criminal
records of this person.
And my fear is if I over
disclose.
So if I disclose a criminal
record that is prohibited by
this section I think that state
agencies subject to liabilities
so if I over disclose and the
employee ends up not getting the
job done and my fear is that the
employee is going to file suit
against the agency that over
disclose saying look I've
committed a crime that was not
recent.
And it wasn't sufficiently job
related and and those are very
subjective terms.
And so that's my fear the the
the other thing that I have.
Is I don't I don't want to give
wiggle room to somebody to use a
pretext to deny someone for
employment and I fear that this
this language might be able to
do that.
so with those in mind I do have
a proposed.
Amendments.
And Mr speaker so I would move
house floor amendment number one
to house bill ninety six as
amended and when you're ready I
will just I will give the to to
number explained.
And gentleman.
I don't have in front of the sea
you're gonna be the one that has
to give us to to number.
Mr speaker I.
and I do believe it's it's been
processed also to do numbers two
two zero four seven eight point
one.
Okay general the amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker and so what
this does is it just replaces
the subparagraph for those
previously explaining.
And it attempts to sort of
redefine what subparagraph for
suggesting here complications so
what it says is.
Of these type of crimes will not
be disclosed so convictions for
crime.
That a court for more than five
years prior and underlying
convictions on related to the
qualifications for the job
position being sought so the
idea is to bring some some
objected to it and so I by title
four date of five years when you
talk about something not being
recent.
and then we want to make sure
that the underlying conviction
whatever that indigenous it's
unrelated to whatever the job
application qualifications are
so that's that's the main.
Okay and gentle lady is just a
friendly amendment.
Mr speaker this is an unfriendly
amendment
Utility and we need to.
And I think I need to explain
why.
Thank you Mr speaker so if we
look at what he's proposing
unfortunately what we're trying
to do with this bill Mr speaker
is make it so that there's a
pathway to success that's not
arbitrarily defined by the an
amount of time that would have
to pass before someone can
achieve employment situation so
we're giving discretion to the
different boards to be able to
make that decision based on
whomever it is that applies for
that license or for that
job opportunity that they're
looking for Mr speaker so really
this creates an sort of
arbitrary impediment to that
possible employment without
actually looking at the the
facts of what edit print in
killer
application again be seeking
jobs up asked to.
Okay Is there debate on the
amendment.
Gentleman from the.
Thank you Mr
speaker will jump from San Juan
yield Mister speaker can you
you'll John from early.
One of our.
This this legislation is order
all of which were.
On a couple of occasions.
Representative to term not
recent which.
Definition of the.
Your world.
Mr speaker Johnson Lee I don't
think there's a definition along
those lines and to be clear.
Of this subsection for it's not
talking about.
The bases that the licensing
boards can use to approve of
your license or not of your
license or person in filling a
job.
Of vacancy work only this this
subparagraph in this context is
only about.
Disclosing prior convictions to
someone that's requesting them.
And and that these prior
convictions are to be used in
making that that decision making
process.
and so that's that's the reason
I'm just trying to bring some
objectivity to I don't know what
recent us means I don't know
what sufficiently job related to
be predictive of performance
gains so just trying to to bring
some objectives terms.
Misprint tweet.
Gentleman from San Juan to make
clear.
Just across
the.
Last year which.
Question to this person
Representative replying for
lunch.
All the.
A tractor in their
considerations that correct.
Mr speaker Johnson the so it if
the crime was one of five years
ago and the underlying.
Prime but nothing it was not
related to the job being sought
after than than that.
Prior convictions cannot be
considered and if you're an
agency that is received a
request.
For any records of a criminal
conviction you also are are
precluded from disclosing those
records.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Just.
Five years Mr speaker and
gentleman from windows correct.
Could you describe how you
believe this language.
Related to job related to be
protective of performance could
you describe how you believe
your language Titans rob.
Over the language of the
original bill.
Mr speaker Johnson eight are.
I I have some concerns about
specially when you talk about
disclosing records to someone
else to another agency who
requested.
the stock records you're gonna
have to have somebody sitting
insurance going to have to make.
Discretionary decision on when
you saying okay this person
committed a certain crime isn't
sufficiently job related to be
predictive of performance in the
positions are I I don't really
know what that phrase means and
so we're trying to apply that in
the real world I think it could
present some real difficulties
for people especially talk about
over disclosure of our previous
criminal.
Convictions and so what I tried
to do was just tie it to what's
look at the underlying
conviction.
Is it is it at all related to
whatever the job qualifications
are the job posting.
Mr Chairman San Juan example of
this would be someone comes up
to the rules all financial
problems for example plans for a
CPA licenses are accurate Mr
speaker Jim lease I think that
would be an example of.
The underlying condition is
related to the job
qualifications.
Gentleman
Districts are.
Right level action supported
thank you Mr speaker thank you
Jim.
These are for the debate.
Johnson Chavis and Lincoln thank
you Mr speaker order John
problems San Juan County yield
Mister speaker I probably yield
to the gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln jobs Mr speaker and
gentleman I to rise because the
language in your amendment seems
to be.
Clear and the regional worried
about the ambiguities and and
concern for statutory
construction language as of
exist in the bill but does.
Pose many issues so I stand.
in support of of the the clear
language it's in your in your
memory thank you for bringing.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John.
The gentleman from Chavis Mr
speaker thank you very much for
the gentleman from San Juan
yield Mister speaker vital yield
to the gentle lady from
Chapman's.
Mr speaker gentleman I also
agree that is lead the.
In line twenty three twenty four
recent end up gives me great
concern.
Also on page four of the bill is
sense means a conviction for
crimes that is reason enough so
we've got it in here twice tell
me what the correlation between
those two lines.
On page three and then the.
Two lines on page four tell me
the correlation between the two
plans Mr speaker gentle lady
from Travis I think the.
The issue is is what you
highlight which is our you know
we talk about recent enough that
maybe one thing to you and maybe
another thing to me and when we
write law in my opinion as
lawmakers it's important that we
try to be as objective as and.
Particularly when you talk about
potential liability for stated
C. for for over disclosure so
that's that's the motives for
choosing an objective standard
of five years for example.
And Mr speaker gentleman not
fully agree with you because
sometimes.
One person's.
Interpretation of that is
totally different from somebody
else's Mr speaker I would still
a lot more comfortable gentleman
if that was.
Exactly what your amendment
sense and I I do plan to support
this because I do think that we
need to set the boundaries of
what we are actually trying to
do with this bill and this
language right here in my
opinion is very ambiguous thank
you very much.
Generation going on a.
Thank you Mr speaker I move to
table.
Your is motion is Taylor
remember yes the amendment will
be tabled right of no we
backdated the amendment the vote
is now open.
What is that's close.
But those that according.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes to table Representative
Harry Garcia both yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Those close to forty in the
affirmative twenty five negative
the members tabled.
Jonathan San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker.
And thank you for the dialogue
not gentle lady I I know well
again this is an important bill
and our I know that recent more
working on the Senate side but I
do have just one other section I
would like to look at and that
is on page four.
To the gentle lady is there Mr
speaker.
And they're Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr generated from
Santa Fe and so as I understand
this this subparagraph it was
certain offenses that a
licensing board for example can
can use as a basis then I
someone for receiving a license
is that correct.
That's correct Mr speaker.
Mr speaker Ginnelly so it was
certain senses on the side of
not being.
you know some pretty heinous
crimes criminal sexual
penetration when sexual offenses
and child abuse and so I had
just one other inclusion I think
is important and so Mr speaker I
move faster than ever to to
house bill ninety six as
amended.
Your team members can house
amendment number one gentleman
your prior and then it was table
the tier two number eight two
two zero four seven seven point
one is that correct thank you
speak about is correct knowledge
explaining that to thank you Mr
speaker and so really all this
does is it adds just another
offense and that is the the
instance of human trafficking.
This may seem like a very small
change but I think it's an
important dialogue for us to
have as a body that human
trafficking is a very real thing
unfortunately in our state it's
very service and so I think it's
important we speak when we think
about sort of this laundry list.
We often come up with with
what's heinous crimes that we
get in the practice of including
human trafficking and so that's
that's a rational person Mr
speaker.
We'll go to the generation Santa
Fe is just a friendly amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen I have spoken with the
gentleman about this ammendment
and while we agree with the
inclusion of this based on the
fact that it is current law it
doesn't expand any sort of
situation that is doesn't
already exist as far as the
vetting process for of being
able to
look at different at a previous
crimes and being able to assess
them we have agreed that this is
a friendly amendment Mr speaker.
Is there is a friendly
amendment.
Is there objection to it.
I see none house one moment
everyone yes ninety six
amendment as amended is adopted.
Decoration.
Mr speaker unfortunately it's
only well actually I've lost
jobs are I thought was three but
there might be one more there
but so.
I want to set the record
straight we're happy to take
your good amendments.
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Do you wish to debate the
amended bill.
Thank you Mr speaker over gentle
lady from Santa Fe County here
okay I happily yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
just a couple questions
I'm a little concerned about.
Completely erasing
of certain things that more
current and so my my question is
can there be a.
A juvenile.
Adjudication.
Of the nonsense that is fairly
high paying us.
That would get completely
Not considered.
If that person were to seek
employment and maybe a school or
someplace that you would not
want.
That type of person to appear
because I see in.
you know subparagraph three
juvenile adjudications are
completely blocked and etcetera
if I read it correctly and I'm
just wondering if there's any
your the general education
secretary for that really should
be considered.
Mr speaker John and thank you
for the question
I can't quite
Representative my hand around
hypothetical that may come up in
that situation again in the
you know sort of extensive last
on where we prohibit any sort of
conviction from building up and
applicable to being able to
access certain license Mr
speaker gentleman I guess you
know in this situation
again we want the system to be
improved and we hope that it
works through the bureaucratic
process and that we still
through this legislation
Given the discretion to the
regulation licensing department
to look at the background of any
individual whether they had a
sort of a criminal past or what
have you to decipher what the
best sort of applicant would be
so in the at sort of
hypothetical that you bring up
Mr speaker gentlemen I believe
that the bill itself creates not
only a pathway for those who may
have had a criminal past as a
juvenile but prohibits those who
should not be accessing any
licensure in our state and
certain employment in our state
from being able to a teen for
routine that Mr speaker.
Well Mister speaker jelly.
What is.
A young person was convicted of
aggravated rape they're sixteen
years old.
And that.
As a juvenile sentenced as a
juvenile and then go to college.
Basically
eight years after they conducted
that are or were convicted of
that.
Crime as a juvenile they're now
applying to their teachers
license to go into the teaching
profession would that
individual.
Be prohibited from sinking that
employment or under this bill
with that individual.
Not even have to have any
consideration very for their
past conduct because it was a
juvenile programs.
I hear you Mr speaker gentle and
so going back to the bill and to
the hypothetical that you
brought up in it looking at the
yeah the teaching certificate so
I first and foremost the first
impediment we're trying to
remove is the ability to even
apply for the job or for the
license rather Mr speaker gentle
and so yes indeed this this
allows for at least a pathway of
applying for that a possible
licensure the second bit that
you asked that you asked about
but I.
Mr speaker I believe she was cut
off in mid sentence.
It.
Sorry Mr speaker gentlemen can
you hear me we can now thank you
Mr speaker and gentleman.
If you clarify the latter part
of your question so I can follow
what it was that you were saying
regarding the.
The teaching certificate we do
expressly
Insure that you cannot access a
teaching certificate if you are
in the categories of of us.
Any of the convictions that we
will list whether B. two.
And no are otherwise
so with that Mr speaker
gentlemen
hopefully that answers your call
up.
Well
you Mr speaker and gentle lady I
just I see on page two paragraph
B. and this is the amendments
and complex origin.
It says the following criminal
records shall not be used
distributed or disseminated.
And then it was juvenile
offenses.
And so my my concern is that if.
The sixteen year old was
convicted of aggravated right.
Then at and convicted and
sentenced as a juvenile.
And then.
Six years later they attend
college graduate from college
and and are seeking are.
Teaching certificate and
license.
Would they be able to secure
employment or does this bill.
Is this bill.
All use the word race a race
that general direction so that
it doesn't have to be reported I
don't have to reflect that they
were convicted of it because
they were juvenile and there
then eligible you're going to a
school and teach.
Thank you
Mr speaker gentlemen so
hopefully I can answer your
question or expanding that
juvenile records are sealed so
as far as education goes based
on the hypothetical that you
provided Mr speaker gentleman
I'm trying to follow.
It if they should apply for a
job and they are looking for
that in any context not just
this.
Regarding regulation and
licensing department.
I feel like any any organization
any
situation whether the regulation
licensing or otherwise would be
in the same situation and and
seeking out this.
Well I guess I'm trying to
relate the program I just wanted
to with.
The paragraph on page four.
Representative to the we just
amended to add on another
offense.
And whether a juvenile is
protected.
From having that disclosed for
whether because.
I believe a criminal sexual
penetration is one of the
offenses related whether that
controls the the general park
that gets.
Not considered take precedent or
does the.
Crime for which they were
convicted as a juvenile and
sentence as a juvenile does that
still remain with that
individual and then route
to all page for controls and I
just.
Use the which one would take
precedent and whether that
individual would be able to.
applied for and seek licensure
and secure a job in our schools
what about the.
Having to.
Go through the full procedures
as an adult would because they
are juveniles and you pointed
out one other thing those things
are sealed so there's two
exceptions number paragraph on
page two or three.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen for the clarification
so as I understand the process
working if there is a juvenile
in case in the circumstance that
you discussed in hypothetical
that you posed
if a judge so sees that it's
important for the juvenile to be
tried as an adult for heinous
crimes such as you described Mr
speaker gentleman the the judge
has the discretion to try them
as an adult in that circumstance
and then there for the their
record would be absolutely
available in this circumstance
because they are juveniles and
they are under age for the
majority of what we're seeking
out and what does get sealed Mr
speaker gentleman if they are
tried is is under eighteen as
juveniles and yes that record is
sealed Mr speaker and gentleman
and they are not tried as adults
then of course that that would
not apply to this situation but
the list Mr speaker gentleman
that we are looking at on in
subsection two of AA Mr speaker
German I cannot think of the
single hypothetical where there
was a child situation that where
they weren't tried as an adult
for something as egregious as
what we've looked at per your
hypothetical in for this list Mr
speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think we could come up with
actual cases that reflect.
Juveniles who have been.
Convicted of and have been
sentenced as juveniles and not
as adults for.
Crimes such as bit by
hypothetical and I'm not a
criminal lawyer is as you well
know but but I I believe that if
I were to call my district
attorney right now too she would
probably have some specific
cases of money.
All juveniles who have been
convicted of juvenile.
This is that would otherwise
you know maybe the last on on
page four.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
was was my question those were
my concerns with respect to this
legislation because it doesn't
give any we want seem to be
pretty certain that those
categories were exempt from
the following that individual
am I can.
I can see some instances where
that would still raise some
levels because convention of
aggravated rape of sixteen
Seems to be something that six
years later version noted
teaching license and we've put
back in a school setting but
that appears to be the situation
in the bill so thank you Mr
speaker thank you John wide.
Senior for the gentle lady to
close thank you Mr speaker I now
move that house bill ninety six
is twice amended do now pass.
Well final passage of house bill
ninety six is intended to vote
is now open.
But those that according to.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
both yes.
What is not closed my lotus
fifty five minutes for me twelve
and negative house bill ninety
six as amended has duly passed
the house.
Mexico to the gentleman from
Dona Ana on item eighteen
Representative Madrid are you
ready our house bill one ninety
eight.
It was restricted.
My desk.
Okay Mister speaker.
Students like election necessary
for placing House Bill one
ninety eight as amended on final
passage has been taken gentleman
to explain it all.
Mr speaker.
We can't gentleman it might be
easier to hear you if you return
the volume down on the overhead
speaker in the room that
projects the sound from the for.
Very.
Okay give me just a pointless
for complete.
Representative election Mr
Westinghouse one ninety eight as
amended on final passage isn't
taken the gentleman to explain.
Thank you Mr speaker invite this
is a House Bill.
For the.
The transfer of the DPS
Authority to New Mexico dot.
The department of transportation
related to the trip tax act
weight distance tax act in the
motor transportation act
including administrative rule
make a rulemaking authority and
clarifies the safety enforcement
features taxation of
Representative revenue
department and retains an
administrative tax authorities
summation this is just a
transformations of DPS two DOT.
When I stand for questions Mr
speaker Mr gentlelady from
Chavis Representative result.
Mr speaker will the gentleman
from Dunn and the.
The
here you know please.
Yes I yield to the five years
and one.
You get the wrong.
Actively down the state sorry to
I yield to the I may be of
service.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you very much why were you
pushing to move this from the
department of public safety to
the New Mexico department of
transportation what was your
impetus behind this up Mr
speaker.
I maybe of troubles this was a a
simple department with the
ministry of change that has been
in existence right now for quite
a few years were dubious of the
point has been Adams did not
measures have those of the
authority of it but deep New
Mexico DOT has been the one
responsible for doing it all
these years and it just
basically wanted to.
To transition to the right
authorities and we have support
from the yes on this transition
of administration.
And Mr speaker gentleman I think
that for you maybe this is
exactly the right way to make it
of there has been problems of.
A lot of people I used to hello
also help drive to a big truck
and we would haul seated
terrorism or or copy editors
over CD to one and it seems like
there was always a problem there
Mr speaker gentleman from.
Done and then Tero
With this make the process in
these here for those particular
tracks that are trying to cross
in after they have already
submitted all their paperwork to
get the special permits they
need to come into the state.
Mr speaker I need a job as yes
is to make a lot more simpler
for everybody involved in this
is why it's a a complete support
of both departments coming
together and having a meeting of
minds.
Mr speaker and gentleman and one
instance I'm going to give there
is a
Seasonal.
Mr that comes into our area and
he operates in Kansas Nebraska
Texas Colorado Oklahoma New
Mexico and Arizona and he can
submit all his permits to get
all of those custom harvest
machinery into all of these
other states he can enter all
the information into their
websites and he can have all
those permits within thirty
minutes he called me so
frustrated one day he said I am
not going to come into New
Mexico anymore and I ask the
reason why he said he had
submitted all of his paperwork
six months prior here was two
weeks before he was supposed to
be back in my particular area to
start top and court and he had
not gotten the permits from the
state of New Mexico yet.
Whenever I went to inquire why
the permits were not
issued.
There was a certain promotion at
through working through the GPS
that said well we're
understaffed and I said six
months behind in getting permits
pulled for this particular
gentleman.
Mr speaker.
I was very adamant whenever I
said if you cost my farmers
their ability to be able to
harvest their crops and try to
make a living and pay back bank
loans I will go in there and I
will clean house personally Mr
speaker if you can.
In this particular area if we do
yes additional to ensure that
that will not happen again I
will back this one hundred
percent because I am fed up with
these truckers that are moving
things throughout our nation.
Because once.
I'm just appalled by what is
going on at our ports of entry
Mr speaker and gentleman and I
do intend to support this one
hundred percent thank you very
much.
Next to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Ferrary.
Mr speaker I lowered my hand but
I just want to make sure that
this was just transferring motor
trans to D. O. T..
We you yield.
Mr speaker gentlemen I'm done in
a way you yield.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
five million.
Yes this is this is gonna help
this whole process is we do pre
has automated the process is
designed to staff they will
expedite these processes
I hope I answered your question.
Annexing the gentleman curry
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker will
Johnson during editor please
you.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
fine gentleman.
Thank you John this is a good
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you for the debate
gentleman close.
Thank you Mr speaker all I
think.
Well we're.
And saying that house bill one
ninety eight twice amended.
You're but do pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill one ninety eight is amended
the vote is now open.
The clerk to call the number
without a recorded vote
Representative Fajardo.
Those closed by a vote of sixty
six in the affirmative zero
negative house bill one ninety
eight as amended has duly passed
the house.
Next we'll go to item twenty
five gentleman from Bernalillo
and Sandoval are you ready on
house bill two thirty yes Mr
Gramley give me that point but
the record reflect all action
necessary for leasing house bill
two thirty on final passage has
been taken the gentleman to
explain the bills Mr speaker
this bill updates the real
estate recovery fund to provide
for fifty thousand dollars in
the fund and to streamline the
process so that.
We can actually use it thank you
Mr speaker C. noted right John
to close Mr speaker I now move
that house bill two thirty do
now pass you're on final passage
of house bill two thirty the
vote is now open.
The clerk to call the members
that are recorded so.
Representative.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative and on this.
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya both
yes Representative closed by a
vote of sixty four in the
affirmative zero the negative
house bill two thirty has duly
passed house next that I'm
twenty six gentlelady from
Bernalillo are you ready on
house bill two sixty two yes yes
Mr speaker point let the record
reflect all action necessary for
placing House Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
substitute for House Bill to
sixty two on final passage has
been taken gentlelady to explain
the bill thank you Mr speaker
House bit House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
house bill sixty two aims to put
energy storage behind the meter
on the customer side by way of
energy storage system income tax
credit Mr speaker I stand for
questions.
The gentleman from the
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman ladies
yield.
Mr speaker kind gentleman yes I
yield.
Thanks.
Credit.
Total expenditure was as I
recall from our committee
discussions one million dollars
is that the correct number.
One million dollars each year so
two million total.
Over to.
Alright misspoke one million per
year this is actually the number
that are remembered and how much
would each of these
installations.
Eligible for Mr speaker kind
gentleman about
It's either forty percent of the
total cost to purchase and
install the energy storage
system with up to a maximum of
five thousand dollars.
Mr speaker and gentle lady can
you tell me about the
approximately what the installed
cost of the systems would run.
Mr speaker and gentleman
installed counting the the cost
and installation just insulation
Mr speaker kind gentleman.
Just installation.
Mr speaker gentle lady the
purchase and installation of the
system.
Mr speaker kind gentleman that
can very cost between seven five
hundred and ten thousand around
with an installation of two to
three thousand.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
fifteen thousand dollars.
Reasonable number for.
I think.
Mr speaker kind and I think
that's a little bit high maybe
twelve.
So.
Gentlelady could you do the math
for me how many homes are we
going to help eligible for this
given that the five thousand
dollar credit would be
applicable to about every
installation.
Mr speaker kind of that's true
so we should end up with about
four hundred homes over two year
period.
So.
This really will be a pilot
program rather than a
comprehensive effort to
conserve.
And reduce consumption Mr
speaker kind of and that is
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady would
also be trying to well for the
people would more than likely.
The early adopters of the
system.
Mr speaker kind gentleman I
actually asked the gentleman
about that this morning he's an
installer of solar panels and
energy storage and he said
wealthy people will be part of
it but but she's seeing more
four but just middle middle
class people getting some of
them are getting small loans to
do this Mr speaker and gentleman
some of them are the energy
people who just want to follow
and help our earth to bettering
N. and actually have control of
the Energy electricity in their
homes so Mr speaker and
gentleman it's it's it's some
wealthy but not always the well
just well.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
believe the one in the.
Yes after hearing.
This was represented to be of
expensive.
Compared to the.
Even sold or or certainly the
utility correct is that accurate
I'm well Mr speaker and
gentleman the cost of energy of
electricity is about that but
the cost of the solar panels and
energy storage is coming down so
it is expensive at this point
but it's it's the price is going
down more people using it it's
becoming known all over the
country and we're really looking
at why we use it it's for value
do we need is energy storage
according to you when you have
blackouts or brownouts or arctic
blast that's what we're looking
at the value of what how
important it is to you when it's
needed thank you Mr condemning
Mr speaker
these were to our system's
pretty much work to.
Mr speaker kinda then yes they
were.
Mr speaker gentle lady in the
last episode do we.
With respect to whether.
Were those outages were run in
some cases days would run out of
battery storage how long before
the weather abated Mr speaker
gentle lady thank you for a few
more questions that's all I.
Thank you for the debate gentle
lady to close thank you Mr
speaker I move house bill of.
it House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee SO
for House Bills two sixty two do
now pass we are on final passage
of House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill two
sixty two.
The vote is now open.
Representative Strickler we can
hear you.
The clerk to call those without
a recorded vote Representative
Brown.
Representative Fajardo.
There's not closed negative
fifty in the affirmative fifteen
of the negative House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for House Bill to sixty two has
duly passed the house.
Next we'll go to item twenty
nine gentleman from Santa are
you ready on that item.
Mr speaker I am.
The record reflect all action
necessary for placing House Bill
two seven one on final passage
has been taken the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and ladies
and gentlemen house bill two
seventy one.
It's really a technical
statutory cleanup codifies
current practice.
what happened was in two
thousand six New Mexico passed a
bill to bring us into compliance
with the new federal uniformed
terrier registration act.
But we didn't like to to tell
the question include that bill
where the revenue goes.
and so this bill corrects that
how to find current practice
that revenue from you see our
we'll go to the.
Our our water transportation for
and I'd like to thank my co
sponsor where Representative of
the generally from twenty New
Hampshire transportation for her
support what I stand for
questions.
Seeing the gentleman close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that house bill two seventy one
to pass we are on final passage
of house bill two seven one the
vote is now open.
I will agenda the clerk to call
the member without a recorded
vote members Representative Rod
Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya votes
yes.
Representative Andrea Romero.
Representative close by the
sixty six new permanent zero
negative house bill two seven
one has duly passed to the
house.
Next we have we're going to.
Temporarily jumped over idle
Levin got item twenty one.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo are
you ready on house bill two ten.
Yes Mr speaker can you get me to
that point please let the record
reflect all action necessary for
placing House health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill to ten on final
passage has been taken
gentlelady to explain the bill.
House Bill to ten is the
audiology and speech pathology
compact it adds New Mexico to an
interstate compact the goal of
improving public access to
audiology and speech language
pathology services with that Mr
speaker I stand for for
questions seeing noted right
gentle lady to close.
Well that was certainly easy at
this time I Mr speaker I move I
do pass on the health and Human
Services Committee sub for House
Bill to ten.
We are on final passage of hell
Spence of house health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for House Bill to tend to the
vote is now open.
We.
One minutes close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong votes yes.
Representative Brown.
Yes Representative Brown votes
yes Representative Ezzell.
Representative these although
it's yes.
Representative Rod Montoya
Representative Rod Montoya votes
yes.
And Representative Townsend.
The vote is now closed by the
sixty seven in the affirmative
zero negative house health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill to ten
has duly passed the house.
Next to that I'm twenty two
gentlelady from you are you
ready on that item.
Yes Mr speaker I'm ready please
get me to that point.
But the record reflect all
action necessary for placing
House Bill to seventeen is
omitted with an emergency clause
on final passage has been taken
the gentle lady to explain it
the bill.
You Mr speaker house bill two
seventeen as amended is an
important bill supported by our
higher ed department and brought
to me by the associated students
of New Mexico State University
this bill is making sure that
our students have room to keep
up their qualifications and
maintain their lottery lottery
scholarships during a public
health emergency with that I
stand for questions.
See no debate the gentle lady to
close.
Mr speaker I move that house
bill two seventeen as amended
with the American falls now pass
we are on final passage of house
bill two seventeen as amended
with an emergency clause the
vote is now open.
Voters that's close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Dixon both yes
Representative doubt.
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya votes
yes.
There is a close relative sixty
seven in the affirmative zero
and negative house bill two
seventeen is amended with an
emergency clause.
Has duly passed the house.
We'll go back to item eleven.
Generally from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon are you
ready on house bill fourteen.
Thank you Mr speaker will you
get me to that point for the
record reflect election
necessary for placing House Bill
fourteen is amended on final
passage is been taken gentlelady
to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker the purpose
of house bill fourteen The New
Mexico grants administration act
is to increase revenue and
investments in New Mexico by
leveraging federal funds and
outside dollars.
Right generally to close.
Mr.
I'm sorry gently read out the.
The.
I was given says I stand for
questions.
Okay.
I'm sorry generally I I missed
heard if you have more please.
I was a.
I stand for questions okay there
is me gently from Chavis
Representative you sell.
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
from Bernalillo yield.
Mr speaker I'll yield to the
gentle lady from Travis county.
Mr speaker gentle lady this is
moving through so fast I have
not had a chance to read it I
want to know what this bill does
please.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
this bill does three things its
primary purpose is to bring
revenue into the state of New
Mexico and a very low cost we're
looking at a potential return on
investment of two hundred and
fifty dollars to every dollar
that we spend in attracting
outside federal grant money.
This bill would set up a grants
administration.
Establish a grants opportunity
council and set up a matching
grant Fund.
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
kind of requests are we talking
about here that we would be
eligible for.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
we are speaking about
competitive federal grant
funding and national
philanthropic dollars that would
bump things like waste water
systems emergency vehicles
pilot programs violence
prevention programs
Roads.
Economic development.
All sorts of things that are
state desperately needs.
That Mr speaker gentle lady I
why is this any different than
what is already actually taking
place now thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady that is a fabulous
question and the problem is that
right now New Mexico is actually
one of the worst in the nation
in getting federal funds in
fact.
If you will allow me to provide
some statistics.
A twenty eighteen urban
institute study out of one
thousand counties in the
country.
Included ten rural New Mexico
counties and found that we were
number forty six.
In the nation.
In it getting outside federal
funding and you know which
county is.
We're actually the worst in New
Mexico and could really use the
help.
Chavis.
San Juan and Lee counties.
And not just in our county level
but also at the state level.
In twenty nineteen the US FDA
made eighteen point eight
million dollars available and
it's a rural intermediary re
lending program.
These are loans that are given
to nonprofit lenders that then
go to small businesses.
New Mexico received zero of
those awards.
In twenty twenty two hundred
million dollars was made
available through the cares Act
for telehealth New Mexico
received in here point one
percent of the available
funding.
New Mexico organizations have
failed to receive any awards in
the last three years from
housing and urban development
fair housing initiatives program
we missed out on over ninety
five million dollars.
In three years.
So we are not doing a good job.
And this is money that we could
be spending on infrastructure
and programs that right now we
are using general fund funds for
and severance tax permanent
funds for.
Mr speaker gentle lady I want to
go back to the very first part
of you're telling me about this
you said that there are the top
three counties that did not.
Of.
Utilize this particular program
that's already in place was.
What three counties to to name
off.
But Mr speaker gentle lady at
the three counties so to
qualified for at least
investment in small counties in
the country and that included
Chavis and Lee counties.
One of the top ten for securing
the least amount of funds in a
medium size county was San Juan
now up gentle lady and Mr
speaker if I could find a little
additional context what we have
seen through the work of the
Permian strategic partnership.
Which
started helping we County after
that study.
the Permian strategic
partnership actually has shown
us that by investing in
collaboration and grant writing
you can leverage two hundred and
fifty dollars for every dollar
that you put in.
More specifically.
The Permian strategic
partnership worked with.
But to counties Lee and Eddie
and through their work.
The partnership.
Contributed thirty eight
thousand dollars and brought in
over nine hundred and eighty
thousand dollars through six
requests.
Thank you.
Mr speaker gentle lady it kind
of surprises me that the top.
Three the two listed was Chavis
Louis and San Juan of bulk of
the money comes from those
particular counties through oil
and gas and agriculture Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Of one of we're talking about.
Hold on here just a minute
there's something that caught my
nonprofits are they included in
this or have they been
eliminated in your bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady they have
been removed the amendment.
Mr speaker I couldn't understand
the last part of that I'm so
sorry let gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
they have been removed.
Yes the amendment.
And Mr speaker gentle lady can
you tell me fall non profits
were removed.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
there was some concern that it
would violate the anti donation
clause.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady.
And this this new council the
the grants opportunity council
is going to be concise consisted
of fifteen members in my
understanding that right.
Mr speaker gentle lady you are
correct.
And Mr speaker with district why
is this fifteen member council
necessary.
Two five days whenever we are
already having.
At the functions of the
division.
Where we have an advice coming
from the brand new grants
opportunity council at in this
kind of.
Duplicate even my opinion and.
I think it's also redundant.
And what about what happens to
our local government division Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
reason for the
Lou number of members on the
grants opportunity council is so
that we have representation from
each small medium and large.
One from each of those large
small medium and large counties
and municipalities.
That Mr speaker gentle lady
my question is.
Where we haven't do twice.
Because it's already taken place
right now.
Mr speaker gentle lady I don't
think that anything is being
done twice we're not doing it
now.
Mr speaker if your bill passes
it will be returned and it will
be repetitive and it will be
done twice.
Mr speaker gentle lady I
disagree.
Well Mr speaker you have your
opinion and I have my opinion Mr
speaker that's all the questions
I have at this time.
Next to the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady.
Yield.
Generally from Bernalillo the
gentleman from San Juan has
asked if you yield.
Mr speaker I will yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentle lady gently from Chavis
asked a question about nonprofit
organizations have if they had
been removed from this
legislation and Mr speaker and
gentle lady
I believe your answer was that
the nonprofit organizations have
been removed from this
legislation that is that correct
that is correct Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan that is
correct.
So thank you for that Mr speaker
gentle lady conversation that
we've had a in the lead up to
this bill coming forward this
evening
can I direct you to section six
page seven.
Of the bill.
In that subsection do.
I'm sorry Mr speaker and
gentleman could you repeat that
yes can I have you go to page
six section six page seven.
Subsection D. of the bill.
Yes so thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady there at says there
that on this Council that to
representatives of nonprofit
organizations focused on
community needs we part of this.
Are council so Mister speaker
and gentle lady
I have an amendment it's a hand
written hand typed.
And meant to
Change the wording from to
representatives of nonprofit
organizations focused on
community needs to.
Are read to representatives of
non profit industry associations
focused on community needs
and Mr speaker this time I'd
like to introduce an amendment
it's a hand written amendments
this with the house floor
amendment one to house bill
fourteen is three times amended.
The gentleman it has been
distributed.
It is on the website.
John to explain the emitter.
Thank you Mr speaker and and the
gentle lady and and members the
amendment is to be consistent
with the amendment that was that
took place.
prior to hitting the floor that
removed.
kind of an open ended community
organizations.
A nonprofit organizations and
made it more specific to
nonprofit.
organizations that are industry
related
to be a little more specific as
to what I believe the sponsor
meant to be the purpose of this
bill.
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and will the
gentleman from San Juan yield
yes the speaker I will yield to
the gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Thanks for.
Before I answer whether it's
from we're not could you please
provide a couple of examples of.
Nonprofit industry associations.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
Permian partnership which I
believe you identified earlier
as.
having some input on this bill.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady I
believe you mentioned the
association of grant writers.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan at this is an
unfriendly imminent.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady if I could ask a further
question as to why this would be
friendly it was my understanding
that
the purpose was to not be wide
open as to just nonprofit
organizations but more
specifically those that would
be.
industry
related
MIA in correct Mr speaker
generally.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan you are
correct that that was the intent
there's
it appears so that perhaps the
specific wording might open the
door for other industry
associations that are non
profits such as.
Am I allowed to reference
specific entities.
Such as
Of the New Mexico oil and gas
association cattle growers
association or attentional a
and educators association other
industry associations
and our non profits at the same
time.
So thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady as we discussed this
a prior to coming on the floor.
we struggled over the specific
language is there a different.
Nomenclatures are different
wording that would achieve.
Of what we had discussed
earlier.
In the really in a point of
order gentlemen and we've got to
the gentle lady to ask if it's a
friendly amendment or not she
said it is not
we you are debating the bill the
questions typically would be
posed by members to you in your
defense of the amendment it is
somewhat irregular for the
proponent of an amendment the
proposing questions remember
who's asked the amendment
proponent to yield thank you Mr
speaker I do understand that but
miss before we came on the floor
there had been an agreement and
the language that was proposed
was language that was proposed
by the gentle lady from
Bernalillo so Mister speaker and
gentle and just and Mr speaker
body I understand it's a little
odd but this whole situation is
a little bit odd considering
this had been negotiated prior
to coming on the floor.
Mr speaker point will state your
point so here's a problem once
you see it in writing then you
can evaluated it's not written
correctly as we look at there's
no line there's no page number
was a page number but no line
and as I start to look at it
becomes a different type of
amendment as you're discussing
so you look at it read you see
it so that's why it's not
appropriate she just said it's
not friendly and now you get to
support your amendment and have
questions raised about your man
thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker the.
Responding to the point of
order.
Okay is there debate on the
amendment.
Gentlelady familia.
Mr.
Mr speaker.
I move to table okay Mr speaker
there was other debate I did not
see any hand raised I see it now
the gentle lady is made motion.
The gentle lady give a burning
question from the general San
Juan.
Mr speaker I do.
No you can us deal gentleman.
Speaker.
Yes miss speaker I will yield to
the gentleman from Lee.
Mr speaker question.
Is one wouldn't.
No less.
Distribution solutions.
Most appropriate for this task.
Nation strategic partnership has
done more for a couple of
counties in the southeast.
Thing else of her response.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentleman for that question.
Yes they actually
in.
questioning of.
This
Bill with the sponsor the that
organizational specifically.
talked about as an organization
that would appropriately be able
to be involved in this so
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
why the language was written as
industry association.
Mr speaker and gentleman would
send right.
If the building trades to the so
sedition commerce ministry the
growers all of these folks what
certainly would vested interest
in the well being of the
citizens in New Mexico this
looks like ideal language to me.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman is a matter of fact it
does seem to be ideal language
but even by removing this
language.
They would still fit the
category as a nonprofit
organization so it wouldn't
exclude them so I I'm not
exactly sure.
the reasoning behind.
It not being friendly so the
speaker and and gentleman I'm
with you a little protect
perplexed.
Mr speaker and gentleman more
concern would be that the
nonprofit's.
Routinely or appear which is a
world wide variety of.
Conservation groups comfortable.
Activist oriented want
my attempts to.
If you will nonprofit certainly
I would like to see other non
profits at least opportunity.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I believe that was the
concern as the broad nature of
who the original bill could
potentially help secure funds
because if you are the original
bill for the bill as written
included those nonprofit groups.
To be able to maybe even receive
funds so Mr speaker and
gentleman all this does is say
who would be on the board
because that section was already
amended out.
Previously so I'm a little
confused because all this does a
state.
Who could be on the board which
still would not exclude.
Of one of those organizations
such as cattle growers for the
Permian basin.
partnership.
So I'm.
Little confused as you are.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you.
Good amendment to me this for
the debate the gentle lady from
Rio Arriba.
InTaos the Representative
Herrera.
Thank you Mr speaker with that
kind gentleman from the San Juan
yield.
Yes I will yield to the gentle
lady from Rio Arriba.
I thank you so much I am I
Armstrong supported this bill is
one of the co sponsors and I
think it's a I think it's it's
certainly really something that
we could use in New Mexico for
for all of those of you who
don't know I have a strong
background in philanthropy and
nonprofits I worked in that
field for over forty years I
think I think the language is it
is it is appropriate to I don't
think you need to at industries
you know there's an association
called the New Mexico
association of grant makers and
includes all the foundations in
New Mexico and you might want to
hand of their president or or
somebody from that group
programs of major foundation and
is a major giver in New Mexico
you might want to pull in a you
might medical international the
a big foundation like Kellogg
who has a presence in New Mexico
to be on this board all of these
people have different have
different
Groups of people that that
support foundations and and
that's good to know what kinds
of many there I think I think
the representative from
Bernalillo was was really very
smart in in putting two people
from a foundation on the world
could then include the Permian
basin organization of Corsica
but it could also include other
people you just don't want to
limit that to industry you
really don't yes there is
industry has has a big footprint
in the foundation real but it's
really not as big as your major
international foundations who
who would really be interested
and are interested and have
funded huge projects in the
state so so I wouldn't limited
to that I think I think that's
the problem with that yes they
could be included you don't want
to limit that to industry
foundations they don't they
don't pay out as the they're not
is what do I want to say they
don't have as much money as a
private conditions in the in the
private foundation where I am
the tend to be more specific to
the grants that protect or help
their industry and that's a fair
thing I'm not saying there's
anything wrong with that I'm
just saying you want to you want
a greater pool to choose from
when you put this council
together and I think it's a good
council because
you know there is they know
about funds that you would know
that that's really what it what
it matters I mean the foundation
world of for those of you who
don't know I started the New
Mexico.
Thank college foundation I
started land all of them Madam
sessional laboratory foundation
and and I worked in those in
that realm in New Mexico for
twenty years in Washington DC I
also did a lot of fund raising
more
I think this is a good idea I
think it'll bring a lot of money
to the state it's interesting I
I I told the representative from
Bernalillo that I have thought
of that introducing this
legislation but I wasn't as
pragmatic issue as I I was gonna
put
a department that a great
running foundation and every
agency in the state and have
them you know really focus on
that and right and I can just
tell you having set up
foundations doing a lot of great
writing the first year the
probably make their salaries and
a little more this second here
that probably bring in the
hundreds of thousands and then
the third you're going to bring
million cents just kind of have
the formula works up I stand in
strong support of this bill I
think you should have non
profits at that table along with
state agencies that M. and local
governments and county
governments that do the work and
and I have learned being a
representative
Committee in my cities really
need grant writing help and
we're working right now to put
together an economic development
plan of for smaller cities and
smaller counties so that we can
go after major funding bills on
economic development plan for
region and I am yes that yes the
gentleman from the San Juan I
guess I'm not asking you a lot
of questions but I just kind of
giving you some background about
that and do you think it would
be yeah I think we should have
the maybe major foundations that
in a I'm saying hundreds of
millions of years hundreds of
millions of dollars a year to be
I have a chance to be on this
Council to.
The gentle lady.
Mr speaker Jennifer San Juan I
withdraw money and.
Thank you Jennifer.
And that for folks watching all
that the gentle lady from
Bernalillo and once the same
thing that the gentleman from
San Juan once we just wanna make
sure this drafted correctly.
And that was that.
That was just a check up on how
do we say some friendly when
they are working on it together
but it was.
And I think that incredibly
drafters this so the plan that
focuses if you don't makes to
the Senate rather gentle lady
will get an amendment done is
grateful to everyone in the
Senate we'll get right back over
and we'll do concurrence will be
no problem so he wasn't that.
You know I I I personally germs
from the rents on the amendment
so it's not about whether the
gentleman from San Juan was
acting the spending rents and
motives were limited gentle lady
was able to the concept just
wanted to get it right so
gentleman from San Juan
appreciate he was trying to get
runs and.
New Mexico to the gentle lady
from any Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr speaker and
colleagues.
Well we're approaching the
midnight hour and I actually
have a lot to say about this
bill.
And I'm kind of conflicted if I
should say everything I want to
say or cut it short for the sake
of everybody getting little
sleep but I'm gonna talk a
little bit I think
I have little disappointed Mr
speaker and and professional
with the gentle lady yield I
apologize for not asking.
Mr speaker it yes I will yield
to the gentle lady from Eddy
County yes thank you very much
gentlelady.
Mr speaker
We heard this bill in the house
Appropriations Committee and
normally we we really just
considered the the budget when
we hear bills at at at that stop
but I really felt that I had to
mention that I have is my
opinion that certain provisions
of house bill fourteen would
violate the state's anti
donation clause which is found
in our state constitution and
I'll just paraphrase it briefly
Mr speaker gentle lady it's
basically the state county
school district municipality
shall not directly or
indirectly.
Make any donation to or in aid
of any person association or
public or private corporation.
And there are a few exceptions
For like veterans scholarships
and loans to medical school
students and there's quite a bit
in here on affordable housing.
And there's a little bit on
economic development but
basically the rule stands that
we do not aid public or private
corporations and nonprofits or
incorporate their they are
incorporated they are
corporations there are ones that
have a indeed a public purpose
but they're they're not
government they're not
government agencies so
okay much of what we do Mr
speaker gentle lady in
government is
we we deal with government and
we don't give public money to
private concerns.
So
Mr speaker and gentle lady when
we were on probation that at
issue was researched a little
bit and it was the opinion of I
believe that the chair of the
committee and others that we
were to strike any language in
the bill in reference to non
profits.
And I checked the
provided website to make sure
that that an animated and when I
checked it it wasn't there so
I was when I finally got a hold
of of what was there I was
surprised to see that some
nonprofit language still stayed
in the bill and I assumed it was
a vestige of just not catching
it.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
that language is found on page
seven.
One four and five.
And it talks about to
representatives of nonprofit
organizations being given seats
on the council.
So are.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
think that still violates the
spirit at least of the anti
donation clause it gives them a
seat at the table which gives
them certain advantages and I
think they were there for a
reason Mr speaker and gentle
lady because the original
version of the bill before the
amendments on on the nonprofit
language.
talks about
That this this grants it
administration division would
services state grants
clearinghouse and identify
federal and other public and
private grant and donation
opportunities of interest to
governmental agencies and
nonprofit organizations and then
there's another reference here
as well and so when I first
started reading this bill I was
pleased to see the focus on
helping local governments and
state agencies with grant
writing because I believe there
is a need for that.
but when I saw the nonprofit
language I began to wonder what
what this bill is about.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
I'll point out that there's a
Senate joint resolution that's
been introduced.
To amend the state constitution
to allow nonprofit
organizations to come under and
it is coming as an exception to
the anti donation clause and
what that tells me is there's an
acknowledgement released a
knowledge that.
This bill in particular because
it does bring in non profits
which are not governmental
it it would be clearly a
violation that's why that
resolution is being cared
because apparently there's a
desire by some people to open
the door to the public treasury
for the benefit of non
governmental groups.
So.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
I actually have a committee
substitute but.
Because I'm trying to be
merciful tonight I'm not going
to introduce it.
but let me tell you what it does
briefly so that you can
understand I hope the gentle
lady Mr speaker.
This bill really needs to be
fixed and I
I I'm hoping the Senate will
rise to the occasion.
But I believe generally aside
from the nonprofit issue that
this bill stands up a new
division and state government
that we really don't have to do
to achieve our goal.
the substitute.
Send this over to someone in the
Senate and hope that they'll
they'll consider running with
it.
but basically the local
government division and says
this bill is intended to help.
Raise funds essentially through
grant writing.
I think the local government
division is the obvious choice
and we don't need to stand up
anything new and spend the money
on something we really don't
need to do because we already
have that function in state
government and there's a
supplemental appropriation Mr
speaker gentle lady I believe
it's two.
Hundred thousand dollars or
something like that for for some
of this purpose in this bill
House Bill fourteen also creates
kind of a matching fund and all
that so there's there's money
involved.
Some that money could be set up
within the department of finance
and administration to hire a
couple of full time equivalents
to focus on grant writing for
the aid of local governments Mr
speaker and gentle lady I also
believe that this would really
benefit small government small
local governments who often I do
not have the resources to hire
grant writers
the need is perhaps not as great
with larger
instruments of government
because a lot of that already
have grant writers and it's a
very specialized field in my
opinion and it's an arts and
if people can get very good at
it and and do a lot of fund
raising through it but that we
have councils of government or
through the state and the
regional and they that's what
they do they do grant writing
and so maybe the need is not so
great there I think there is
there is value Mr speaker gentle
lady and having
assistance available for local
governments the smaller ones
one of things in the bill my
committee serve would actually
preserve.
but so what I would do is.
Back away from creating I'm
summing up now it back away from
creating a grants administration
division within DFA and I would
back away from creating a
fifteen member Advisory Council.
instead Mr speaker gentle lady I
think the grant administration
duties to be assigned to DFA is
current local government
division.
Mr speaker gentle lady
I have done a lot of pro bono
Representative rating for
nonprofit organizations do what
I can to help build my community
for for more success.
And I have a great deal of
understanding I believe of what
it takes to to to be a
successful grant writer.
And so I just wish to make it
clear Mr speaker gentle lady I'm
not against so much having a
tool to help.
I do want to praise the Permian
strategic partnership Mr speaker
and gentle lady it's an
outstanding organization that's
done a tremendous amount of good
but we need to recognize that
it's using private money.
many oil companies got together
and donated to create this this
fund that they're using to
catalyze good things in there in
the Permian basin things like
education health care
they do a lot of things and
they're very strategic with
where they where they help and
so that models a little
different from what we're seeing
proposed here in this bill
because this is state money
public money and they're using
private money I think that makes
a big difference.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think goals okay let chair here
with this one I.
I really wish we could of us fix
this tonight to avoid that
The nation because issue I I
still strongly that that that
still persists in the bill.
And if I can help in any way Mr
speaker gentle lady to assist in
in re working this bill as
needed I would be more than
happy to devote the time to
doing that I'm just down the
hallway from Sanchez from the
Sanchez thorough.
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the time tonight and one
minute away from that date.
Thank you generate there is
further debate the gentleman
from curry Representative
Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
please yield.
Mr speaker I will yield to the
gentleman curriculum thank you
generally and as I heard the
debate this evening on hold on
on house bill fourteen
It came into my mind that that
We were told in House
Appropriations finance
committee.
I think on the second time if
you look on your dollars you'll
see that this bill was amended
twice and House Appropriations
finance committee.
And we were told that the
nonprofit's had been removed
from the bill.
I will tell you that's part of
why I voted uh to pass this on
members unanimous vote coming
out based on the word that the
nonprofit's had been removed
from the bill and so I want to
stand in and of some
what my colleague from a Eddy
County that just sent our it was
affirming Jimmy to hear someone
else say that that's what they
heard we have the debate about
the the Act anti donation rules
and so I was a little bit
surprised when I.
See that nonprofits are still in
the bill after we were clearly
to all the nonprofits have been
removed from the bill in
Appropriations Committee sell
I do hope that we can get this
fixed one year over the Senate.
I think it is.
Probably good I I agree that the
costs
are the grant writing group so I
do believe there is some
duplication and what you're
trying to do here so but I
I guess I'm just shocked that
after what we were told
appropriation that there was it
was removed to find it in there
a surprising so just wanted to
confirm my colleague from any
cancer thank you John already
thank you Mr speaker.
Here is for the right to
challenge me Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady young.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the gentleman from the can.
Thank you
I just.
I to that and the limit on this
tonight the that I I held back
on Mr speaker.
Based on the agreements the
didn't come to fruition Snyder
and and I appreciate that the
discussions happen with respect
to that and expects formation Mr
speaker.
Thank.
As I
I've only been here.
forty five days and I'm I've
watched for.
Different bills goes very
different committees and Mr
speaker I'm thanks I'm getting
more more concerned with the
concept taken can down the road.
And then also Mr speaker getting
more more concerned with the
inclusion of nonprofits.
Gaming.
From government funds and and
it's highly concerning to me.
That was the reason why I agreed
to carry and to look at this and
to put together an amendments
night sure that we to the the
language out of page seven.
For the the two nonprofit
positions Mr speaker and gentle
lady I do have a question when
we put together a team like this
the team members receive a
payment Mr speaker gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman at.
Generally speaking per diem.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and and so I think the it's
a test for the for the amendment
to the gentleman from San Juan
brought tonight was to bring.
Industries into the into the
fold because they have a
tendency not to ask government
for money.
And
and
Where the nonprofit server like
I said I watched it for the last
forty five days for for forty
five days this is growing more
and more of a concern to me how
we're trying to fund.
Different organizations.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
You know we we and this is in
line with this
Passed house joint resolution
nine several weeks ago it takes
the anti donation clause up for
infrastructure.
And we run several other bills
over the last several weeks that
we continued to do actions like
this.
That spend government money
for resources that it was never
intended to do Mr speaker and
gentle lady I just asked the
You consider these things very
seriously and
not be part of that issue as we
continue to go forward and
government thank you Mr speaker
I yield back to you.
Thank you John the gentleman
next year the gentle lady from
granted out well and Sierra
Representative Dow thank you Mr
speaker with the gentle lady
please yield yes Mr speaker I
will yield to the lady from
grant it although in Sierra
County thank thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
and I I do apologize.
I haven't made paid more
attention to this bill and still
the cost side conversations and
that the things that were
happening around each night and
I had not read the bill and so I
just got a copy of the
amendments in context and I I
have a different perspective
than some of the folks that I've
spoken before because I have
been you know I was twenty six
when I decided to move to the
consequences and open up a
nonprofit to meet an unmet need
in my TV.
To provide a service that was
not offered prior to the
existence the nonprofit and
little did I understand that how
difficult it was to sustain.
High quality services that are
affordable and accessible to all
without pursuing grants so.
In in Lee you know I I wanted to
focus on early childhood I
wanted to for focus on child
welfare I had to start learning
how to write grants so over the
last twenty years I'm and I
think your expert witness for
miglior with one of the requests
we wrote for USDA rural facility
improvement grant to bring a
commercial kitchen to my
community so that we could do
USDA meals are served to low
income families and yes
particularly children in the
summers and so and and multiple
multiple requests that were
built federal state and private
so I have a different
perspective I think there's an
important role of nonprofits and
I I'm not skeptical typically of
non profits but I do understand
where this conversation is going
awry and I want to get back to
the bill and and my questions in
regards to the amendments as I
see them in context and and
first.
Mr speaker and representative I
want to thank you for what
you're trying to accomplish we
we've so many dollars on the
table federal dollars in table I
think it's do you have an
estimated amount of dollars that
we need on the table in our
state.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
in the tens of millions if not
hundreds of millions.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady and I'm I'm not
surprised by that.
And even in my world.
We are spending state dollars
precious state dollars growing
early childhood programs while
we reverts for us revert we
don't draw down the federal
dollars that are available.
Such as legalizing head start
tribal head start child care
development block grant military
child care and even the pre K.
dollars that are available to
federal level and we're spending
state dollars so by being able
to utilize the federal dollars
instead of the state dollars.
You know education and education
advocates over half our state
budget and we have over two
hundred fifty other agencies
fighting over the remaining
portion the budget once we focus
on early childhood K. twelve and
higher at.
So I I understand the value of
what you're trying to accomplish
so I don't know if folks are
familiar with the process of
writing a grant this is where my
question comes to the need of
this my experience has been I'm
and I'm on page two.
And I don't have lines but it's
the creation of the grants
administration division and from
my experience.
Every agency somewhat has their
own little many administrative
division in which they put out
and a request for proposal for
an request for application.
And then they typically have a
bidder's conference and at that
conference date gives an
overview of the grant and many
times provide technical
assistance.
With the federal grants
technical assistance and then
the application is do they have
a did review and ask for them
it's a competitive process then
you go through the contract
agreement the procurement
process which general counsel
from each agency reviews the
assurances and creates a scope
of work.
And then the grant is
implemented and that's that
great writings the easy part the
implementation of the hard part
and also the valuation is is
also difficult so Mr speaker is
only considering that each
agency has their own kind of
many grants administration
division within their agency
what's the gap.
That is not met and makes this
grant necessary.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady the issue is a lack
of collaboration and
coordination between state
entities and vertically through
state agencies county
governments local governments
and tribal governments.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I I do agree with
that.
When I go through the process of
what's going to be offered by
the.
Requests administrative division
so do you envision.
Point each of these many sort of
grant administrators into a new
division and out of there okay
could you could you tell me your
vision is working.
Where there's.
Our nation and not duplication.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady the grants division
would have its own staff that
would serve as a central single
point of contact we have no
single point of contact here in
the state that coordinates
between state agencies or even
with the federal delegation or
with our New Mexico office in
Washington DC and so it would be
a single point of contact you
know everything that's going on.
Thank thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentle lady.
I'm having a hard time grasping
that.
In so I've worked with the O. H.
CYFD PED department
transportation workforce
solutions
partnered with.
Additional divisions within and
and even division within those
agencies so for example even
went with and C. Y. FTE.
Those that work with juveniles
there's no coordination between
corrections.
And those that work with someone
who may have been incarcerated
and was an adult when they're
released I don't that seems
incredibly complicated to me
that one person could
coordinate.
Programs between overturn to do
state agencies.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
it's not
I apologize if I.
I didn't answer that precisely
but the by being a single point
of contact they're not writing
the requests for all of the
other agencies those agencies
have specialists to deal with
requests for transportation and
education we don't want to take
that away but what you do want
to have as a clearing house of
information about what grants
are available for all entities
and know who's applying for what
so that's that's one function of
the grant administration there
several others that are laid
out.
Thank thank you Mr thank you Mr
speaker and thank you generating
and and and okay.
So.
When we go to page four.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
It's also been my experience
that folks who do not have the
capacity to write the grant.
Often do not have the capacity
to implement the grants to
delegate or to complete the
evaluation process according to
their scope of work sh and so
when I look at page four.
Number it's in section B. I'm
sorry don't have numbers but it
talks it says here they will
provide services and education
Transurban diss by grantees to
the life cycle of the grant
process including best practices
for fiscal and programmatic
kindly most federal grants which
is what I believe you're focused
on our four years executive your
option.
So could you describe what you
believe that support would look
quite to the municipalities
across the state counties across
the state thank you Mr speaker
and gentle lady yes actually
some of the services that could
be provided would include
manuals webinars training
sessions and
Solicitation through the process
Introduction to compliance
experts auditors.
So Tatian through each process
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady and I.
What I know about grants is
probably a drop in the bucket
but probably
Probably more than most at most
people who may be utilizing the
services so even though I may be
familiar with the USDA facility
improvement program.
I may have absolutely no
knowledge on.
Something would juvenile justice
advisory account you know some
sort of other federal program
around juvenile justice advisory
councils or something like that
so they're so completely
technical and they're so unique
and compliance is so completely
different even evidence based
models that you can choose from
at the federal level are so
different so unique.
I'm having a hard time grasping
how.
Why we wouldn't utilize these
kind of many grant
administrative.
Associations are councils that
exists within each division
that's right go for help the
program manager at the state
level to implement the federal
dollars are transferred to the
statement released out for bid.
They have the technical
expertise so is this a generic
kind of general like how to.
Maintain.
The Delhi and and best practices
at the at the ground level at
the association level or at the
municipal level I'm trying to
understand how a.
How the million dollars would
create the team that can help
people with these literally
hundreds of different divisions
of federal government federal
dollars we can apply for.
Someone who can help with
transport and transportation
funds.
Would be a very different skill
set and someone who can help
with head start funds would be a
very different skill set than
someone who can help with
correctional funds.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I think what you're getting
at is there are services that
already exist and that's
wonderful and we don't need to
supplant those but what we do
need to do is fill in the gaps
for those who are looking for
funds and the services do not
exist I would say that we have
seen in Nevada a very successful
program and their budget for
there's grants administration
office is on par slightly last
and they have been very
successful at bringing in
Over at a two and a half year
period they brought in over a
hundred and fifty million
dollars in additional funds into
the state and to help their
state applied for over sixty
five additional requests thank
you Mr speaker and things
gentle lady that is that is very
exciting are they also writing
grants for counties and
municipalities are they focused
their so I mean there's so much
we can do just at the federal
level just with state applying
for grants there's been requests
that I've seen and been released
from the federal government and
when I asked different agencies
to plan apply for this because
it's something my community
needs you know that we don't
have the capacity so I
definitely am on board with you
on that at a state level find
for federal dollars that are
then released into the into the
state.
Does Utah also help local
municipalities applied well
thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady a Nevada yes in fact does
hope all of its entities state
local tribal as well as non
nonprofits and citizens thank
you thank.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you ladies are also helping
nonprofits.
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
correct thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentle lady and so I I
think about.
What we funded so far as a body
they are not created equal some
are very ineffective and others
are very effective but we have
health councils.
And they are funded by this body
to help build capacity and to
help local program you know to
me and said to assess community
needs and gaps and then to help
identify funding and help I to
those funding at the local level
we have our council of
governments which I suppose it
sounds like you've talked about
before in committee and they're
not all created equal because
boy I'll tell you I have two
different clubs in my district
and one is section she.
And that has it it's very
evidence and not County that the
services are these that that the
card is doing their grants and
work very well.
We also have for our schools our
regional educational
cooperatives are REC and they
provide this and these are
things that we're funding in the
millions in order to help our
local communities build capacity
and implement programming up
very very local and so it gives
me because not that I'm against
review because he tries to
imagine how someone so far away
from our local communities will
to do a better job than than our
existing I think those
organizations they need support
they probably need technical
assistance and training but it
is they're not exist.
But I guess the part that is
because I'm an advocate of non
profits I'm a fan of nonprofits
there are domestic violence
shelters it's a homeless shelter
it's what's this care it's our
community owned hospitals it's
our nursing homes are child care
centers are meal delivery to
indigent folks I'm a fan of
nonprofits I know there's some
people who think about
nonprofits and it's like right
now I'm not trying to bash girl
scouts that those girls are out
with what with this body would
consider slave labor selling
five dollar box of girl scout
cookies and trick it's a quarter
and you know we hear these
reports about executives making
half a million dollars you know
a year five hundred thousand
dollars two million dollars a
year that's not the typical New
Mexico nonprofit I'm sure there
are exceptions but the typical
New Mexico nonprofit struggles
to survive every day.
Mainly because we pay them
adequate contracts for the fees
for services that we ask them to
do on behalf of on what
populations.
And many of the struggles of our
local nonprofits could be solved
with adequate funding from us
which your bill then
accomplished.
However what's missing in this
grant that we often see.
Any in this bill and I'd like
you to consider adding I'm
asking for a minute now yeah I'd
like you to I ask that you would
consider adding is that these
governments and cities and
municipalities and schools would
not supplant the work of
existing nonprofits I understand
that you chose to strike non
profits from the bill.
I don't see language prohibiting
the supplants supplanting the
work so in theory I'm just
making this up a community to
come in and get support from our
state.
To duplicate the effort of the.
Landmark nonprofit in the local
community and supplant their
efforts and what I think is
missing from the grant is an
assurance that it would not be
used to supplant or duplicate
existing efforts Mr speaker
gentle lady had to consider that
of the body wrapped up.
Mr speaker gentle lady I had
considered it in so far as
providing services and you know
as you mentioned the the design
and goal of this is not to
supplant but rather supplement
thank you Mr speaker thank you
July and I'm I I believe that's
the intent and probably when
nonprofit was structure being
able to help eligible to
participate then that's when it
would become even more
critically important that
governments don't supplant or
directly to do with existing on
process I hope you will consider
that as you move forward with
your bill thank you Mr speaker
thank you generating.
Senior for the debate generated
close.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
house bill fourteen as the race
amended you're not process we
are on final passage of house
bill fourteen is amended the
vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
But the members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Lane.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative yes yes.
Representative close by a vote
of forty nine in the affirmative
fourteen negative house bill
fourteen as amended has duly
passed house next with that I am
twenty three gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Garrett are you ready on house
bill two twenty one.
Mr speaker can you take me to
that point the record reflect
election necessary for placing
House Bill to twenty one as
amended on final passage is
taken gentlelady to explain it
all.
Thank you Mr speaker House Bill
to twenty one as amended is
about kindergarten to second
grade assessment changes it
calls for the use of an
observational assessment in
reading and writing for
kindergartners first graders and
second graders it has already
been developed for kindergarten
by PED and we currently use set
up for the first twenty days of
kindergarten at the request of
the superintendents of New
Mexico this legislation would
not go into effect until the
twenty twenty two two twenty
three school year and it would
be phased in over four years
indeed with second grade
being instituted in the twenty
twenty four twenty five year and
with that I stand for questions
Mr mate the gentleman from curry
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker will
generally please yield I yes Mr
speaker I yield to the gentleman
thank you delivery gently I'm
reading your bill on page two
line twelve.
We're talking about this
Observational assessment that is
developed or purchased by the
department of gentle lady Mr
speaker can you tell our what is
the cost of the software to do
this observational assessment.
Mr.
Speaker and kind gentleman I it
is an observational assessment
it's entered online into a PED
system that already exist so
that's.
We can't really say the cost yet
because the kindergarten
assessment already exist.
The
no cost for this year.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I
appreciate that but it the the
language of plain language of
the bill says or purchased by
the department and gentle lady I
I have heard the
the software that was purchased
for testing for five years ago
was in the millions
that they're actually instead of
doing observation are actually
administering tests to the the
K. one K. two kids.
And could you speak to that just
a little bit Mister speaker
July.
Yes.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman
we have three different tests
over the last six years and
that's why it's cost we started
with the G. R. A. which was
entered into district computer
systems statewide we switched
over to doubles then we switched
I station we also have are you
ready observational assess
assessments are generally done
online into a system and and I I
said that K. O. T. we have a
your your tier early the CO two
early childhood this provision
yes that's used for pre K. the
K. O. T. the kindergarten
observation yes that is already
use statewide already is in a
system it's done online so this
software is already done it
would be adjusted on a yearly
basis starting in the twenty two
twenty three school year of the
FY are just estimate the cost
yet because it's going to be
phased in.
so that is something that would
be worked out next year when the
PED of figured out how much
needed to be added and how much
pre existing software already is
fully usable.
Thank you generally appreciate
that very much I just like I
said receive some information
this morning that
the the last system where they
actually instead of an
observational yes it was an
actual yes and that there was
million spent for that system on
I was also informed that some of
those tests that have been done
on on the kindergartens
there there is a five year
record there's a five year
database in existence that shows
performance and and when I when
I hear the term observational
I I actually ask a couple of our
state troopers this morning.
I said if you guys have a or a
car wreck at a major
intersection and there's ten
witnesses how many different.
Stories do you get and I said we
get ten stories and and they're
all different so observational
to me is subjective or is a yes
it's taken is not.
In order to move from from
testing observational in my mind
it is not necessarily a step
forward I know a if I were to to
observe one of my grandchildren
or someone like that I think my
bias would come through very
small because I levels organized
and then I I would I would
assume that a teacher has
emotional ties to students in a
but teachers during some of the
observational.
Valuation.
I'm not sure how in the world to
keep bias out of it so I I I
have questions about your bill I
haven't had a chance to study
them I wish I had a liability
which comes quick.
But.
I I just have some concerns
about moving from actual yes to
observational testing so thank
you gentle lady thank you Mr
speaker next year the gentle
lady from granted all go and
Sierra Representative Dow thank
thank you Mr speaker and will
the gentle lady you'll.
Your.
The lady I I yield to here thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady and I I am.
I'm very familiar with well
unless they've changed the early
childhood observational tool
that we're using with three four
and kindergarteners at the the
way that I understand it happens
correct me if I'm wrong is three
times the year there's I believe
seven domains in which the
teacher observes the child in
the natural environment and
documents the natural occurrence
of the of the at the domain.
Development milestone.
And then put if they are.
Their age level if it's emerging
or if it's mastered then the
teacher who is only in the
classroom four days a week is is
pre K. yes in the fifth day.
Documenting the observations
making sure their exact
objective and then putting them
into a data system Mr speaker
gentle lady is that how you
would understand it to occur yes
that is correct Mr speaker and
gentle lady and training
includes all of that kind of
inter rater reliability on teens
and across districts thank you
Mr speaker and thank you gentle
lady so in New Mexico pre K. the
teacher is with the students
four days a week they're forty
and we programs and on the fifth
day it's the educational systems
and the teachers are doing
parent teacher conferences
trainings you know these sorts
of things entering data Mr
speaker gentle lady to all of
our kindergarten first and
second grade classrooms have a
second teacher in the classroom.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
kindergarten classes with more
than fourteen students have an
educational assistant larger
classrooms in first grade
sometimes have an educational
assistant and I will remind
people that there's a.
The director for teachers
at team meetings where a lot of
this occurs thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady it's been
a while but when I used to help
with observations because admin
or at least in pre K. it needs
to be done by the Hummer teacher
so but when I did get to help
with observations it was off
often difficult to observe the
child doing something that
demonstrated pre science skills
solving a problem and if you're
writing an object to achieve an
outcome in the time frame that
was given for a particular large
motor milestone or it was
difficult but when it became the
horrid teacher.
What I ate what I observed was
that the room the
intentionality.
And sometimes the relevancy and
that the actual observation
would not always demonstrate the
child's ability it demonstrated
what occurred in that time frame
we're given to give that
particular milestone because
language is one set of weeks and
large modern diner another seven
weeks and so it's not open ended
you're trying to do an evidence
based cycle and repeating at and
so it as time became pressure
and as more milestones are being
measured the Austin tech
observation which is the it's
what's by the evidence the team
becomes less meaningful as more
pressure put on the classroom
and things Mr speaker gentle
lady.
The other thing that I saw was
the kindergarten entrance exam
what was what was happening and
again six years back.
The teachers observing children
the four year old classroom are
there seen additional set of
accomplishments over the year
and they're able to show the
progress of the child me.
Then there's the summer and you
go to kindergarten and I believe
right now with the of the
authentic observation tool that
we use for the kindergarten
assessment it's a new teacher
that doesn't have a lot of
context in time and at my last
involvement they had they have a
complete these observations
within the first thirty days of
school Mr speaker gentle lady is
that still the case.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is the requirement PED during
that first month to do that
kindergarten observation
yes thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady and how many
milestones are they measuring it
I just thought it was thirty six
but I'm it's been it's been a
while.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it
has been streamlined to be a
more reasonable amount.
Mr speaker gentle lady do you
know from the milestones are
majoring in the first thirty
days.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I do
not know the exact amount but
could part teachers that I
worked with for five years
were able to accomplish it.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes they
are able to accomplish it
because all they are required to
do is mark what they saw happen
naturally in the classroom
within the first thirty days but
that doesn't mean it's
reflection of a child's
capability of is doing it so.
Actually reflection with the
teachers able to capture with a
room full of children in which
she has as you know classroom
can be how big that many
children with that many
assessments within thirty days
and so it doesn't matter.
What the teacher checks.
And sometimes what the report is
okay maybe I didn't see them
hold a pencil in the proper way
so I'm going to mark that is not
accomplished yet because they
show progress throughout the
year.
But I'm wondering in an
authentic assessment it makes
sense to me with preschoolers
and it makes sense even at the
beginning of kindergarten
because you're measuring.
Progress but how do you use an
authentic assessment to measure
whether a child understands
basic mathematics skills or
understands their Val sounds and
to put.
Simple words together how do you
do that in an authentic
assessment.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is part of the estimate
assessment to observe their
reading their letter management
their numeracy that is part of
it.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you generate a typically.
In the early years these are pre
literacy in pre math skills
you'll see a picture and a
teacher's description two or
three sentences sometimes a
paragraph of what occurred Mr
speaker gentle lady is this
still a process that would be
put in place.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
kindergarten observation yes has
been developed but over the next
two years the first grade
observational.
S. would be developed and then
over that final year the second
grade yes would be developed
that's why this is phased in
over four years thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady but the
kindergarten assessment test as
a checklist.
Gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
But good teachers always have
observed taking a computerized
tests doesn't give you any more
accurate information in doing
the first thirty days that many
teachers have discovered a
physical situations with
children all of which they've
been able to alert families to
and that's why it's important to
look at the whole child.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I do
not disagree that it.
An authentic observation tool
could be used to look at the
whole trials I'm trying to
understand how it would be used
to to measure the child's
concrete understanding of
letters and numbers.
Mr addition the things that what
is the current system that we're
using.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
current system is I station for
reading.
And and there's no writing at
all in I station it's a
computerized test.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I I I definitely see that
the benefits of an observational
tool specially we're looking at
the whole child.
I'm not sure it should replace
and and I are we not using any
observational tools in the
classrooms with first second
third graders now.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
standards based assessments or
report cards that districts here
is have lots of observational.
Up on them that teacher good
teachers are constantly
observing their children and
reporting to parents guardians
and grandparents about them this
observational test doesn't mean
that other tests aren't used it
just means that we're really
practicing the best practices of
early childhood education.
Thank thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentle lady I'm that's
very exciting to hear about the
whole child approach because so
much of children's ability to
learn happens outside the school
day depends on the strength of
their family and are they need
to have their basic needs that
and and still safe and secure in
their surroundings to be active
learners but in order for us to
measure if they are active
learners.
We have to have some sort of
assessment tool that goes beyond
observational tool which I
believe is perfectly appropriate
prekindergarten even even for
the entry exam that we're giving
up on it in terms of
kindergarten which is supposed
to be used to measure the
success of pre K..
I just can't grasp.
We're going to stay focused and
less we're leading our focus on
third grade proficiency and
literacy.
How we are going to accomplish
that when we abandon standard
assessment and go to
observational only.
Mr speaker and gentle lady we're
not abandoning any of our past
systems and data.
We're simply.
Reminding.
Our best understanding of early
child development by re
incorporating observational
assessment.
And as I said this is phased in
over four years for the very
purpose of affected late using
our existing resources and
developing any new resources
that are needed to do this
effectively thus we responded to
the superintendents request not
to mandate any of this in the
next school year thank you Mr
speaker and thank you gentle
lady As You stays the
observational tool in what do
you envision being phased out.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is something that PED will be
working with I don't anticipate
things being phased out I yes
excuse me I envision the
recognition that observational
assessment is an essential tool
for early childhood education
which technically goes up to
third grade but we are stopping
in at second grade thank thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady I I concur with your point
it is also extremely time
intensive.
From the training to the
implementation to the data
entry.
That means it is extremely
expensive our teachers will need
additional time out of their
classrooms to do this work.
And is there a fiscal impact in
your bill.
There is no fiscal impact for
the coming year Mr speaker
gentle lady because it's not
imposed in the coming years that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady are
kindergarten teachers are
already trained in observational
assessed that they've been doing
it for the last three years.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady I I have been
noticing that the speaker has
referred bills that have a
deferred fiscal impact to the
Appropriations Committee and I'm
I I just I'm very concerned that
perhaps we haven't thought about
how labor intensive this as our
pre K. programs which have to
teachers out the most twenty
students with two teachers
typically twenty students with
three teachers need an entire
day.
To to finalize and document
their observations and enter
them into a computer system this
is not I'm not saying it's not
worthy it is not a cheap
endeavor this is going to be an
expensive endeavor.
And if it is added on top of the
existing standard assessments
which are critical to measuring
our student outcomes that we are
progressing towards third grade
proficiency.
Is going to be an additional
burden on the school districts
and on the classrooms and I
don't know that we have had
enough conversation about what
this looks like an application
and cost for me to support your
bills thank you Mr speaker thank
you generating enough for the
debate gentle lady to close.
Thank you for this discussion I
now move that do pass for house
bill two twenty one as amended.
We are on final passage of house
bill two twenty one as amended
the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The councilmembers without a
recorded vote Representative
Alcon.
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Stansbury.
Yes.
Representative Stansbury both
yes Representative Sweetser yes
Representative Sweetser both
yes.
Is now closed by a vote of forty
two in the affirmative twenty
one in the negative house bill
two twenty one as amended has
duly passed the house last bill.
Item number nine.
Gentleman from Lincoln and
Otero.
Representative Cook.
Are you ready another number
nine I'm ready Mr speaker.
With the record reflect all
action necessary for placing
House Bill three oh three.
On final passage has been taken
the settlement to explain the
bill.
Mr speaker H. B. three oh three
events the trade practice
section in the liquor control
act.
To bring all licensees under
that statute.
Two three tiers are presently
covered by this law and this
simply brings the retail tear
into the trade practice little
practice law and with that Mr
speaker stand for questions.
There is debate the gentleman
from Cibola and.
Great.
the generation Dona Ana
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you Mr speaker all the
gentleman of cheese you are you.
Thank you I was just wondering
what types of things are
happening at the retail level
that you know the persuasion and
what's the difference between
persuasion and marketing.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady to hold on one second I
have a expert here with me the
expert in the industry in one
second.
John from the Connecticut
Tero holy holy we lost
connection.
Now Mr speaker I'm just
consulting with my expert
It's telling me that in in the
retail that that retailers are
allowed to to receive things
that that the other two years of
not so what I've learned
recently is that the liquor
industry is a three tiered
system that.
Many fracture in the dish and
then the distributors and in the
the the retail that level and
So the the lower level is
allowed to to receive gifts from
the higher tiers and what this
would do is just prohibit them
from it would put them in the
same playing field as the as the
other two tiers.
Mr speaker and gentleman
are we that includes things like
promotional items that for
certain.
You know like wiser forces that
you know sometimes they have big
lamps or full plants and things
like that Mr speaker and gentle
lady that's correct is as well
as like free advertising and
things along those lines.
Okay and Mr speaker and
gentleman who is your expert.
Your muted I'm sorry so sorry Mr
speaker Mr leader it's it's
Jimmy Bates.
Is he owns several liquor
businesses in Albuquerque New.
I think just Albuquerque
measures.
Mr speaker and gentleman is this
Something it's a problem between
different retailers that this is
his.
In order to preserve have you
present additional.
Yes Mr speaker and gentle lady
it's a mostly just a matter of
fairness.
Four I'm sorry Mr speaker for
and gentlemen for what so that
the to the two upper tiers are
regulated situated they can't
participate in these kind of
activities that the last year is
is allowed to to receive
gifs in advertising promotional
products.
This would just bring them into
the same regulatory still is the
other teachers and districts.
Okay Mr speaker and gentleman I
just can't support this bill
thank you.
Mexico gentlelady from
Bernalillo Representative Lewis.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from licking county
yield I yield.
So part of it thank you Mr
speaker and gentlemen so part of
that title in your well as
inducements I just want to make
sure that what we're not
inducing anyone that.
Not.
Twenty one years and over.
Mr speaker gentle lady that's
correct we are not do you see
anybody that's under the legal
drinking age that would be
illegal thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentlemen so what is
the purpose of inducements.
General.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lincoln I don't think I heard
the answer what is the purpose
of inducements.
Mr speaker and gentle lady to.
I'm not sure if I understand the
question are you saying why
would people choose distance.
So part of your title Mr speaker
and gentle man as that it has
inducements so I'm particularly
interested in.
Who are you trying to induce F.
F..
We're talking about people that
are over the age of twenty one
and then who are you trying to
induce.
Mr speaker and generally the
bill is intended to prohibit the
use of it and Spence.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for your answers that's all
I have.
Mr the main gentlelady from
Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm I guess
I'm just confused so you're
talking about the the the items
that the retailers can have that
the other two levels can't are
things like promotional items
but I and you it seems to me
like you would want Mr speaker
you would what the promotional
items at the retail level not at
that distributor or or
manufacturing level so I guess
I'm just totally confused.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I.
Of I guess every level may want
to induce people to purchase
more of their product and at
this time that to upper tiers
are prohibited from doing that
and this would
Regulate the lower tier at the
same level as the opportunity to
part two teachers are regulated
just to make it all fair so that
nobody can use these inducements
along the entire distribution
chain.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman but I maybe I could
see a distributor of the
manufacturer may want to get the
distributor to choose their
product but who would that what
the manufacturer be trying to
entice.
I mean who I just I guess.
I guess I just don't understand.
Can you put it this way can you
tell me what it has been a
problem I mean is there is this
at a solution in search of a
problem or is there problem
you're trying to fall.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
legislation in the past have
prohibited the manufacturers and
the wholesalers from providing
inducements this bill would
bring their retailers into that
same regulatory scheme such that
none of the channels a longer
discussion training.
Able to use in these funds.
Mr speaker and gentleman just
one more question so is that
that they can use them or they
can accept them.
Mr speaker gently.
Okay thank you thank you Mr
speaker.
Seen over the debate.
Gentleman to close.
Mr speaker I move that House
Bill three oh three do now pass.
in a gentleman before we go to
the vote I have a a note here
Harry potter called any would
like his glasses.
We.
We are on final passage of house
bill three oh three.
The vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call those that are
recorded.
Senator Eli Representative Ely
both yes Representative and then
that.
Representative Hernandez will
yes Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Representative Stansbury.
Representative Townsend.
Let's not closed by a vote of
forty nine in the affirmative
fifteen a negative house bill
three zero three has duly passed
house.
Gentlelady familia.
Thank you Mr speaker we could
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objection it is so
ordered.
Are there any nonsense the
gentleman from Bernalillo
chairman Martinez.
Thank you Mr speaker good
evening members house taxes
meeting tomorrow at eight thirty
have a great evening see
tomorrow.
Generally the state nine thirty.
Eight thirty Mr speaker nine
three.
Getting the chairman of the the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
house commerce committee will
not be meeting Friday of
tomorrow or this weekend but
we'll be getting back with a
long agenda Monday afternoon no
commerce meeting tomorrow
afternoon thank you.
Members say no the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Lewis.
There any other announcements Mr
speaker the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Montoya
thank you Mr speaker of house
Republicans will be having a
caucus meeting tomorrow at three
thirty in room three eighteen.
Members take note.
Oh what a beautiful morning.
The Johnson Bernalillo chairman
or Romero.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
Education Committee will meet
tomorrow or well later on at
eight this morning I think
you're right.
Members take note are there
other announcements the
generating Dona Ana
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm not
sure our chairman still up but
our house health and Human
Services Committee will meet at
eight thirty tomorrow morning.
The chairman Armstrong is she
has been voting she is.
She is still up.
Are there other LCS.
Many other announcements.
Mr speaker gentlelady from
Bernalillo rancher blue.
Thank you Mr speaker the state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee will meet and
eight hours at nine AM.
Members take note are there any
announcements.
Gentlelady firm Dona Ana.
Thank you Mr speaker I move we
address four thirty PM.
Today thank you members we had a
very good meeting present all
the good hard work anyone still
out there watching online please
watch your committees tomorrow.
We'll be back at four thirty PM
tomorrow as a reminder to
members will have the floor
session Saturday starting at
twelve thirty and in other
