Members of the House roll call
is open.
Mr speaker.
Your attention.
German the joint column called
so we're not announcements I I
can't recognize you we're on the
roll call vote if you want to
come just question your please
do.
Okay.
Question gentleman you're not
recognized we are on a roll call
vote please just come over here
and ask a question if you have
one.
This.
Members roll call is closed.
Please rise for today's in
vocation offered to us by the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative bash.
Let us pray.
Dear lord as we do the work that
is before us today we pray that
you would give us wisdom and
compassion for the people we
serve.
May our judgments be founded our
decisions be just.
We thank you for all the gifts
that you've given us including
the opportunity to serve the
state of New Mexico in your name
we pray in.
The gentle lady the gentleman
from Santa Representative
Hernandez please leave this in
the pledge of allegiance.
The gentleman from San Miguel
city the Torrance Representative
Castellano would you please
listen saluting New Mexico just
like.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker and members of the
house I am back.
Mr.
I move that we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
no objections so ordered.
We're glad madam leader for the
power of hashtags hashtag.
Save Cheryl has worked wonders
welcome back.
Members I want to announce we
emailed out a list of bills to
be considered today the list of
that we're gonna start with
rather the bill members are
correct the item numbers are
not.
There was a repeat of the you
know is a guest today and as we
went from yesterday's for
calendar two today's for
calendar.
The item numbers change because
we passed some bills so we're
resetting that you the list of
bills with the correct item
number.
the floor calendar before us.
does match the floor calendar
that is on the website is
mandeeces email.
Has been redone with the correct
item numbers.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker.
It not being eleven fifty nine
AM I move we adjourn until
twelve OO one PM no objection it
is so ordered.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the journal
show all those present in this
morning session are present in
this afternoon session
interjection is so ordered Mr
speaker I ask unanimous consent
that the rules be suspended and
that the record show that the
judge has been read.
Subject to the approval of the
rules of the of the business
committee no objection is
ordered.
Are there other assets.
Okay we'll be getting a minute.
We'll be getting a minute or two
the bills will take up if once
we get to the end of the list of
sent out this morning.
Okay gentlelady from Bernalillo
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business third
reading of legislation no
objection it is so ordered
gentleman from Santa
Representative Harper are you
ready a hassle to seventy seven.
Mr speaker I spoke with the
record reflect all action
necessary for placing House Bill
to seventy seven as amended on
final passage has been taken
down to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and good
afternoon ladies and all of the
house.
So house bill two seventy seven
is a constituent issue that was
brought to my attention.
Last year this constituent money
very early in life and his
career I was married and then
divorced.
When purchased of worst named
his spouse as is her a budget
you're.
Having such include remarried
and both maintaining a great
relationship.
she would like to this is
current spouse as permanent
fishery in this former spouse is
supportive of that actually
happy to.
Find a written statement to that
effect under current law that's
not possible.
So what this bill does is it
allows her retiree a one time
your local option to designate a
different individual that was
designated previously.
Now this requires a notarized
statement from the currently
But designated individual
relinquishing that benefit.
General close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that to hospital to seventy
seventy pass we are on final
passage of house bill two
seventy seven as amended the
vote is now open.
The clerk to call the members
that are recorded.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative upon both yes
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lujan yes
Representative Lujan is yes
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid yes
Representative Madrid is a yes
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
is a yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative ream.
My board is not working.
Okay the vote is now closed by
the sixty three in the
affirmative zero negative house
bill two seventy seven as
amended has duly passed the
house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative very rare Siri
ready on item number eight.
I was born ready Mr speaker can
you take me to that point please
let the record reflect on
actions.
The record reflect election is
sorry for placing House Bill one
ninety two as amended on final
passage has been taken
gentlelady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and great
members of this body I'm here to
present for your consideration
house bill one ninety two
modernizing the Human Rights
Act.
I'm a proud New Mexicans and one
of the many things that makes me
so proud of our home is that we
truly are multicultural
multiracial and incredibly
diverse state with the power of
knowing that our strength is in
our differences.
I believe that is one reason we
have had such a strong and
powerful Human Rights Act or non
discrimination law in our state
for so long.
We were only the third state in
the entire country to add gender
identity to our law protecting
our transit we across the next.
This bill is an effort to
further strengthen clean up and
modernize the language in this
act to reflect our values as New
Mexicans house bill one ninety
to clean the pollute all but as
long existed in our Human Rights
Act it allows for taxpayer
funded discrimination this
loophole I believe was never
intended to be left open.
I our our Human Rights Act
prohibits discrimination by
employers and housing and public
accommodations but Mr speaker
public accommodations are
narrowly defined as training or
selling goods or services to the
public the reality is that many
state agencies and their
contractors as well as local
governments provide services but
it's not for the public examples
include child youth and families
department staff in child
protective services.
Education institutions and other
entities that are paid for by
tax bills actor dollars.
This bill adds state agencies
and public bodies to the Human
Rights Act to protect New
Mexicans.
The other thing this bill does
is clean up the language
regarding people with
disabilities Human Rights Act
use outdated and rather
insulting language and are we
have to modernize it to reflect
the language we now know we
should be using with that Mr
speaker I think you and I stand
for questions.
Another survey the gentleman
from curry Representative
Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
please you.
Yes I yield thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker Dilip the
mentioned yesterday that this
bill shows on the FIR to have an
eight hundred and fifty nine
thousand dollar impact in FY
twenty two and then eight
hundred eighty five thousand
dollar fiscal impact in the year
twenty three but yet it did not
go to the house appropriation of
finance committee so Mister
speaker gentle lady as workforce
solutions agreed to just absorb
this cost or are they gonna come
back and ask for more money to
hire the eight new employees
that the FIR says they need or
can you tell me about those
discussions we didn't get to
hear this appropriation so I
have I have some curiosities.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman the situation with
workforce solutions is I there
was a they they agreed that
their houses presume that public
employees were not already
covered by the Human Rights.
And the reality is that they
they are.
Mr speaker gentle lady I think I
just heard you say that all the
local government county
government all those governing
bodies folks are covered in and
There will be no expense is that
correct gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman if I
could I would like to live brief
we talk about this with my
expert witness news Marshall
Martinez and I will be right
back to get clarification for
you thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker July the
second time.
Thank you so much Mr speaker and
thank you gentlemen for your
patience with me the fiscal
impact was what what what are
workforce solutions I was the
fiscal impact was because they
thought that we were adding
thousands of employees
To the the the civil rights are
in the queue the human rights
law what we're actually doing
the were already covered for
actually doing is adding service
provisions.
From these agencies.
Just to be clear there has been
less than ten cases in the last
forty years so we do not believe
that that there will be back
back to school impact.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
for very much so I also notice
in here that the other fiscal
implications it talks about
increase to the state's legal
defense costs so how much of
this funding that we're looking
at it is due to your legal
defense costs and gentle lady
would be if it's okay I'd like I
like to know your expert witness
Martinez is employed by please.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I'm I'm working with
the Marshall Martinez is the
interim director for equality
New Mexico.
And and if it's okay with you I
would like to have converse with
them one more time I to get you
a clear and concise answer thank
you gentlemen.
Thank you so much are Mr speaker
and and gentleman when it comes
to the the legal defense costs
we actually believe that that
this will reduce costs and the
reason that we believe that is
because right now if there is
discrimination you have to go
directly to court.
And and with the with this bill
What would happen is you would
you would go to the the Human
Rights Commission to even see if
you have a case so we see those
costs actually coming their.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I sure hope you're right I I
noticed that some of what the
requesting those are asking for
investigators and so if there's
a complaint filed.
They're gonna have to have
someone to go out there and
investigate that before can
the Helder dealt with so I I I
sure hope you're right I did
notice it association the court
said that
There are several laws that
already governor's behaviors I
understand your bill all you're
doing is causing this bill to
reach out canopy over the top of
cities and counties and all
government agencies is that
correct gentle lady Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman you are
correct.
Thank you
I appreciate it
I I. positive that wanting to
accept.
The hope that this will be a
less expensive and save money I
sure hope you're right thank you
Mr speaker.
This further debate the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
lady from Bernalillo yield.
Mr speaker I gladly of thank
you.
Thank you Mr speaker and lady
from Bernalillo I'm not I don't
really believe that I have a
question but I do have a little
history here.
As I was the sponsor of the
original amendment to the Human
Rights Act that ended
discrimination based on sexual
orientation and gender identity
what what I see here is.
Actually simple clarification of
the law.
Frankly I do not believe that
any of us who voted in favor of
that bill who advocated for that
bill back in two thousand and
three and then we had to make a
minor correction in two thousand
and four because when enrolling
in grossing problem.
I don't think any of us realized
this wasn't covered.
So what you're doing is
clarifying in is I read it the
administrative office of the
courts there have been very few
losses is appreciate for clarity
and additional guidance to
public bodies and governmental
entities as well as applicant's
employees and the public that
this is a requirement.
And it.
It would be where bill.
I really appreciate the fact
that AOC contends administrative
office of the courts not the U.
S. representative from your the
administrative office of the
courts further contends that
this clarity along with
appropriate compliance
enforcement which should be
showing we're very minimal
because it's a.
Our technical correction could
reduce liabilities to the state
and legislative mechanism for
candidates and vice.
I'm.
Public to seek and his rust
administrative reveille remedies
if they believe that the
unlawfully discriminated against
but it was never the intention
of the
legislation initial legislation
not to include public bodies so
I've used this as one of those
things that.
White sometimes sixteen
seventeen years later we're
saying you know we better
clarify this year in the law.
And
I that's why I believe that the
there was a misunderstanding
because of a lack of knowledge
of history and application of
this law
In in constructing man FY are we
have that discussion in a
previous committee and I think
it was in state government and
I said then and I stand by that
to date that I think that FY are
was absolutely wrong and it
sounds as if you have actually
clarified through some
discussion we just don't have a
an updated FY are in our hands
right now so with that Mr
speaker and make burly off I
stand in strong support of your
legislation and let me know if
you have any other.
Any other history.
On this particular issue
I yield thank you.
Thank you ladies for the debate
the gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative of my
part.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady you.
Thank you Mr speaker I will
gladly yield to the gentleman
from Chavis and Lincoln.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady after
of we went through this and
committee I got to reading this
a little bit closer.
And had some additional
questions.
And one one of the questions or
one of my concerns
Is.
I believe the the department of
corrections would fall under a
state agency pursuant to section
one paragraph you of this
legislation is that correct.
Or as my understanding correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman your
understanding is correct.
And so here here's my here's my
concern.
Mr speaker gentle lady the
department of corrections.
In trying to protect the safety
of those who are in their
custody.
I think go through a process
that does.
Discriminate and does so to
protect those individuals from
from harm from other individuals
and I'm I'm just grappling with
whether providing housing
accommodations which is defined
in section one paragraph J..
Whether we need to find for some
mechanism to allow the
department of corrections to
properly fulfill its role keeps
the inmates Senator.
And yet.
Fulfill the desires of of your
legislation and there may need
to be a
An amendment for an exception
made with respect to the
department of corrections and I
don't know if Mr speaker gentle
lady whether you discuss that
specifically with them but that
was one issue that popped out
after we had our discussions and
committee so my question would
be Mr speaker gentle lady did
you specifically go through this
with the department of
corrections and did they give
their blessing to this
legislation.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman if I can talk with my
my expert I will I'll get right
back you think.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentleman from Chavis and we
can for your awful our questions
and also your patience with me
the short answer for the second
part of your question is no we
did not have direct
conversations with the
department of corrections and
then.
Just to elaborate on that
The R. the Human Rights
Commission is well versed in
knowing the difference between
discrimination and just when
somebody is being treated
differently.
Mr speaker gentle lady I thank
you for this legislation moves
forward it might be helpful to
have that discussion to make
sure that they themselves are
comfortable with the language of
the executive department is
comfortable that this does not.
And do we create some problems
with them the department of
corrections and I would just
Why that out for you the those
discussions may be of vital for
for the same to maybe get the
governor's support if it gets
that far Mr speaker gentle lady
thank you.
This for the debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr Kharola gentlelady
yields for just a couple of
questions.
Mr speaker I will gladly I yield
to the gentleman thank you.
The state can is or.
Municipal.
Governmental authorities be
required as a consequence of
this legislation to alter or
modify any facilities.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
believe so but let me let me
just get a clarification on that
okay.
Mr speaker and gentleman now.
Thank you for.
One last question.
We hear the Civil Rights Act
which is it is signed by the
governor.
Will allow all.
Restrict persons if you will to
become involved in these civil
rights human rights issues how
would you say that legislation
interacting with this piece of
legislation.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman just give me one one
second.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen we actually don't see
the the two interacting and
that's because the final version
of house bill four that we
passed only applies to the New
Mexico bill right.
Pollution lady only plans to.
The New Mexico bill of rights or
anti Mr speaker and gentleman
The New Mexico will.
Thank you thank you truly for
your answers.
Just for the debate the
gentleman from the
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
Mr speaker I will gladly yield
from my fellow freshman from
from return.
Thank you but I think I have one
simple question
two simple questions
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Would you agree that over the
last forty some odd days that.
We reviewed and debated a
multitude of.
The legislation with respect to
exempting.
The
Public body or state agencies
from the legislation that.
We are considering.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
I would state now but that
really just depends on I'm here
your personal opinion.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I can
think of six bills and six
pieces of legislation off the
top of my head that we is
specifically exempted state
agencies from our legislation
process and so to get to the
point.
What is specific about this bill
that makes this so important in
your mind and the the the the
other Sanchez minds that we make
sure that we're inclusive the
state government.
With respect to this when.
Over the last forty days Mr
speaker and gentle lady we have
done everything to exclude state
government from our doctor our
our legislation thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I I am a taxpayer of
we we're all we're all taxpayers
this piece of legislation is
important to me personally
because I don't want my taxpayer
dollars to be used or
government funded
discrimination.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I would challenge
that a majority of the
legislation that we've done
Over the last forty days has
done exactly that and different
areas so I do appreciate your
response Mr speaker I yield
that.
Si no further debate the gentle
lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker at this
time I moved to of passed house
bill one ninety two as amended
we are on final passage of house
bill one ninety two is amended
the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
But the members without a
recorded vote Representative
Anderson.
Yes Representative Anderson both
yes.
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary both yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative small.
Yes Representative
Representative small boats yes
Representative closed road fifty
two in the affirmative fourteen
and negative house bill one
ninety two as amended has duly
passed the house.
Next we go to house bill one
eighty eight gentlelady from
Bernalillo are you ready on that
item.
Yes I am Mr speaker when you get
to that point the record reflect
on action necessary for placing
House Bill when eighty eight is
amended on final passage has
been taken gentlelady to explain
it all thank you Mr speaker
house bill one eighty eight as
amended the bill to support our
teachers by creating a license
endorsement for secondary
computer science with that Mr
speaker I stand for questions.
Seeing no debate the gentle lady
to close thank you Mr speaker I
move house bill one eighty eight
as amended do now pass passage
of house bill one eighty eight
is amended to vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call those without
a recorded vote Representative
Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya votes
yes Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
There is a closer to sixty five
in the affirmative zero negative
house bill one eighty eight is
images to the passed the house.
Mexico to house bill two
nineteen.
These are fifteen gentlelady
from Bernalillo Representative
Garrett are you ready on that
item.
Mr speaker what you get me to
that point the record reflect
election necessary freezing
Hospital to nineteen as amended
on final passage has been taken
gentlelady to explain the.
Mr speaker house bill two
nineteen US prices mandate is
the by literacy development
framework task force it creates
a working group of local experts
to work with PED to develop by
literacy an oral language
development and to especially
focus on oral language that
emphasizes tribes and indigenous
language revitalization.
I can you know to my co sponsor
for a brief addition Mr speaker
Representative Trujillo.
This.
Leo Representative Trujillo yes
thank you Mr chair members of
the body I very strongly support
this bill because
many studies have already shown
that being by literate is not
just being bilingual bilingual
is the ability to speak two
languages but by literacy
actually of allows you and helps
you to to.
Our process information in in
two or more languages so
this bill is a long time coming
we needed in public education
and I think might might lead
sponsor for supporting it.
Mr speaker that we stand for
questions.
There's debate the gentle lady
from Chavis Representative ease
L..
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the gentle lady from
Bernalillo you'll place are you
know the gentle lady.
Mr speaker I have had a chance
to read your bill here can you
tell me put them in does please
yes the first amendment adds the
legislative finance committee to
the parties that will receive
the report in December the
second amendment removes the
appropriation because two
representatives are giving their
junior buddy just support this
bill okay that was that was my
main question there Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
Is there a witness is supposed
to take place.
Will take place of within ninety
days after it signed.
Okay Mister speaker and with it
taking place ninety days after
the if it is signed is that
going to be enough time because
she said this is going to be
done in December is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is correct and the advocates I
worked with believe that this is
adequate time and I will add
that the spell originated with
of Representative Tomas Salazar.
Okay Mister speaker and gentle
lady of what will be on this
group like I said I have not had
a chance to read it yet I just
want some clarification here.
I'm working group will include.
Local experts and culturally and
linguistically responsive
instruction tribal language
experts designated by the
tribe's service providers
including special education
providers were especially want
to make sure we include oral
language development frameworks
since some languages are not
written languages.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
is this.
Statewide just one certain area.
Mr speaker gentle lady this is a
state wide since we have tribal
groups
from throughout the state.
And that's what I wanted to make
sure the gentle lady thank you
very much for your responses.
Si no further debate gentle lady
to close.
Mr speaker I now move a do pass
for House Bill to nineteen is
twice amended final passage of
house bill two nineteen is
amended the vote is now open.
That includes call members of
that recorded a Representative
Pettigrew.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend both
yes.
Representative closed Friday's
vote sixty four the Fuhrman of
one of the negative house bill
two nineteen as amended has duly
passed the house.
Next that item sixteen.
The gentleman from Colfax curry
hardy quite results in the field
and you are you ready on house
bill two five six Mr speaker can
you get me to that point the
record reflect on action
necessary for placing commerce
and economic development
committee substitute for house
bill two fifty six on final
passage has been taken gentleman
to explain it all.
Mr speaker but bring before you
today health Kerr commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill two
fifty six this is an act
requiring the aging and long
term Services Department to
convene a task force to
determine the feasibility of
launching elder workforce
development opportunities in
selected tribal and rural
communities.
Speaker this task force would do
asset mapping and gas gap
analysis.
on services of support elder
independence.
Services like home.
Deliver meals or congregate
meals transportation to the
doctor health services.
Elnur workforce opportunities
and training projected
employment opportunities in
education and that you could be
something like a computer class
to help them deal with
the various things they need to
deal with in their life or
possibly training some of the
paper of people in these very
rural communities in them
ability to help take care of the
older folks various medical
skill required.
Mr speaker I would like to
relinquish some of my time to my
co sponsor of the gentleman from
Rio Arriba Sandoval and San Juan
families representative Lente
the.
Certainly the gentleman from
Santa Bernalillo.
Rio Arriba Sandoval San Juan
Representative Lente.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman from all those
counties just to the point
regards to workforce development
for elders in tribal lands in
rural New Mexico without a doubt
our population New Mexico is
getting older many of them wish
to maintain their mobility by
receiving second job or at least
providing some opportunity for
them to be part of the work
force and also it it's a fact
that many of our elders now have
grandchildren or great
grandchildren that they are
responsible for so some of them
need to get a job to help to
support these these children and
their households and so
providing the an opportunity
like this for further study as
to how we can help these
elderly's in those very spaces
in our state is going to be well
well deserved and well needed so
with that Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you probably
part of this bipartisan support
for elderly in our state thank
you Mr Mr speaker.
Thank you John.
Gentleman from doctor you have
the floor.
Representative Chatfield the
floor is yours Mr speaker I
stand for questions.
In general you reside in the
Baca County is that correct.
Mr speaker I reside in Harding
county I represent Colfax curry
Harding quay Roosevelt San
Miguel and you can these well
then unity I was I was off
apologize just wanna make sure
Jennifer Harding.
there is debate Jennifer
Bernalillo Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker.
And
gentleman
Will the gentleman from
Leave at apple Levi Garcia
country yield.
Mr speaker I gladly yield to my
friend the kind gentleman.
Thank you and then
You know miss madam speaker and
gentleman the.
This is a really admirable and
kind of detail piece of
legislation I really appreciate
this.
one question that has the most
Baker is
Is this all new language.
The substitute.
It is it on the line which is
this a brand new section that's
going to be going into this and
despite you.
hello Mister speaker gentleman
the the substitute basically
stripped funding that was in the
original bill and the secretary
will pay for this
Yes fourth with the key piece of
regular senior dignity fund
which is.
Funding that she hasn't heard
but.
Okay thank you for that
The gentleman from the right
Garcia country.
The legislation that focuses on
elders sixty in over.
And that in general from the
legacy of country on page four.
you've got some terms that I
really wanna be familiarized
with.
On that page four nine sixteen
and seventeen you've got to
research concepts that I that I
really want to understand what
they need one is asset mapping
in the other one is gap
analysis.
Mr speaker and gentleman what
that means is that they will
look and see what for Services
are provided where are the meal
sites would do they have
transportation what assets are
there in gap analysis means what
services are needed so what's
the gap between the services
that we have.
In the services that are needed
and I can tell you in many of
these communities where the
young people have moved away and
the older folks are still there
that that gap is great
of the services that are
normally available to our elders
in the beauty of the cities are
just not there for senior
citizens most of the folks grew
up out there they grew up in the
in the rural areas and to move
them into the city into an old
folks home can be a death
sentence I just a it's not to
where there is natural used to
being in also we're what we're
trying to do is to see what
assets we have out there well
what are we able to provide for
them in the past and what is the
need you know what we need to
give these give respect to our
elders to give them
just the dignity of life in the
in that maybe a maybe a class in
computers maybe a maybe there's
someone that needs a home meal
set them home meals delivered or
or just a ride to the doctor so
asset mapping gap analysis what
do we have what we need so.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from the wind Garcia
country are thank you for
clarifying that.
That question with concrete
examples.
Appreciate that and I value your
you championing our elders
gentleman from the right Garcia
country on page out I you
basically are lines of four and
five.
basically state that the that
these analysis will be conducted
within three rural counties and
three tribal communities see
more speaker what are those
counties and tribal communities.
They're the most rural counties
to my knowledge of in New Mexico
and some of the counties that I
represent a it would be Harding
you.
And I believe Colfax.
Counties in the all tribal.
Communities that are having that
are very rural.
Thank you Mr speaker John from
the right Garcia country are.
Again here sponsor addressed the
federal communities that they've
been identified or it's still
kind of in play is the most
bigger.
Mr speaker I yield to my cool
Fund.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo county thank you for
that question the three tribal
entities that are going to be
looked at are going to be the
the Navajo Nation one Pueblo and
one of the one of the Apache
nation either he Correa or
Mescalero but that is yet to be
determined Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Thank you thank you so much
speaker and gentleman from the
like I see a country
This must be
You know this is metal piece of
legislation and
And the gentleman that's
bringing this legislation
forward is to be commended as
well.
And estimates speaker of the
reason I always address the
gentleman.
from all those counties as
The gentleman from Levi Garcia
country.
Is because of you my second
cousin who's passed away.
And every time I mention his
name.
A tear comes to the eyes of the
gentleman from the one car see a
country.
Because the my Garcia this must
be
Broke the race barrier.
In terms of the National rodeo
scene.
He was the first Chicano.
To participate on the National
rodeo seen as a champion Roper.
You got that title numerous
times.
and even as the most beaker up
even to as anything into his
fifties.
Are the right Garcia was
receiving all round complex
doesn't nations here in our
state.
And
I was fortunate to attend the
last in all there at Raleigh I
school gymnasium.
And.
Every cowboy from Lee County.
Do you County from someone
County Harding County.
Was in attendance.
That's how much admired this
gentleman was.
One of the top cop was in New
Mexico has seen.
And
every time I look at my.
More money all from all those
counties.
You know I I think of my my
second cousin.
And so thank you as the mile
gentleman
and thank your co sponsors
wealth and give this last week.
The gentleman the the three
caliber you Harding and clay.
And Mr speaker gentleman here
because of those were widely
recognized as having one more
money than any other amateur
Roper in the world they did an
article about.
Thank you madam speaker.
This for the debate the gentle
lady from Catherine Sikora and
let's see a Representative Gail
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker role the
kind gentleman yield.
Mr speaker I Bradley you.
Thank you Sir and Mr speaker and
I'm wondering if this is just a
start Mr speaker to possibly
expanding across the state in
rural New Mexico is that the
intent Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady of that
is the intent to as you well
know our rural counties are the
the younger people move away the
population grows less and
population becomes older so the
many services that it takes to
help our elders is still ongoing
live remain in their home remain
healthy be able to take care of
themselves well they're just not
available in our rural
communities and I think it's
time that we call attention to
that and that we did something
about it thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker kind
gentleman I couldn't agree with
you more I want to support your
legislation and
just want everyone on the floor
to note that these are the kinds
of services and the kinds of
things that we need in rural New
Mexico are just to bring it to
everyone's attention Mr speaker
kind gentleman I've been
hustling and fighting for
hospice services.
And catching County New Mexico
which we have none of.
So Mr speaker kind gentleman I
will be supporting your bill and
I and await the outcome at.
Anxiously await the outcome Mr
speaker kind gentleman and the
expansion of it into other areas
in New Mexico thank you Mr
speaker pendulum.
This was for the debate the
gentleman from the
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker give me
just a minute of it the non
stacks on.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
all those find counties can you
would you would you please Mr
speaker I yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman not
have the the pleasure of the pin
your office mate during the
session and I understand your
passion towards this
legislation.
Can can you do me a favor and
give me a little bit more
history on on how long you've
been working towards us thank
you Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
By I lived I lived in a very
remote area on the rage my
father in law
recently.
The way in into is ninety so
force many several years before
that he required the you know a
little more attention left folks
do when they get up in their
nineties and is really hard to.
To provide the adequate medical
services that were in will reach
of of our area.
Well one of my neighbors.
Husband got Alzheimer's.
And she was although the board
with her she could not find
someone to look after her
husband while she did the simple
act of attending a board meeting
or to go out and have lunch with
her friends there was absolutely
no place that was qualified to
take care of her husband as I
need when I go to tell my I see
many of the folks I'm at an age
now that I knew.
A lot of those folks when they
were we're young and they're no
longer young and they need they
need medical attention some of
them just need a meal with
someone to visit we do have meal
sites of.
We do have a folks deliver meals
but are they fully are the well
funded off often times they rely
on federal funding that may or
may not be there the programs
come and go we need to look at
the funding for these programs
that we have are the adequate or
the adequately funding do they
need other resources there's a
big is the building that they're
house the inadequate so.
How well are we respecting our
elders you know us.
I grew up in a time when the
that we had extended families
and young people looked after
the old people and that's
continues to exist today but not
to the extent that it did in the
past a lot of the young folks
had to move away to get a job so
how can we see to it that our
elders are well cared for oil
House will Fred and that their
medical needs are met.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman yeah it is here where
I'm from Lee County and and
My family existed in Lee County
before it was Lea County.
And and the I believe that we.
Well I come from I was raised Mr
speaker and gentleman that
there's certain things that we
do in life.
One of those is we take care of
those that that raised us.
And and the that that's
important to me.
Is so important Mr speaker and
and gentleman that a hundred
percent of my house bill two
junior money with.
To the senior facilities in the
senior citizens within my
district.
To ensure that we continue to
take care of those that raised
us and
Actually created as a state.
In reality the Mr speaker and
gentleman that.
Allows us to live and make the
decisions that we're making
today.
And so.
I just I support this bill in in
Mr speaker and gentleman can you
tell me was was how you move
forward with this what the
potential impacts this would be
for for my constituents in Lee
County Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
that once we set together a
framework in the format it could
help all the citizens of the
state of New Mexico there are
some of the smaller communities
that that either travels to the
adjoining community to get a
meal or I will during my.
I'm campaigning I made it a
point to go to each of the
senior meal sites and talk to
them about of what was happening
in their community there was one
group that one community they
didn't have a facility to cook
and so there are that they were
allowed to coach young so they
have a pot left like once a once
a week because I wanted to be
able to get together and visit
with their neighbors and the end
of their other the friends that
they haven't seen for awhile of
one to one facility had the lost
federal funding and they said
they were bound and determined
to continue with the meals even
if they have the.
To work for free it's only their
own money so so we just need to
look at what we have and what we
need and we need to do that
statewide with this is a stark
us I think the the greatest gap
today is in these rural
extremely rural areas and once
we look at that and try to get
it under our belt let's look at
what the rest of the state and
see what we need.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
think.
Appreciate what you say was that
the definition of extreme rural
and we have members in our body
that that that have more cows.
Per per square mile than that
then we have people we have
people in our in our body that
the have more horses in some
areas than than that and and I
do have three communities within
within my district that that.
If you do the math and round to
a whole number of zero people
per square mile so it is
important that we continue to do
this and and we
We look at the.
Mr speaker and and try and
gentleman
I support your efforts and I am
thankful the the we have people
like you bring substantive
legislation to our body thank
you.
Thank you Mr Mr speaker I yield
but.
This further debate the
gentleman joining Act grant and
this year Representative
Terrazas.
Just us as Mr speaker
with the fine gentleman my
neighbor on the floor.
The total on the Los four give
me a moment.
Mr speaker and gentleman season
your.
Does it us yes you know a my
friend
Mr speaker and gentleman which
are us yes for
bringing this legislation one
that thank you and your co
sponsor Representative ninety
four bringing this for something
this needed for rural
communities and I just want to
thank you for for doing this and
supporting the needs that are.
They're very much needed out
here in rural in the rural
communities and so I appreciate
it and god bless you and I will
support you one hundred percent.
Through this legislation are you
thank you.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from granted dogwood
Sierra Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield Mister speaker I
yield thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen I I definitely you
know I just really grown to
appreciate your hearts and your
compassion to rural populations
and Mr speaker and gentleman and
for that I do want to thank you
for bringing this bill and you
know what the age of the average
person is in your district.
Mr speaker gentle lady I do know
the average age in my county is
sixty.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen and might might
might as fifty seven so there's
a lot of elderly and because we
are so rural there's also a lot
of needs there's a lot of gaps
in service and I will make sure
that I'm understanding the
purpose of your bill it's to
identify.
The folks that could provide the
workforce that can find the
support services it it's it's
not a rehabilitation for the
elderly it's typed in a five
employment opportunities and
service opportunities for people
who want to help the elderly.
Mr speaker gentle lady just I
want to clarify that my last
answer I know that I know that
in county where I Lee of that is
the age I think it's in some of
the others it may be a little
bit different but close to that
so the answer to your second
question is this program would
do both we with the help to
train some of the young people
and skills that would allow them
to have a job and earn money to
look after some of the elders
that are in the community it
will also analyze the
opportunity to provide training
programs for the elderly that
maybe a compute commuter class
or maybe some other type of
class that would allow them to
maybe earn a little bit of money
or do something that would help
them to stay in their home also
both training for the elderly
and training for people that
could assist the elderly thank
you Mr speaker and thank you
gentlemen and could you tell me
when you think about met the
assessment asset mapping and gap
analysis Mr speaker gentleman
with the cost of implementing
these programs be part of the
gap analysis I didn't see in
particular an analysis of cost
to implement programming is not
part of your study.
Our.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes it
would the cost would be part of
the study the the cost to
provide to perform the study is
dealt with in this bill but the
where the money comes from to do
what we find we need to do would
be a matter of a leader bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
reason why I ask is because I
believe one of the reasons there
is a gap of services in your
area and my area is because of
the low reimbursement rates that
this body appropriates to pay
people to provide services on
behalf of seniors Mr speaker and
gentleman you start
appropriations are you aware
that we find our home health
providers those that provide
period care those that go in and
do personal care less than
fourteen dollars an hour for the
service call our well I minimum
wage is approaching it just came
to ten fifty we're wanting to
add sick paid leave for wanting
to we just imposed in a
appropriation of the bill passed
the surcharge on health care
benefits and in rural areas
there's no scale of operation to
overcome these costs the
reimbursement provided by this
body is less than the cost of
doing business there for we
can't get providers in our area
Mr speaker gentleman will that
be part of your study.
Mr speaker gentle lady our study
will include the need the gap
analysis the needs of the of
what causes the gap in our
community and the lack of
services.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you John and for that and one of
the programs that I'm really
glad that has survived in Sierra
County is the senior companion
program but I start to worry
about that as well the senior
companions foster grandparents
they they they help with meals
they spend time with each other
and they get a very low rate
wage it's not a minimum wage
they get like three or four
dollars an hour and they spend
time with elderly they check on
them check on the medications
deliver food and it's it's it
benefits both the person who's
providing the service but also
the the senior they're serving
because they get companionship
and they get checked on and they
can stay in their home saves us
a lot of money because they get
to stay in their homes longer
but it's not a minimum wage
because it was a minimum wage
account and social security
income it count against or
disability income Mr speaker
gentleman would you be looking
at the impact of maybe
legislation that we would impose
that would would would
jeopardize or I have it a
negative impact on the federal
dollars we receive our federal
programming.
Mr speaker gentle lady our area
is notable for its lack of
program so much familiarity with
so many of the programs that are
available throughout the state
is is kind of small so one of
the things that I'd be
interested in this finding out
all the various programs that
exist throughout the state in in
some of the more populated areas
that would be applicables to an
area like mine which is I always
say has seven hundred and ten
people in the county but in the
county where I live I looked it
up yesterday and it said we have
dropped to four hundred and
fifty so that makes is one of
the least populated counties in
New Mexico and probably the
United States of America so a
lot of these programs
they're not something that's in
my life right now we would like
to we would like to have some of
them up where we live thank you
Mr speaker thank you John and I
I would like to for you to have
them as well and I think one of
the reasons that you did want to
barriers you may see is that
there's not enough people to get
past the costs that we impose
that can only be covered if
there's hundreds and tens of
thousands of people to serve we
can't get past the fixed costs
in their areas and we continue
to raise the cost because I
think a lot of people think
about the service provider in
their area that may have two
hundred three hundred thousand
clients so they can get past the
fixed costs of rent or
administration or insurance or
audits or just the ability to
manage the paperwork where is in
our areas every time we impose a
higher cost without a high
reimbursement rate we're cutting
off services to seniors and I
think that's probably what's
happened in your area Mr speaker
and and gentlemen I'm I really I
wish you well I think Mr speaker
and gentleman one of the areas
that you might want to look at
is triple eight I did not know
until I was elected that that
the amount of milk the cost and
the reimbursement for meals are
senior meal sites varies from
less than three dollars a.
No to fourteen dollars mil.
I could not understand why it
varies and it kind of turned out
however I do the best for their
district sort of got a higher
reimbursement rates so I'm eyes
in my first term with it during
interim committees I go and
visit senior meal sites and I
was just shocked to see that
some senior meal sites for
spending more on these beautiful
hexagon biodegradable to go
meals that they were using for
indigent mills they're spending
more on the to go box and we
were getting for mill in my area
Mr speaker gentleman I are you
going to be looking at the
senior mill services and how
those reimbursement rates are
determined.
Mr speaker gentle lady we will
look at everything we will look
at that another thing that we
might look at is our other
people already living in that
community that are able to find
some of the services that do not
exist can they be trained they
can we help them to be able to
provide the services instead of
bringing in services from far
far away the cost lots and lots
more money so we're willing the
intent is to examine all of
those things.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you John and I I guess my final
question is why did you choose
to focus on three rural counties
in north northeast New Mexico
verses and and and and three
tribal communities versus a
statewide analysis are Mr
speaker gentle lady I think it's
wise to bite off not more than
you can choose and these are the
most rural areas of my district
it's not my entire district what
is the most rule of my district
and right now we have the
ability to address extremely
rural areas those are the areas
where the services are most
missing some of the more
populated areas they have more
services so we just chose to
look at the ones that were
extremely lacking in services
thank thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentlemen and I think
in in doing that it might be
good to look county by county
and even region by region to see
what the contracts amounts are
and what the fee for services
are because they are not
consistent statewide and
unfortunately in the rural areas
sometimes they're the lowest
when we have the highest cost
and so I would definitely
encourage you to look statewide
and I hope that this study will
reveal where we need to address
parity and we we need to address
equity and where we need to as a
body need to us to come together
and provide access for all rural
populations regardless of who's
County they reside in and Mr
speaker and gentleman I'd be
happy to point you in some
directions where I found some
shocking disparities that this
body needs to address thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentlemen.
Thank you Mr speaker thank the
lady there's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
gentleman from all of northeast
New Mexico yield.
Mr speaker I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman I just
sit in in this bill that.
The talks about providing
services to.
Those that are aged in our
communities and it talks about
the elderly workforce.
We have a program Ms and
Russell that is really a
volunteer program and it's
taking the.
retirees who have control your
skills such as former
people that lead the industry
People that have accounting for
legal backgrounds people with
various backgrounds and trying
to put together a retirement
force that can then assist other
businesses and other people in
our community with respect to
issues that arise and I was
wanting to know Mr speaker and
gentleman there anything in this
of legislation that would also
cover that water from where
we're we're asking
The retirees that our
communities to maybe band
together to supply needed
expertise needed with them with
that our communities to other
businesses people on and if the
government agencies for that
matter Mr speaker and gentleman
that is absolutely what we're
all about.
Mr speaker and gentleman of.
I'm pleased to hear that because
I think that that is critical in
this day and age that we.
C. and that we secure the
continued involvement of those
who have retired in our
community so the.
Those that are younger can learn
from them missteps can learn
from their wisdom can learn from
their experience and so I'm
pleased to to support
legislation if it covers that
waterfront because I think I I
think it's very
Critical one of the problems in
Roswell with respect to that
program is it's not well
organized so I hope that this
this task force looks at how do
we a quick local communities to
make that an effective tool
because they're not meeting
their potential Russell and I
think it is it could use a task
force to look at that make
recommendations have tool can
really be used to move forward.
Mr speaker and gentleman what a
wealth of wisdom we have in our
in our elderly you know and and
to have a full field life you
need the help you need the
medical.
services to give you that
healthy need food shelter and us
something to do with your life
that's meaningful and we have
such a great wealth and wisdom
in our older folks that we need
to utilize that in and the help
pass it on to our younger
generation.
Mr speaker and gentleman since I
didn't see the the volunteer of
the retiree volunteer force and
here
I'm glad to hear you say it
covers it and I'll be anxious to
see how this task force really
works not only around the state
but particularly in my
communities that are have a
large retirement communities
both of Lincoln County and the
Travis county and and I'll be
most interested to see their
investment the recommendations
that they have seen are retired
members of our community thank
you vantage of of the programs
that may come out of this thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen and and I would extend
my invitation to ever member of
this body as we proceed forward
in this state the in this
endeavor to help us to have
ideas that maybe as work in your
community let us let us know let
us know what works and and help
for fail the same forward in a
positive way.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen for your for your
answers and I look forward to
seeing some positive results
from the task force thank you Mr
speaker journalist.
Next we have the gentle lady
from Rio Arriba Santa Fe inTaos
Representative at at a.
Thank you Mr speaker
well the kind gentleman from
from in god's country yield.
Mr speaker I yield.
Point point of order gentle lady
from Rio Arriba Santa Fe and
Taos I don't believe it is a
good idea if you can see that
you do not represent that's
country.
Part of your district includes
a actual god's country which is
Santa Fe County so if you wish
to have a moment to revise and
extend your remarks to the
unanimous consent you can feel
free to do so.
Thank you Mr speaker I actually
believe all the counties in New
Mexico our gods counties or
god's country let me put it
you're correct your correctional
lady these risks.
kind
gentleman thank you so much for
bringing this bill forward it is
that it's vitally important to
all the rural communities in our
state and
And I think we're all just
excited to have the study done
so that we can help in the
future so that we can to help
design different programs or or
hook people up I I would like to
just remind this body that last
year this house and that was
signed by the government two
years ago I'm sorry two thousand
nineteen kinship guardian I
should bill that provided
grandparents of.
With them we funds to help raise
their grandkids and and and for
those of you who don't know
about fifty one thousand of our
kids in New Mexico live with
their grandparents so I just
wanted to remind remind the kind
gentleman that's certainly a
service that we have it will
provide them with them housing
allowances food school supplies
lots of things so if you don't
know about that bill I'd love to
talk to you about it later thank
you thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
the lady.
This further debate the
gentleman from encouraging Baca
one of the Roosevelt in San
Miguel Representative Zamora.
Thank you Mr speaker I have a
quick question with the general
in the.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield.
The gentleman from all those
counties on the bill it states
that the covers I believe three
counties in northeastern New
Mexico and then it changes the
way it covers the other landed
it says tribals.
The Navajo Nation and and I
believe a couple other tribes
can you tell me how many
counties that encompasses on
tribal and.
Mr speaker and gentleman I defer
to my co sponsor Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
for that question I I don't have
the number of how many counties
of.
trying to land in in New
Mexico is the right now said so
well does not have that
information for you Mr Mr
speaker down.
And Mr speaker and gentleman
maybe that we can rephrase that
a little bit and can you tell me
how many.
Counties are Navajo Nation.
Representative.
Gentleman I defer to my post
office.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman we have three counties
that that location sits on.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman for that answer and I
want to commend you on on
tagging.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
from north eastern New Mexico on
tag in the.
The issue with computer literacy
and our seniors.
It's I believe it's a very
important issue expression in
today's world and and what we're
doing today and this happened in
this body.
We expect and try to make it
fair for everybody but our
seniors are left behind when it
comes to computer computer
literacy we saw that in a bill
and in the.
In committee the other day where
we were trying to pass a bill
where people would have to be
computer literate to.
Be able to
Respond the to their rights
their water rights that they
have in this state and to me it
was a big issue that we were
pushing a bill fourth and.
Knowing that our farmers and our
ranchers and in New Mexico are
getting older and.
And they have a hard time
keeping up with the computer
literacy I know I had to learn a
lot in the past couple of years
and I just imagine it be a
bigger struggle far from farmers
and ranchers and and now the
rural communities and I want to
commend you for that to look
into that and and see how that
moves fourth and how we can help
our seniors in that manner.
Mr speaker German often times of
services that are available to
our seniors in the various
agencies within our state there
is not an office in that rural
community so
they are expected to go online
and apply for those services
online
They they may not have of the
skills or training to do that
some of them do some of them
don't
and the a lot of folks like well
the grant children can happen or
their children will the those of
children oftentimes of moved
away to move to a more populated
area where those job available
so so computer literacy is
important in our communities for
for all of us.
I appreciate that Mr speaker and
gentleman I look forward to
supporting this bill and see how
it helps the state of New Mexico
in the rural communities in the
seniors thank you very much
bring this bill for thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Eddie
Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr speaker I
My question has been asked and
so I will
not need to speak thank you.
Next generation Chavis
Representative these are.
Mr speaker will the gentleman
from Colfax curry Harding play
you Sierra rose fell ill please.
Mr speaker I yield.
And Mister speaker I want it
noted that I just cannot say it
is fast as he can.
Mr speaker I was not I I
understand what you want to do
with this bill but there were
some that really caught my eye
on the first page of of whenever
you're listing not first page
but whenever you're listing all
the different agencies there's
one that really just jumped out
at me because we had a huge
problem with this agency.
Non metro area eighteen of.
Non metro area agency on aging.
And Mister speaker the problem
there was I think my seniors to
just as important as any other
seniors throughout the state Mr
speaker I am one of those
seniors.
But whenever they will not would
not to couple years ago is that
recent couple of years ago seems
like our choice Centers down and
Travis county our senior centers
and Eddy County Lincoln County
and Lee County we're not
receiving funding from the north
central New Mexico economic
development district that
oversaw the non metro area
agency on aging.
enquiring came about.
Because I know that the joys
centers in Travis county.
With one and Russell one in
mid way one in Hagerman and
wanted dexter.
We're not receiving the money
that they were due from the
state.
It seems like there was a little
glitz on the part of non metro
whenever if they had a new
member joined the choice centers
because they do have general.
Those names Risin into non metro
non metro sent to the company
and to compare if where they
languished for over three
months.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman whenever funding
doesn't go down to my senior
centers.
For those in Eddy county Lincoln
County and Lee County.
And more often than not that is
the only meal our seniors are
going to get for the day I have
heartburn over that so these
agencies are listening I hope
they're taking he did I know
that there is a new guy run and
it never thank he promised to do
the best job possible and we're
holding his feet to the fire to
get that job done.
Mr speaker.
My seniors are very important to
me my seniors in my district.
More often than not those
seniors are racing either their
grand children or their great
grandchildren.
And that's reason for concern
right there because they are
getting up there in age of with
whatever the case may be they're
struggling to make ends meet.
Some of the some of them are
actually trying to go back to
work and those job opportunities
for those certain seniors are
few and far between Mr speaker
gentleman would you agree with
that.
Mr speaker gentle lady those are
exactly the types of things that
this Task Force seeks to
rectify we're going to find all
what job opportunities are out
there what Dr opportunities are
available and how can we do
things better to better serve
our elders.
Mr speaker gentleman you're
exactly right.
Our area that southeastern.
Corner of our state my heart
swells with pride for the rest
think about fought.
Degree of volunteerism we have
down there.
But with these COVID
restrictions that came into
play.
I'm very concerned Mr speaker
gentleman whenever I took it
upon myself about how once a
week I would just sit down.
Start calling some of my senior
senior strict random seniors
throughout my district.
How you doing today do you know
are you made many think what's
going on in your life.
And what I heard from the first
of March all the way through
until some of the restrictions
were lifted.
Was manning depression.
Manic depression for my seniors
one of the ones that hit me the
hardest was the gentleman that I
was talking to said.
There's no reason for me to live
anymore Mr speaker gentleman.
He said every morning I get up I
go in there to look at them to
wash my face I look in the
mirror and I sees nothing but
wrinkles shaggy gray here I
can't see my grandkids I can't
see my kids I can't go out and
see any more friends and the
manning degree of depression
that I heard from my seniors
gave me great concern.
I took it upon myself to start
calling ministers of our local
churches.
And.
The the some of the senior
centers the the executive
directors there even though they
could not be opened.
My concern was our seniors are
worth a heck of a lot.
Another one and see anybody
sinking down into the depression
level that a lot of my seniors
for getting into.
Mister speaker whenever we're
talking about the services one
of the things that really.
Hit me the hardest there's an
agency that deals with those
people that have.
Problem sync.
And it was County there is the
commission for the blind there.
There was the elder lady that
lived in dexter her eyesight was
failing very very fast.
But she wanted to be able to
work with through the computer
to get.
At.
She was very intelligent lady
but she needed some help.
I called that particular
facility in Travis county said
what's the deal here she is
called up there repeatedly and
they said.
Well she'll just have to drive
rules will and us to do not
understand that this lady can no
longer see to drive she does not
have a driver's license and
besides that you are listed as
Chavis County.
Chavis county not Russell.
Chavis county.
Mr speaker I I'm afraid that
some of these agencies.
That I have been talking about
don't realize.
The need.
For the degree of help that our
seniors need.
Mr speaker like I said all ball
into your work of volunteers
that live down there in
southeastern corner of
fantastic.
They provide.
The means for some of these
elders to get churches I don't
drive anymore to go to the
grocery store to be able to.
Just be involved.
But it kills me one of ours joys
centers down there the other
senior centers down there.
The amount of work that they do
to keep our seniors involved.
To be able to help them if they
are looking for a job to be able
to help them.
Just cope with life sometimes is
amazing.
But you know what I'm not going
to stand anymore for the state
agencies to totally disregard.
That corner the state anymore.
And I have read here for a
reason and not think of some
people up here can attest to the
fact that whenever I do blow my
top you better watch out because
Mr speaker and gentleman.
All seniors throughout the state
our important we should not
segregate them by color or
religion or whatever the case
might be.
All of our seniors are important
just like every human being in
our state Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you very much.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady there is further
debate the gentleman from
Bernalillo Cibola McKinley
Sapporo San Juan and Valencia
Representative Harry Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Well the gentleman from I scurry
parting ways overall on the year
and you come to your.
Mr speaker I yield.
What county chair.
Mr speaker and gentleman
enlighten me.
Generally if one second there's
been request for a folks through
to remove their jackets that's
just fine.
My friend from all them counties
I represent some one located
table of brown deal with this
show Bill coral colonies.
Between the both those Mr
speaker one and gentleman this
is not a question just a comment
between both those we represent
twelve counties in the state and
let me pull out of the state of
New Mexico and now I want to do
is tell you thank you what
you're doing for all our rural
communities in our and all of
our Iglesias in the state of New
Mexico thank you very much for
all the people really appreciate
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
fundament.
Next we have the gentleman from
San Juan Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
kind gentleman from Norse east
New Mexico yield Mister speaker
I yield.
Thank you gentlemen thank you
speaker
kind gentleman to the both of
you I want to thank you for
bringing forth this legislation
this legislation would greatly
benefit my district there are
most of.
Indigenous rural communities for
me this bill with.
Genuinely from both
selfsufficiency and it would
also rebuild our resiliency with
that I thank you for bringing
forth this legislation.
Thank you the two gentleman and
Mr speaker.
Thank you John Cena further
debate the gentleman to close.
Mr speaker I do now move that
has come up commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for House Bill two
fifty six do have faith grant
final passage of commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill two
five six the vote is now open.
Thank.
The clerk to call this is that a
recorded vote Representative
Lundstrom.
Those close by the sixty five in
the affirmative zero negative
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill two five six is
duly passed the house.
Next that item seventeen.
Gentleman from Bernalillo sequel
of the killing Sikora San Juan
and Valencia are you ready on
that I.
Yes Sir Mr speaker can you give
me double let the record reflect
that all action necessary for
placing commerce and economic
development committee says to
for us to to seventy on final
passage has been taken down to
explain it all Mr speaker.
Well I have reviewed your
substitute.
Okay John has been passed out.
is the two oh two number two two
zero.
Four one two points to.
Yes.
It is on the website German if
you could explain please
differences between the for
substitute and the in the bill
to be substituted.
Mr speaker I move for host for
substitute for House commerce
and economic development
committee substitute for house
bill two seventy.
Thank you John Representative
was a friendly floor substitute
would you please tell nobody the
differences between it and the
bill Mr speaker can I refer that
to my local sponsor of
Representative from from getting
a more limited I mean.
Some wonder McKinley got in
charge the.
We'll see if she isn't available
originally from committee San
Juan are you are you available
to the.
For the gentleman yield you for
question.
The president to the gentleman
from Bernalillo Representative
Maestas.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker quick
explanation we're trying to
wordsmith that in house commerce
Mr speaker and gentleman from.
From McKinley and we couldn't
get there so we passed out the
committee so it's a question of
how do we regulate.
You know how do we give the
state proper rulemaking and give
a the language in the statute
consistent with other states and
we found that middle ground
after it left commerce instead
of sending it back to commerce
we just tweaked it for the floor
so it's a fix between the
could be a bill Sanchez and the
and the industries that
That advocates on behalf of the
driverless vehicles so it's a
good amendment thank you.
Okay is there objection to the
action of the for substitute.
Is there a discussion or debate
Jonathan curry Representative
Crowder thank you Mr speaker
will the kind gentleman from
support all those counties
please you.
Is.
Thank.
Has a the industry reviewed your
floor substitute.
Taking a particular liking the
trucking industry Mr Johnson
have they read the for
substitute and their stamp of
approval.
Mr speaker I believe they have.
Thank you gentlemen thank you Mr
speaker.
K. are for the debate on the
floor substitute.
Is there objection.
To it the gentle lady from
Chavis Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker No I'm not objecting
to the floor so it's too have
questions gentlelady from
Chavis.
Speaker will the gentleman from
Bernalillo Cibola McKinley so
course in one of the Lynsey
you'll please.
They had made.
Mr speaker gentleman I do have
some questions concerning here.
Flores.
For house bill two seventy will
there be night time restrictions
on this platooning of trucks.
Mr speaker and I this up to
Michael sponsor from civil up.
Someone County Representative
Lundstrom I think she's on.
Good afternoon Mister speaker
are the gentle lady from
McKinley in San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker would you
be able to can you hear me.
Yes.
General Joe was registered
questioning in.
Okay I was curious about Mr
speaker gentleman about night
time restrictions on pollute
platooning of these trucks.
Your.
Generally the three came in San
Juan.
Mr speaker.
General you recognized.
If I may if there's no
restrictions on public to needs
on the vehicle that night.
That was coming from my expert
witness.
Okay Mister speaker whenever
we're talking about platooning.
The said that there would be no
night time restrictions fund
about restrictions for during
inclement weather.
Mr speaker just give me a second
please.
Mr speaker for Indian lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman could
you repeat what you just said
please.
Mr speaker I maybe no there's no
restrictions on the demand
whether opportunity and I don't
know for sure mixed up between
and the problem is vehicles only
restriction on to to mean is
will be trying to do is get of
the rules change so they can
follow each other little bit
closer but there's no.
Restrictions on incoming weather
Mr speaker in waiting.
Okay Mr speaker gentleman up I
did get that I understand that
you're wanting these estimates
to be able to drive at a closer
distance and they originally did
and so therefore I did have some
concerns about the inclement
weather legislatively truck does
it some black us it goes to Jack
knifing and what it could cause
to the tracks behind this Mr
speaker the night time
restrictions I could see that
those that might.
Find a little bit of
Concern especially if they're on
are not the interstates that
are.
Of four lane highways Mister
speaker whenever we're talking
about these particular trucks in
this area concentrating on right
now what kind of permits will
they need to be able to do this.
Mr speaker finance lady the
first permit that we're going to
build that will be issued will
be.
Give me just a second madam
chair.
Perfect this personally chose
just by way of a point of order
if we're debating the substitute
what perhaps we should take the
action of adopting the four
substitutes that the debate okay
is there is there objection to
adoption of the floor substitute
hearing none house floor
substitute for House commerce
and economic development
committee substitute Pressel to
seventy is adopted.
So just reported clarity that we
we can all be clear what we're
debating okay the gentle lady.
The speaker for the would you
are repeated questions.
Mr speaker couldn't quite hear
us gentleman would you mind
repeating your question please.
Mr speaker I maybe I was a vast
ascertain you to the last
question you asked you repeat
the question please.
Mr speaker gentleman I was
concerned I was curious about
what type of permits these semis
would have to apply for if
they're going to be platooning.
Mr speaker can I refer that to
my expert witness from someone
and can you tell me.
The gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan Representative
Lundstrom.
Mr speaker.
In funding leading generally
from San Juan we cannot hear
you.
Already it is very all right
okay great if I could please
look for speaker there's you
think I need to think thank you.
Bills about changing the motor
vehicle code as it pertains to a
Honda vehicle because nothing
currently is on the book in New
Mexico the department of
transportation give permissions
to various companies to use our
roadways for testing clearly we
know this is going to be the way
of the future therefore we need
to update the motor vehicle code
and that's exactly what this
bill that.
We are working we've had a good
workgroup within two to
committee and if each one of the
committees and the.
The audience and participants
have been able to protect the
participate we've added and
strength in the bill so what we
currently have is a bill that
simply changes the motor vehicle
code to allow for the state to
then get into the building at
the end of rules and regulations
that deal with this kind of
testing Mr speaker and gentle
lady from have a what we're
asking is.
Is to move toward the process of
setting up rules and regulations
by the department of
transportation so we do have
those kinds of guys and those
kind of guidelines in place for
our state.
Mr speaker gentle lady I do
appreciate what you just said I
guess my concern that though is
if we're working with the
department of transportation to
set up rules and regulations at
I just want to make sure that
the.
Over the road.
haulers.
That they do have representation
in this and Mr speaker gentle
lady and gentleman both.
Of.
Every area of our state is a
little bit different and will
this be tested in every one of
our I think this.
I districts.
right.
District two which takes in the
surf southeastern part of the
state it has more road miles in
any of the district and they go
from being flattened even to
very mountainous and curvy and
and I just want.
Of to know if this is going to
be tested throughout the state
or is it just going to be on
let's say the interstate or four
lane highway.
And I'm sure that with the rules
and regulations that are going
to be implemented that the
public will know whenever these
vehicles are going to be tested
in my understanding that
correctly.
Yes Mr speaker gentle lady from
tablets inspection seven of the
bill this requires the persons
wanting to test if Thomas
vehicles on the New Mexico
public highway to give DOT five
days advance notice.
The information has to be set
for the DOT regarding testing
and that the DOT then that would
give us you know through the
authority and they're finishing
up their promulgation of rules
would then either allow it or
not because what we're trying to
do is to give them an
opportunity to set up the rules
which is exactly what you're
talking about gentle lady and
and things like how would the
public going to be notified
exactly where the testing going
to happen don't think like that
that course our general public
is going to be very interested
in.
Mr speaker gentle lady you're
exactly right the public is
going to be very interested in
this and.
Excuse me whenever we're talking
about the semi trucks and
everything plus platooning I do
get at do you understand what I
understand drag whenever you're
running one semi behind another
one to back to for all it does
is just interfere with Thomas
vehicles.
No ghosting I wish my
grandmother would have had one
at the end Mr speaker gentle
lady and gentlemen I understand
what you're trying to do here I
just wanted clarification over
the notification to the public
and what the time span was going
to be whenever these particular
companies we're going to be
testing these vehicles at on New
Mexico roads Mr speaker.
Gentleman and gentle lady thank
you very much for your answers.
Through the debate the gentleman
from the let's see here
Representative Baldonado.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you
gentlemen and gently for
bringing this bill forward a few
questions maybe to
take a little bit further the
there the gentle lady from
Chavis is questioning about the
tuning so I I kind of one
understand we talk about this
bill and and house commerce a
little more about the platooning
idea are we talking about
several semis.
Following very closely behind
each other headed down I. forty
I. twenty five Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr Mr.
Well done.
Mr speaker gentle man platooning
that does not mean that they
would be driverless.
But it does mean that you would
have of those larger vehicles on
the road.
It Mr speaker and generally
thank you for that answer if we
change this section statute will
it allow.
A normal scenario where you have
a driver in the semi currently
like today the ability to
platoon or is this going to be
specific to the autonomous
driver the type vehicle.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
part of this is going to all be
done in our rules but generally
what we're trying to do is is
change the motor vehicle code so
that we are actually able to
have a forum to deal with the Mr
speaker gentle man the problem
is now is that testing is
happening in the state of New
Mexico it's being approved by
DOTA this this technology is
fast growing throughout the
country and we need now to take
that next step and and your get
you're you're getting right into
what some of those details would
be Mr speaker gentlemen but
we're just trying to move this
along where those kinds of
questions would be dealt with
specifically in rules and
regulations.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlelady up this deal
specifically with testing if I'm
not mistaken and and and during
testing they're still of of a
person in in that time this
vehicle is that correct Mr
chairman and and generally are
Mr speaker gently to.
Mr speaker gentle yet.
So in Mr speaker and gentle lady
in committee we we try to flush
out a little bit of the
technology and I I had asked a
few questions and one
specifically
I I was curious whether or not
one of these are Thomas vehicles
can can recognize the the the
pattern of the road if there's
snow and ice on the road how do
we handle that Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker and and gentleman
part of it is about the
communications availability
which is one of the other
reasons it's important to have
broadband connection throughout
our state you know that
communication it's about making
sure that the sensors are
Our developed appropriately and
that we know what we've got on
our roadways Mr speaker
gentlemen you know it that that
the the ball being technology
and what what I read yesterday
in preparation for this bill is
probably already outdated
science.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I I I always use the the
analogy that only about twenty
five years ago we were we were
stuck to the wall using the
phone and now we we we go about
our business strategy and and
obviously we know that this
technology will advance
and and and become more more
accurate as it as it does
advance Mr speaker and gently
I think one of the bigger
concerns that I have in in this
testing phases is you know the
idea of these I tried to speak
was on the road maybe in in the
City of Albuquerque board where
it gets congested or maybe Mr
speaker gentle lady on coming
down I. forty on so the help
where where things are little
treasures even for anyone
driving as a a person they can
recognize things so obviously
those things gonna move along
but Mr speaker and New Delhi
I'll just make one more comment
and
In regards to the different
modes of transportation in
moving goods throughout our
country on the railroads have
long been on a place of delivery
of of goods throughout our
country and and we've had
several conversations of last
year's Mr speaker regarding two
man crews and and the and the
desire of the the railroad
unions wanting to mandate to
people in a train all the time
and the speaker I would I would
submit to the body that the
train is on a real that is a
closed system not not like of I.
forty right twenty five Mr
speaker and and members so I
would just say that you know in
that spirit that we we look at
things fairly between the two
modes of transportation and Dr
and the speaker I think the
gentleman jelly for being the
bill and and obviously this is
the wave of the future and and
hopefully we can we can get this
into place so we can continue
testing and doing the things we
need to do thank you Mr speaker
that's all I have.
Next we have the gentleman from
Lee Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr cool lady from
McKinley yield.
Mr speaker I'll be happy to.
This can't happen fast enough.
This.
Between all disincentive for
the.
And I could certainly use a map
on the water up.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
One question I did not see.
Of the legislation any mention
of insurance or liability issues
addressed here has been
discussed at all.
Mr speaker gentleman thank you
for that question very good
question and one that is pretty
consistent with all of our
workgroup workgroup meetings
that we had yes it has been
discussed.
That whole issue of of of
regulation and and approval has
been discussed and what we
thought is the we actually added
in the substitute on on page
fifteen on the floor substitute
our page fifteen line to what we
talk about profligate in rules
regarding the notification and
regulations propped up so at
that time we would be able to
get those in power that put
those kinds of regulation
together and we're hoping to do
that Mr speaker gentleman in the
interim we've got our fingers
crossed the the interim
transportation committee will be
reappointed this next summer and
we're really think that this
will be a good good piece of
legislation for them but you on
and help the department with
policy guidance.
Can't happen fast enough thank
you for your answers.
Annexing the jump from curry
Representative Crowder thank you
Mr speaker gentle lady from
McKinley please you.
Mr speaker I'd be happy to
yield.
Thank you.
What made to understand the bill
and then the substitute that we
just received to know that the
first six sections our existing
language were just amended and
new terminologies there's new
definitions of of different
phrases there's a whole new
vocabulary with autonomous
vehicles and then sections seven
and eight are the new material.
And probably the one that I
think would.
The body would be most
interested in is.
Under section eight item be.
It talks about a political
subdivisions the state by
ordinance resolution or any
other means may not prohibit the
testing operation of the Thomas
motor vehicles or autonomous
commercial motor vehicles within
the jurisdictional boundaries of
the political subdivisions
solely on the basis of the motor
vehicle being equipped with an
automated driving system.
And I think that's the one that
kind of reaches into each
community
as we go forward with this bill.
In the gentle lady and we talked
about at length the the testing
is already on going on I. ten.
There are plans of of expanding
it in the I. forty perhaps I
twenty five.
But I just wanted to stand and
and strong support your bill and
and I agree with my colleague is
the center of the better thank
you gentle lady.
next we have the gentle lady
from granted dogwood Sierra
Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentleman please feel.
Okay maybe from native counties.
Speaker I so this is about
testing that's happening now in
New Mexico.
Mr speaker you need yes it is
about testing.
Thank you Mr speaker and is is
the testing is it typical that
the testing would be done on
public highways and roads or is
testing typically done in
private areas for Thomas
vehicles.
Mr speaker young lady right now
all the additional be done would
be limited to rural interstates.
Be limited from women's States.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman what what you mean
highways what what's the
definition of a rural
interstate.
The Mr speaker maybe it'll be
like interstate forty interstate
twenty five it Public
interstates.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen so is this in the
is is D. O. H. gonna set those
parameters in their rule making
because I don't see that in this
bill.
The refer that question to
Michael Sanchez please.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes you
hit the nail on the head that
the exactly where that would be
done currently Mr speaker gentle
lady we're looking at probably
public roadways Public
interstate read more bringing
this forward because we're
changing and we're tweaking the
motor vehicle code thank you Mr
speaker and thank you gentle
lady is there a related bill
that would be addressing the
rules and I I don't I.
I'm not reading in this bill
we're we're directing DOT to DO
that are seen parameters around
the testing or how they're being
prohibited from going on county
or city roads is there a related
bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady at this
time I'm not aware of any
any related bill
but it would be done in the
rulemaking so the answer is yes
when we get into if this bill
were were to pass Mr speaker
gentle lady with the department
is down directed to get into the
rulemaking process and any
question like you just raised
would be dealt with in that
process.
Mr speaker and gentleman or
General gentlelady does this
bill provide a framework for.
I understand the need for this
and and I'm also reading in the
FIR that we're we're one of the
last states to do this but I'm
not I'm not seeing in this bill
in the framework or any any
direction of what if local
governments have any state of
this or if it's it's just it's
it's our highways.
Where is this where's this
information coming from when
you're describing what this
process will look like an
application because I'm not
seeing framework in the bill.
Okay thank you Mister speaker
gentle lady if you look on page
fourteen section seven.
Our it'll thank you under new
material line nine Thomas motor
vehicle notification and
regulation of testing and that
first paragraph section eighty.
If you look at line sixteen by
rule by the department and what
we're providing there following
that section is a number of
guiding to down in rural making.
You look at number yes thank you
Mr speaker thank you delay the
this I was not looking at the
substitute.
Thank you Mr speaker just thank
you Mr speaker and gentle lady
gentleman.
Mexico for the next eight thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady to in this promulgation of
rules with the local governments
have the ability to say that
they do not want these a Thomas
vehicles on there county
municipal roads.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes and
and that was a big debate Mr
speaker gentle lady particularly
from my my my.
My thinking is that I didn't
like the idea that they wouldn't
have any bank but they need to
and rulemaking be able to think
we're not we're not interested
in them and and it thank you Mr
speaker gentle lady like the
fact that state road state road
goes right down the heart of of
the Gallup poll sixty six which
is actually a state they broke
that they maintain and keep on
their on their run maintenance
schedule and in Gallup May Day
you know what was just too busy
it's too dangerous and maybe we
are not have testing here but I
want those local governments to
have that opportunity in the
rulemaking process to to say
that if that's what their
wishes.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and just are these
vehicles going to be primarily
in the northern part of the
state at like I haven't heard
anything about this in my areas
are they gonna be in the
northern part of the state.
Mr speaker gentle lady now if if
the statewide once the rules are
promulgated and the criteria is
that it could happen anywhere
that's kind of what I think is
going to happen Mr speaker
gentle lady because.
The testing is important on in
different terrain areas your
front elevations different
roadway you know the important
to know that the the kind of
testing can be successful
regardless if you're on the I
can or four ninety one.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
already I guess were always
afraid of things we don't
understand it sounds scary to
have puts tuning as I'm learning
what this is today when we don't
when we haven't demonstrated
safety with the single the
vehicle operating safely among
the New Mexico citizens could
could administer polity also
impose a fee for the wear and
tear if they are using a
municipal city highways could
they could they be reimbursed
the wear and tear of the use of
the rosaries that at a
consideration.
Mr speaker gentle lady that
would be taken up in in rules we
haven't talked about fees and
permitting levels yet.
But we do want the department to
review how permits would be
issued and what that what the
value of that might be.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you so lady and just one
last question and what I'm
reading and they are saying that
were on the last states to do
this is there a is there
anything primarily different
something that you chose to
leave outreach was to add in our
bill that is different than
other states.
Mr speaker gentle lady what we
chose to do is rather than put
everything in statute it that we
want to allow rulemaking process
we think that more open to the
public you know particularly now
that and you know we haven't had
as much public contact during
the development of this bill we
also think it's important to
have the industry at the table
we've had real good helped by
the New Mexico trucking
association and and several of
the industry groups in the state
currently real good that because
the patient with the to the
department of tax and revenue
and the department of economic
development benefit working
group a little on will leave
some time to think it over fifty
people at any given time but
we're all trying to move in the
same direction.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and that that makes
sense to me and then just
because there aren't any listed
supporters people who supporter
pose the bill was there any is
there any strong opposition and
and if you feel comfortable
sharing the reason why.
You know Mr speaker gentle lady
we haven't heard any real strong
opposition I think the devil
going to be in the detail when
we start negotiating with the
rulemaking is going to provide
for and that that just hasn't
happened yet but generally
everybody's been very positive
they're very excited about the
state of New Mexico being part
of this initiative and and I I
just need to Mr speaker put a
plug in for New Mexico highway
Commission we made a
presentation to them and let
them know that this bill was
forthcoming and they were a
hundred percent on board and
really like the idea that we are
leading the way and the state as
opposed to having to be pulled
into what somebody else is doing
in a surrounding state.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady will the use of
economists vehicles be
prohibited until the rulemaking
process is complete.
They're currently Mr speaker
gentle lady permission is
granted I DO need for you the
public roadway so that's
happening now and it's been a
very good relationship with the
DOT on the up and the companies
that are interested in our state
very good and I'm I'm hoping
that industry growth that bring
jobs but I'll be right now we're
we're kind of taking baby steps
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
Mr speaker thank you the
gentleman and gentle lady for
your presentation.
Mr speaker seeing a further
debate the gentleman to close.
And my hand that Mr speaker.
You were on the you were on the
board the generally Bernalillo
Santa Santa Fe.
Thank you so much for that and I
apologize it'll be very quick
will the gentle lady please
yield.
I'd be happy to yield thank you
briefly I just wanted to make
everyone aware that we are ready
are the Guinea pigs for us self
driving trucks in case people
that know that this is been
happening since last year they
are experimenting with self
driving trucks driving up and
down the highway my district on
the freeway and I understand I
was looking at the bill I see
this is just making a language
to prevent all that but I just
want to keep in mind as a
motorcycle rider I have deep
concerns about these automated
trucks and self driving trucks
and the trucks follow each other
in my community because we go
down I. forty in the winter time
that road is very steep and
covered in ice and it's going to
check to see how this plays out
because it might have got me I
got a we're ready as it is about
regular drivers and just having
the highest death rate are with
cars crashing into other
people's spec motorcycle riders
and now we're going to have this
so I do appreciate you made the
language for but I think it's
going to have to be worked out
as we go because I think there's
gonna be problems but just
everyone knows there have
already been self driving trucks
as and you have been the Guinea
pig state since last year thank
you that's it thank you Mr
speaker and representatives.
The scene no further debate
gentleman close.
Reeker of some of the questions
that were asked previously of
all the daughters vehicles have
to meet federal and state and
federal safety and standards of
of the state as well for the
federal
clients's with that being said
Mr speaker I move that the house
floor substitute for House
karma's and economic development
committee substitute for house
bill two seventy do now pass.
We are on final passage of the
house floor substitute for House
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill two seventy.
The vote is now open.
We will.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Those close to the age of sixty
in the affirmative for the
negative house floor substitute
for House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House Bill to seventy has
duly passed the house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker
the leader stable to.
I'm sorry okay.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
committee report no objections
so ordered clear to read.
We were so close.
Yeah I missed it by that much.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to a
Mr referred house bill one
twenty two and had it under
consideration point it with
recommendation that do pay off
of amended respectfully
submitted Patricia A. Lundstrom
chair.
Move adoption rounded option a
favorable committee report on
house bill one twenty two
submitted all those in favor
please signify by saying hi.
This is Nate three point isn't
it gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business third
reading of legislation.
Hearing objections order
gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Trujillo are you
ready on IT.
Well.
Mr Chairman.
All right would you give me to
that point please thank let the
record reflect that all action
necessary for placing House the
one thirty one is amended on
final passage has been taken
gentlelady to explain the.
Thank you Mr speaker members of
the body I bring to you house
bill one thirty one it creates
an Assistant Secretary of
respect of Hispanic Education at
the higher ed Department and
replaces the current Hispanic
Education liaison that currently
exists at the PED
the bill will amend the purpose
of the Act Hispanic Education
Act to provide assessment and
accountability and up to foster
family and community engagement
these are all conversations
we've had in the past of that
include our.
The way we have to interact in
public schools through the
Yazzie Martinez lawsuit of the
bill.
Contains one hundred ten
thousand dollar
Appreciation and we have
solicited and and gotten that
money from several those
donations of my colleagues in
the house to their junior our
money and
Right now I will defer to our
Representative right Roybal
Caballero for a couple of words.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you co chair and co sponsor
Representative here I just want
to say that this position is
actually going to provide much
needed administration and
accountability so that we can
ensure that we re mediate and
improve the compliance with the
findings and Martinez Yazzie and
I encourage all of our
colleagues to support this bill
thank you so very much.
Okay there is debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from someone.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
so bye bye.
Replacing the current liaison.
With a W. secretary
impracticality.
What does that do what what what
more will happen.
With the title of deputy
secretary and of what's
the story is given under that
title of of W. secretary.
Mr chair different from one but
this does that empowers the.
Hispanic Education secretary to
actually review and oversee the
direction which we're moving
implementing our Yazzie Martinez
to he'll be interacting with
both higher ed and PED to also
ensure that all the
requirements for Yazzie Martinez
are being met you'll be in our
here she will be interacting
with the communities and their
liaisons to also.
Include there are committee
their input and all of this will
be
focused on making sure the kids
are and teachers and school
districts are being held
accountable in terms of of lower
a teaching and learning so that
we have the best outcomes for
kids.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady of Martinez Yazzie for the
most part was about the dollars.
that were to be spent
and I'm I'm trying to figure out
what what a story beyond.
What we are able to provide as
legislators to adequately fund
the the purpose what extra story
with this W. secretary have.
And the do not one this this
particular position.
Will will heighten the roll of
the of the.
The dust on to an actual
not necessarily pop policy maker
but a person who will drive some
of the decision making and some
of the cooperative input that we
get from the communities right
now the a cell position exists
with without a whole lot of
interaction the the premise of
Yazzie Martinez Martinez wasn't
just to get money and funding it
was to turn our attention to a
to ensure that the kids in the
in the school districts
especially kids of color
receiving the appropriate
education that they deserve and
that had been lacking and what
this person will do is make sure
working alongside with the
African American.
African American
Secretary Assistant Secretary of
education and the and the native
American secretary of education
to ensure that every think that
Yazzie Martinez is requiring is
actually implemented.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady but I believe the judge's
ruling was that adequate funding
was not making it into the
school districts that have
minority students mail it didn't
go beyond that so I'm trying to
figure out what.
What we are talking about as far
as implementation and that the
ruling I've read through a
couple of times and it was about
the fact that this body
according to that one judge that
we were not adequately funding
the school districts where there
were
of children
A lot of minority students but
under served students it wasn't
just minority student but it was
underserved students that they
were getting the funding so I'm
I'm not reading into the lot of
the decision by the judge
anything beyond that it was
specifically we needed to spend
more money on education those
schools so I I'm I'm not seeing.
Anything beyond that and maybe
you could explain that to me
speaker gentle lady.
Mr chairman and general fund but
if you look at page three on the
bottom of the that.
Actually the middle of the the
page additional duties
particularly to PED's Assistant
Secretary of Hispanic Education
include providing effective
communication tools in the
primary language of the family
support school districts charter
schools and public post
secondary educational
institutions to recruit Mr
survive committee Representative
committees Representative of the
ethnic diversity of the
community support alignment and
collaboration between community
school districts and PED of
curriculum and pedagogy monitor
the statewide textbook adoption
process to ensure the adoption
of historically accurate locally
written and culturally relevant
materials and resources and
design and assessment plan that
includes qualitative and
quantitative measures of
teaching and learning and there
are several other requirements
if you read the government Mr
chair so it's not singly just
appointing someone to fill the
space it is really a very meaty
very substantive a position that
will help our learners in the
state of New Mexico and teachers
to implement that what the court
says.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady I I.
The reason I'm bringing up the
the losses because you've
brought that up as the reason
for this legislation and I think
that
this is outside of the lawsuit
as far as I mean this I'm not
saying this is not a stand alone
bill but I don't believe this is
necessary to comply with
Martinez Yazzie Martinez Yazzie
it is very specifically that we
were not getting enough funding
into those schools I I I just
I.
The connection that you're
making between Martinez Yazzie
and this legislation I'm just
not making that connection.
the speaker and gentle lady I I
as as it is right now with a
liaison I could see how just
with the title of liaison maybe
there's not much authority but
in reality
A a
W. secretary.
Still I don't see.
has.
That much more a sorority
and I I say that because I
served in the lieutenant
governor's office and the actual
ability for any by or deputy or
assistant or whatever doesn't
normally have much authority
beyond what is is
That the that the secretary has
so
I I understand what you're
trying to do here I just don't
see the connection to Martinez
Yazzie Mr speaker thank you
gentlelady.
Thank you Mr chairman and
gentleman from such.
And this is the generation
granted although and Sierra
Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady you'll.
You the lady from all those
funny thumbs up thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
how is this still being funded.
As I stated earlier.
But several folks have donated
their
So there's supplemental money to
ensure that this money is funded
we have a total of two hundred
and ten thousand dollars that
what was donated.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady is are we
talking about you money.
Yes that's what our supplemental
is.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
in can you many that's a lot of
use for salaries.
Yes Mr chairman and members of
the committee are requests were
vetted.
By the house appropriations and
finance committee staff and we
were assured that we had
followed all the guidelines to
comply.
Thank you Mr speaker in July the
and then also I understood
instructions if we were specific
about what the dollars for for
they wouldn't be reoccurring
have you also that ensure that
these dollars are gonna be
recurring.
Mr chair and the gentle lady
these the funding that we
provided right now.
will get us into it I think two
years and then we have to come
back and ask for more money
thank you Mr speaker thank you
lady so the two hundred thousand
is enough to fund positions at
PED and hire an.
One single position Mr chair
madam.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady because there's isn't there
already someone doing something
similar at PED.
Replaces Mr chairman and gentle
lady the liaison position makes
them the secretary of education
madam chair I mean Mr chair
thank you Mr speaker thank thank
you generating so there's
already somebody in the liaison
position.
Mr chair and the gentle lady
it's my understanding that the
space is available but I'm not
sure if anyone is there at this
point in time.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Julie as my understanding that's
positions filled and so I'm just
wondering do they automatically
become the secretary or.
What happens to that person.
Mr chair and gentle lady
with this but when this bill
passes I'm gonna see the glass
half full and this bill passes
of those conversations will be
had with the PED.
And with the.
The
Committee that is working on
trying to ensure that we get
that
position filled thank you Mr
speaker thank you Julie so what
happens to the role of that.
Bilingual director the Hispanic
lazy on.
Are not striking that section of
law or the those rules
responsibility who takes on
those two cities.
Mr chairman members of the
committee and gentle lady I mean
members of the body the the.
The bill also includes remember
the we have a a director deputy
director three specialist want
clerical support provider that
are.
Assumed in in P. E. C. and so
those people will be a lot we
will be making the decisions
along with PED and higher ed to
make that decision.
Mr speaker thank.
I thought that the liaison.
It's just one part of the job
that the bilingual there's a
position in PED where there's
bilingual director any liaison
is one part of our job to the
bilingual director is also going
away.
The gentle lady bilingual
liaison.
Is it is my understanding that
that person will go away and
we'll have this is going to be.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
and gentle lady so if.
Sixty one percent of our
students are Hispanic isn't it
every department head job every
secretaries job and
responsibility to assure the
success of all of our Hispanic
students so that is the money
much majority of our students
and what's strengthen my making
it one person's job verses.
Minimizing the focus to one
person rather than keeping it
everyone's focus on Hispanic
students.
Mr.
You say you're from New Mexico
and you have been
our.
The person was work to try to
include students at specialty
primary students and our young
children into the world of of
education but you also I think
I've heard you talk about the
history of New Mexico and one of
the debates recently you know
that is that in New Mexico we
have to as much as we beat our
chest with the cried about our
culture the people that we have
placed in policy making
decisions in the past have not
always kept the word about
inclusion and about the
ensuring that children from
different backgrounds receive
the appropriate education that
they that they're supposed to be
safe and clearly I agree with
you if we had if life was really
great and perfect the people who
are supposed to be overseeing
everything
should be doing that but that's
not happening and so you know
when judge singleton ruled that
the PED had failed to meet its
oversight functions to ensure
that all students are receiving
an appropriate.
I'm sorry to to ensure that
students are receiving the
purpose of services that they
need we.
Really agreed with them about
that that wasn't happening and
that's why there were of bills
that were provided to ensure
that the the ethnic minorities
in the state were getting some
representation in a much more
substantive way.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
thank you gentle lady.
Next to the General Assembly
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Bernalillo you'll.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from I forgot to only.
Thank you very much
I just have a couple clarifying
questions the first Mr speaker
and gentle lady how long is the
liaison position at the PED been
in place.
It was my understanding Mr
speaker and gentleman that
I think it was in nineteen.
You know I honestly don't know
it's been awhile because
representative Rick Miera
carried the bill years ago but
it didn't have a whole lot
of substance because it had a
much of the funding and much of
the act of the actual
language was was kind of struck
so
I
think it was in the early
nineties but I could be wrong.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady for the history lesson
because I had no clue.
And and so I was just looking
for clarification on that and.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
appreciate your comments and and
I take it to heart because you
and I can agree here that we do
have people.
In policy making this positions
that are making decisions that
in that are not keeping their
word and that we can apply that
to this bill we can apply that
across the board and so I but I
do appreciate that comment
Mr speaker and gentle lady can.
We agree that the the secretary
and and the way the the PED is
run.
Mr speaker and gentle lady is
based off been at the will of
our chief executive.
Mr chair and gentleman it's a
pointed position so clear early
there the PED secretary does
have his up his direction given
to him but I can tell you being
in of an educator for over
thirty five years that there
have been many I including a
state board member of education
are there been many people who
have the and that department and
some of them made a really good
faith effort in trying to to
work with the the state's
children and the.
Some of them didn't and we're
we're struggling I think because
there has been inconsistency and
I think it's important that we
are take the the rates here and
work with that with the PED who
is I who right now is making a
good faith effort in working
with the state legislature to
move the direction of public
education in a direction that is
inclusive and important to all
of the students in the state of
New Mexico.
Mr speaker not a and and gentle
lady from Bernalillo I would
agree completely I I think
Secretary Stewart does an
excellent job and and is very
committed across all lines in I
think we've we've proven a
multitude of times over over the
last year that.
Unfortunately secretary stirs
hands are tied in so many
different areas and so I'm just
what I will what I want to do
now Mr speaker and gentle lady
this helped me understand how.
We are going to be able as a
legislative body to hold this
Assistant Secretary of Hispanic
Education on target on task as a
body when this person will not
Mr speaker and gentle lady
report to us.
Thank you.
Mr chairman and Mr speaker and
gentleman from the county.
The process is that
Right now this person will work
with both the public education
department and the higher
education department those up
those are entities that are
funded by this legislature and
the LFC has of the oversight and
they do reports they.
Gather information they share
with us and in many committees
there
the information that they
gathered and and that that staff
of gives us an opportunity to
look at that information and we
determine if it's a program that
is going to get that further
supporter not so the there is in
place a process in which we can
do so have some oversight.
The lady.
Reckon with you completely with
what you're saying but that goes
completely against.
Comments made earlier when we
have people in place that are
making policy decisions and
they're not keeping the word
and we're not accomplishing the
things that we want.
The secretary report the false
right in line Mr speaker and
gentle lady which is the same
reporting structure that you
just described.
But the conditions that created.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
need for this legislation still
exist.
And so at the end of the day.
Help me get to the point to
where were we as a legislature
can control this when all we're
doing is putting another person
in place Mr speaker and gentle
lady the this part of the same
process I don't think I I can't
wrap my head around that when
the existing processes the is
the reason why we have this
piece of legislation thank you
Mr speaker and thank you gentle
lady that's question for you.
Do you want me to respond.
Mr Mr Mr I mean gentleman from
Lee is that was that a question.
Are you just stating your you
can't wrap your head around it.
Well both thank you and thank
you for the love the because
I I need that I'd we Mr speaker
and gentle lady
We have a system in place where
we have secretaries that the
respondent and are accountable
in theory.
To the legislative body.
Because.
Well right now we have a system
in place that in my opinion
based on the legislation that's
written in front of us that
we're discussing and debating
right now is creating the very
problem.
That this legislation wants to
address but then puts a person
in the middle of the of that
problem how how.
With with Mr speaker and gentle
lady the I I don't see the
solution here I I see the
position I see the intent I just
don't see how we get around the
gap there's a big gap analysis
here the the Mr speaker gentle
lady that I'm not getting we can
we could fund it and I think
this is very
very commendable with the money
that the the different members
of the body have put forward to
ensure that this position is
good for at least two years.
And I and I again very
commendable.
But at the end of it during that
whole time frame they're still
Mr speaker gentle lady part of
the problem.
I can't wrap my head around it
so please explain.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
the.
I think that everything we do.
In this legislature is not the
end result it is a process of
growing and learning.
And one of the structures we
have in place is this body that
allows us to investigate and
learn about the about the
departments and the.
Programs and all of the other
things that we Fund we have
hired staff to try to guide us
in the direction that they feel
we need to go we don't take
direction from staff but we try
to ensure that the information
that they give us is accurate we
question it when it isn't and
what we do right now is set and
back.
The stuff that we think is not
working and bring back the think
and or invent the things that
are I understand your concern
because I've been concerned for
a long time about how we but did
you Kate our kids the state of
New Mexico and a lack of the the
the issue is.
I can't help you Representative
have around it because take a
long time for all of us who
support this bill to recognize
that things weren't working or
if we did that no one was
listening this is our
opportunity to move this.
Bill forward and ensure that we
have the checks and balances
that are necessary through west
of the legislature to ensure
that those kids succeed in this
program succeeds.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady
does the secretary of education
support this legislation.
I haven't Mr chair Mr speaker
and gentleman I believe that
although I haven't personally
have to I believe that he does.
I've heard from other people.
Okay thank you madam speaker Mr
speaker and gentle lady I will
only verify that hopefully
before this though takes place
The.
I appreciate the the that we've
gone through this debate I agree
that that is part of our bodies
responsibility is to verify and
check on on how decisions we are
making a fact the state of New
Mexico we just acknowledged
earlier today or one of the
speakers said the that they were
part of the original
legislation.
From two thousand and three.
as an agreement with making
these changes today and I just
want to reiterate to the body
that we're making decisions
right now that the implications
are going to be devastating to
our our state.
Within the next several years so
we're going to have to re re re
look at those with that gentle
lady I do appreciate this
legislation I I appreciate you
bringing that through appreciate
the debates even giving me and
Mister speaker I yield back to
you no further debate gentle
lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of the body I now move that
house bill one thirty.
Do now pass.
We're on final passage of house
bill one thirty one is amended
the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call those without
a recorded vote Representative
Anderson.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Crowder votes no.
Representative Representative
Rod Montoya.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Serrato yes vote
is now closed but forty four in
the affirmative nineteen in the
negative house one thirty one as
amended has duly passed the
house.
Mexico died in nineteen.
Gentlelady from tell us are you
ready on that are.
Thank you Mr speaker can you get
me to that point.
The record reflect all action
necessary for placing House Bill
one sixty eight on final passage
has been taken gentlelady to
explain the.
Thank you Mr speaker members of
the body house bill one sixty
eight is a new agency requests
bill from the department of
homeland security and emergency
management that applies and
adopt the national flood
insurance program's minimum
building standards to any future
buildings that are funded with
state dollars that are built in
special flood hazard areas.
This does not apply to private
buildings on state funded
buildings already constructed
nor would it apply in the future
to buildings that are already
under local floodplain
regulations this bill is meant
to cover those instances where
local regulations do not apply
for our outside in the existing
local floodplain Authority on
the amendment will help maintain
New Mexico's compliance with the
national flood insurance program
through FEMA that program is
really important it provides
subsidized flood insurance to
communities all around the state
in return for a community
adopting minimum building
standards inside special flood
hazard areas by breeding the
state standards into compliance
New Mexico remains eligible for
this critically important
national flood insurance if we
do not do this the state and
local communities risk losing
eligibility in other types of
federal assistance if there's a
flood event I now stand for
questions.
I
the gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker gentlelady
from south field I do yield to
the gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
What have the a number of
discussions even within the past
hour regarding
one provision program the on
page two.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
This is one of the.
Only bills that I've reviewed
where the state of New Mexico
is.
Divesting its sovereignty to a
local community.
And if I read this bill
correctly it says that the
state.
Will comply with floodplain
management rules.
that may be more restrictive.
if adopted by a local community
and so even if the state rules
are.
Less restrictive your your bill
is going to force the state to
comply with the rules of
a county or a municipality is
that correct.
Mr speaker and and gentlemen of
the state already a requests
already grants authority to
local municipalities to adopt
and enforce their own floodplain
management regulations.
With exclusive jurisdiction so
what this does is if there is a
state funded development you
know a building
a trail that the state must meet
the you know the guidelines the
flood plain management
guidelines within that community
we've had some instances in
which that has not happened.
Mr speaker gentle lady I would
submit to you that if the state
of New Mexico wanted to build
something less stringent than
the county or municipal
ordinance that the state should
have the ability to do that
because the state is the
sovereign it's a local
communities that derive their
powers from the state not the
reverse and so yes we have
imported to the municipalities
and to the counties the ability
to
exercise.
powers to create flood plain
management tools.
I don't dispute that what I'm
concerned about is now requiring
the state to follow.
More stringent criteria if the
doctor by a local
community and I just don't see
how or why the state should
put that in statute if the state
feels like it wants to build a
building or put in a hallway or
or whatever it may be that may
go against the very terms the
more stringent terms of the
local community and so you know
I hope that we would.
Be at this point where we have
an amendment work out to to
address that issue we do not and
the this things of before us
without addressing that
situation and I cannot support a
bill that is going to require
the state to allow local
communities to control.
The decisions of the state with
respect the building and and
putting them of of state owned
facilities with that I local
communities so for that reason I
can't the support this
legislation thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen.
The for the debate Jonathan
curry Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker will gentle
lady please yep.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the gentleman from court.
Thank you.
several questions generally
number one at if I. R. says that
the.
This bill of yours is going to
cost over a million dollars a
year recurring.
And it did not go through house
appropriation of finance
committee so gentle lady when
you went through house add in
and the other committee did you
have discussions about how
you're gonna pay for this or how
the states can apply for this.
Mr speaker and gentleman we we
did have some of those
discussions and based on that
conversations with the agency it
was determined that in this
first year possibly even two
years that we would need that
appropriation this is this is to
get us on track with the federal
guidelines for the national
flood insurance program that we
that the agencies indicated that
they do not need that that
funding.
To make this.
Mr speaker gentle lady I
appreciate that I I have a lot
of confidence in the gentleman
that that wrote that FIR and and
it shows over a million dollars
impact in FY twenty two which is
the budget we just passed so I I
Life experience with FEMA flood
insurance programs I I wish you
well on your outcome on that one
and and this is this is a a bill
about flood insurance about the
FEMA flood insurance program
you're gonna house this at the
department of homeland security
and and it's gonna be enforced
by the construction industry
division is that correct only.
Mr speaker and and gentlemen it
will be enforced by it that
homeland security with with the
reviewing and Enforcement and
and permitting by the ID yes.
Okay.
The.
I do find that it says it will
be up the permitting and
enforcement will fall under C.
I. B. construction industries
division but the management as I
understand the management of the
program is going to happen at
Home security.
And as I got on the bill I
noticed that
the language that you have
stricken says that if the
building one half of that
building more than one half the
building was financed the state
money then they have to comply
with FEMA but less than half
they did not have to complies is
that correct new year's stricken
Language gentility.
Page one all.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe so but I think this is
the time to act to confirm that.
should read to this is over
fifty percent.
a greater than fifty percent of
the buildings valued.
Mr speaker general yes.
Okay thank you.
And and I I kind of like the
language in and I'll give an
example in a minute as to why I
think that's very important.
in in the private world if you
buy flood insurance on a
property normally it's because
the financing institution if
they have FDIC insurance they
require that or you can get the
loan the banks and everything
are governed by FDIC.
Since that's a federal agency
and this is a federal insurance
program.
then you are required to
purchase their insurance.
However the beauty of that
system and private world is that
if you're fortunate enough to
pay off that loan then you have
the option of canceling that
insurers are no longer required
to have that because you no
longer are obligated to the
financing institution.
And your bill gentle lady
It's my local community asked me
to put fifty thousand dollars
for the capital outlay into an
animal shelter.
Because this is if this in the
state money is there they are
required to purchase flood
insurance if they're in a flood
plain is that correct
gentlelady.
Mr speaker and and gentlemen
yes.
Okay so if I if I master put
fifty thousand dollars into a an
animal shelter a big four H.
building or something of that
nature.
Unlike the private world where I
pay off my loan I can get out of
that flood insurance as I read
your bill if I put fifty
thousand dollars into a building
for my community they are
required to buy flood insurance
into perpetuity I cannot find an
escape clause in your bill am I
missing something gentle lady.
Mr speaker and and gentleman I I
I don't believe that that is
true.
Can you show me in your bill
gentle lady I simply cannot find
an out clause I can see where
you're required if you receive
any money from the state you're
required to enter the program
but I can't find a way out.
Mr speaker and gentleman give me
one moment and and I will say
that right now I have two expert
witnesses with me that is
Matthew staff Poland Loretta
hatch from the department of
homeland security and emergency
management.
Thank you.
Speaker and.
The gentleman at this this bill
is released only for develop
development standards only this
is not about a requirement for
for purchasing that insurance
it's just if you're using state
money and alright in part or in
whole for a you know for a
development in a local community
that you have to meet the you
know the minimum standards at
the at the federal level in
addition to on the the local the
local something management
standards that there's it's not
a requirement for flood
insurance if you have entered
that program.
Gentlelady if if this project is
built within the flood plain.
It's going to be required gentle
lady you can you can get your
payment down if you build the
project up higher you get above
ground.
But I don't know when we're we
would put him through this if
you're not gonna required to by
the flood insurance why would
you require them to buy the
permit go through the
examination and in the process
of surveying all the things
required if they're not going to
have to buy closure of the
doesn't make sense to me it's
that's this thing this whole
program is about national flood
insurance.
Miss Mister speaker and and
gentlemen.
I am they're gonna buy flood
insurance if they're
participating this program
they've they've purchased that
flood insurance and if you're in
a flood plain you will you know
you will have purchased
insurance this is not this bill
is not about purchasing flood
insurance it's about meeting the
minimum standards.
Thanks committee meeting minimum
standards means that you're
the the entire purpose of your
bill I believe gentle lady is to
require them if they received
any state funding in part or in
whole.
There are required to comply
with this bill which would
require them to buy that flood
insurance that's the purpose of
CTE ideas to enforce that the
purpose of homeland security to
oversee that.
I'll tell you what my fears
gentle lady I think the cities
and counties are going to stop
requesting any funding for
animal shelters any kind of
building or structure because if
I put fifty thousand dollars in
there they're gonna buy flood
insurance for the into
perpetuity and there's No Way
Out according to this bill
unless we come back and change
something.
It is very obvious that.
That's a bad place to put money
put in rules put it somewhere
else but don't put it buildings.
Because it's going to cost you
more than you're going to get so
I I appreciate it I know your
your intentions were really good
I understand that
of work with this program quite
a bit.
I will not be able to support
your bill is written gentle
lady.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John.
Mr the debate the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
Garcia.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Nancy your.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Bettinelli.
Thank you.
Speaker gentle lady.
You know I I use the word
thousand says there's so on the
New Mexico Chicanos that have a
subdialect of The New Mexicans
Spanish.
Language where they put that
line.
Thank housing.
After a predicate.
So don't see our committee or
who guided the article cutting.
You know what
speaker gentle lady from our
house
this this issue about insurance.
floodplain this kind of
foremost.
definitely my district and
And probably in many other
districts in our state.
And I'm gonna give some examples
I see what you're trying to do
with the legislation.
In terms of that first part
where we kind of make our New
Mexico on that security and
emergency management department
kind of the coordinating agency
for our flood insurance program.
Which includes the whole state.
Private instead of not private
and state owned.
Properties I think that.
And
and then you've got the second
party legislation which kind of
makes the C. ID.
The Corning agency or.
the year.
Work for projects
buildings etcetera.
That are owned in part or whole
by the state so that's exclusive
in terms of what the see what
the role of the C. ideas.
And
But they're still the roll on
that security.
In regards to our the private.
And
And that's that's where I kind
of have.
Gonna have a history as the must
be current terms of.
That probably an issue of the
flood insurance issue.
And I'm kind of spell it out so
that we could kind of see.
what we mean the concrete
estimates speaker are.
Because a lot of times must be
grow when we try to do stuff to
kind of fix the state.
The state component we kind of a
create an unintended
consequences in terms of the
private.
And I'm not seeing that that's
what's happening with this
legislation.
But
We definitely don't want to see
an increase in flood insurance.
to mortgage holders whose house
sits on a flood plain.
And
as determined by FEMA.
Mr chair because that four one
my district is a big disparity.
Mr speaker and and I don't want
to see that happen.
Because.
Right now basically FEMA's one
that's calling the shots more
speaker this bill does it kind
of puts comments security in
terms of that coordinating
agency.
And
You know it's not speaker
On an average sixty two percent
sixty five percent of my capital
outlay.
For the longest period of time
in my twenty four years up here
most Baker has gone for road
improvements my district.
With the key component of storm
right.
Why is that.
If you must be could look at a
flood plain maps.
Bernalillo county you'll see
these huge.
islands of state let's call it
Brown.
In the back in the basin.
These are floodplains and the
term by FEMA.
If you purchase a house in that
but then you have to buy flood
insurance is the most Baker no
way around.
And
And what insurance in terms of
what my constituents of paid.
because this is a recurring
issue I'm working on three
projects right now we're gonna
build storm great.
In this year's capital outlay
sixty two percent of my capital
went for road improvements.
With the articular aspect of
storm drains.
They're paying four hundred to
two thousand dollars a year
flood insurance.
That's the average of what my
constituents are paying flood
insurance.
And a couple estimates speaker.
They have to pay for a home
hazard insurance.
Top of that they're paying a
mortgage payment.
On top of that the pain property
taxes so all the.
The agencies.
And and a typical tax bill in
the south valley reads like this
will go expect property tax the
state of New Mexico from the
county the school district.
The community college C. N. M.
university medical hospital the
Albuquerque metropolitan flood
control authority small speaker
and the Conservancy district.
People in the high school based
amounts speaker that the
Conservancy tax.
Only people in the basin we have
provisional sick **** of which
the concerns he manages.
There's there's another
disparity.
In terms of how traditional
Senate community land that
communities of South Valley
have a disproportionate.
May I disproportionate property
tax.
The residents throughout the
metro area don't.
Get the money you hardly ever
see is the most bigger planes in
the northeast heights.
On the west agency.
Andrew west west west central
communities.
And for the most part in in the
north valley city communities.
We see that plant is one of our
prayers southbound.
We're right here with this
additional order of two thousand
dollars ranchers.
They could see how this issue is
so.
Irma.
Mainly because the more speaker
a lot of people don't buy houses
in the south valley because they
all they don't want that it
becomes unaffordable to them.
Because of the additional flood
insurance.
So what do my role projects do
as the most be.
Once we run the store during.
The property owners along that
street on that community are
provided with this up the road
from the storm drainage.
Basically thank.
A letter from the public works
director of the county the
mortgage company saying that
they have storm drainage on the
property and that mortgage
company upon receiving that
notice estimates speaker just to
remove the flood insurance.
They no longer have to pay for
insurance because of that
development you know it's not
speaker all time that I've been
up here in fighting for this
type of of capital improvements.
To basically provides important
drainage to create the process
toward that now I assurances
disallowed.
I get criticized by my
colleagues.
Why am I using capital outlay
for roads
what is sisters I just shared a
story with you
in a it's a matter improving
quality of life in my community.
Making housing affordable up an
affordable factor.
Because that darn flood
insurance makes it unaffordable.
Speaker.
And
And and madam Mr speaker and
This I hate to really.
You know kind of.
Then we had this issue because
the there's been this this very
factor historically but
planchets.
With floodplain.
With flood control.
That's the most Baker and and
and that's why legislation like
this planet just shoots up the
recollects every time.
Because I've experienced this.
Mr speaker.
The city level yes.
Representative control plan.
This is.
By.
The Albuquerque.
Metropolitan Arafat control
forty four south valley
residents have been part of
since nineteen sixty three.
All those who must be good not
great line that Royals that you
see up and down I twenty five up
and down I. forty.
Subsidized the city.
For that the local control
projects.
Six one in the into that so the
city residents.
That a free press control
system.
Yes not speaker when I came on
board in nineteen ninety six.
See more speaker.
Thirty four years after Mexico
was created.
I'm not that had not one penny.
Into the south valley
communities for flood control.
And Mr speaker one of my first
projects.
Was to repeal the map that.
Thank god that there are some
common sense folks in the map.
Comments and folks with the
public works department County.
That order through that
disparity the history of this
parity.
You know on taxpaying
individuals that we put in
twelve forty and change their
planned overnight started moving
on that the money's.
Or storm drain systems road
improvements for rent systems
some of them that's how we've
been able to take thousands of
people off the but we move on to
the front Smolinske.
So I guess.
The question that I have.
Really is.
I'm kind of making this ship.
From team up being the primary
source.
in terms of overseen the flux.
Insurance.
program to on that security.
What guarantees that we have the
flood insurance is not going to
increase.
In terms of the private.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
from Bernalillo I want to be.
Very very clear this bill is
focused on state funded in whole
or in part buildings period it
has nothing to do with with with
private with with private
mortgages it's it's really
really focused on you know on on
state buildings of this this
bill doesn't get rid of FEMA
this bill puts the department of
homeland security and emergency
management in the coordinating
position working with C. ID to
do the permitting so that we can
keep our communities safe so
that if there's state money
that's used to build a building
you know in a community that
we're insuring that we're
meeting the the minimum the
minimum of federal requirements
so that we are meeting the
requirements of that local
entities so that we can keep
people safe that's what this is
about I I think I I can't
speculate on on what FEMA is
going to do with insurance rates
at all but if we make this
change we will be allowed to
continue participating in the
program in the national flood
insurance program so that we can
continue to keep our
neighborhood State at safe and
if we can't if our local
communities can't but the longer
that program and they and they
have buildings in you know in
the flood plain and if there's a
flood event we may not be able
to get the funding that we
needed that's I think that's why
really this coordinating is now
being done by the by homeland
security and emergency
management by that department
you know I I'm I I don't see any
impact to to local residents and
all this is really focused on
state funded buildings.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
times
you know I honestly believe you.
You know I
I wanted that clarification.
I honestly is the most it could
be the that you're experts
believe the same thing that you
just shared with us.
This amount speaker but.
Come to three five six years
down the road and if I'm still
here.
And we see this change in law
that we're dealing with today
and the negative consequences
I'll be the first to drop
legislation.
To protect my constituents.
That goes residents of state New
Mexico there are medically being
impacted but what we're doing
here today.
And then they do
a speaker I'll be supporting
your thank you so much speaker.
The Germans further debate the
gentleman from Lee.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from accounts yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Lee.
Thank you I'm learning how to
read my map on for more and so
My first question Mr speaker.
Is actually a poll hopefully.
Clarifying something for me why
We designating department of
homeland security and emergency
management.
As a.
Organization responsible for
coordinating floodplain
management when that was done on
a federal basis in two thousand
and three.
Thank you
Thank
you sorry no you're fine thank
you for M. questions done.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman we that the department
of homeland security and
emergency management is is
already coordinating this
program.
They've been doing it for
awhile.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
understand that and by federal
statute is been done since March
first of two thousand three but
I understand that we are
designating DHS as the
responsible party in the state
The New Mexico and I'm just
curious.
maybe I'm reading the
legislation wrong so
They are responsible for FEMA in
the state of New Mexico are
ready would you agree Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker and and gentlemen
Let me if they they are
coordinating these kinds of
programs already and they will
continue to it you know there's
and if there's a flood of and
they will continue to you know
they will coordinate the
response that flooded Center or
any
Emergency Management situation
just as they are right now you
know helping to coordinate with
that with COVID and they're
working closely with the C. IDE
as well.
I'm sorry I thought you were
the.
Mr speaker and and gentleman but
there is they are responsible
for writing state regulations
that that you know help keep us
safe.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
appreciate that but.
I mean.
DHS The New Mexico's responsible
for so much more than just
coordination I mean the the
flood of that that happened in
two thousand and fourteen
they not only coordinated it
they receive funds from a so
when women women of that is
created or it does happen
DHS that is part of their
funding part of the funding is
as we put together packages for
road repair for any facility
repair that may happen in a.
And as federally declared that
state or federally declared that
DHS's receiving funds for that
they do so much more than than
just coordinate so I'm just.
There's confusing pieces so this
of this legislation to me and so
with that.
Mr speaker
The lady.
I understand by the legislation
that we're going to add some
person to see ID and I think
that's critical see I do carry
such an important role in the
state of New Mexico they're
understaffed as it already is
and so.
Mr speaker gentle lady I assume
that that C. ideas completely
okay and guarantees of the staff
the increase in staffing is
going to be sufficient to deal
with.
With the the issues the
this legislation bring them on
board.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
they are.
I hope so so with that so one of
the.
Some clarification with respect
to this with respect to state
facilities.
With this legislation includes
state roads as well or just
state owned facilities but
facilities.
Mr speaker and and gentleman
that would include any state
development development includes
our facilities and also roads or
trails.
Thank you for that clarification
Mr speaker so.
If I if I read the legislation
the way that I think I do.
The local governing body has
control over this in could
potentially create a flood plain
map or.
Plan.
That could potentially block the
state from putting a bypass
around image of a municipality
would you agree with that
statement.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I I
do I don't agree with that
statement.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
please show me in the
legislation were aware that.
We're we're I would be
incorrect.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The second.
Mr speaker and gentle lady on
page two.
Starting at line eighteen
development is under funded in
whole or in part by the state
shall comply with more stringent
criteria of locally adopted
community floodplain management
regulations and floodplain
management rules.
Thank you continue on with the
rest of that statement but as I
read that local rules.
Trump the state plan for.
Bypass.
That Mr speaker and gentleman is
that your question whether local
rules could trump I passed.
That is what yes that is a
question to you the way I read
on page two I don't do.
local flood plain.
Management regulations could
actually stop.
The state funded by pass.
Mr speaker and gentleman up what
happens right now is that you
the state works with the local
jurisdiction to ensure that
there that they don't have
negative flood impacts on the
community that's that's what
happens now that's what will
continue to happen the the state
will be to work with the local
community to.
You to come to agreement to make
sure that we are you know that
we are using state funds
properly and that we're keeping
everybody safe.
Mr speaker and gentle lady this
is what I do for a living the
way this Burbage is written.
I can actually those as an
engineer on a flood plain
management.
Program in such a way that to
block the state from ever by
passing my town.
Mr speaker gentleman is is is
that a question that you'd like
for me to answer.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes
very specifically or maybe one
of your professional witnesses
can answer that because the
vertiginous.
I don't do to me is crystal
clear.
So at I'd like to Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you the state
isn't giving up any statutory
authority in in this section in
in section do you know there are
instances in which a local flood
you know I local agency and
local community has higher
standards and that this make
this up in enforces the state to
take on those higher standards
if if if the community has lower
standards than this legislation
ensures that we're meeting the
minimum federal standard of this
legislation doesn't doesn't it
deal with with the scenario that
that you have just.
Thank you just described.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
appreciate those comments and
and that's clarifying words
because I I agree with what you
just said and then in retrospect
what I should have said is I
could actually as an engineer.
By the flood plain management.
Requirement.
The required the specific area
around my town.
For the road for anything built
in that area to be done within
the five hundred year flood
plain and make that road so
expensive that the state could
not do it and so that was I
guess.
Cation point on that and so Mr
speaker and generally moving on
with respect to
I can only development funds and
logo are funds.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Houses still with so because
these funds Mr speaker and
gentle lady would would
ultimately be taxpayer taxpayer
funds
That would fall under needs
this.
This legislation would you agree
with that Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and and gentlemen
there is no funding in this
legislation so I'm unclear what
you're referring to this is
instead of the fund this sets.
The state minimum requirements
for the state.
Bills.
Thank you Mr speaker for that
and and so what I meant by that
is.
We typically.
Municipalities that have access
to Leader lowgar funds typically
use that for construction
development.
One of the main things we can do
with all of our money is is
infrastructure development that
helps bring developments to
specific undeveloped areas
within within our communities
and by that process bring in.
New corporations that that that
bring employment that bring
taxpayer money
payroll taxes you name it to our
community.
With that because this is tax
funds that we are applying to
infrastructure development this
would fall under this rule would
that be correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman if if
there is state development in
with state funds in whole or in
part these this this law would
apply.
Thank you like plain management
area.
Thank you Mr speaker for that
response some of my last
question is will.
Any of this with respect to
flood plain management
include C. ID.
And that is C. ID specifically
to be the responsible party for
flood plain management redrawing
of maps as new state development
occurs.
Mr speaker Mr speaker and and
gentlemen I I I do not believe
so the legislation requires that
that you see ideas the licensing
agency they review and and
permit and forced a flood plain
management roles.
Thank you Mr speaker for that I
appreciate the time in the in
your clarification clarifying
answers Mr speaker I yield that.
Next to the generally for
recovery The Santa Fe yes.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you.
Hi lady from tell us
You know I'd I'd try to help you
with anything at this is an
agency bill
And I think thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady I I do he'll and
field and it is a HSD.
I'm.
Thank you for yielding to me I
apologize for not asking
I I have problems with this this
bill to I think it's going to
cost us a lot more than one
million it's going to cost a
million up front or two million
up front over the three year
period to pay for the staffing
but once the staffing those and
once they redo all these
These requirements I think we're
going to be in from a huge
raise on our insurance policies
to cover a flood plain
management I'm just speaking
from personal experience I live
on a river.
Really good include and after
those big floods in the Mr
Midwest about seven years ago.
insurance companies lost
billions and billions of dollars
what happened a year after that
is being put out new regulations
for flood plants.
Because the insurance insurance
companies for going bro over so
many paths and also FEMA put out
new regulations and all across
the country and I know we're
talking about the private sector
here all across the country if
you live near river if you lived
in a flat plane.
I you've got you got hit by your
bank on the new insurance policy
to cover up being in the flood
free land I just hold my you
know my mortgage down is getting
ready for retirement a very
minimal level refinance Sliq
rates for low only to get a bill
from the flood plain from FEMA
which now made my insurance cost
on my home including flood plain
insurance and hazard insurance.
It was it was higher than my
mortgage I mean we were my and
my new flood plain insurance was
three thousand dollars a year
before it had been zero so I'm
not so worried about.
The FIR on the cost of the put a
new FTEs in that department what
I'm really worried about is the
consequences of those costs when
they go out and look at all our
state buildings.
And and you know just start
start reevaluating the cost of
insurance I think I think it may
go through the sky.
I mean I have nothing else to go
on except my own personal
experience
I saw people up and down the
river read live I saw all of
their insurance rates go up sky
high and a lot of this people
were older didn't have new
sources of income or having to
sell their homes I I really
worry about this legislation and
not the way it stands now.
But the way it might stand in
the future so.
I just think yes I guess I want
to know if if there has been if
you could ask your experts at
the state level are there other
states who have done this and
what have been the cost not in
the first year but in the second
third and fourth.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentle lady I I am I will ask
them that in a moment but but
but first I want to address the
biggest concern and I and I
share that concern I live very
close to Arroyo you know I
played flute and I pay flood
insurance even though that our
oil hasn't had you know it
watered down in I don't know how
long it is it is a concern for
folks because because of the way
we have built buildings where we
have built our homes but let me
be perfectly clear this bill
does not have an impact on
private homes at Ole what were
you and and I and I and I
understand gentle lady and Mr
speaker that that you that you
understand this to but if if we
build outside if the state built
outside of of the local
regulations.
That could cause an increase for
everyone because where we will
no longer be in compliance with
the national flood insurance
policy that's that's the biggest
concern and I'm going to route
you know let folks know again Mr
speaker and gentle lady you know
that we that the the department
hopefully hopefully security and
emergency management C. ID do
not agree with that FIR the this
is what we have to do this year
to get into compliance so that
we can continue to ensure you
know our our buildings that's
that's that's really really
important for all of us if we
don't do the right thing right
now we may see bigger cost
because we have a major flood
event that put strain on our on
our resources because we don't
have the insurance to cover that
so I do that I want to be I want
to be clear in that way and now
I'm going to ask Miss experts
about that other states but but
but but but before I do that Mr
speaker and gentle lady you know
we we got this letter a couple
years ago the state of New
Mexico from FEMA saying you've
got you've got to do this you
got to bring your Reds up
otherwise you're going to be in
non compliance in every single
community that has a floodplain
management regulations that are
in line and get flip a get
insurance through this program
will also be out of compliance
you're gonna get kicked out of
the program if you don't bring
up your standards so that's
that's what this bill is about
it isn't about you know
increasing and you know
insurance for for residents but
that might happen if we do the
right thing now.
Every single state got the
letter and from from what I
understand right now and there
you know many have already
changed requirements to meet you
to meet those of federal
regulations so that they can can
continue getting the flood
insurance that they need.
So I'm Mr speaker and
And gentlelady from Intel so so
tell me why so if we're not in
compliance if we're not in
compliance with that.
There are a couple things that
Mr speaker gentle lady there are
a couple things that that can
happen one we may be suspended
we are we made our the state is
considered a community there are
many communities all around the
state that have that are part of
this national flood insurance
program they will also it be a
potentially an eligible maybe
not immediately but probably
within the next year will be
ineligible for flood insurance
if there is a special flood
event you know a terrible
horrific flood event a we may
not be able to get federal
assistance to you know to deal
with that if we are not we're
yes we're not sure exactly what
happened but we've lost your
audio.
Hello can you hear me now Mr
speaker yes there okay thank
you.
The last twenty seconds of what
you said.
Of Mr speaker and gentle lady
bad things will happen if we
don't comply with this that's
essentially what I was saying we
we will lose we will lose the
ability to participate in the
national flood insurance program
other communities all around the
state will also do that lose
that ability to participate
which means that their buildings
and developments are not covered
by flood insurance.
That's what will happen right we
may not be eligible for for
federal mortgages that those are
the kinds of things that could
happen if we don't if we don't
get into compliance and Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady all
right I will I will vote for
this so.
For this bill that I I have to
say this is probably a matter
for congressional delegation and
the cost the cost of this has on
states and local communities
Israeli X. R. thank you thank
you gentle lady Mr speaker.
Senior further debate the gentle
lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that house bill one sixty eight
do now pass we're on final
passage of house bill one sixty
eight the vote is now open.
Thirty six close.
The clerk to call the member
without a recorded vote.
Representative Cook.
Representative close level to
forty three in the affirmative
twenty one of the negative house
bill one sixty eight is duly
passed the house next.
The gentleman from San Miguel
Santa Fe in Torrance
Representative Castellano are
you ready on item twenty.
To the point that the record
reflect election necessary for
placing House Bill to twenty
eight on final passage has been
taken the gentleman to explain
the bill yes speaker house bill
two twenty is an agency bill
that changes the distribution of
eighteen point seven five
percent of the motor vehicle
excess tax revenue collected
from local government real fund
to the transportation project
fund Mr speaker.
Seeing progress is because
seeing a great gentleman close.
Mr speaker.
I know
that house bill two twenty eight
do pass.
We're on final passage of house
bill two twenty eight the vote
is now open.
That.
It is close I would have sixty
four in the affirmative.
Six six four the firmest of zero
negative.
The gentleman has passed its
first bill house bill two twenty
eight.
The other because they until but
I will.
With the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative Garcia
like to sing a song to
Representative Castellano.
All right we will now go to item
twenty one I'm sorry I'm twenty
two generally from Bernalillo
Representative Figueroa are you
ready on item twenty two.
Mr speaker would you give me to
that point.
Let the record reflect election
necessary for placing House Bill
to sixty six as amended on final
passage has been taken.
Gentlelady to explain the.
Thank you Mr speaker to sixty
six is a recruitment and
retention bill that allows a
fifteen week practicum teaching
for the alternative licensure
pathway of special education
teachers that I will stand for
questions.
This debate the gentle lady to
close.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
house bill two six six as
amended do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill two sixty six is amended
the vote is now open.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew votes
no.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Yes.
Available to us.
The vote is now closed logo to
fifty in the affirmative fifteen
in a negative sense House Bill
to sixty six as amended has duly
passed the house.
Next what I'm twenty six
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Maestas are you
ready on that item.
Mr speaker up Representative
Madrid gonna present.
Okay very good hi John you have
Representative the I'm sorry Mr
this sheet apologize that John
joining into are you ready on
item number twenty six.
Yes Mr speaker given to a point
please let the record reflect on
action necessary for placing
House Bill one sixty three on
final passage has been taken the
gentleman to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and body a
lot of the house bill one of one
sixty three is allowing
financial management to count as
an elective in the sixth through
eighth grades and amending
graduation requirements required
one half unit of financial
management prior to graduation.
Thank you several questions.
I see no debate drama close.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
bye I now.
To help and do as for house bill
one six three two passed.
You're on final passage the
house bill one sixty three the
vote is now open.
The clerk calling ever without a
recorded vote.
Representative Roger Montoya.
There is a closer to sixty five
any from is here the negative
house bill one sixty three has
duly passed the house.
Gentleman from Bernalillo are
you ready on item twenty seven.
Mr speaker I and what the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House so
one eighty endorsed by minute on
final passage has been taken.
Gentleman to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
one eighty four is twice amended
would allow for the K. five plus
extended learning programs to
utilize acquittal in hours as
opposed to adding days before
after the school year so this is
a way of adding flexibility into
the K. five plus extended
learning programs that all of
our districts have been asking
for so with that Mr speaker I'll
stand for questions.
No debate the gentleman to
close.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
house bill one eighty four is
twice amended do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill one.
Eighty four twice amended.
The vote is now open.
Thirty seconds remaining on the
vote.
The electronic portion of the
vote is now closed the clerk to
call.
The remaining votes.
Representative Lord.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Representative Lord is a yes
please.
Representative Lord votes yes.
By a vote of.
Sixty five in the affirmative.
Zero in the negative house bill
one eighty four has duly passed.
General thanks for going to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Hochman Vigil.
I am twenty eight.
Thank you Mr speaker we take me
to that point.
Let the record reflect that
action all actions necessary for
placing House Bill to fifteen
once amended on final passage
has been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
Gentlelady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker our house
bill two fifteen expands the
usage of mental and behavioral
health screening and brief
intervention and referral to
treatment services
also includes prescriptions for
benzodiazepines under the
purview of the prescription
monitoring database and it also
mandates the availability of the
medication assisted treatments
for those county jails in which
funding and resources are
available with that Mr speaker I
stand for questions.
I see no debate gentle lady to
close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that H. B. two one two one five
as amended do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill two.
Fifteen amended once.
The vote is now open.
Thirty seconds close.
The question of what is now
closed the clerk to call the
remaining members.
Representative Dow.
Representative Dow votes yes
Representative Figueroa.
Representative Harry Garcia.
yes ma'am.
Figueroa is yes chief clerks
Representative Figueroa yes
Representative Harry Garcia both
yes Representative Harper.
Yes Representative yes
Representative Roger Montoya.
Representative Rubio.
Madam chair yes.
Mr chair yes.
Yes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of.
Sixty one in the affirmative and
for in the negative.
House memorial built to fifteen
as amended has duly passed.
The house.
Mr speaker when the program
percentage.
Don't make you wait to
announcements please.
Gentlelady from Santa Fe are you
ready on item twenty nine.
Yes Mr speaker can you get to
that point.
Let the record record reflect
that all action necessary for
placing House.
Three.
Coming to do.
For house bill two thirty five
on final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
gentlelady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker members I'm
pleased to present the house
judiciary subcommittee so super
house bill two thirty five to
today the committee substitute
bill works to clean up some of
the insurance because language
codes language input.
Regions that help the
superintendent of insurance to
regulate regulate more
efficiently support is efforts
to make sure consumers are well
served by financially sound
insurance companies and
competent insurance
professionals.
The office of the super and
intentions of Insurance has
worked well and cooperatively
with the insurers to modernize
the insurance code.
with that Mr speaker I stand for
questions.
Seeing no debate the gentle lady
to close.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I now move eighty pass of House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill two thirty five
thank you.
We are on final passage of House
Judiciary Judiciary.
Committee subject to two thirty
five.
The vote is now open.
Thirty seconds.
The vote is now closed the clerk
to call.
The remaining members.
Representative cut off us.
Yet.
Representative yes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of.
Sixty six of the formative six
of the negative zero when the
negative house memorial house
Judiciary Committee subcommittee
for House Bill to thirty five
has duly passed the help.
Gentlelady from McKinley and sun
Quan are you ready for item
thirty.
Thank you Mr speaker would you
get me to that point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill two eighty seven as
amended on final passage has
been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution thank you Mr
speaker house bill two eighty
seven will direct the PED to
convene a task force to conduct
a gap analysis and asset mapping
regarding the needs of public
school students in the capacity
of schools for providing
behavioral health and social
services the task force will
bring together state agencies
and local experts to conduct the
asset mapping and gap analysis
thank you Mr speaker I stand for
questions.
Si no further debate.
The gentle lady to close thank
you Mr speaker I now move a do
pass on house bill two eighty
seven.
We on passage on final passage
of house bill two eighty seven
as amended the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds.
The vote is now closed.
Well the one we call.
When the clinical remaining
member Representative Dow.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of.
Sixty five in the affirmative
zero in the negative house bill
two eighty seven as amended has
duly passed.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
I
know that you know a.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
See no objections so ordered.
Other announcements.
As the most Baker.
Then from Bernalillo.
As the most Baker a.
Ladies and gentlemen of the
house I have some
Or restrict news to share with
the body.
I like for you to take out your
handkerchiefs and your the next.
but is the most bigger
Representative me get Garcia.
The rookie first bill some
director.
Has been sentenced to a one year
sentence to Siberia.
For cruel and unusual hazing.
So I'm gonna restart baby.
Thank you gentlemen have a safe
flight.
Mr speaker point of order.
Thank you point Mr I'm the only
one that gets to make those dumb
jokes from the chair.
Members members take note.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to announce that the
house health and Human Services
Committee will not meet on
Monday we will have an agenda on
Wednesday but no meeting on
Wednesday I mean on Monday thank
you.
Members take note.
The only gentle lady from Santa
Fe Representative Serrato.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to announce that with
Representative the
Representative the gentleman
from Santa Fe Representative
Lujan now all every freshman has
passed something through the
house and I just wanted to and.
Graduation to our freshman
class.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Martinez.
Thank you Mr speaker
House tax we get Monday morning
off we will reconvene on
Wednesday eight thirty have a
great weekend.
Members take note.
General gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
education committee will meet at
eight o'clock on Monday morning
we have a few bill so eight
o'clock everybody thank you Mr
speaker.
Members take note.
Are there any other
announcements.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
With.
Mr speaker I move that the house
stand in recess until to date to
do Monday afternoon.
Thank you members for a good day
everybody watching from home the
house will stand in recess
Monday till Monday at two thirty
PM.
