Members roll call is about to
close.
Numbers we have a quorum.
Representative Dow would you
would assume the implication.
Only father we thank you for the
state and the opportunity to
gather and to appreciate your
creation to the beautiful
weather the beautiful sunrise
thank you for the opportunity
you've given us to serve this
great state and to serve the
people of New Mexico I pray for
protection provision over the
members of this body over the
staff over the law enforcement
and national guard as they serve
and protect largest thank you
that you are the author and
finisher of faith that we can
cast our cares upon you to
sustain us I thank you for
wisdom thank you for discernment
and mostly lord I thank you for
your mercy and your grace that's
new every morning forgive us
where we fail and help us to
better in Jesus name we pray
amen.
And Representative lane would
you listen to pledge allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America
and to the Republic for which it
stands one nation under god
indivisible with liberty and
justice for all.
And Representative Johnson wants
me to send a salute to the New
Mexico I.
Representative from McKinley and
San Juan Representative Johnson
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
All right before we started
announcements couple of basic
announcements to drive the day
the into let me give you the
number nine eight six four seven
nine nine that's nine eight six
four seven nine nine and I want
to remind everybody that we are
in the last forty eight hours
so we will end as the
constitution prescribes less
than forty eight hours on a of
the we will end at noon on
Saturday Representative night
for the now.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker this morning and.
Judiciary Committee announcement
was made that this possibly was
our last meeting in judiciary
and I am with my co sponsor the
gentleman from Santa have to
bills that have been pending
before the committee for some
time that would be house bill
one thirty nine and.
Our house joint resolution six.
And those are the two pieces of
legislation that basically nine
months ago next week.
I rose in front of this body and
and implored our members to
consider a piece of legislation.
To.
Allow this body to allow the
legislature.
An opportunity to weigh in on.
And of that that have at that
time been going on for three
months.
And that of course was the
pandemic.
A little over a year ago.
The state was that was.
And still is faced with a health
crisis.
And the governor probably act
and to her credit she did
promptly Act.
As I stated.
Nine months ago next week.
This body.
The legislative body that we
set and the people that we
represent.
The duties that we have under
the New Mexico constitution.
Find.
For this branch of government an
equal branch of government.
To have a place at the table
with respect to significant
events that affect our state and
affect our citizens.
And even at that time I felt it
important bring that before this
body.
And I'm even more convinced at
this point in time that this
body.
Needs to have a place at that
table.
And those two pieces of
legislation or either one of
those pieces of legislation.
Would allow that.
And although I am hopeful and I
pray every day.
This health crisis.
Be abated and that we are in the
process of moving out of it and
I'm thankful that that we are
looking like the numbers that we
are moving in that direction and
I appreciate governor Lujan
Grisham for for opening our
schools and allowing the kids to
get back to participate in the
and athletics and band another
the activities and glad that
many of our communities are now
in a position of opening up of
businesses again.
This piece of legislation in
both pieces of legislation I
hope have nothing to do with
this pandemic or of the orders
that were currently under.
By the time they got into effect
we would be be on this.
But I think it's still important
for this body and I've use a
term call back call back power
that we gave to the executive
branch.
In the early two thousands.
And that we as a legislative
branch.
Recognize and enforce the powers
of the constitution.
Specifically grant to this
branch of government.
And it's not just meeting.
For sixty days in the.
Odd numbered years thirty days
in the even numbered years.
It is to attend to the business
of the people whenever the
business so the people required.
And I would submit to you that
we have not met our
constitutional obligation.
We have not met the.
Desires and demands of the
people that we represent we have
not had a place at that table
and I will submit that if we do
not passes legislation and it
won't be passed this year
because do this year is not
going to me.
But I submit that we need to
bring that or similar
legislation to this body next
year if required two years from
now to bring that issue
to the forefront because.
Well I hope.
This emergency is the only
emergency that the people in
this body will ever see in their
lifetimes maybe it's a once in a
century of that.
We are guaranteed that there
will be other events more
helpful in the long future
where emergencies last for
ninety days.
And there is a need for this
body to be at those table
working in conjunction with the
executive and exercising not
only are oversight duties.
Exclusively given to this branch
of government and holding the
purse strings.
But in representing our
constituents and bringing their
voices to the seat of government
and working with the executive
and crafting policies that
affect every citizen in the
state.
And so Mister speaker I
appreciate the opportunity to
make this announcement.
Well I am disappointed that of
the two piece of legislation are
not going to be heard I hope
that this body will be resolved
to deal with that issue in the
future maybe when times are
maybe not as politically
sensitive on the issues and that
we can recognize and have a
spirited debate on that very
issue and I look forward to
engaging in that debate and I
give you my word.
I give the people New Mexico my
word.
But this will not be the last
time they see that legislation
in this body but that I will be
bringing it forward I hope I am
able to join with my colleagues
the representative from Santa Fe
County in bringing that measure
forward in the future and trying
to see if you to every member in
this body to recognizes that
that's an important piece of
legislation an important not
just for this branch of
government but important for all
of the people in the state of
New Mexico.
Let's hope that god grants us
peace god grants us.
Safety and god not allow another
health emergency like we've
experienced this past year to
exist but if one does come I
want this body to be prepared to
have a seat at that table if
it's of extended
emergency Mr speaker I'm sorry
take up so much time once again
nine months later but I have to
I had to say this because I
think a number of people around
the state have made those
demands and may need to that
answer for that so thank you Mr
speaker gentleman I am not
allowed as you know under our
rules to participate from the
speaker's chair but I do want to
compliment you on the thoughtful
and respectful way you handle
that and I thank you very much
for your comments thank you Mr
speaker I look forward in the
future to raising this issue one
more time thank you the
gentleman from Sandoval
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to announce that today is
both Friday in the house and I
want to thank everyone from both
sides of the aisle for
participating in this bipartisan
effort.
If you need one I have plenty.
That's one of the categories
there's a day for you the gentle
lady from Chavis is wearing a
bow tie.
I'm not I'm not sure if I'm
supposed to say congratulations.
So I guess that's in order thank
you and thank you for the bow
ties.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The gentleman from current A.
Baca Guadalupe Roosevelt and San
Miguel Representative Zamora.
Thank you Mr speaker I want to
thank my office mate.
And Representative fellow.
Representative and and bring
that bill forward and trying to.
Encourage the body.
And trying to make this point
more of the legislature for the
people of the state of New
Mexico.
It's not from the government to
the people it should be to the
people from the government.
And.
I look forward to seeing that
legislation from back.
And and supported thank you.
Thank you gentlemen are there
other announcements.
Sorry I I just have a difficult
time seeing the counties the
gentleman from curry
Representative Crowder thank you
Mr speaker Mr speaker I I heard
you rattle off five or six
numbers in a row and I didn't
know if you were giving us an
agenda for the day of items of
that was a phone number but I I
was gonna ask you a Mr speaker
do we have an agenda for today.
And
Can you give it to us if we have
I haven't received an email so I
just was curious did you did you
give it to started a Mr or do
you have one the gentleman from
curry no I do not have an agenda
the number that I read off was
for the drive of the day but I
do not yet have an agenda when I
have it you'll have.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Are there other announcements Mr
speaker.
Of the the gentleman from
Bernalillo Cibola McKinley
Sapporo San Juan and Lancia
Representative Garcia thank you
Mr speaker all just to reiterate
what the Representative Nibert
just said to all.
You know I've been
Representative for six years now
and that the harvesting would
not you constituent addresses
you and asked you for help on
why there closed down or when
they go to re open and full for
Mr speaker and it is really hard
to tell them I don't know
because we don't handle spatial
so we really need to Christie's
issues they're just seconds for
Mister speaker thank you.
Before we got our further
announcements there is a request
of the gentleman be able to take
out the approach seeing no
objection that request is
granted.
Gentleman from Donnie Anna grant
and she are a Representative
USCIS thank you Mr speaker I
just wanted to ask because I'm
not I think this is very special
my grandmother my father's side
is going to be ninety nine
so she it's a it's a great thing
and
I really appreciate being able
to announce that so she's an
immigrant from Mexico came back
came here in the fifties and the
shoulder ranch here about my mic
my father and his siblings
across and were they started to
so they can get their
their their education and and
get their careers
to move forward but anyway so I
just my grandmother just want to
say she's too again she's going
to be ninety nine it'll be right
after the session but I thought
it be important to bring that up
she's been in the nursing home
so I I I feel for all those
people out there in New Mexico
that have had their their family
mender member in a nursing home
and haven't been able to see on
I I haven't been able to see my
grandmother I mean I've seen
about through a glass but not
been able to hold her give her a
hug in almost a year so we
appreciate you allowing us to to
wish her Happy Birthday today
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen are there other
announcements.
Side takes me just a minute
gentleman from Colfax curry
Harding quay Roosevelt San
Miguel and you Representative
Jeff.
Thank you Mr speaker I represent
seven counties but I live in
Harding County and I just want
to take a minute to congratulate
them on a hundred years of
existence this body did a
memorial of recognizing that but
I really haven't got to announce
it on the floor it's one of the
least populated counties in the
state.
Hi a I used to say it had six
hundred and ten thousand fifty
thousand people I think it's
down to to our six hundred ten
people and fifty thousand cast I
think it's down to about four
hundred fifty people in.
Maybe the same amount of Chelsea
it's a to beautiful places got
canyons rivers grasslands trees
it's a good place to raise your
kids have also schools and so I
just like to congratulate
Harding County on a hundred
years of this body declared
March the fourth this party
County day and I appreciate
thank you Mr speaker I yield.
Are there other messages.
Seeing none.
Speaker recognizes the gentle
lady from McKinley and San Juan
Representative Johnson.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
reading of messages.
Or to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in gross copy of Senate bill one
forty as amended has been read
in full and signed by the
officers of the Senate vote
session a request the signatures
of the officers of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
message will be honored.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed house bill one eighty
nine.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
thirty five.
House Bill to sixty nine as
amended by the house House Bill
three oh three how's Education
Committee substitute for House
Bill three thirty one and
returned same here with
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
this will be honored.
Gentlelady from McKinley and San
Juan Representative Johnson.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business reports of committee
reports.
Committee reports court to read.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too is been referred
Senate bill one ninety two has
had it under consideration
report thing with recommendation
that I do passed as amended
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
To the action reduction of a
favorable committee report for
Senate bill one ninety two as
amended all those in favor
signify by saying hi I'm.
Very Ortiz Aztec all those
opposed may.
The eyes have it.
Committee report is adopted.
The members of the body we are
waiting we are likely to go to
third reading and we're waiting
for the agendas and as soon as I
have it we will now it should
just take a couple minutes so
please be patient.
The gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Since you've all been so patient
I think you get rewarded since I
am Jewish the one Jewish jokes
that I would be able to tell in
this body which is what is
Jewish meditation.
And that is letting the other
person finishes sentence thank
you all body.
The gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan.
The gentle lady from McKinley
San Juan Representative Johnson.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business third reading of
legislation.
All right we still do not for
members of the body we still do
not have a an agenda calendar
but we do have the first item
which is item number thirty
seven on the calendar is the
gentle lady
Representative Chandler ready on
that item.
Yes Mister chair Mister speaker
I am ready will you get me to
that point.
Gentlelady let the record
reflect that all action
necessary.
Placing Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill eight
has been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution the gentle lady to
explain the bill.
Mr speaker thank you this is
truly a very very simple bill
and it's a bill that I think
anyone who cares about state
rights in our state's ability to
act on health and safety and
environmental matters for the
citizens of the state of our
great state you'll love this
bill and it is
as I said Senate bill eight it
allows the environmental
improvement poured in the local
board.
To adopt air quality rules more
stringent than federal law it
also allows the ERP to live
adopt hazardous waste rules more
stringent than federal law.
In each case must be substantial
evidence that the proposed state
rules will be more protective of
public health and the
environment and I would note Mr
speaker that that last provision
was an amendment that was placed
on on the original bill and
Senate finance at the suggestion
of Senator Candelaria who
negotiated that language with no
Moga and with that Mr speaker I
stand for questions there is
debate the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Eli.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from lost almost
three percent of all in Santa Fe
you.
Mr speaker I gladly yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
almost thank you for that and
and gentle lady mentions a
simple bill I confess I don't
understand all provisions of it
seems that mean I have a simple
mind.
Mr speaker certainly not and I
would note that the amendment is
are are you narrow in terms of
what the bill says.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
for that I'm glad.
I'm glad the.
My intelligence isn't too low
but I do want to make sure
understand what the amendments
due to the executive existing
statutory framework.
So the way I understand.
The existing framework that this
bill would seek to amend is
currently local municipalities
and counties.
They can essentially enforce the
air quality control act is that
correct.
Mr speaker gentleman actually it
is not correct there is only one
local board in the state and
that is Albuquerque is the
Albuquerque Bernalillo area
under current law there's a
definition of of of of who may
have a local board and it's a
classe County with X. amount of
people it's one of those
definitions that essentially
only applies to the the
Albuquerque metro area Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady from also
almost thank you for that and so
essentially it in order for a
county to to come to that point
they have to fit within those
very narrow programs is that
correct.
Mr speaker gentleman from San
Juan that is correct.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from Los Alamos and so the the
these local boards they have the
the power to if they fit within
that narrow definition I did you
save Bernalillo county is one of
those I'm sorry.
I believe it is Mr speaker if I
may just ask might express I
want to have it exactly precise
give me one moment.
Previous extension one thank
you.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is a
it is both Bernalillo county and
Albuquerque and I understand Mr
speaker and gentleman that it'll
that they have a joint powers
agreement where they have a
joint board.
Mr speaker gentle lady from lost
almost thank you for that and Mr
speaker with the gentle lady
from Los Alamos just of kind of
disclose who heard expert
offices of.
Mr speaker gentle lady from lost
almost I can't see you if you're
trying to talk your your muted.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman yes thank you for
reminding me about the need to
disclose my witnesses one of my
I have two witnesses one's name
Sandra Ely and she is the
environmental protection
division director at NMED and
the other is Ryan mast and Ryan
is with us the Albuquerque
Bernalillo environmental health
division.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
for disclosing those and so.
we're really speaks at least in
two thousand twenty one really
only talking about Bernalillo
county the City of Albuquerque
but then does the those the
state agency have the authority
to do that what this
legislation.
Contemplates as well.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Mr speaker generated from lost
almost thank you for that so
this this doesn't just concerned
citizens that happen to reside
within Bernalillo county or the
city of Albuquerque this
specifically implicates citizens
throughout New Mexico is that
correct.
This legislation X. all citizens
in the state of New Mexico.
Mr speaker generated you say
protect side of is that right.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan yes it's an
environmental protection bill.
Mr speaker Julie thank you for
that and if we could if we could
turn our discussion for the time
being on page four.
And I'm looking specifically at
one one one the gentle lady from
Los Alamos is there.
Mr speaker yes I am on and
gentlemen I'm on page four.
Mr speaker gentle lady I see
that this adds language talking
about vehicles that are
registered at an address within
the jurisdiction of local forty
this is new statutory language
can help me understand why you
feel like this is important
language to add to the existing
statute.
Mr speaker and gentleman it let
me refer to my experts give me
one moment.
Mr speaker and gentleman and
speaking with Mister mass to as
I previously indicated is from
Bernalillo Albuquerque I've been
advised that that was language
added by Senator Ivy Soto
in Senate Judiciary and it just
clarifies that the
ical emissions program that's
administered by the city of our
size only to be a goals
registered within the address of
the jurisdiction which is the
Albuquerque Bernalillo area.
Mr speaker generated from Los
Alamos
when I read that language it
that actually makes sense to me
so I I live in asked to come and
just take board as to kids so I
go to the big city for the day
and I'm I'm going to you know
Albuquerque and and for whatever
reason I get pulled over I think
what this language does it I
don't have to worry as a citizen
who resides outside of
Bernalillo county outside
Albuquerque that maybe with the
emissions on my vehicle aren't
up to those standards is that
fair.
Mr speaker gentleman from San
Juan yes the emission program
only applies to individuals who
have in cars registered within
the Albuquerque Bernalillo area.
Mr speaker gentlelady from Los
Alamos and and I I do think it's
important that we we understand
the context of the body here
we're talking about this
subparagraph the.
what we were talking about
sensually at least what I would
commonly referred to as vehicle
emissions is that right.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady so we're
we're on.
Age four I'd like to turn the
body's attention now to line I.
And I notice here that there's
language struck that previously
read program shall be no more.
Stringent ban.
To now we're changing the
statutory framework to the
program shall be at least as
stringent as and that's in
reference to the federal
statutory framework with regard
to vehicle emissions is that
correct.
Mr speaker give me one second I
want to be exactly precise and
how I answer this question.
Mr speaker gentle
It the language is is intended
to make clear that the federal
Rules are the floor and that the
state has that the local
authority has the ability to
issue a greater standards with
respect to air quality and be a
Collett missions.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos so.
So that we all understand under
the current statutory frameworks
the federal regulations.
And if there happen to be in the
statutory provisions will just
call the federal rules the
federal rules currently are the
ceiling is that correct.
Mr speaker gentleman that's
correct.
And what this language doesn't
mind I on page four is it now
takes that that ceiling and
because of the become a floor is
that right.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan that's correct Mr
speaker gentle information from
Los Alamos would you just kindly
educate me on why it why make
the federal rules of floor
instead of a ceiling.
Mr speaker gentleman from San
Juan I again I will point out
that this allows the state to
make its own decisions with
respect to the health and safety
of its citizens and it allows us
to take into account our unique
circumstances and find for that.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos but it seems to me that
if you make.
The federal the floor here you
are in fact not make allowing
the state to make its own
decisions what you're saying is
that we shall start here at the
federal level and and that can
go up but they'll cannot go down
so I I feel to see how the
allows the state to make its own
decisions can you help me with
that.
I can Mr speaker gentle and I
can try to help you with that
and the explanation I would have
for you is federal rocked a law
now controls just as a minimum
it now controls the federal law
does allow states to issue their
own standards so long as they
are not lower than those
prescribed by the federal rules.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
for the clarification.
And if we continue on to page
five.
For the body I noticed there's a
new subparagraph.
J..
In the way that I understand the
subparagraph J. if you're there
gentle lady.
Mr speaker I'm sorry and yes I
am I am on page five lines
twenty through twenty five Mr
speaker Julie from lost almost
perfect thank you.
And so the way I understand this
new subparagraph J. is this this
allows it currently Bernalillo
county the City of Albuquerque
to the state of New Mexico after
notice in public hearing after
they go through that process to
enact an ordinance that is more
stringent than the federal rules
is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
That is correct but not complete
it talks about the need for a
determination based on
substantial evidence and after
notice of public hearing that
the proposed ordinance will be
more protective of probe public
health and the environment.
Mr speaker gentle lady thanks
for the clarification let's talk
about that the standard of
proof.
that and I as I understand.
Of the gentle lady from Los
Alamos is a licensed attorney
and I'm not asking for your
legal opinion but I I am sure so
no what is your understanding of
when we talk about substantial
evidence what does that mean in
layman's terms.
Mr speaker gentleman from San
Juan it means the weight of the
evidence that's been presented
to through these extensive
hearings establish of that
public health will be served
through the proposed ordinance.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos so is it is it more
likely than not is it and it
when you balances it as long as
it bounces in favor but how how
would you describe the.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
understand you're also an
attorney and I I would say it's
fair to say that it's more
likely than not and Mr speaker
gentlemen
the term substantial evidence is
a term that's frequently used in
the law and is well understood
by those who are charged with
establishing the findings
necessary to meet this
requirement Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from Los Alamos I do think it's
a often times as learners and
sort of have our own legal so I
think it's helpful for the body
to note in in a practical sense
what is substantial evidence
means I think that's helpful and
the other thing that the gentle
lady from Los Alamos mention Mr
speaker is that whatever the
proposed ordinance is to be it
has to be more protective of the
public health and environment
can the gentle lady just help me
understand a little bit what
that last piece means.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
interpret this language to me
that the proposed ordinance
would be more protective of
public health then the floor
standard of the federal rule.
Mr speaker generally and and so
I guess I'm left wondering what
additional regulation.
Wouldn't be more productive in
the health and environment.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
many people come to us in
hearings in argue that what
we're doing is not adding to the
health and welfare of the
community and I think what would
be necessary years through the
through scientific evidence
and other professional expertise
the it would be the expectation
that the local authority would
have to point to that evidence
to ensure that public health is
served.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos and.
And when I read the language you
know my mind starts wandering it
it just it seems like a very
easy threshold to me and so
here's what I mean if if the the
emphasis is on the protection of
public health and environment as
long as it.
Adds to that protection that it
seems to me for example the City
of Albuquerque could enacting
ordinances says you're only
allowed to drive.
The motor vehicle gas powered
engine or diesel powered engine
when you have four more
passengers in the vehicle
because otherwise you're gonna
have people in groups of one two
or three driving these vehicles
and if we limited for then that
means there is gonna be fewer
drivers on the road in a thirst
your drivers on the road there's
less CO two emissions and if
there's less CO two emissions
that is there for more
protective of the public health
and environment am I missing
something with this line of
thought Mr speaker gentle lady
from Los Alamos Mr speaker and
gentleman I imagine that you are
and I will consult with my
experts thank you.
Mr speaker and gentleman up.
I have been advised that in
addition to the just the
standard any rule making would
have to be consistent with not
being arbitrary or capricious or
otherwise violative of the law
and of course we would still
have to rely on the substantial
evidence that's contained in
this paragraph.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm sorry
could you repeat that that I
caught the very last thing but
you said I think not arbitrary
capricious and I think you
mentioned something else.
Otherwise prohibited by law Mr
speaker gentle lady from lost
almost could you point me where
in the state for from work you
got that language.
it Mr speaker I will ask my
experts but I my expectation it
might be somewhere else in
the air quality act but I will
ask them.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan yeah as I thought it's
not contained in any language
within this as part of the bill
or the air quality act it is
contained within other sections
of the where air quality act and
I have also been advise that is
consistent with
administrative law when one is
issuing findings.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos I do recall taking a an
administrative law class back in
I maybe somewhere in there it's
been awhile but I remember
something about the chevron
doctrine.
and I don't know if this is
related not but I do think there
has to be some reasonableness
and the regulations offered by
administrative agency Mr
generate is a similar concept.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
agree with that certainly
reasonable mass is not arbitrary
or capricious so I think there
that you might want to consider
them being used almost
interchangeably Mr speaker
gentleman Mr speaker generated
from Los Alamos you mentioned
other a reference to another
staffer Division within the
air quality control like what is
that other statutory provision I
don't have it handy I'm happy to
ask my experts Mr speaker and
gentleman Mr gently if that
helps me understand it if it's
not too much trouble appreciate
it.
Mr speaker and gentleman a lot
one of those orange books it's
seventy four dash to dash nine.
The speaker gentle lady thank
you for that.
So does reference the arbitrated
reserve use of discretion
standard that that would be on
appeal looks like maybe to a
judicial review of any
administrative action taken.
So Mister gentle lady
Then I guess the example of if
the City of Albuquerque wanted.
To reduce emissions by saying
about shall only drive a a gas
or diesel powered vehicle if
there's four more people are
they have to somehow convince
supporters challenge that was
arbitrary capricious or abuse
instruction is that correct.
Mr speaker and I think that's
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady didn't
back to the text of the bill
itself.
Miss change my tab here since
those looking statutes.
So I I was curious.
With this subparagraph J. still
on page five.
If you look online twenty two so
up to that point we're talking
about
Sources that are covered in the
federal rules but then there's
this line that is that in here.
Or that applies to sources not
subject to regulations.
So that seems like a very broad
and vague language as though it
could take it outside of this
context of vehicle emissions so
Mister speaker gently floss
almost could you just help me to
understand what this languages
in there for and what it means.
Mr speaker I'm and let me for
with my experts.
Mr speaker gentleman this
provision applies not to just
vehicle emissions this provision
applies to
all aired
sources that are
regulated and it applies
two things two air quality
issues that may not be governed
by federal law.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos that's that's how I
interpret that we wish to and so
I guess my question is why why
stick it in what the paragraph
that's talking in the context of
vehicle emissions why not give
it it's own little sub
sub section so that we were not
confusing.
The citizens when it comes to
complying with the statutory
language.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe I said that this
provision does not apply just to
the section relating to vehicle
emissions.
Mr speaker gently from also I'm
sorry saying that.
J. E..
Within the statutory framework
is not dealing with vehicle
emissions or just vehicle
emissions.
Mr speaker and gentleman I am
saying that paragraph J. does
not apply just to vehicle
emissions.
Mr speaker generally that from
those almost us I guess that's
what I'm asking is my
understanding all the way up to
this point within this statutory
framework we're specifically
talking about vehicle emissions
and now we have language that it
does talk about vehicle
emissions within paragraph J.
but then it goes beyond vehicle
emissions it seems out of place
and so I'm just wondering in
terms of trying not to confuse
the public why why did this not
get its own its own of
subparagraph for someone section
in white fitted in here with the
full missions.
Mr speaker gentleman from San
Juan I do not know as I
mentioned earlier this was an
amendment that memo go worked
out with senator Candelaria and
was placed into Senate finance
substitute for Senate bill
eight.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos I think that was maybe
the missing piece of the puzzle
sorry I earlier in reference
that Senator Ivey Soto has added
some language about somebody
driving through Albuquerque for
example but I I must've missed
the reference to Senator
Candelaria adding language this
subpar artist for F. J. so that
that gives a little more context
And I guess I just have some
concerns with how broad the
languages.
when we talk about.
Being more protective of public
health and environment can I ask
why.
Is there not some sort of
balancing that you see in in
most administrative agency type.
a regulation Environment so
simple they they will have you
can you can add a right a new
regulation.
If after notice of public
hearing that the organs will be
more productive public health
and the environment then.
And then there's usually some
balancing that takes place so
that so for example you assess
the economic impact on the tax
payer or the burden that this
this new regulation maybe may
make on the tax payer.
And I don't see any of that
similar language here it's just
a one sided in terms of well
this regulation protect the
public health environment.
And so my question is Mr speaker
gently from Los Alamos how can
we don't have any of that kind
of bouncing type language within
the subparagraph.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm not
sure of what type of language
you're talking about I've never
seen language that references
taxpayers I have seen a lot of
language that references public
health and citizens and in this
case I think it's pretty clear
that what is intended here is
that firstly one must have
substantial evidence after
notice and public hearing that
the proposed regulation is more
protective of public health and
the environment they in the base
which is the federal law of law.
Mr digitally from also almost so
so again I I think it's
incredibly low standard because
you you can come up with almost
any regulation that's above what
federal regulations currently
hold in it it is it is going to
satisfy the standard.
That they protect public health
environment and typically it's
it's a waiting it's a balanced
approach against the economic
impact of the inconvenience
those type of factors and I
don't see anything like that it
was in this paragraph and so I'm
just trying understand why are
we considering what the impact
will be on the citizens on the
consumers on the user's whatever
this regulation is targeted
towards of when we're when we're
having this public notice and
comment preacher.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe the it's notice and
public hearing and within those
hearings any any any amount and
kind of of the information may
be presented to the local
authority to make a
determination and that
determination will need to be
supported by substantial
evidence that will be included
in findings that the local board
issues and the local board will
certainly be subject to
challenge if they fail to meet
this standard contained in
paragraph J. Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker generally from Los
Alamos.
I'm I've been been in here for a
while now so I think all I'll
stop boring you with my
questions but I do appreciate
the debate and I I think we're
just gonna have to disagree on
this language specifically in in
paragraph J..
Because even if I'm I as a
citizen bring forth mountains of
evidence about economic harm
economic impact inconvenience
how it's going to stay in the
industry none of those are
relevant pieces of evidence in
this public hearing because the
sole focus of the standard is
whether the regulation is
protective of public health and
environment there's no other
room for this board to even
consider other evidence the
factor is alone does the
additional regulation.
protect the public health
environment and that's a very
easy burden to me in my opinion
it could be something as simple
as as I mentioned earlier and so
I just have concerns about.
how broad the languages that it
doesn't factor in any hardships
this may create on our citizens
in New Mexico and I I that's how
I would interpret this
subparagraph Jerry so I
appreciate the the committee
appreciate the debate with that
Mr speaker I yield back there is
further debate the gentleman
from curry Representative
Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
please yeah.
Mr speaker the gentle lady from
Los Alamos will yield.
Gentility I took a guess
normally Bernalillo cover it so
I just took a shot thank you I I
thought you were from Los Alamos
that I wasn't sure but thank you
agility I would like to start
our conversation off of the FIR
they came in so that you can
know what I'm looking at what
documents and the reason I'm
doing that is because as I
looked at the FIR the only
responded is the New Mexico
environment department and this
is their bills there are no
other responses received from
anyone besides the New Mexico
environment department so I feel
like I'm in safe territory using
their language so.
And as I look at these bills
gentle lady are always find
myself wondering who is this
going to affect and what are we
hoping to accomplish and I want
to start in the FIR with water
we trying to accomplish is so
gentle lady if you look on page
three of the FIR under
performance implications.
It talks about the improving New
Mexico environment department's
performance for the measure
quote percent of days with good
or moderate air quality index
ratings.
And so that's the goal we're
trying to achieve we're trying
to elevate those ratings make a
better.
That's what we're trying to
accomplish with the language
that we have before us in your
bill.
So.
Gentlelady has as I try to
understand what we're trying to
accomplish.
I find myself wondering how do
they accomplish that how they
measure.
The air quality.
Where do they Mr is it measured
around the state is it measured
strictly within the class say
counties is it measured.
Where can you help me understand
that July.
Mr speaker gentleman let me
consult with Miss beauty.
Mr speaker gentleman from curry
the state as well as the
Albuquerque Bernalillo area as
air quality monitors within
their jurisdictions so that
within jurisdiction I buy I mean
the local authority and the
state has air quality monitors
across the state in various
places.
Thank you delighted Joe Emrick
do you know about how many they
have
are are there any geographic
areas that are large areas that
do not have a measuring
capability dollars.
Mr speaker gentleman let me
check.
Mr speaker.
Gentlemen.
The state has a number of air
monitoring equipment across the
state in an air sheds that's how
it was referenced in the city
has I.
Thank you John by the and the
five is a good number that helps
me a lot the the first part of
your comment that they have
several I I would like to know
number is a big state you know
if if the state has ten of them
and and are mostly in the Rio
Grande corridor and we're not
measuring here is on the border
of the or the Texas border of
the Colorado border that that
would be good information for me
to know as I try to understand
your bill and what we're trying
to accomplish so would you ask
your expert how many does the
environment department have and.
Facsimile where are they located
John let me thank you Mr speaker
I will do that.
Mr speaker gentleman.
There are twenty.
If you give me one second here.
There are twenty.
monitoring stations across the
state.
Okay Mister speaker gentle it is
that include the five there
within Albuquerque so to be
fifteen scattered around the
perimeter of the state
Mr speaker and gentleman from
curry that's a really good
question let me ask.
Mr speaker gentleman from curry
I know it does not so they're
actually twenty five monitoring
stations across the state.
Thank don't thank you Mr speaker
that that have some kind of
understand and I'm assuming
that.
The environment department has
those located geographically.
Pretty much around the state so
that there is a no large areas
where there's no monitors at all
a gentle lady I I also if as I
read through your bill last
evening I noticed that part of
the monitoring system is to
measure the ozone is that
correct Mr speaker John.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe it is but let me just be
doubly careful with that answer.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
curry that's right.
Thank you Dylan you Mr speaker I
assume those are some kind of an
electronic monitoring by the
that particles within the air
will come to settle up on those
and and they have an ability to
measure muted by waiter by
measure by something
and and if you're if that's
incorrect your expert can
correct me a little while but
that's what I would assume is
taking place so if we have
twenty five monitoring devices
scattered around the state I
within Albuquerque Bernalillo
area.
And the gentle lady as they
measure the ozone.
How do they know which particles
are being emitted from
automobiles or or electric power
plants or gas fired power plants
or coal fired power plants.
And how do we know how much of
it is just being picked up by
the wind.
How do we know whether it's
sentiment and sales that are
blowing in from Arizona from our
prevailing southwest wind how do
they discern.
Where those actual particles are
coming from that are that are
being.
Analyzed within those machines.
Mr speaker gentleman there were
a lot of questions within your
question so I am interpreting
your question to be how did they
know where and from what where
the emissions are coming from is
that your question Mr speaker
and gentleman for curry
Mr speaker gentle lady primarily
at I would like to know how they
know the source of the
contaminated.
And how did they determine how
it arrived on that sensor that
monitor.
I will ask that question thank
you very much Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker Mr speaker and
gentleman.
They do use modeling that is
based on air dispersion and they
also know the inventory of the
types of things that might
admitted by various airs AIR
pollute air sources sources of
air pollution thank you Mr
speaker gentle and gentle lady
when they had a a base
realignment and closure process
that at one time it caught up
the Kirtland Air Force base and
a little little bit later on I
believe it kind of Canada
airforce base was pulled into
that
Base realignment and closure
process for the US airforce and
during that process we found out
that Canada airforce base in
Clovis New Mexico and and the
East West corridor right there
it was right in the middle of
the flies on between Dallas and
LA.
And there are tremendous number
of flight you can go to close
look up in the sky in the
afternoon and see the trails
constantly above us so do I do
I'm wondering how do they know
if it's an automobile putting
out through their emissions the
contaminant or if it's an
airplane flying over the top of
the state of New Mexico have the
date discern.
What we are doing and what
someone else is doing that we're
gonna be.
It's going to accrue to our
account because they're flying
over cinematic that up in the
sky.
Mr speaker gentleman let me
consult with my experts.
Mr speaker and gentleman just to
the part of your question that
related to
airplane pollution I've been
advised that airplanes fly so
high that in the atmosphere that
there will be no issue in terms
of source from those admissions
and with regard to your question
about the vehicle emissions
I've been advised by my experts
that they have a good
understanding of what type of
emissions from vehicles and can
account for that Mr speaker and
gentleman from curry.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I I
I don't fully understand how
they could possibly measure that
know that but if they have their
methods they have their methods
and and I'll accept that
the gentle lady.
We're not and and I live six
miles from Texas I live on the
very far east side of the state.
But yet we've had forced fires
in Arizona that we can smell the
smoke for days and days and
days.
we happen to have an opportunity
to to do a tour of our southern
border with legislative finance
committee here so go and we
watched the smoke come over the
el Paso Los crucis area
prevailing southwest winds which
would drop that smoke right over
the pollution would drop tried
over the Hopson Eddy County
area.
And and so generally I how do
they know and how do they
measure I know they do modeling.
But I know that the last time I
talked to the secretary they
work they work completely done
with all the modeling.
And and I still in logically
cannot understand how you can
separate what's drifting over
the state lines into our state
when I can smell of Force
fire in Arizona from three
hundred miles away.
How do they probably attribute
that pollution.
To the regulations that they're
going to increase the on federal
standards.
Mr speaker
And then I will consult my
experts.
Mr speaker gentleman from curry
I've been advised that modeling
capability account account for
forest fires versus other sorts
of air emissions and again I
will point out or maybe for the
first time I will point out this
applies this expertise is
necessary and as a and applies
whether or not we
given this authority to
ourselves or whether or not we
are applying federal law they
still have to do it and they do
do it currently Mr speaker and
gentleman from curry.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I appreciate that very much I I
also understand though that
you're we're being asked to
increase.
The authority and and lower the
ratio.
And as the my colleague
mentioned earlier there's a
concern about what is the impact
going to be to the citizenry
how's it gonna affect business
and so I'm trying to understand
if I if I can understand how to
measure it monitor it and that's
all logical reasonable that that
I'm okay but I'm I'm not there
yet so I'll keep working on.
Generally I'm gonna I'm gonna go
in shift back over the bill for
just a minute and I apologize
what I printed out as the
amendments and contact so I. may
not be paid for page with you
yes but that might my first
question of course was
Where it says account your
municipality meeting the
qualifications set forth in
paragraph one or two in
subsection three and I believe I
heard you explain my colleague
that's a classe County if you go
to look up that statute it's
referring to a class a county
so.
A city like Russell or
Silvercity are not going to meet
that standard so they're not
going to they're not going to
have the ability to have local
jurisdictions that correct
Mister speaker July.
Miss Mr speaker and gentleman
you're correct the only and of.
Area that qualifies for a local
authority is the Albuquerque
Bernalillo area.
Okay thank you delighted and and
that's the biggest part of my
Senator your bill last evening
before I learned that a little
bit ago was I I don't think
there is a city or county and
the state other than
Albuquerque.
They would have the ability to
hire.
A local board reform within the
boundaries create a local agency
to administer the program and
then appointed director and and
meet all the standards that are
listed down below I thought I
don't think anybody can do that.
And so I appreciated learning
that that part would only apply
to Albuquerque Bernalillo area
and the remainder of the state
would run
would remain under the purview
of the state agency the abbey
would be who regulates and
controls the remainder of the
entire state is that correct
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct III the would be the
authority that would issue rules
for the rest of the state of New
Mexico and you will recall Mr
speaker and gentleman that the
E. ID is a seven member board
that is appointed by the
governor and it Representative
we have no
Any person representation beyond
one one additional member so it
has to have
but parity just the way I would
phrase it Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Thank you for that I I I
appreciate that I.
I know that I went through a
similar process in the
construction industry when the
state of New Mexico decided that
the entire state would have a
one uniform code that governs
the entire state.
However when they did that they
didn't realize that all the
federal facilities within our
state operated off different
building codes the state of
Arizona state Texas state
Oklahoma all had different
building codes and so while they
were crying out for uniformity
throughout the state.
We begin to try to get him to
drive straight across the
international code council.
But there has to building code
international elector code and
so on.
But that wasn't that wasn't ever
accepted that was never possible
I guess to to the powers that be
and so I didn't happen.
The one problem we ran into with
having a uniform code statewide
other than some of our
contractors across the taxes
workers there's a cross in New
Mexico and get a license and
they would work here.
Was that we became it became
very very difficult for us to
get electrical inspection
because we use in state
inspectors.
Under their culture and we
couldn't get him to come down
and and inspect we would call
for inspection we would email we
would do all the protocols were
given and it would be weeks
before we can get one schedule
and so the job would come to a
screeching halt.
So the only issue that I kind of
see where this is.
If the state controls all the
state except Albuquerque and
Bernalillo it's all under one
governing and the enforcement
would all be underneath the
state per view there will be no
local enforcement.
Then.
I hope that it doesn't become
problematic to get inspections
or schedule the the services
needed from the state.
In order for everyone to to have
a business that flows smoothly
and and operates
Efficiently saw Jodie thank you
for allowing me to ask more
questions I I ask you to thank
your expert for me I would like
to sit down with with the.
Gentlelady at some point talk a
little more about how they
measure monitor the particles
that that are being measured and
monitored.
But I'll do that at a later time
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
that's argue about my time there
is further debate the gentleman
from Chavis Eddy and Otero
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady yep.
Mr speaker and gentleman from of
this I gladly you.
Thank you ma'am
As I look through.
SB eight they are just.
There are issues that I believe
that
Continue to be.
Interpreted as the divide
between.
Rural and urban New Mexico.
The transportation.
Of pollutants pollutants that
are addressed in SB eight that
are problematic in the.
more populated areas.
Are not nearly as prevalent.
in many rural communities would
you agree.
Mr speaker and gentleman
truthfully I can't agree or
disagree I don't understand your
question.
My question is simple if you got
a lot of cars you're going to
have more pollutants if you
don't have very many cars you
probably don't have the same.
amount of pollutants would you
agree.
Mr speaker I would agree there's
probably more concentration of
vehicle pollutants in the
Albuquerque area which is
probably why they have a vehicle
air emissions program that does
not exist in any other part of
the state Mr speaker and
gentleman.
And Mr speaker and and gentle
lady that's my point these air
monitoring stations are looking
at.
Concentrations of the pollutant
in a given area.
And they are impacted by higher
sources that are closer to
correct or would you agree.
Again I'm a little confused by
the question the previous
question related to vehicles Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Maybe if you rephrase your
question I have might have a
better understanding of what
you're getting out with that
question.
My question again Mr speaker and
gentle lady is we agreed that
the more sources you have the
more vehicles you have.
The more pollutants you probably
have.
And that those monitoring
stations that are closer to.
Those higher number of sources
will be impacted by that I mean
you have more cars in
Albuquerque the monitoring
stations in Albuquerque are
gonna show higher impacts of
those pollutants would you
agree.
Mr speaker and gentleman we
consult with my expert they may
have a better understanding of
the question you're asking me
give me one moment.
Miss.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The and I think I'd mentioned
this in previous answers the air
monitoring devices that are
spread across the state are not
monitoring for vehicle emissions
and they the agency and local
authority have the ability to
distinguish between emissions
that are coming from vehicles
and other ambient air
Articulates.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady.
What communities do you believe
will be impacted by this.
Gulai shop.
Based on
areas that are in or may be in
non attainment what areas of New
Mexico might be at impacted.
Mr speaker of and gentleman
thank to use the term non
attainment I I didn't quite
understand what you said
they're.
Yes ma'am Mr speaker and gentle
lady non attainment is a term
typically used in the
environmental world.
When an area has exceeded those
thresholds of their monitoring.
Okay.
So it Mr speaker and again I'm
not going to be difficult I just
wanna make sure I understand the
question you would like to know
what areas would be impacted by
the proposed amendments is that
right Mr speaker and gentleman.
No ma'am what I'm trying to find
out the is.
When I look at Senate bill
eight.
When I read the F. I. R..
When I see.
That the state can impose
statewide.
Rules that are or may be more
strict more stringent than
federal rules who's going to be
impacted what's the purpose of
this piece of legislation that's
what I'm who in New Mexico is
going to be impacted.
I'll ask my consultants but I
believe Mr speaker is the
citizens of the state of New
Mexico it gives the New Mexico
environment department so you
ability to
A proposed rules and adopt rules
that are for the benefit of all
residents of the state of New
Mexico and there tended to be so
and I would point out also it's
not it relates not just to air
quality rules and regulations it
relates to a service materials
as well and for example
currently if I just is a very
hazardous material that has been
found to be in various parts of
the state including Air Force
space cannon Air Force base and
Holloman Air Force base and I
also believe Albuquerque but
don't hold me to that it would
be is the state regulators the
ability to protect the citizens
and regulate those kinds of at a
hazardous materials as well and
if you give me one moment I will
see if my experts have wished to
supplement my answer.
Mr speaker up I believe my
answer and gentlemen my answer
coverage your question I hope.
Well.
Mr speaker and and madam speaker
I'm shy and gentle lady
There are twenty or twenty four
ambient air monitors across New
Mexico I heard you say earlier.
Standard twenty five twenty five
and.
Madam speaker
I'm sure that they all don't
report the exact same results.
They're different there's
different areas of the state of.
Different altitudes different
ambient temperatures different
rain falls that have washing
effect on many impurities so.
I'm what I'm trying to get you
to tell me.
Yes what areas of the state.
Might be more impacted than
others.
If this.
Yes.
Regulations.
Our.
Increased above federal levels
and they're all equal I'm gonna
assume that I I am going to
assume.
That the state would not make
regulations more stringent in
one areas and the other would
you agree with that.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Let me consult with my ex.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Act is an example that I was
been I've been given up right
now the the state is working on
issues relating to zone and.
They are looking at seven
particular county so in fact the
the would have the ability to
identify particular areas if
indeed they were shown to have
more problematic in in terms of
certain kinds of air emissions.
Thank you for that the madam
speaker and gentle lady page
seven counties are they looking
at.
In terms of the ozone which is I
can let me get ask the expert Mr
speaker and gentle.
Mr speaker and gentleman six
seven counties are Dona Ana we
Eddy San Juan Rio Arriba Chavez.
And I'm missing one I think me a
moment.
Mr speaker and Bernalillo.
So Madam speaker and gentle
lady.
When you look at those.
Seven counties.
What do they have in common.
Mr speaker perhaps and gentleman
perhaps you could enlighten me.
Well I think what you'll see is
they either have population.
Done in and Bernalillo.
Or they're gonna have all and
gas production.
In the late Chavis and San Juan.
My point is that whether.
The emissions come from.
Industrial.
For.
Then maybe.
People.
Automobiles.
Those areas where where.
Why are people in.
Or where they.
Or or the areas of the state
that are producing the vast
majority of our income will be
the first to be impacted is that
correct.
Mr speaker are you referring to
and gentlemen you're referring
to the old song rulemaking which
I understand has been a two year
process is a bit ozone is
another way of talking about
that but is often referred to as
the methane rule making and.
I I understand that it's the
seven counties Mr speaker and
gentle.
So.
Methane might be the methane
rule making might be.
Greatly enhanced by in the
process of methane.
Regulatory framework would be
enhanced.
By this piece of legislation is
that correct.
Mr speaker talent let me double
check.
And gentlemen.
I am advised that this provision
will not affect the rulemaking
that's currently on going
relating to VOCs.
Well madam speaker in.
Gentle lady
That that the.
I'll come back to that I think
there's much more to talk about
there but let's go on down and
another area.
the NMED
Analysis.
States many things and one of
them is that.
hazardous air pollutants toxic
pollutants that are not
And suspected to cause cancer or
other serious health effects or
adverse environmental effects.
Visibility impairing pollutants.
What are those visibility
impairing pollutants.
Mr speaker and gentleman let me
consult my experts.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
It includes the sulphur dioxide
oxide.
With of nitrogen with nitrogen
particulates and ozone and Mr
speaker and gentleman sometimes
I have a hard time reading my
own handwriting.
We all do
Especially when we're writing
like crazy
Madam speaker and gentle lady
many of those pollutants that
you just
identified come from natural
sources like Mexico.
Wildfires.
Fires that the for service
sometimes starts on their own.
they come tremendous and
industrial fuel burning.
And what bothered me is not only
knowing the origin of some of
these visually impaired
impairing pollutants.
Is that can a regulation.
The imposed but because that
creates visual impairment.
Mr speaker and gentleman let me
check with my expert.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The the the federal law allows
for the regulation of
visibility effecting pollutants
I would point out that do you
prior to the ultimate question
you went through kind of a list
of things and as I mentioned
earlier in my remarks the
department has the ability to
distinguish forces based on the
type of matter that they are
analyzing and as again I will
point out do that now under the
federal air quality act that
they apply currently.
And I think I'll Madam speaker
and gentle lady I know I will
not argue with that that is that
is true
I am
I am trying to comprehend.
How the state of New Mexico
given are.
Industry.
Our population centers.
The lack of jobs.
The need for more.
Income at the state level to do
many things.
I'm trying to
Can.
And I'm and I may have missed
something but Madam speaker and
gentle lady can you can you.
Do you believe any of the
existing industry in New Mexico
will be enhanced by this.
SB eight and more stringent
federal regulations.
Mr speaker I think at the state
of New Mexico and its people
including those who work for
those industries will be
enhanced by the ability of the
state to protect their health
and welfare.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
worked for a.
About forty years pro for one of
those companies.
that may be impacted by more
stringent regulations and I can
tell you that their own
policies.
And they're on our and the
purpose.
Were what protected employees
not so much federal regulations.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
We are in southeast New Mexico.
and and really all over many of
the counties that.
That were mentioned.
Border.
not only Texas but Mexico.
And
Prevailing winds out of.
Mexico sometimes bring all
sorts.
Of pollutants that you have
described.
Sometimes
Those are.
Sometimes those winter good and
sometimes bad but gentle lady I
think giving.
Hey
State director.
Who is with you today.
Who I think does in many ways a
good job I'm not I'm not arguing
that.
But.
Having a state have the ability
to impose regulations.
That exceed federal regulations.
With the no mechanism.
No clear mechanism.
To identify.
Their financial benefit their
health benefit or their benefit
two thousand ways that we just
discussed.
I don't believe I think you're
talking about decades.
Decades of of time before you
would be able to say it worked
or it didn't.
And why should those industries
in New Mexico have higher costs
of operation the less
competitive and New Mexicans not
have the same amount of jobs
that there are in our
neighboring states in the same
industry how do we benefit from
that of.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
think I disagree with your
premise.
This is currently state
implements federal law.
This this is provisions allow
not the director of the
environmental improvement board
to issue regulations after
public notice in hearings and
after a finding based on
substantial evidence that
these enhanced is it is enhanced
rules will
it increase health and safety
for the for the citizens of the
state of New Mexico.
And so for that reason I think
we should all be wanting to see
this the individuals who work in
those plants in the surrounding
communities
are impacted by the I think the
rules and regulations may be
issued by the team the I. B. R.
our responsibility and to ensure
that we are taking care of their
health and safety and that in
terms of government is our
primary responsibility or for
the state of New Mexico ensuring
that health and safety of it's
our citizens and anyone and this
is a home rule this is a state
rule or state primacy issue and
if you believe in states rights
every person on the floor or in
their offices or in their homes
participating in this
of this review of this bill
should support this bill because
what we're saying is we the
state of New Mexico will.
insure that our citizens are
taken care of to the full extent
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Well I appreciate that gentle
lady in.
Madam speaker but when I look it
up almost every.
And I know this is not directly
in your bills that allow me if
you would.
When I look at our state's
ability to provide.
Education for our kids.
And I go down there is a whole
list of of.
Of markers that you and I both
are aware of.
This legislature has done has
performed miserably.
And implementing this yet
another.
Regulation.
That will without it now.
Impose higher costs.
less corporate traffic in New
Mexico I think it's only going
to make it worse so I I a
We differ we did we differ
greatly on that the gentle lady
in that opinion let me ask you
something.
With these regulations.
With that yeah I'd be under SB
eight.
Would they be able to use that
a regulatory framework around
the transportation of high level
nuclear waste.
Mr speaker and gentleman let me
confer with my expert.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
state does not have authority
over high what level waste.
Mr speaker and gentle lady let
me rephrase that do that with
they under SB eight rules as
proposed with with the E. I'd
be.
With the state.
Be able to set more stringent.
Rules for the transportation of
nuclear waste.
No.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
sorry now.
Thank you gentle lady
as I read the F. I R..
I believe it
Insinuates the opposite
but it may be.
A misunderstanding gentle lady I
I believe SB eight.
Is
Is not good for New Mexico.
I believe.
That SB eight.
We all.
Result in the loss of jobs for
New Mexicans.
I believe SB eight will reduce
income to the state.
In the long run.
And gentle lady I think.
Our state should tried
desperately.
To do a better job at what they
do.
And once we have done that then
we can take on new efforts but
we have much to do and a poor
track record before we start
picking up and and imposing new
regulations and more regulations
on our citizens thank you madam
chair thank you gentle lady.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Thank you.
Madam chair with the gentle
lady.
From Los Alamos yield.
Of Mr speaker and gentleman for
me late yes I will yield.
Yes.
The first question I would have
to ask.
What makes New Mexico's air.
So.
It requires regulations above
and beyond.
Required by the.
Environmental protection agency
the federal.
Environmental protection agency.
Mr speaker and gentleman we both
live here and we know how
wonderful and beautiful the area
is here and we know how
important it is to all of us and
I think it's a magnificent place
to live that I'd want to protect
and I am sure you want to
protect to the fullest extent so
to that degree I think we all
know that New Mexico and it's
public and its citizens and its
children and its moms and dads
and its employees are unique in
and of themselves Mr speaker and
kind gentleman.
So.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
To preclusion.
I think my travels around the
state via.
List all from pop schooling for
example up to the southwest.
This one I can see quality peak.
Almost a hundred miles.
Gentlelady so.
Particulate matter or for the
soul it's in the air which is
one of the components regulated
quality act.
Is not really the issue is.
Well Mr speaker and gentleman
but if I understand you're
correct your question there are
multiple issues related to this
proposal one is state rights as
I mentioned earlier and I would
like to think we would agree
that it's better to have the
state regulating health and
safety for its citizens and as
opposed to the federal
government and I'd be surprised
if we disagreed on that but
perhaps we do it perhaps you do
think it's better to have the
federal government involved in
our lives to the degree that we
are talking about here
so really it first goes to state
rights second of all I would
point the fact the way this bill
is written.
The fact that you you have
beautiful visibility while
you're flying your your play is
great and before any any sort of
rule could be issue that would
increase
The air quality standard in any
particular area would have to be
a finding through substantial by
substantial evidence that there
would be an increase and let me
read it specific.
If I may it would be more
protective of public health and
the environment so I appreciate
the fact Mr gentleman Mr speaker
or if it's madam speaker I
apologize it's madam speaker
sorry madam speaker and
gentleman the fact that you of
the nice clear visibility is
great and I would point out
again that before anything could
be done by the I. B. that
changed the regulations there
would have to be these findings
were negotiated by Senator
Candelaria and Moga when this
provision was put in Mr speaker
and gentleman.
You madam speaker.
And gentle lady.
Do
any specific well first of the
four components.
Normally considered to major
pollutants in the air quality
act.
Your question is what other
components are major pollutants
Mister speaker Madam speaker and
gentleman is that your question.
C. will teach your question
please madam speaker gentle lady
yes Madam speaker and gentleman
your question is what other for.
You are regulated by the air
quality act is that correct.
Yes.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
that is correct.
Thank you for the clarification.
The San for.
Thank you for your patience
Madam speaker and gentleman.
in there are particular it's
ozone.
oxidize nitrates and one one
more let me let me consult again
my handwriting is so poor Mr
speaker and gentleman.
So far to.
Mr speaker and gentleman sulfur
dioxide and carbon might not
monoxide Mr Madam speaker and
gentleman.
Madam speaker gentle lady that
comports with the list that I
have here ozone particulates CO
two.
Also to and Dr socks so with
this legislation we are trying
to improve we're trying to make
the atmosphere.
That is.
The primary goal and objective.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
an objective of the statute
certainly.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady
can you describe for me.
A specific target that is what.
We're trying to reduce CO two
emissions by.
But twenty two metric tons a
year or or.
What is the specific objective
with respect to the use.
That we're trying to improve
upon.
Mr speaker Madam speaker and
gentleman from Lee do agency at
this has no specific targets at
this time this bill is a bill
intended to give
E. I. B. the tools to
propose rules after notice of
public notice and hearing that
are more protective of public
health and at this time there's
no specific target or plan Mr
speaker Madam speaker and
gentleman.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
Would.
Some cause for pause.
We don't know where we are now.
We don't know where we're going
how do we know one more thing.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
don't know what you mean when
you say we don't know where we
are now we certainly do now
how air quality and hazardous
materials are measured and
and how they're regulated under
federal law and our agency is
that I'm not sure I understand
what you're saying other than we
know I believe that it's better
to have state vault in
protecting its citizens
certainly then the federal
government I think I would like
to think we all agree that lower
level or you bring it down to
the state level we have greater
control and and ability to act
on behalf of our citizens and
we're not relying Mr speaker and
gentleman Madam speaker and
gentleman from on the federal
government dictate everything to
us.
So.
Circumstance Madam speaker and
gentle lady and then for mental.
The quality board considers.
The federal standards to be an
adequate.
Mr speaker and
Madam speaker and gentleman I'm
not sure I understand what you
mean by inadequate what is
this provision would allow do I
need to do is to evaluate
whether or not we need enhanced
regulatory standards after
appropriate public participation
hearings import and findings.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
believe this legislation takes
the New Mexico regulations from
as strict.
No more strict.
At least yes is that correct.
Mr speaker speaker and gentleman
that's correct.
So.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
might want assume.
That somewhere in state agencies
someone believes that the
federal standards are in
adequate.
Miss madam speaker and gentleman
this is not an agency bill.
This is a bill that is brought
right legislators who believe
it's better public policy to
have the state determine what
rules in terms of air quality
and hazardous waste are best for
its citizens.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
not being HSD bill we can say
there are legislators.
I believe this legislation is
necessary because the national
standards or inadequate is that
accurate.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
think it's better put way that I
sent and that is this is the
state a tool to evaluate whether
or not federal standards are
adequately protecting the sit
and sit at the citizens and
environment of the state
and it would provides the
process to do that in the
necessary ability make findings
and and it also speaks to the
fact that many of us in this
body and in the other chamber
believe that it's better to have
the state determining what's
best for its citizens and its
environment in the federal
government and it does not
necessarily mean that all all of
the standards that.
Applies to will be changed.
Madam speaker gentle lady just
not the HSD bill.
Apparently.
There was no perception.
Quality problem that not that
could not be solved with
existing statutes this is an
legislative initiative because
some legislators be leave.
That the current national
standards or.
It should be Madam speaker and
gentle lady a yes or no answer.
The answer to that is.
No I think it was a rather long
question Madam speaker and
gentlemen if you'd like to
repeat it I want to make sure I
I answer the question and I
believe it's okay to answer
beyond no which is not a.
If if necessary.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady.
Hi.
I believe for the labor the
point all.
move on from there does this.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
Does this legislation national
awhile.
The quality board.
To regulate material that is not
considered pollutant under the
pump.
Mr speaker Madam speaker
gentleman
We need but is the national
environmental policy act I
believe and I'm a little
confused because I don't think
it applies in this situation
madam speaker gentleman's.
Madam speaker gentle lady let me
rephrase that the national air
quality.
Okay.
Reason I'm in this I am a little
hesitant to answer madam speaker
is because I think I I lost the
training of your question so if
you could read it I'd I'd really
appreciate it madam speaker and
gentleman from Lee okay you very
happy to madam speaker and
gentle lady does this
legislation awhile New Mexico to
regulate materials that would
not be considered pollutants
under the national air quality
act.
Madam speaker and gentleman
thank you for that clarification
give me one moment.
Speaker and gentleman it would
allow us to do so yes in the
same way the act the bill would
allow us to regulate the foss
which is not regulated at the
federal level level as well and
I think we can all agree that
that would be a very handy tool
then the the Lucien at all in
New cannon Air Force bases that
have had a huge impact on the
neighboring communities and
severely damaged I understand
dairy farms and and because
health and safety problems in
those communities.
Speaker gentle lady.
Would you repeat exactly what
the material is wasn't familiar
with the terminology.
You Mr Madam speaker and
gentleman are you referring to
P. false.
When I use that terminology P.
F. A. S. it's an of and then
after
it's an abbreviation for
terminology is that what you're
asking me to clarify.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
yes that's correct.
Madam speaker John so glad you
asked me that because I looked
it up before this hearing
knowing someone was going to ask
me that question and it is.
Carol Floyd all cold substances
in if you want me to spell it my
pronunciation of words like that
there is not very good I'm happy
to spell it for you
it's P. E. R. F. L. U. O. R. A.
L. K. E. L. I think it's the
right spelling.
Speaker.
And gentle lady would you have
available for me in English that
is.
I guess what I'm requesting for
is it commonly emitted
substance that the body would
recognize.
Madam speaker and and gentlemen
thank you for that clarification
let me let me refer speak to my
experts Madam speaker into.
A common example given when
asked is firefighting foam
that would be the kind of
material at the faucet is madam
speaker and gentleman from way.
Speaker gentle lady I wouldn't.
Even suspected.
Firefighting foam.
Who's in that common usage and
would provide.
Very little addition to or
subtraction from.
Quality in the state to have
another example let me ask more
specifically.
Methane would be included in
this designation.
Madam speaker and and gentleman
just let me clarify something
with you in terms of that
previous answer with regard to
firefighting foam I had thought
we were talking about P. foss
and P. five us it is the
hazardous material it's been
found you at cannon and Holloman
and other areas of the state
that the state currently does
not regulate and cannot regulate
because we don't have this rule
in place and the federal
government does not regulate
that's what we were speaking
about Madam speaker at least
that's what I was speaking about
gentleman firmly so
your question now madam speaker
is those would methane fall
under the air quality of rules
that that could be enhanced
pursuant to this amendment to
the air quality act is that your
question madam speaker and.
Current chain lady.
Directly or indirectly with this
legislation now allow all the
regulation of methane emissions
as a pollutant.
Madam speaker gentleman let me
face with my experts.
I'm.
Madam speaker excuse me and
gentleman we currently have the
ability to regulate methane
through the ozone rulemaking
process that we have and through
that process we have the ability
to issue rules that are that are
more stringent than the Feds
currently.
Then.
Speaker and gentle lady I
thought that's what the answer
would be do you know the current
areas of the state
or and nana trying to last.
Last reported also was from so
years ago and I believe Dona Ana
County was.
Only the state county not in
compliance with the ozone
standards is now as of late I
heard mentioned already there is
some question.
As to whether we counties are
approaching.
The small attainment status is
that correct up Madam speaker
and gentleman I I just wanna
make sure I understand your
question
the question is under thus the
state's current authority to
regulate
Methane through its ozone rule
making are there any counties
other than Dona Ana at our at
non attainment status is that
correct Madam speaker and
gentleman is that your question.
Speaker gentle lady that is
correct excellent thank you so
much give me one moment Madam
speaker and
Madam speaker and gentleman from
Lee there's only one county that
has been designated at non
attainment and that is going on.
Thank you.
Speaker gentle lady so.
Can you describe the process by
which produce zone is formed
it's really pretty simple do you
know how ozone is formed.
then.
Maybe activities man made
emissions.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
I'm embarrassed to say if it's
simple and I don't know then I
guess I'm I'm don't always
answer to a simple question but
let me consult with my experts
madam speaker and gentleman.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
Happily I've been reassured that
it's not simple
and so therefore might lack of
knowledge isn't an indicator of
my of of
Missing something that I should
know I've been told that it's
not a simple process and it's a
combination of vox knocks and
sunlight and other factors.
Madam speaker.
Gentlelady you you've nailed
most of that in the fox knocks
and some light for the
components necessary.
To generate ozone.
Knox is a component of.
What press.
Then let let me consult with my
experts one second.
Madam speaker gentlemen
primarily combustion.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady that comports with
my information and how about
volatile organic compounds where
would those be sourced.
Please turn waiting.
Madam speaker and gentleman give
me one moment.
Madam speaker gentleman anything
that uses petroleum products
petroleum would be something
that the Mets box.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady without also
comports.
With what on it with the
information that I have.
Let me ask you now gentle lady
the cost.
National zone air quality
standard is measured and I
believe parts per billion is
that your information.
Madam speaker gentleman yes.
Madam speaker gentle lady which
rural legislation with this
legislation.
Allow the reduction of that
allowable park provision
component.
Of course.
The national standard.
Madam speaker gentleman now.
Speaker gentle lady that is the
current standard.
If adoption was greater than the
national standard with that
not affect.
The allowable percentage of the
component of that material in
the Mr.
Madam speaker gentleman let me
consult with my.
Madam speaker gentleman could
you repeat the question the X. I
understand the question and
might expert does not understand
your question either Mr speaker
and gentle lady the current
standard for the allowable
amount of ozone in the
atmosphere is seventy parts per
billion.
If the local.
New Mexico environmental air
quality board decided that was
not sufficient to protect health
and public safety could that
standard be modified to
something lower.
Madam speaker and gentleman we
already have that authority.
So madam speaker gentle lady the
authority to take fact quality
Mr stick to what what is the
level of ozone is allowed in New
Mexico under the current
statute.
Madam speaker and gentleman give
me one more.
Madam speaker and gentleman
seventy parts per billion of the
state has not exercise its
authority to lower the standard
at this point Madam speaker and
gentleman.
So.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
thank you can understand perhaps
the consternation.
Of my constituents with this
piece of legislation.
Potential.
A small.
On methane emissions from the
oil and gas industry.
Because the legislation is very
broad very for reaching and
specifies the deregulation
should be at least district and
possibly more strict.
What we currently have in place
let me move on if I could gentle
lady to another concern that I
have that.
Yes yes to.
In the quality board is will not
be subject to legislative review
or oversight in the current
regulation is.
Madam speaker and gentleman in
regard to the E. ID and they
will that would be the entity
issuing the rules
legislature always has the
authority to legislate has the
ability to just laws that would
affect the ability of the IV and
their actions Madam speaker and
gentleman.
Madam speaker there is no
reporting requirement contained
in this legislation is that
thank you.
Madam speaker and gentleman
there is no specific reporting
requirements however we all have
have interim committees and the
ability to seek information from
the environment department as
needed.
Thank you madam speaker up.
Microphone for quite awhile.
It's more questions but.
Vehicle emissions but all.
For some of our.
Thank you very much Madam
speaker and gentle lady for your
answers.
Thank you gentlemen for your
questions.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Santa and Santa Fe counties
Representative Lord.
Okay the gentleman from San Juan
County Representative Strickler.
Thank you madam chair Madam
speaker with the gentle lady
from Los Alamos a yield.
Can you hear me thank you muted
yeah so so so sorry Madam
speaker and gentleman from San
Juan yes indeed all yield I'm
looking forward to our
conversation thank you thank you
gentle lady gentle lady issue
now on Representative San Juan
County and we have a lot of a
only gas up there and and coal
mines and power plants and did
you know gentle lady that that
the air quality of a San Juan
county according to the American
lung association is the second
cleanest air in the in the
country were you aware that
gentle lady.
Madam speaker and gentleman no.
Yeah I think we're actually tied
with
with with a small community in
Wyoming so I'll I'll go ahead
and be careful and and
we're we're we're actually tied
but although I'll take number
two so gentle lady in in our in
our neck of the woods we have a
lot of westerly winds from you
know from the west from
California and Arizona and and I
don't know if that that helps he
also healthcare quality or not
it's just hard to
control what our neighbors do
and California is a is it is the
biggest state and and I know
they've done tremendous work and
their quality and but a lot of
times we when we get some of
their other pollution enhance
our way so that's something we
can't control but gentle lady
and and and
Madam speaker.
I just cannot touch a touch a
little bit
on your comments that that these
amendments that were put on
Senate bill eight
had the of the approval of the
New Mexico on gas association
and and that simply is not true
I have a
some comments by their their
legislative team and they of
they oppose this bill at every
committee the menace that they
were trying to put on were not
accepted in the and were you
aware that Chile I know you you
you said you thought they were
on board but they're not you
have any any clarification on
that gentle lady and madam
speaker.
Madam speaker gentleman first of
all I never said they were quote
approved by no longer what I
said was it was that was
language developed by Senator
Candelaria in consultation with
the mocha and I never said that
memo the endorsed the bill so I
think one of the students at
excuse me I think what I said
madam speaker and gentleman is
accurate and indeed I did listen
to some of the hearings when
this bill was presented in other
venues Madam speaker and
gentleman and I did hear them
all the thank Senator Candelaria
for his work on those amendments
they regrettably or did not
endorse the bill.
That well thank you for that
clarification maybe a
Maybe I misunderstood you they
they they oppose this bill every
step of the way
and and I'm I'm thankful that
that some some possible language
was put in by Senator Candelaria
but all in all they they're not
in favor of this bill in in the
independent producers
association are in that kind of
the same boat and in my concern
gentle lady is we you know we
have two point one million
people were trying to be
attractive to business and
industry and and we want people
to come here of and our
neighboring states mainly Texas
in Arizona they don't have a
more stringent rule like this
and so it just puts a sentiment
income a competitive advantage
you know we have opportunities
to move business and industry in
our state we want to be
competitive we want to have we
want to have a good regulatory
environment good tax policy good
education.
You know
good good legal tort reform all
these things factory and good
crime prevention you know all
these all these items are so
important first for business and
industry come come into our
state and and this kind of puts
a little red flag for those for
those opportunities and I know
that's not what you want to may
I know your for business and
industry well but this this is
Just another red flag for these
folks in the small independent
producers and I'm part of that
community.
You know they're trying trying
desperately and and
cooperatively with with the
state environment department to
work on the methane rule it is a
very complex and we have a lot
of man hours into that process
and and and I want to thank the
environment department gentle
lady and Madam speaker of for
for a hearing aid taking and all
the input that is necessary for
for rural change like that
because we have you know we have
eighty thousand wells and you
know we're trying to make sure
that we cut down our emissions
and it's a real positive thing
because every every MCF of gas
that we say we can we can sell
down the pipeline and and get a
little recovery you know for our
investment in.
The
I think this really again you
know we've talked so much about
business development and and
helping our small businesses get
over this pandemic and as you
know gentle lady we've lost
thirty thousand jobs or trying
to get those recovered
the the businesses are opening
up now the economy is opening up
in our State thank goodness
schools are opening up and and
this just this just kind of puts
a little.
you know I don't know how to say
it I I just don't kick us while
we're down we're trying to
recover in our our air quality
elation our area San Juan county
is is quite good it's just it's
just gorgeous up there I hope
the members of this body can get
up there and and recreation
enjoy our outdoors and ends in
you just can't beat the place a
lot of good hiking and a lot of
good restaurants up there now
that their vote but
We we just.
You know we're just having some
issues with this
and unlike the federal programs
gentle lady you know they the
federal programs to extensive
scientific and tech technical
study
on on these air quality issues
and so it's not like the federal
government is being lax in their
in their criteria it is just it
just makes sense they were on
the same playing field of of our
two big neighbors to the east
and to the west especially Texas
yes we can page so so it so
vigorously with them and and
I'll give you a simple gentle
lady we have a lot of natural
gas you think of all in
southeast New Mexico Madam
speaker gentle lady we we
produce a lot of natural gas.
In in in the Permian basin and
we need to process a gas and we
need to to build new the
processing plants that that'll
of strip out the propane butane
shin and for other products and
natural gas liquids and what's
happening gentle lady better
speakers is those companies
there set up shop across the
border because they have more
regulatory certainty there and
you know we're talking you know
literally miles of just a few
miles from our border so.
This legislation it just seems
to be a.
I don't know solutions searching
for problems and I don't know
what you what you think about
that gentle lady wind now makes
it we let our economy recover
and we have such as a golden
opportunity to get our
businesses back going again
thirty thousand it you know is a
lot of folks that have lost
their jobs since this pandemic
and we want them to get back to
work as quickly as we can
is it is our.
Do you have any comments on the
why we're doing this now.
I'm.
Miss madam speaker and gentleman
why now
so first I think we need to keep
in mind this in and of itself is
it going anything what this bill
does is give state yes already
look at it's air quality rules
and regulations as well as is
hazardous waste rules to
determine whether or not there
is an area where there can be
improvements to the health and
safety of the citizens of the
state as well as its environment
so in fact point of fact nothing
is happening right now what it
is doing is creating the tool
for in the future
yes thorough evaluation as to
whether or not there are
situations and circumstances
under which state should act to
improve public safety and the
environment so I think that
answers your question and
misters Madam speaker and
gentleman I whole heartedly
agree that we all are looking
forward to the end of the
pandemic and let's keep in mind
it's not environmental rules
which have caused a large part
of the issue that you are
referring to the gentleman from
San Juan it is
unfortunate horrible
circumstances has happened to
the entire country in fact the
world and we are working
diligently members of this body
and the governor to bring the
economy back this rule and
existing rules had nothing to do
with the loss of three thousand
jobs in the state if that's the
correct number and I'm not sure
that it is Madam speaker and
gentleman.
I keep thank you madam speaker
thank you gentle lady well I I
think we're all in agreement
that the pandemic was something
we never envisioned never during
a hundred years the last time we
had a and you know of a major
health crisis was that was a
hundred years ago nineteen
eighteen with the Spanish flu.
But looking at the big picture
yeah that's that's a health
issue
that is been devastating to our
economy in the state but I'm
talking about just business and
industry and being business
friendly
you know you and I serve on the
tax committee and we hear a bill
after bill trying to help these
these these large industrial
projects to move to our state in
accident with this sort of bill
this week that gives later
funding to to big projects an it
in excess of three hundred fifty
million dollars and at in the
people that that are concerned
about this bill they're just
worry about unnecessary
regulation possible litigation I
mean you know these are the
business owner some main large
and small gentle lady and and
I'm mainly a small you know
business owner and I represent a
lot of small business I mean
businesses in my district in the
state is blessed with a lot of
small businesses I think we're
like night in the country in
terms of number of small
businesses in this affects them
today
So I just I just want to make
sure that we're.
you know you you mentioned that
that nothing's happened yet and
and and that's that's the
concern the fear that their
business and industry has out
there and when the chamber of
commerce and of the farm and
ranching only gas all our major
industries are concerned about
this bill we need to we need to
cast
stand up and take take attention
at their their their.
Insurance or or not without
you know
The reason they read this bill
very thoroughly and they have
problems with it and I think the
existing set you know exit
existing regulatory
regime is is very quiet adequate
for our small.
State rural state at the people
live out in the country.
And and half the people live in
the you know and and three major
city Santa Fe Albuquerque Los
crucis so
do you have any
I'm sorry I'm just looking over
my notes.
Gentlelady our own I was trying
to look at Senate bill eight and
some of the amendments and what
what are
I believe I have the right
amendment that they added a
component for vehicle
inspections is that right.
Thank you madam.
Yeah and madam speaker and
gentleman I believe that's
correct relating to easel
vehicles but let me just verify
the details of that madam
speaker and gentle.
Madam speaker gentleman there is
a provision that was added
relating to
mission controls on diesel
vehicles and that provision only
applies to the local authority
area and Bernalillo county
Albuquerque area.
So this is this is limited
simply to Bernalillo county it
won't affect this and the rural
parts of the country.
Our statement Madam speaker
gentleman that's correct.
Would you say that gentle lady
I'm looking at
I don't mind of the amendment.
And has a two hundred dollar.
The fifty.
A permit for a I guess for the
Mechanics the the auto mechanic
a service industry to to
yes these vehicles and then
there's a thirty five dollar fee
for each vehicle
I guess to pass inspection and
can you can you cite work worst
limited to finally County.
Madam speaker gentleman if you
first of all I don't mind is not
a new prevention
but if you know it I don't mind
says a local authority having a
vehicle emission and inspection
and maintenance program is
authorized to do X. Y. Z. and a
local authority as we discussed
previously in our conversation
about this bill is only in a
story that exists in the
Albuquerque Bernalillo area
because it applies to a class
eight county with an X. Y. Z.
population in the county and the
city with X. Y. Z. population
and that happens to be
Albuquerque and Bernalillo
county okay thank you for that
thank you for that clarification
and what happens if you if you
fail that test that vehicle
inspection.
Madam speaker gentle on I'm
happy to ask and yes my ex for
but I would not that's not part
of of the legislation but I'm
happy to check into it for you.
In the legislation it's not part
of the amendments Madam speaker
of the bill I'm sorry about that
I've got hard copy to in a very
low tech you'll have to forgive
me gentle lady.
I'm sorry did you want me to
follow I'm sorry man speak you
want me to follow up and happy
to answer any question you have
there let me ask my experts
thank you gentle lady I I think
it's in your bill I just I
didn't side in the right place.
Madam speaker and gentleman it
is part of a person's vehicle in
the Albuquerque Bernalillo area
fails one of these emission
tests
you may be unable to register
their vehicle until they can
bring there are up to standards
Madam speaker and gentleman.
Okay the.
Thank you gentle lady
that that that makes sense you
got a you're going to rectify
the problem before for you get
your your permit and this is an
unusual Texas has an inspection
vehicle inspection requirements
so this is kind of similar to
that in a in this and I
appreciate your clarification is
just from Bernalillo and not the
rest of the state so yeah gentle
lady
You know I I I guess I guess I'm
just worried about about the
little guy out there
yeah the pandemic is certainly
not the fault of and anybody in
this room it was a worldwide the
catastrophe and issues really
really hard our economy but it
but I I want to reform that
before the pandemic hit we had a
four point eight percent
unemployment rate that was forty
six thousand people out of work
and so and flash fast forty year
we're we're a little rate
percent and and seventy six
thousand people are out of work
so we we we need to recover
thirty thousand you know it's
not you know that's a lot of
folks it's doable you know a
percent unemployment is is is is
a little high compared to our
neighbors but we have a chance
to
start recovering some of those
jobs and I just hate to have
more regulatory burden that
structure then our neighbors
that we do a lot of cop that we
were in competition with and
I think this this is just kind
of a bridge too far so thank you
gentle lady I appreciate
your your comments and Anna your
clarification and and I'll I'll
pass it on to I'll pass the
baton to the next next debater.
Thank you John there is further
debate the gentleman from Dona
Ana Representative small.
Thank you very much Madam
speaker with that gentle lady
feels.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
again I will you.
Thank you very much miss speaker
thank you gentle lady I want to
ask a few questions Madam
speaker gentle lady covering a
few kind of different areas
Madam speaker gentle lady first
I want to begin.
Madam speaker gentle lady it's
my understanding that in some
across our state
statewide and especially in some
parts of our urban areas we
actually have significantly
higher prevalence of asthma both
with adults and children.
Is that your understanding madam
speaker gentle lady.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
believe that is correct.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady
Madam speaker gentle lady the
the.
Those sorts of disparities
discrepancies and threats again
madam speaker gentle lady
threats that aren't theoretical
in fact Madam speaker gentle
lady health threats that New
Mexicans live with every every
day again it's my understanding
is that slightly elevated rates
for adults statewide in some
parts of our urban areas
especially in Albuquerque
significantly elevated that
those threats
those because then speaker
gentle lady fair to say those
because co morbidities and an
increase.
The the danger to those New
Mexicans certainly under covert
nineteen but also under it it
just makes it less safe for
those New Mexicans in their
daily lives would you agree
madam speaker gentle lady.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
would definitely agree with you.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady and we don't
have to go through certainly
every instance where these sorts
of clear and present not
theoretical threats but current
facts of life perhaps we should
say Madam speaker and gentle
lady are facing our citizens and
so madam speaker gentle lady I I
heard earlier during the debate
visiting about the fuss
otherwise known as as the the
the fire retirement speaker
gentle lady
There is suspicion that that was
used this was used especially in
federal facilities then speaker
gentle lady you talked about so
the Air Force bases Madam
speaker gentle lady is my
understanding that there is
concern that it may have been
used at the white sands test
facility which is of course
close to the community I
represent is that also so fair
to say we we we don't know the
extent of the P. five US
contamination and usage then
speaker gentle lady Madam
speaker and gentleman that is
true in I would point out
Madam speaker and gentleman that
we are I think we're even
finding and now at Los Alamos
national lab which is a brand
new area where there's and some
P. foss identified so it's it
this is a very potentially
important and significant health
threat this the residents near
these facilities Madam speaker
John that thank you madam
speaker thank you gentle lady
that that's my understanding I
know we as a body have likely
heard although a press briefly
on the floor I know certainly in
different committees and in our
communities Madam speaker gentle
lady entire dairy herds have
been eliminated due to this and
we're at the very front and
madam speaker gentle lady both
in terms of not only finding it
but madam speaker gentle lady
then understanding the extent
and then what sorts of different
effects are out there and so
madam speaker gentle lady.
That seems to me another clear
instance these wrong federal
facilities now contaminating
local communities where having
state flexibility to set our own
standards seems like the simply
of a responsible
A responsible step that gives us
that flexibility would you agree
madam speaker gentle lady.
Madam speaker and gentleman not
only responsible I think
necessary and critical we I I
heard some heart wrenching
testimony during the interim so
wasn't last year because we know
we didn't have interim
committees about individuals
near these Air Force bases and a
law as you pointed out Madam
speaker and gentleman with a
loss of entire herd in the
inability of that farming that
dairy farming family to get
fully compensated and taking
care of in terms of the issues
and the health issues associated
with both areas and this bill
would allow the state to step in
and begin to take on this very
significant problem Madam
speaker and and gentleman.
The thank you madam speaker
thank you gentle lady
Thank you for fleshing that out
and I certainly agree with you
and I would agree Madam speaker
gentle lady with with your use
of the word necessary now madam
speaker gentle lady I want to
spend a very brief amount of
time kind of summarizing this
scenario not a theoretical
scenario a current scenario
madam speaker gentle lady that
is of great importance to our
state.
And madam speaker gentle lady
I'm gonna make the case that
having this state flexibility
that will exist
with the strong checks and
balances that currently are
there with the environmental
improvement board.
Actually makes a lot of sense
for us and so madam speaker
gentle lady we see the share and
just allow me briefly and I ask
a quick question the shale boom
madam speaker gentle lady that
has transformed.
oil production in the Permian in
the world but especially here in
New Mexico and Texas in the
Permian basin.
That's really taken off
you know going back to twenty
fourteen at the end of some
really awful price years Madam
speaker gentle lady.
president Obama during that time
lifted the the with the Congress
bipartisan support lifted the
ban on exporting of oil Madam
speaker gentle lady up until
that point for quite a number of
years any oil that was produced
in the United States had to stay
here Madam speaker gentle lady.
So we we really had and it's
transformed in a very positive
way our state budget it's
brought
not only that fiscal wealth to
the state ma'am speaker gentle
lady but continues to drive
incredibly innovative industries
and I have no problem saying
that Madam speaker gentle lady.
The Obama administration
instituted one set of.
Air quality regulations with
methane.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
The trump administration the
subsequent administration sought
to undo that.
And it was really interesting
madam speaker gentle lady
because we had a number of.
Operators to my understanding
who played a bigger and bigger
role in the extraction of oil
and of course natural gas in the
Permian basin.
And madam speaker gentle lady
there was a date some of them at
least had deep concerns with
that kind of federal whiplash
they variants.
And madam speaker gentle lady
now we're in a scenario as we
know Madam speaker gentle lady
Think right now it's something
like fifty seven percent is the
number I've heard and I've
certainly stand to be corrected
if that's appropriate and if I'm
wrong but the the point stands
that New Mexico very uniquely.
Has a significant amount of
federal land Madam speaker
gentle lady that is connected to
our oil and gas industry very
important and so federal
decisions madam speaker gentle
lady that are taken have
outsized importance to our state
Madam speaker gentle lady.
So we had a scenario where
regulations promulgated under
one federal administration
sought to be undone by the next
administration.
Left this in a limbo.
You madam speaker gentle lady.
Now we're in a scenario with the
new federal administration.
That
Is taking a somewhat of a
different tack.
On extraction where Madam
speaker gentle lady we I think
in a view shared by many we have
to make sure that a higher
standard in an appropriate
standard madam speaker gentle
lady is going to be easy central
for us now say that again for
the body the central to continue
our oil and gas production.
And madam speaker gentle lady I
think if we had this sort of
state system that you're
proposing.
That is based on clear science
based on the the amendments
coming out of the Senate.
Madam speaker gentle lady that
is with the strong checks and
balances with the environmental
improvement board it will give
us a clearer way informed with
all stakeholders to engage a
fair standard that is protective
of New Mexicans health and madam
speaker gentle lady as our world
continues to change I think
could provide us frankly a leg
up.
To continue the important oil
and gas production that is so
necessary for our state in a
number of different ways.
So I'm not really a question
there madam speaker gentle lady
thank you for allowing me to to
go through that briefly but
Madam speaker gentle lady.
We've talked about the health
risks New Mexicans live with
now.
And madam speaker gentle lady
right now.
There is no state ability to
respond to those health risks
that is madam speaker gentle
lady we can say this area this
part of of the state that has a
higher prevalence of asthma more
folks with health risks we can
go above the Federal stand we
can deviate from a federal
standard right now maybe that so
I can see that why that's
important to do madam speaker
gentle lady we've talked about
the faster in some of these
areas with essentially a
hazardous waste that is
impacting communities in New
Mexico right now where are we
have very limited ability to
help regulate it.
And and or to help recover
damages Madam speaker gentle
lady for New Mexico communities
impacted that by it.
And madam speaker gentle lady.
In an increasingly carbon
conscious world.
To continue are very important
production of oil and natural
gas having clear science based
balanced standards that are set
by our state with all of the
stakeholders at the table as has
been done I think by this
administration our current
administration will provide us
much more certainty in my
opinion madam speaker gentle
lady to continue that I'll just
close madam speaker gentle lady
ask a quick couple other
questions Madam speaker gentle
lady coming from the Los crucis
city council I recall that there
was a high degree of interest in
finding communities where
Health where folks could look
towards health where they could
feel like they have access to
the great outdoors Technion with
that all the great broadband
work this body is doing to be
digitally connected and have a
clean environment where those
madam speaker gentle lady I
would choose that those are
standards that folks are looking
for in today's world.
I'm.
Madam speaker and gentleman
absolutely and I you know I
think we're all reminded of how
we are trying to expand our
economy in the area of outdoor
recreation and eco tourism and
any number of things that will
draw people madam speaker and
gentleman to the state and
ensuring that our environment
continues to be the beautiful
place that it is I think is is
critical to those activities
madam speaker and gentleman.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady I would
definitely agree Madam speaker
gentle lady you mentioned
outdoor recreation and tourism
and those sorts of things and
that's clear Madam speaker
gentle lady that having that
sort of healthy environment the
ability to help
again state set clear science
based balanced state standards
that are informed by our
expertise by stakeholders that
run the gamut here in New Mexico
makes a lot of sense Madam
speaker gentle lady.
My understanding and I'll give a
quick example and ask if you've
heard about this and communities
you know of the New Mexico is
that for folks they're not these
folks are coming for other
reasons that is we have a video
game developer madam speaker
gentle lady who retired from.
Retired from the navy
And has invested
millions of dollars Madam
speaker gentle lady in this high
growth area working with
graduates from New Mexico State
University other folks that have
been recruited to our state and
I'll never forget madam speaker
gentle lady this person talking
about how they set of criteria
after they retired of where they
wanted to let and madam speaker
gentle lady outdoors was a key
part of that and madam speaker
gentle lady health and at a
healthy community was another
key part of that does that does
that sound like an isolated
example madam speaker gentle
lady or would you say that that
is something that maybe is
happening far more often than we
might think.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
think that is one of the key
reasons people come to our
beautiful state and are
productive and become productive
job creators in the state they
are looking for an environment
that they not only
cherish and enjoy but where they
can attract employees madam
speaker and gentleman to cherish
and enjoy the beauty that with
impunity and that we have here
in our love the wonderful state
so I I'm I'm completely and
Alliance with all of the things
that you're saying.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
thank you madam speaker thank
you John lady this was something
that in this area of of job
creators as you say madam
speaker gentle lady folks who
want to invest who are part of
gross industry and certainly we
see those in media but we see
those and many other areas as
well that these criteria madam
speaker gentle lady are
essential for them to choose
where they are are going to live
where they're going to invest
where they're going to grow
their business raise their
family except our Madam speaker
gentle lady.
Do you think that a state which
is able to again in a science
based way through the system of
checks and balances with the
environmental improvement for
the table to say we're going to
be able to
Create the best to to preserve
the air to manage hazardous
waste in a way that's not going
to be threatening people's
health whether it's respiratory
and asthma of course worsened
during COVID immeasurably but I
also in very important ways when
it comes to some of the the
things like the faster do you
think that that would be a
selling point for these sorts of
of folks.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
think society at this point in
time and
Young young people and people
entering the job market and ms
level people are focused on
lifestyle choices in addition to
career choices and what is they
are looking for madam speaker
and gentleman is a place where
they can have a fantastic
lifestyle in him and have good
income and I think companies who
are drawn to the our wonderful
state know that Madam speaker
and gentleman and take that as
part of their a valuation
process when they're deciding
whether or not to locate to our
state Madam speaker and and
gentleman.
Thank you Mr excuse me thank you
madam speaker thank you gentle
lady I completely agree and
madam speaker gentle lady the
the research bears that out
communities that are growing
communities that are thriving
they are madam speaker and
gentle lady absolutely looking
out for the health of their
residents and madam speaker
gentle lady I think it's just
it's without a doubt at least to
me a fact when it comes to
states that if states are able
to do that sort of work that
you're as you're proposing to
have this flexibility that we
will in fact create significant
rewards by not only attracting
folks here the madam speaker
gentle lady keeping people here
when they have those
opportunities to stay close to
the outdoor spaces with the
pristine err with the high
quality water would you think
that those things madam speaker
gentle lady are important for
keeping New Mexicans here giving
New Mexicans reason to stay here
as they work to build their
careers their lives their
families that sort of thing.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
think you have you really hit
the nail on the head we we want
to do two things in the state
while many things in the state
but one of course is to bring
people here and the other thing
Madam speaker and gentleman is
to keep people here I can't tell
you how often I hear from
constituents about how they
really want their children to be
able to enjoy the beauty and the
opportunities that our state has
to offer and certainly they want
for their children and their
grandchildren a place where the
environment is cared for and
where health and safety is a
primary concern of the state and
so I couldn't agree with you
more Madam speaker and and in
general.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady I I again I
think it's it's something that
we probably all intuitively know
administrative project.
I think that we see born out in
research again madam speaker
gentle lady which communities
are growing which communities
are not which states are growing
and thriving Madam speaker
gentle lady and which states are
not that that
The health the well being of
residents the ability to for the
state to act in ways that
promote that are in fact
essential in growing and and and
diversifying and all those sorts
of things madam speaker gentle
lady there's just one more group
want to keep busy about a few
things.
One other thing really comes to
my mind though madam speaker
gentle lady again about my time
there is a Los crucis city
councilor we've talked about say
bringing in folks who are maybe
in the middle of their career
starting up businesses that sort
of thing attracting companies
and madam speaker gentle lady
and we can visit about that here
in a little that.
We've talked about madam speaker
gentle lady providing the
reasons for folks who have had
the absolute privilege to grow
up in New Mexico why it's so
important to have a clean
healthy safe environment for
them to want to stay here Madam
speaker gentle lady there's
another group of folks and and
now I'm talking about retirees
Madam speaker gentle lady who
would you think they're also
motivated by a clean safe
healthy environment.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
know that for a fact because of
the.
The retirees that come to my
community and there are many
actually that are drawn to the
northern New Mexico for the that
very reason Madam speaker and
gentleman it's for the the
beauty in the outdoors they
retirees these days are at least
the ones that come to New Mexico
and I know many because many of
them have come to either Los
Alamos or the greater Los Alamos
area matter speaker and
gentleman are and I bet it's the
same in Dona ana county in other
parts of the state and that is
they want an active outdoor
lifestyle and most of my friends
who have come here from other
places chair love that about our
state and they rely on that and
in view that is that we as the
reason they came here it is for
the outdoor activities and and
all of the beauty associated
with that Madam speaker and
gentleman.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady
it's something that that that
not your experience from
northern New Mexico madam
speaker gentle lady similar to
experiences I which relate and
have seen in southern New Mexico
these are communities madam
speaker gentle lady that are
marketing to retirees whose
financial where with all can be
very beneficial for our state
Madam speaker gentle gentle lady
who want to experience the
outdoors who maybe they want a
second job a second career maybe
they're gonna volunteer
but then speaker gentle lady
they're very engaged they're
very involved in a clean healthy
safe environment the state madam
speaker gentle lady that is able
to help set these clear science
based and balanced sorts of of
rules when it comes to air
quality and hazardous waste I
think it's it's really Madam
speaker gentle lady maybe
keeping the golden egg that is
that is there right now Madam
speaker gentle lady
And and beginning to market at
staying on this just briefly
madam speaker gentle lady
anecdotally during the COVID
nineteen I know at least
initially in southern New Mexico
we are seeing a lot of folks
coming to a cleaner.
Southern New Mexico they were
coming to our area from places
all across the country wanting
to look at real estate even
during this incredibly
challenging time and madam
speaker gentle lady it's seems
that are clean safe healthy
environment was one of those
reasons would you agree.
Madam speaker and gentleman I do
agree and we were observing the
same sorts of things here in
northern New Mexico people
recognize that
living in these big cities with
all these environmental issues
and health and safety issues
associated with being in densely
populated areas is maybe not the
best situation and what we saw I
think Madam speaker and
gentleman was the recognition
that coming to a state that is
less densely populated that
respects its environment that
cares about its people and
ensures that the other that
we're providing a healthy
healthy and safe environment is
really important now and this
crisis that we had with COVID
really get put that on the
forefront of people's minds and
people are beginning madam
speaker and gentleman to
reevaluate how they want to live
and where they want to live in
New Mexico by being on the
forefront Madam speaker and and
gentlemen of of of the of the
process of ensuring that we're
providing a safe environment
with as you say all the checks
and balances that are necessary
I think it is a draw that they
know we care about the
environment we care about public
safety is definitely a selling
factor for people who are
looking for alternate places to
live and work Madam speaker and
gentleman.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady and I couldn't
agree more madam speaker gentle
lady would you say that for
parts of our state really all
parts of our state when we're
looking for the some of the it
just from a purely economic
perspective Madam speaker gentle
lady that continuing to be that
state that folks want to come to
and be part of that that is
could be very beneficial shall
we say madam speaker gentle lady
not eight not only for for some
of our urban areas but perhaps
substantially madam speaker
gentle lady for some of our more
rural areas in fact madam
speaker gentle lady would you
put more benefit of the scribe
more benefit to some of our
perhaps more rural areas from
some of that influx of of folks
and investment.
Okay Madam speaker in and
gentleman I absolutely would and
I have a kind of an in a door
the little story Madam speaker
and gentleman about how I know
that during the COVID they're
just you know periods when we
could go to to restaurants you
know if you were eating outdoors
and so on and so forth so my
husband and I did a little bit
of that in order The New Mexico
just to think about a lot of us
Madam speaker and gentle as you
know we're feeling a little
faster phobic as as things as we
were staying at home so much and
and we didn't do that we were in
Avid U. S. which is you know is
a rural area in northern New
Mexico very beautiful of course
but
and at the table not very far
from us we were we started
chatting with a couple who had
moved to happen to from
elsewhere looking for the kind
of environment that we have to
present this beautiful pristine
clean environment and we were
talking a lot about how people
are migrating to the state and
moving into rural community
areas like no northern New
Mexico the more rural parts of
northern New Mexico
Lee the city's income to of
these these beautiful
environment so I know for a fact
I I know it's anecdotal but I
I'm certain that if we if we
ever did any kind of a
questionnaire as to why the to
come here I on the list madam
speaker and gentleman would be
concerned about our environment
interest in the outdoors and and
all of those kinds of things
madam speaker and.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady thank you for
letting that that simple.
I strongly suspect madam speaker
and gentle lady that as we
emerge from this terrible
pandemic as we continue you know
as we see the pace of
vaccination rise all across the
country especially here in New
Mexico where we're helping lead
the nation there that we're
going to see and hear those
stories in all parts of our
wonderful state not just in the
north not just in the south and
speaker gentle lady not in the
southwest and just in the
southeast all over our state
Madam speaker gentle lady
because our entire state is a an
incredibly wondrous beautiful
state that has so many
incredible natural resources
with such an incredible culture
and madam speaker gentle lady
giving our state.
Through this balanced science
informed process the ability to
help safeguard that in a rapidly
changing world seems like a just
a very good place to go madam
speaker gentle lady we visited
just a little bit about
some of these clear and present
facts of life if Madam speaker
gentle lady that wondrous as our
state is our higher rate of
asthma the P. five Austin other
contaminants that continue and
in fact plague some parts of our
state in increasing rate often
times that have come here
through our as you well know
madam speaker gentle lady of
course with the lads up in your
area the great benefits of
federal investment but some of
the the terrible challenges that
have also come with that history
we've talked about the the those
clear those facts that afflict
New Mexicans now Mr speaker
gentle lady.
This is it briefly about I guess
kind of money if there any of of
regular regulatory certainty
Madam speaker gentle lady and in
a federal environment and
frankly in a world environment
where there is a higher level of
concern.
Being paid to carbon that being
able to set our own state course
Madam speaker gentle lady in
fact will be I believe it could
be part of.
A very important equation
allowing New Mexico to continue
to produce oil and gas.
Madam speaker gentle lady we
visited about just the basic
community and therefore economic
benefits why people want to come
why they want to stay where they
want to start businesses I want
to just present now briefly
madam speaker gentle lady about
some of the businesses some of
the industry madam speaker
gentle lady that is actually
not distant from but in fact
closely correlated to a cleaner
safer healthier environment
Madam speaker gentle lady do you
When it comes to some of these
new emerging innovative
technologies do you think that
those technologies the
application the businesses and
private sector actors working in
those spaces do you think
they'll be drawn to a state
where.
In fact they can partner with
the state in some of these
potentially innovative ways to
help clean up our environment.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
think you bring up and an
extraordinarily important point
and and and and that is that
when these innovative technology
see that we're interested to and
and moving forward and and
bringing progress they see they
will see the state as a really
strong partners in the kinds of
things that they're trying to
accomplish so I I think that's a
very good point that you're
making Madam speaker and
gentleman thank you thank you
madam speaker thank you gentle
lady I want to briefly
illustrated a few examples that
at least I'm aware of madam
speaker gentle lady perhaps you
can add more in into the pot
Madam speaker gentle lady I know
in southeastern New Mexico with
In where in oil and gas
production.
In some of the more remote areas
there now our in that production
with solar panels and with store
battery storage on site Madam
speaker gentle lady also looking
to do much of the drilling
process powered by gas Madam
speaker gentle lady that is
essentially the lever there on
site and then is fed to power it
did continued production and
work at those sites Madam
speaker gentle lady I know that
there's just been
these to my knowledge and and
maybe the numbers hopefully
these are accurate and it's not
these are the numbers I've heard
reported but a five hundred
million dollar Madam speaker
gentle lady five hundred million
dollar investment.
At an oil refinery for bio fuels
Madam speaker gentle lady here
in New Mexico Madam speaker
gentle lady know that there's.
Methane monitoring and methane
capture
that that set up the folks who
are setting up shop Madam
speaker gentle lady I know that
there's folks are looking to
source lithium Madam speaker
gentle lady that's important for
our batteries and parts of our
state Madam speaker gentle lady
look folks who are working on
innovative hydrogen technology
that has received state support
that has a really exciting
collaboration is now looking to
continue to expand and so madam
speaker gentle lady those are
all in their own sorts of ways
businesses that fit squarely
into grow into expansion into
more jobs more investment with a
cleaner safer help wealthier
environment would you agree with
that then speaker gentle lady.
Madam speaker and and gentleman
I would end there are examples
of spin off country the
company's in Los Alamos or in
the greater Los Alamos area
where all of those where we are
developing or they are
developing technologies that are
all along the lines that you are
referring to Madam speaker and
and gentleman in terms of
innovation
of alternative energy sources
any number of things and I know
that those companies came here
in part because of their the
knowledge that this was a
wonderful place to drop people
that their employees would want
to come here because of the
environment that we're offering
not it's not just the work but
it's the environment Madam
speaker and gentleman and I
think you're making some some
incredibly good points in terms
of why this law this law and the
amendments that to go on air
quality what line hazardous
waste law really part of the
equation of the state that will
draw people here and Madam
speaker and in general.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady I I firmly
believe it Madam speaker gentle
lady and and it's not a matter
of believing disbelieving it's
matter Madam speaker gentle lady
of looking around seeing where
investment is flowing how do we
maximize that investment
administrative per gentle lady
how do we safeguard something we
didn't create we are so
fortunate to have the privilege
of being part of stewarding that
is our great state.
The health and safety of New
Mexicans the health and safety
in the
the health of our environment
madam speaker gentle lady I want
to try just one other area of
technology speaker gentle lady
that fits squarely into a
cleaner healthier safer
environment driven by science
with the strong checks and
balances that exist currently
and that's carbon capture use
and sequestration Madam speaker
gentle lady we can be a world
leader in both developing that
technology in finding ways madam
speaker gentle lady to apply
that in ways that better protect
our environment that create
economic sustainability and it
dropped investment
Thank worldwide investment madam
speaker gentle lady.
That yeah I could go we could go
on and on about some of those
investment opportunities which
is so important because we
should all be worried about the
economic health of our state we
absolutely have to be fighting
for a more diversified stronger.
economy Madam speaker gentle
lady and I think.
In this conversation it seems
like we've come to a place.
That is enabled in part by your
legislation giving the state the
flexibility to set appropriate
standards to not face the
whiplash that they can sometimes
be generated at the federal
level to not worry about the
inattention under funding or
other lack of investment at the
federal level madam speaker
gentle lady we haven't even
talked about the ability for the
state to set a much more
flexible
Set of responses how to correct
sorts of of of things madam
speaker gentle lady if something
is out of attainment you know
sometimes it seems like if the
federalized earns often it
doesn't turn until it's too late
Madam speaker gentle lady we see
that was P. faster and then
madam speaker gentle lady when
that I turns it can be with
sometimes with the a force that
is
not helpful to local communities
and different sorts of ways
madam speaker and gentle lady so
Madam speaker gentle lady at I
really appreciate the fact that
we're talking about how growing
our economy is connected to.
Continuing to safeguard and set
standards and help protect our
environment Madam speaker gentle
lady.
US focusing in on that paradigm
that reality that we're seeing
across the United States across
the world it will help us grow
and bring more investment.
Bring in keep more jobs and hold
on to an appropriately steward
this incredible state that we
all have the privilege of being
living in and and having the
privilege to represent so thank
you madam speaker gentle lady
from bringing this important
legislation and for engaging I
think in this exciting dialogue
about how we move our state
forward together thank you very
much then speaker thank you
generated.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker this motion having
been debated food three thirty I
was I move that the big cities.
no objections so ordered
gentlelady from Los Alamos to
close.
Mr speaker I could not have done
a better closing for this bills
and my dear colleague from Dona
Ana Representative small and
with that Mr speaker I move
that.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill eight
do now pass we on final passage
of Senate finance committee sets
two percent bill eight the vote
is now open.
I had such a good line the
family gets on just I.
What is that's close.
The results of the election
fortunes concluded the clerk to
call the members without a
recorded vote.
Representative during a loss.
Representative are you guys
because of the test.
Representative Maestas.
You have to do with it will be
in the.
Close five hundred thirty nine
in the affirmative twenty nine
is negative Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill eight has passed thanks.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
I move that we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business you
know genesis order.
I do have the following.
Memorials around third reading
we're gonna place on the consent
calendar we discuss this with
the floor leaders.
I am moving house memorials
thirteen.
Twenty six twenty seven thirty
one thirty three and Senate
Joint Memorial as one and two.
From the third reading calendar
to the consent calendar hearing
objection it is so ordered.
Gentlelady from.
Bernalillo.
The speaker
point of personal privilege.
See your point.
Mr speaker.
And members of the house my my.
Many of you might be surprised
to know that my dad.
Oil refinery in the Virgin
Islands.
And he had the same he always
said you cannot be wrong and
strong.
And he always told the man in
the rig that.
And today I come before the
house of representatives to say.
I.
Have been wrong in a couple of.
Things on the floor when I put
my black Education Act been on
and my call back on.
Representative.
What.
Was a sponsor with me and at
that time I did not give her
recognition.
Up towards the bill and I did
apologize to her.
Mr speaker when we leave here.
And go back to our home towns.
I community the African American
community.
And the first thing they always
said to me.
What do and Santa Fe.
And so I want to publicly
apologize to her because when I
did.
My black Education Act Mr
speaker in public Clarence I did
not mention Representative
Powdrell name I'm
Representative.
Joe get funding to the back
Education Act so Mister speaker
and members of the house.
Apologize to.
We I want to apologize publicly
because I know that she's going
to get.
But she did not do anything with
that black Education Act so
Mister speaker.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
I'm.
Thank you Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Thank.
The gentle lady for Sandoval
Representative Powdrell Culbert
I'm not really sure I accept the
apology.
We have been dealing with this
my teen years of the.
Community has always wondered.
Where we work together on
projects.
And so for the lady from
Bernalillo.
I appreciate the acknowledgement
but I think about this apology.
Sen because everybody seems to
think we don't work together.
And we we work very well
together.
And we have probably.
Since the seventies I have
worked with one another we had a
total disagreements.
We went through a period where
we didn't talk to each other
much for about.
Is.
What I'm getting to that.
You know.
The like African American
Community which is if which is
not a big community but a
community none the less.
And
With this agreement gotten over
them and work together for the
good of the community.
So
thank you for the applause.
And I was more.
To the to the plate and help you
help our community what house
bill forty three.
Thank you Mr speaker not.
Thank you.
Generally I think it is the will
of the house that as penance the
gentle lady from Bernalillo in
the year twenty twenty two it
will be known as the Williams
Stapleton barbecue dinner in the
house of representatives I still
take care that that next year
for us and the we really
appreciate gentlelady from
Bernalillo I treating us all of
our queue for dinner in this
thirty day session.
Hold on.
The barbecue from the lady.
The wall and the money will come
from a lady from Bernalillo
county excuse in the money can
come from the lady from
Bernalillo county.
Thank you.
I move that we go to the next
order of business messages it's
a good it's a very good idea
hearing objects here I had a
point of personal privilege the
gentle lady from grant Hidalgo
is here thank you Mr speaker I
just rise to acknowledge a
legacy from Sierra County grace
Kane passed away this week and I
see is that she is known around
the state as the woman who
establish the act in the
classroom program which is now
statewide and has grown to be
quite a substantial program she
was a member of the council
bills this year county fair
board farming livestock bureau
and she passed away this week
and I just want to stand in
honor and and thank you her I
think her family for sharing her
with so many people she was my
fifth grade science teacher we
have chickens and a girl kinds
of plants she was an incredible
woman but her legacy lives on
through the farm bureau ag in
the classroom program thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentle lady
very sorry for your loss.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of messages of
business messages all this.
You hearing objections so
ordered thirty.
House executive message number
four.
Honorable speaker Egolf and
members of the house I have the
state signed house bill twenty
two as amended house bill fifty
two as amended house bill fifty
seven as amended house bill one
fifty seven and acted by the
fifty fifth legislature first
session twenty twenty one
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor this is
really entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
concurred in house amendments to
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four as amended.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill three
seventy seven as amended
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
this is Richard.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house.
That the Senate has failed to
concur in house amendments to
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill sixty
Sixth Avenue mended and request
that the house received from
their amendments if the house
fails to receive from their
amendments the Senate appoints
the following conferees to
confer with the house conferees.
Senator William P. schools
Senator Katy M. do heck Senator
Gregg Schmedes respectfully
submitted Lenore and Lara host
Senate chief clerk.
Message of the injured.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
committee reports your no
objections order Cllr to read.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too is been referred
Senate bill two eighty five has
had it under consideration
reports a with recommendation
that it do passed as amended
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we are
on adoption of the favorable
committee for the Senate bill
two eighty five as amended all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
All this was caring for to
drive.
Mr speaker you're enrolling in
and grossing Committee too it's
been referred house bill forty
one house bill forty three as
amended house bill sixty seven
house bill one sixty eight house
bill one eighty five House Bill
to twelve House Bill two twenty
four how state government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill to fifty as amended house
bill two seventy one has had it
under consideration and reports
of fame have been duly enrolled
in gross preparatory to signing
by the officers of the house
respectfully submitted Christina
or yes chair.
Move adoption we are adoption
fever a favorable committee
report on house those forty one
forty three is amended sixty
seven one sixty one eighty five
to twelve to twenty four.
To fifteen to seventy one all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
I.
Well this was named report is
adopted that the record reflect
the duly enrolled in a gross
copies of house was forty one
forty three is amended sixty
seven one sixty one eighty five
to twelve to twenty four has
state government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee such do
for us to to fifty as amended in
nasco two seventy one have been
signed by the officers of the
house in open session.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo Mr
speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business
concurrence no objections sort
ordered gentlelady from Rio
Arriba Santa Fe inTaos
Representative at at a.
Mr speaker the Senate has failed
to concur with the amendments to
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill sixty
six as amended I personally
would like to thank all the
members of the house or a
bipartisan compromise on US
Senate bill sixty six and I'm
I'm very grateful to this body
for for helping us for helping
push this bill forward Mr
speaker I move that the house
receipt from the amendments to
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill sixty
six as amended and I urge the
body to vote now.
Very well I presume there will
be no debate on the motion the
Senate has so I'll I will
explain what we're doing for our
first chair members we are
concurrent system in the house
considers actions taken by the
other chamber either on our
bills or on our amendments to
Senate bills the proper motion
when in the options that we have
at this point are to recede from
the amendments that we made to
the Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill sixty
six in other words those members
would go away and the bill would
pass as it existed when it
enters the house option number
two is that we fail to recede in
which point if that is the
outcome of the vote I will
appoint three members to a
conference committee to see if
differences can be worked out
with the other chamber.
If so the covers community at
the conference committee will
produce a committee report which
will come back to each chamber
and if adopted by each chamber
would send up the version of the
bill agreed upon by the
conference committee so in the
proper motion is as with
concurrence of motion always is
that the house
that receipt or the house can
curb within that member making
the motion offers thoughts that
how the member wishes the body
to order.
So the gentle lady from Rio
Arriba Santa Fe inTaos has made
the proper motion to recede and
urged the body to vote now.
All those in favor of receding
from house amendment to Senate
Judiciary Committee sub two
percent or sixty six as amended
please signify by saying aye.
I am on all the supposed no.
You know who's having hello this
is failed to recede from its
amendments to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill sixty six as amended.
I point the following numbers to
the Senate Judiciary Committee
says two percent of those sixty
six as amended conference
committee the gentle lady from
real reverse fantastic
representative at Adam the
gentle lady from which means
Lundstrom and the gentleman from
San Juan Representative Montoya.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Yeah so so there.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
consent no objections orders
members please turn your
attention to consent calendar
number one.
This is I think the third or
fourth time we've done this so
this process should be familiar
this is our way of voting on
multiple men memorials at the
same time.
We have before the body this
list is put together by the
floor leaders.
We have house memorials thirteen
twenty six twenty seven thirty
one thirty three and Senate
Joint Memorial is one is amended
and Senate Joint Memorial to
there that we will action these
with a single vote.
We are on final passage of house
memorial thirteen twenty six
twenty seven thirty one thirty
three and Senate Joint Memorial
is one is amended and to Senate
Joint Memorial to the vote is
now open.
What is about to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Cook.
Representative Lujan.
Representative close by the
sixty eight in the affirmative
zero in the negative house
memorials.
Thirteen twenty six twenty seven
thirty one thirty three and
Senate Joint Memorial as one as
amended and to have passed the
house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business third
reading of legislation.
no objection it is so ordered
members are going to go to item
twenty.
Gentleman from Bernalillo Santa
Fe Torrance Valencia are you
ready on Senate bill thirty two.
Mr speaker will you give me to
the point that the record
reflect all action necessary for
placing Senate bill thirty two
as amended on final passage has
been taken the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Mr speaker members of the body.
Trucking is cruel.
And will suffer.
Before they are killed or left
to die.
It was up to me that would be
the end of the conversation.
That alone is enough to be in
trouble.
Unfortunately it's just
beginning.
Mr speaker members of the body
trapping is indiscriminate.
Trapper who sets a trap might
hope.
To catch a particular type of
animal.
But with the animal isn't
unfortunate enough to wander
into it or investigate the scent
for the debate will be tracked.
Because trapping is
indiscriminate.
It's also a threat to public
safety.
Trucks can be legally set in
areas accessible to the public.
In their path.
Not only are PED's memes in
kids.
The humans are often injured.
Trying to rescue their panicked
at.
Despite recent rule changes
infants a pet scan caught in
traps.
Be on the rise.
Mr speaker members of the body
trapping is not scientific.
There are very few limitations
on where trapper concentric.
There are few limitations on
what the trapper can trap.
There are very few consequences
for violating the very few
limitations.
What's for their no bag limits.
So.
Wildlife management.
Trapping is just.
Calling all the predators you
can kill.
Mr speaker members of the body
trapping violates the north
American model of wildlife
conservation.
Which typically holds that
harvesting wildlife is for
personal use.
And not for profit.
And then finally is the
principle of fair chase.
Which most ethical hunters
subscribe.
Mr speaker members of the body
trapping is contrary to our
efforts.
To build an outdoor economy.
It makes New Mexicans fearful to
use our public lands.
It makes tourists less likely to
visit our state.
Sen bill thirty two doesn't
prohibit trapping on private
land.
It doesn't prohibit hunting in
anyway.
And it doesn't the lethal.
The use of the full.
Forcing the trolling wildlife.
What it does do is been trapping
on public lands.
So this is a series of
exceptions.
Forward to predation trapping.
Under certain conditions
scientific research you go
system management.
And even rodent control.
In addition Senate bill thirty
two as strong provisions.
They respect neither American
religious observances.
In reserves reserves the ability
of tribal members harvest
wildlife.
For religious purposes.
And with that Mr speaker I'll
stand for questions.
seeing no debate the gentleman
close.
there is May Day gentlelady from
Chavis Representative ease L..
Mr speaker will the gentleman
from Bernalillo Santa Fe
Torrance Valencia yield.
Mr speaker telling the ideal.
Mr speaker.
I have read Senate bill thirty
two twice amended with the floor
amendment Mr speaker I'm having
a real hard time hearing.
Mr speaker I have read this bill
I have done my homework I have
been affected.
I what you're trying to stop
right here Mister speaker this
bill is based on emotion it's
not based on science or factual
data.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman from all those
counties.
In two thousand twenty two game
and fish department Mexico game
and fish department implemented
new rules and regulations
regarding traffic Mr speaker
gentleman is that correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady that's
correct.
You Mr speaker you're talking
very softly and I'm having a
hard time hearing you.
Mr speaker have we actually
given those measures the
opportunity to be effective.
Mr speaker gentle lady those
measures.
We're limited at the outset.
And have been in force for
almost a year.
And they're showing no
appreciable impact.
I'm sorry Mr speaker I didn't
hear that last for to sit
gentleman.
You're showing Mr speaker gentle
lady bears showing no
appreciable impact.
Mr speaker.
I beg to differ with you Mr
speaker.
Regulated trapping is recognized
as a legitimate activity and
sustainable use of wildlife
resources Mr speaker.
Because of my profession I am
charged with the protection of
the state's wildlife.
And I also try to make my living
by raising livestock Mr speaker
we overheard these certain
people that have.
Tell their story about their
dogs being caught in these traps
out on state land Mr speaker
most of the state lands that are
in the state in our state.
Our leased lands.
And those less cease do have
rules and regulations that they
have to follow Mister speaker
whenever people do.
Go out on state lands.
Their dogs their pets excuse me
their pets their domesticated
pets have to be on a leash Mr
speaker gentleman.
Have these incidences that we
have heard about and I believe
he may have gotten plenty of
emails from can from a people
that do live in our more urban
areas have these.
Incidences with that
domesticated animals and it's
been substantiated by the New
Mexico game and fish to.
Mr speaker gentle lady are you
questioning the existence of
these infants.
Mr speaker I'm not question I'm
wondering if they are
substantiated by the New Mexico
department of game and fish that
these were illegal traps that
were set.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
There are numerous instances.
I don't know the process.
Good morning game fish follows I
don't know if they go out and
substantiate each event.
But certainly they have
substantiated some of the
events.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman's.
I think it's very important that
this body.
Understand.
The importance of and the aim of
the professional wildlife
management.
And their job is to perpetuate
and ensure the health of our
wildlife populations in our
state Mr speaker gentleman would
you agree with that comment I
just made.
Mr speaker tell a I agree that
that should be their mission.
Mr speaker lady I don't agree
that they to starkly followed.
Why is percent on may wildlife
management practices.
Mr speaker I'm kind of concerned
that you would say something
like that gentleman because I
think in the past and up to this
point so far.
The director of the New Mexico
game and fish has been named by
the governor governors of the
state as well as.
Selecting the members that serve
on the New Mexico game and fish
commission.
Mr speaker if they're not doing
their job.
Why would they be appointed that
gives me great concern that you
would make a statement like that
Mr speaker gentleman do you
understand that as far as our
endangered species go that some
of these measures have to be
implemented for the protection
of the endangered species such
as the lesser prairie chicken or
the sand dunes Lister.
That's only a couple Mr speaker
and gentleman because we have
been impacted by those
endangered species over the
southeastern side of the state
Mr speaker and gentleman working
with B. L. lamb and the industry
and those people that do lease
that land for livestock purposes
or oil and gas exploitation they
are working in conjunction with
the bureau of land management
and the State Land Office to
protect.
And help grow those particular
those two instances of the
indentured species that I just
listed.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
know if you're aware of this but
several years ago I'm going to
say at least.
Ten to twelve years ago I
carried a bill.
And it was signed by governor
Richard since so it's been quite
a while it's been a little bit
longer than that.
And it was to trap feral hogs in
that particular area they did
not fall under the jurisdiction
of the game and fish I made sure
of that because these feral hogs
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Research has shown and I like to
base all.
My information I'm going to give
you a on sound science to me
that's very important.
The actual sound science these
feral hogs carry over thirty two
known diseases that are
detrimental to humans.
Domesticated pets livestock and
wildlife Mr speaker.
Traps have been set for these
talks if you want to call and
Kate straps that's fine because
that's exactly what they are.
These hogs feral hogs do you
like to eat eggs they do like to
eat lizards they tear up water
lines they tear up their
destroyed right parian areas
throughout our state Mr speaker
and that is one instance.
Of the cage trap right there and
these Kate straps for the most
part.
Are being used by the bureau of
land management and there's
quite a few.
A big part of our state is made
up as bureau of land management
land.
Mr speaker.
The New Mexico game and fish
along with every person that
lives up in our rural areas are
the dates on the ground they are
the ones that can.
They are the ones the best.
Determine if there is a problem
as far as any.
Over population of the species.
Mr speaker gentleman.
We've heard the.
The other side talking about
their pets get caught in traps.
And we're not sure if those are.
Illegally set traps we are not
sure if those are legally set
traps because they have not but
that has not been substantiated
by the New Mexico game and fish
Mr speaker.
Right now the game and fish
commission address the concerns
related to trapping on public
lands.
And they took under advisement
and they agreed with what the
New Mexico game and fish is
going to do.
These changes included a
mandatory trapper's education
class minimum setback distance
of a half mile from all
trailheads maintain public
campgrounds boat launches
roadside rest areas picnic areas
and and occupied dwellings also
a minimum setback distance for
lancets about hundred fifty feet
from any man made water sources
set back distance of seventy
five feet from the edge of any
public road or trail in the
prohibition of trapping and
several highly trafficked areas
in the state.
So Mister speaker.
These rules were implemented by
the New Mexico.
Game and fish department with us
so under the authority of the
New Mexico.
Game and fish commission.
That was appointed by our
governor.
Mr speaker in light of what we
have faced in the year two
thousand and twenty.
A lot of these classes were not
held because of the restrictions
due to the margins C. order
because of the COVID situation
that our state was.
Faced with.
Mr speaker.
I'm sorry my hand got twelve.
Mr speaker.
Growing up.
And this still happens today I I
do have to state that.
Lots of dogs in the rural areas
because they are no longer
wanted by their owners.
And these dogs often more often
than not pack up.
Mr speaker I know that whenever
I was probably in high school.
There was a pack of about thirty
five dogs that we're we're
running.
Out in the community I grew up
in which is a farming and
ranching area ins very southern
Chavis County.
These dogs would go out.
And they.
Literally destroyed.
One guy's entire she purred in
one night granted there weren't
all that many of them there
might have been fifty use out
there with their lands that they
destroyed that man's entire she
purred.
They would chase cal's tried to
take him down because they were
these packs of dogs were hungry.
They would run up behind cap
grabbed by the tail and
literally try to take her down
that way.
Mr speaker.
Do the same thing.
Mr speaker I raise cattle for a
living.
And it's not that easy to do
anymore we've been faced with
some dire times due to the
traffic conditions.
Doing to the fluctuation of the.
The market itself.
Mr speaker.
I always take care of my
animals.
And whenever we were calving
heifers.
I had a certain pastor I can't
demand for they would have
protection in case of.
Badlands or things like that
because I wanted these heifers
to grow up to be good moms the
only way they could do that was
to take care of that baby
without any distractions.
You Mr speaker the most.
Gruesome sight I have ever seen.
I was checking here first I was
checking on them four times a
day to make sure everything was
okay.
Mr speaker I went across the
hill I knew that this one
particular have for this just
pretty closed cabin I wanted her
to be able to not be distracted
by me being there.
I came up over the hill.
Mr speaker she was down trying
to have the calf.
And there was a pack of seven hi
it's that we're literally eating
that calf out of the one this
effort could not get up because
the cop one of the coyotes.
Was trying to kill her in the
meantime.
Mr speaker.
I really.
Want everybody to put that a
medium to their mind.
Because Mr speaker the economic
impact of what I had to go
through.
Whenever that have for work
whenever that cap was being
eaten as is being born and that
heifer was being killed as she
was given birth.
That took a toll on my pocket
book.
Mr speaker.
Last year.
Last year.
I raise horses to.
In Mr speaker gentleman and I
want everybody to put this into
their mind just will.
We paid.
A service fee for a stallion
that bread one of my mares very
good Representative bloodline.
Merece just station period.
Is eleven months.
And whenever I just I just
station period for all of you
that don't understand what that
is that's the time that a more
carries the following inside the
womb eleven months.
This you to full baby was born.
That two weeks of age this more
and her baby were put in the big
lot.
At.
With some more more send their
babies.
There's a night watchman out
there to take care of all these
forces that are out there not if
they hear disruption they
immediately go check with their
spotlight.
You Mr speaker this one
particular night last year well
we were up here and session.
Packet coyotes came up from the
river.
And they went after these baby
our fouls is what baby horses
are called.
These mayors are trying to fight
off these coyotes the night
watchman heard the noise went
racing over there in their
vehicle with spotlights shine.
Mr speaker.
These mares in their effort.
To save their babies.
We're kicking and pine gate
these coyotes get them out of
their and before that night
watchman was there.
Hi baby fillets.
Was trampled and both back legs
were broken with compound
fractures.
Mr speaker.
I raise registered cattle.
And I raise good quality of
registered capital.
And we had mountain Alliance
working out there and we had a
big old mama Kitty that was
teaching her babies.
How to find food.
Mr speaker.
I lost three kids in one night
to this momma Kitty that was
teaching Kerr.
Good size kittens had a hot.
Mr speaker.
At my area of our lives.
There's quite a few farms around
there that do grow corn.
It's going goes to feed either
into a feedlot.
Or the corn goes.
Into an insulated pip for our
dairies out there.
Whenever these harvesters come
in and they come across
multitudes of deer carcasses out
there.
There might be a problem Mr
speaker.
These cats these big cats I'm
talking about the Cougars also
known as mountain lions.
They have a radius of fifty
miles.
Fifty miles Mr speaker madam
speaker.
And gentleman.
These cats were even it going
all the way up to Ross will.
They call one game and fish
caught one up in the tree of
pagus elementary school which is
in the heart of downtown
Rossell.
Mr speaker gentleman.
These lines are definitely
predators bobcats are the same
way Mr speaker.
Mr speaker.
We used to have a madam speaker
I keeps I'm sorry Mr speaker you
need to step over so I can see
madam speaker there you go thank
you very much Mr speaker
disability out here okay madam
speaker gentleman.
We used to be the second
largest.
She producing state in the
nation.
I don't know where we stand now
because these.
Sheep ranchers and even go
producers cannot withstand.
The devastation that they have
failed in their hurts because of
coyotes lions bobcats foxes.
Mr speaker gentle lady and
gentleman lady.
Thank.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
Do you know what the just
station period is for coyote.
Speaker gentle lady I do not.
Madam speaker and gentleman it
is sixty days and on the average
yes that is verified Mr speaker
you can look it up a bobcat is
sixty days a cougar is ninety
days hi you can have five
litters a year and the average
litter size is five pups they
you do the math on that Madam
speaker and gentleman see what
the numbers are as far as what
we're going to be faced with if
we cannot have the means to be
able to control.
This popular this far bear
population if you will.
Mr speaker.
I don't think the Senate bill.
Thirty two.
Has had sufficient time we have
not seen sufficient time.
For these regulatory changes
that game and fish is trying to
institute for the first results
on the ground Mr speaker
gentleman.
I think that really bothers me a
best most about this.
This particular bill right here
Senate bill thirty two.
There was little to no
consultation that occurred
between the bill proponents in
the Sanchez the New Mexico
department of game and fish the
agricultural community the
livestock community the outdoor
sporting community.
Or the trusting computers T. Mr
madam chair Madam speaker and Mr
chairman.
I am one of those out there day
in and day out at the gym my
time that I spend up here.
We have a population out there
that does need to be control Mr
speaker Madam speaker and
gentleman.
I have been in contact with
director Sloan and if you don't
know who that is he is the
director of the New Mexico game
and fish department.
I have some system statistics
right here madam speaker and
gentleman.
In New Mexico the national
agricultural statistics service
in two thousand and ten reported
predators kids nine thousand
nine hundred head of cattle.
And that loss amounted to five
point three million dollars.
That's from the national
agricultural statistics service.
Eight thousand two hundred head
of sheep were lost due to
depredation at a loss of over
nine hundred thousand dollars.
Research done by the United
States department of agriculture
stated these losses would be two
to three times higher with out
any livestock protection program
in place and that does mean the
means to be able to set traps.
Mr speaker Madam speaker
gentleman.
Well I'm up here in Santa Fe
disco random I have to place
rented that's three blocks here
from the capital Mr speaker I
heard something.
Out in the backyard a few nights
ago well it is actually about
two weeks ago.
Guess what was out there Madam
speaker and gentleman there was
a coyote in the backyard.
Madam speaker and gentleman
these coyotes have become
brazen.
They know that in town because
our towns are urban areas have
encroached on their territory
Madam speaker and gentleman.
They are bold they are bracing
to ask Miss as the citizens of
Los Angeles what they're faced
with now.
Madam speaker.
We have to have reserves could
trip predator control.
We have to have it because it's
important for stable wildlife
pop Sisi's stable and
sustainable wildlife population.
I am a Stewart as I said earlier
of the state's wildlife and I
support scientific game
management which is going to be
done but the New Mexico game and
fish with these new rules that
have been promulgated.
I don't support management.
That is done through political
agendas or special interest
groups.
Madam speaker.
I think it's time.
That we allow the new rules that
have been promulgated by New
Mexico game and fish.
To have a chance to work for
these trappers who are
necessary that do fall under the
rules and regulations of New
Mexico game and fish department.
To be able to work.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
This has to be based on science.
And like I said not political
agendas.
Madam speaker I know that I will
be getting phone calls emails
hate mail whatever the case may
be.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
As far as I can tell everybody
in the state likes to eat.
And whenever we are literally.
Thank our farmers and ranchers
and those particular people that
do live out in our rural areas.
Whenever we are PED impeding
their ability to make to live
in.
What are we going to do the.
Madam speaker I was criticized
one time.
Whenever I happen to be chair of
the.
Every culture and water
committee.
And this certain person was in
there and she was.
Really coming down on me hard
she said you are to blame for
the losses that you have felt in
your herd of cattle and I asked
for an explanation.
And madam speaker.
Whenever she gave me the
explanation everybody in the
room just sucked all the air out
of.
Because she told me that it was
my fault that I was having
problems with the predators
because I didn't gather my
cattle every night.
Madam speaker I have one of the
smaller ranches down in my area.
I'm the ranch and out there I
work hard for a living I take
care of my livestock I take care
of the state's wildlife.
And it's really really hard for
me to gather my cattle off of
twenty seven sections every
night.
Madam speaker I hope the rest
this body can understand how
ludicrous that comment was once
again there is a big disconnect
between rural New Mexico and
urban New Mexico.
Madam speaker.
Anybody that wants to come out
to my ranch.
With advance notice.
I will be glad.
To take them around and show
them what I am doing for a
living.
Thank goodness my husband does
have a day job because right now
it's pretty rough on me and
every other rancher out there
this trying to make a living.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
I want them to ride around with
me we could even go horseback if
that if that's what they want to
do.
As long as they take care of by
forces.
But I want them to see what I am
faced with what I am charged
with.
What I love doing whether it's
on my private land or the
hundred and ten acres of state
land that I leased or might be a
land pastor of the mind north
country.
That is completely landlocked.
Bye deeded land or the land that
I leased from the corps of
engineers.
And they will understand what I
have to go through not only did
take care of my livestock.
But to take care of the state's
wildlife is will.
And madam speaker I cannot tell
you.
The number.
Dear fonts.
That have been killed by coyotes
Madam speaker and gentleman do
you realize that whenever a dear
sister baby down while she goes
off and feeds and water that
fund will stay right there.
Right there so that may be fun
is a real good target for
coyotes for bobcats for lions do
you know one of the lion's
favorite things to eat it is our
mate it is our maybe down in the
Carlsbad area many years ago
they had an over population at
whatever the.
To help me out here somebody
that the living desert state
park down there.
They had an overpopulation.
Of course otherwise known as
mount Alliance madam speaker.
And what they were doing is they
were kicking all these lying in
alliance out of the state park.
A friend of mine at that time
had three small voice they lived
out on a ranch.
The boys are outside playin in
the confines of their fenced
yard.
She hears a noise looks out the
window and the land has jumped
the fence.
She grabs her gun goes out there
and takes care of business
because the lives of her
children were at stake.
Madam speaker gentleman if
you're still listening.
Seems real funny that that land
was tagged.
That Ryan was tacked.
That's what we have to face out
in our rural areas Madam speaker
and gentleman.
People do like to come out to
the ranch they do like to deer
hunt we have antelope in
abundance out there.
We have badgers that do try to
kill dogs that is their goal of
the dog gets on and they will
kill that doubt.
Raccoons like to dress dogs are
you all aware of that.
The need is out there for the
mechanism for trappers to be
able to use traps.
There are rules and regulations
for these trappers madams
speaker and gentleman.
These traps have to be checked
on a regular basis.
Whenever we're hearing traps
people are automatically
thinking oh my god they're the
old order to stipe traps
absolutely not madam speaker and
gentleman.
This picture I'm holding up
right here.
Is an example of the new type of
traps that are being implement.
In this particular trapped right
here this picture of our.
It's called a let me see
There's the egg trapped it's
modern food in caps leading
design.
It also has a shock absorbing
spring and devils will bring
swivels proven to reduce the
chance of injury to captured
animals.
Madam speaker.
Because I do care about my
livestock.
Because I do care about the
state's wildlife.
Because I do realize.
That there has to be management
practices implemented.
And sometimes the only way this
can be done.
Is through trapping.
Madam speaker.
I'm real disappointed.
That the livestock inner
industry was not included in
these discussions.
Madam speaker I'm real
disappointed that game and fish
was not consulted along with the
game and fish commission.
Madam speaker I'm also very
disappointed that the trappers
who are registered with the
state.
We're not consulted whenever
this bill was drafted.
Because it's a very important
tool for controlling and
maintaining the state wildlife
as as well as.
Those producers in our livestock
industry.
Madam speaker.
Gentleman thank you for letting
me.
Have my say.
That in that instance.
I don't want to have to come
back up here madam speaker.
And tell you also what is
happening in my world that is so
gut wrenching.
And I'm a yes person madam
speaker.
Whenever it gets to the point
that it is certainly internally
because I'd see my animals.
The devastated by some of these
creatures out there that
literally kill for fun.
We've got a problem thank you
madam speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Valencia
Representative Baldonado.
Thank you Matt not through
reflects the last year.
Madam speaker the gentleman
from.
Santa Fe Torrance Valencia
Bernalillo please feel.
Madam speaker chairman I yield.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman.
just a few questions for you and
your bill here
Then speaker
The.
It was an amendment put on in
the Senate madam speaker and
gentleman.
And it's page two line line or
so.
And and talk about does not
include a corral Carell can you
tell me why that amendment was
put on there that is because
only.
Madam speaker Tallman
There was some concern about
corrals and it never was
intended to apply the corrals
that we felt we could.
we clarified and and put people
at ease by specifying that
doesn't include corrals and
madam speaker tellement I'll
I'll note that
One of the ways they try to
feral hogs as the gentle lady
reference is using crowds.
So madam speaker and gentleman
when when we speak of a crawling
means a closure for livestock
animals that that's what we're
on the same page with that then
speaker John.
Mr speaker Tallman.
I think crowds come in different
shapes and sizes and they can be
you know large less I think
closures you can be medium size
closures maybe you know closer
to the house for you.
You keep our or or
cattle that are counting or you
know they can be your designed
to capture
something like that there ought.
So madam speaker and gentleman
with would we be able with
whatever person be able to use a
corral in that instance for for
L. for feral hog trapping in the
same manner the use that now is
this log in and out make that
illegal on Madam speaker
gentleman.
Mr chairman this this law
doesn't affect the scrolls.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman another amendment that
the that the Senate put on the
bill during the committee
process and speaking German was
on page three and it added the
words United States fish and
Wildlife Service to the
definition of public land that
is weaker and gentleman I think
by then reading this this.
Definition includes all public
land whether it's federal or or
state owned is that correct Mr
chairman.
Mr Chairman yes.
So then secret German
Currently if if an individual is
Lujan.
and and has a a license issued
by the game and fish department
that they have the ability
administrative because I'm into
to hunt on National Forest land
the BLM lands that how you
understand that piece of game of
this is
rules and regulations benefit
from gentleman.
Mr Chairman the the state
department given this generally
regulates wildlife in New
Mexico.
So that that sounds correct to
me.
In some administrative concerns
so with this definition you you
encompass every bit of public
lands in New Mexico so then
trapping would be administrative
development.
Allowed on the only private land
is that correct Mr curtailment.
Your judgment private land and
tribal.
So madam speaker and gentleman
you so you mentioned tribal and
I was coming up on that a little
bit later my questions but
Senator Tallman so.
Let's say is that a pueblo which
is just a few minutes north of
where I live and I do have part
of that in my district so
trapping would be allowable for
any reason on on on is that part
of those plans Mr and speaking
German.
Madam speaker and gentleman is
local is a sovereign nation we
have no ability to regulate
trapping on this list is leather
Pueblo nor do we attempt.
So madam speaker gentleman later
on the believe talk about
trapping for religious purposes
and I think it's it identifies
native American religious
purposes what's the purpose of
of mentioning that
administrative from gentleman if
if they can already do that on
their on their sovereign land
miss madam speaker.
Madam speaker Tallman enrolled
members of federally recognized
tribes may also travel on public
lands other public lands in
addition to tribal.
The gentleman we're gonna carve
out just one group of people and
give them the right to still
trapped but not the rest of New
Mexicans and and non residents
is that correct mistaken only.
Sticker Tallman it's based on
traditional religious and
ceremonial use.
The gentleman what they have to
obtain a license from the game
of this to do this practice.
Madam speaker German there's
additional language those added
in a sense for amendment.
Clarifies that
Tribal trapping would still be
done pursuant to regulations
developed the I did Department
game fish in collaboration with
the secretary of the Indian
Affairs inconsistent with
federal procedures for the
recognition and protection of
qualified Indian nation tribe or
pueblo religious ceremonies.
So madam speaker and gentleman
with.
How would they prove that
they're trapped and for that
reason what what there be a card
issued to them some sort of.
Credential Madam speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman
Currently yes Representative a
licensed it this would be.
Flush out in the process of
consulting with the department
any answers I assume it would be
a license.
Some of the German so let's just
say of of a game warden New
Mexico given fish game warden is
is out and about and he he
discover some traps this is
after your bill has passed then
she could only and
He identifies them.
Based on the fact that they have
to the the trapper has to put a
tag on there that gives their
name and phone number except for
and they feel that maybe this
individual is skirting the law
if you will in in is trapping
based on the fact that they are
saying that it's for religious
purposes are they just to take
their word for it then speaker
and gentleman if that individual
indeed says I'm tracking only
for religious purposes and one
indeed maybe they're they're
still taking for for bear and
and selling that for profit
administrative because on one.
Mr chairman presumably it the
Kmart and.
has access to a database which
would identify the trapper as a
needed chopper I think if the
truckers identified as in need
of traversing the the
presumption is it's been gone
for a religious ceremonial
purposes because that's what the
license would be issued for but
if.
Thank you morning came upon a
trapper selling traps of the
back of a truck.
You know in the parking lot at
the Walmart that would be a
different situation.
Thank you Mr chairman so the
taste that line of questioning a
little further administrative
element is.
Is it the game and fish the
boards that will police this and
and monitor whether or not
trappings going on illegally
speaker John.
Mr for German for so I think I
said selling traps yeah of
course it's selling pelts
but yeah that the department
game fish State eight that's
part of their function.
So then figure gentleman.
It in your estimation or are you
know in the in the process of
the bill working through does
this put anymore.
requirements or strain on on
that department in order to
police this or or is this sort
of neutral or do you have a feel
for that equipment because
gentleman.
Yeah I think that's an
interesting question might my
guess would be that this would
reduce the burden on the
department in terms of enforcing
trapping because the vast
majority of trapping on public
lands we come to an at.
So madam speaker and gentleman
are you Jim are you familiar
with the the the rules and
regulations regarding trapping
for the state of New Mexico
through the game and fish
massacres on.
Mr chairman I have some familiar
familiarity with them I would
not describe myself as an
expert.
Gentleman that the division
publishes a thirty six page
proclamation specifically for
for trappers for for bears
that's that's a pretty
significant thing in in the
regard that Mr gentleman that
basically all the other came
species that are that are
governed by the the king Fisher
basically one proclamation of
the now the water fell stuff in
speaker gentleman and there are
some requirements Mr chairman
for for tractors are you aware
of those requirements the
trapper education program Madam
speaker and gentleman.
Madam speaker gentlemen I am
aware that there is an education
require.
Mr Chairman I point those things
out in the I follow the the
gentle lady from Chavis is
comments earlier that the.
The the game commission New
Mexican commission has done
quite a few things over the last
two years to to make sure that
that there are there are staying
on top of trapping in regulating
things.
In a manner that that respects
you know the the folks that make
their living madam speaker
gentleman trapping the folks
that
make their living ranching and
farming and and and
participating trapping or or or
have tractors come on the
property's been sicker
gentleman.
to to keep their livestock safe
things of those of the of that
nature madam speaker and
gentleman and a point that out
because a game of fish and the
the commission.
Mr has been very proactive in
this regard and I I feel that
you know the the bill that's
before us today madam speaker
and gentleman
Goes beyond that and and and
really just takes takes from the
people the opportunity to.
To do what they've done all the
years of the state is existed
massacre and gentleman and so I
would I would point the body to
the fact that the game and
fish's.
Department has taken this
seriously direct phone and and
you know his secretary cabinets
are deputy secretaries and
Bobby Griego the the the colonel
of the of the game and fish
officers the were not officers
they take their job seriously
Mexicans element all they feel
like you know they've done
plenty of things to.
To continue to keep this
practice safe and and obviously
then second element you know we
talk about
that had.
A million emails on this one of
those two bills that I had a
million emails from this one and
and the.
I was house bill seven the the
abortion bill on and so the
emails have been just incessant
on this on this bill and so
there's people on both for and
against and so this is a hot
button issue but I feel like Mr
chairman this is becoming
emotional type bill you know
some some family lost a dog in a
trap and that's unfortunate I
don't condone that and I think
that that's you know horrible
situation.
Because of one of our dogs got
talk kind of in a trap I would
be upset as well Madam speaker
gentleman but but for bears in
tractors they have to check
their traps Daly the they have
to put their their information
they have to identify that trap
that it belongs to them.
Mr gentleman eight I submit that
you know if we pass this bill.
Madam speaker gentleman that
you'll just have a lot of traps
on the field they don't have
anymore in one of the they
belong to and I don't know that
madam speaker and gentleman that
the game fish really wants to go
out and.
Twenties folks that are are
setting up traps when they have
bigger fish to fry with if you
know what I mean Madam speaker
gentleman so I would just ask
that the body listen to the
debate and and understand that
the game commission is taking
this very seriously and has made
attempts to.
To keep dropping safe and legal
in the state of New Mexico and
out of populated areas and
things of that nature Madam
speaker gentle and so with that
I will feel that someone
questions thank you gentleman
from.
All those counties.
Thank you John.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis Lee and
Roosevelt Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentleman from Santa Fe
Bernalillo Valencia in Torrance
yield.
Madam speaker chairman I yield.
The gentleman the.
I have not heard the opportunity
to have the opportunity this
year to hear your bill.
But I
Nonetheless heard it two years
ago in a committee we were in
together.
And heard of.
Much testimony.
To the
Perils the
New Mexicans had encountered.
In in their.
More often than not it had to do
in my mind with.
With walking on trails close to
urban areas.
And the some some.
Outcomes that caused the death
of the path from traps.
The gentleman can you tell me on
that point
how many products were caught in
traps.
In New Mexico last year.
Madam speaker German
you know I I don't know the
precise figure for a couple
reasons one and that the process
figure two
Not every incident is going to
be reported.
And madam speaker German yeah
the infants themselves very.
you know sometimes it's fatal to
the path.
And sometimes.
so it's.
It's more more that would like
to see.
but I think we're we're looking
at you know it doesn't or more a
year on public lands.
Thank you gentlemen then I'm
going to summarize your answer
server madam speaker the way I
heard it which is.
We don't know how big the
problem is but if we disallow
anybody from trapping on public
lands that should do it is that
a correct.
Summary of your response Sir.
Madam speaker Tallman with that
totally eliminates
infants with with pets probably
not.
Mr chairman for numbers first
there are any a number of
reasons in the bill why trapping
in certain circumstances are
still out.
In second as the gentleman from
Valencia noted.
We would still have a problem
with illegal trapping.
at least initially I believe.
So passing this bill doesn't
make trapping on public lands go
way it certainly doesn't make it
go away over time but I do think
it would be a significant step
in the right direction.
Well thank you gentlemen
For that
I I guess I fail to understand
how passage of your bill is
going to reduce for have an
impact on illegal trapping that
doesn't seem to fall within the
scope of your legislation R.
madam speaker gentleman's.
Madam speaker development
This is a bill that prohibits.
One authorise trapping on public
lands.
Imposes a misdemeanor penalty.
For violation it is a criminal
penalty.
I think that is what reduces the
illegal trapping on public lands
is making it clear that it's
illegal imposing a penalty if
that probation is violated.
Thank you gentlemen so.
Gentleman madam speaker.
We are going to make a legal
activity of criminal activity if
this bill passes is that
correct.
Mr Chairman trapping is
currently allowed subject to
regulation on public land that
is correct.
Thank you I thought I thought
Madam speaker gentleman it
wasn't allowed I thought it was
legal that where I live people
actually think trapping is legal
not just allowed could you
clarify on that please.
Mr chairman I I'm using legal
and allow the
someone they're changeable in.
But you know you might argue
that allowed means subject to
regulation which is.
but yeah it's it's legal subject
to regulations allowed such a
strict regulation currently
there is trapping on public
lands.
Thank you gentlemen for that
clarification
I think you're gonna like my man
but.
I have been concerned gentleman
Madam speaker.
For some period of time that
here in New Mexico we're quite
willing to.
Put people out of business.
To simply say this is illegal
and you can't do it anymore.
I've been concerned that we.
Stand our state resources to
encourage other businesses and
their enterprise and employment
and economic activity here in
New Mexico.
So madam speaker gentleman this
evening we have.
Another bill to make it a legal
activity illegal.
And the result is going to be.
A great deal of New Mexicans
owning steel traps that they
cannot.
Use in a more because that would
be illegal which you sort of
agree with that.
That thought process gentleman.
Madam speaker German.
I think I see where you're
headed but.
Yes the trap exclusively on
public lands.
Then they could not use those
traps anymore.
there are any number of ways
they could still uses traps and
of course there's nothing in the
bill that outlaws possession of
those tracks.
So.
The trust may still find some
use they may gather some dust in
the garage it's hard to say.
Thank you for that I I.
I suspect you're correct that
possession could allow people to
use them for decorations in our
home
to perhaps build a backyard
sculpture of swords I can see
many applications if you have
invested.
money in an inventory to conduct
a up a legal business activity
in the state says no you can't
do that anymore there must be
other examples of people who.
I use is the people with liquor
licenses up.
Madam speaker they they might
find a use for their now.
Value list liquor license
because we decided that we
weren't going to allow the value
to.
Continue because that was
wronged in my words.
And we're going to.
simply say those licenses no
longer have values and they must
have some decorative
opportunity.
The gentleman tonight.
Let's see I need the motion to
introduce the amendment.
So all fumble through this madam
speaker I would like to
introduce.
House floor amendment number
one.
The Senate bill thirty two.
As amended all the amendment I
need to
I need the.
So you're ready for the number.
Gentleman to identify the two oh
two number.
Thank you two two zero eight
seven seven point one.
And this gentleman I think
you'll find is a I hope a
friendly amendment.
Because this sets up a new
program.
And this is a trap surrender
program.
Now I understand your point
Madam speaker gentleman that
people who own traps are for are
still legal to go use them on.
Tribal and private land.
But as you know gentleman quite
a bit of New Mexico is not
private or tribal.
So this amendment would give a
new option a new program for
those who
Want to surrender their traps to
the New Mexico game and fish
department.
And receive.
A tax credit.
In the taxable years two
thousand twenty two in two
thousand twenty three.
Now I think that is more than
fair madam speaker gentleman's.
That we we we pay people to come
to this state and make movies we
give them up I need to our
treasury.
We put people out of business in
this state and in the case of
those who own liquor licenses we
said.
We're gonna try to help make you
whole and here's how we're going
to do it.
So this evening we have a tax
credit available to individuals
who now to choose not to pursue.
A business that is now illegal.
And I think it's only fair that
we provide them with a way to
sell their inventory because
they may not enjoyed private or
tribal land.
In order to pursue this lively.
So gentleman if you have a
chance.
To review this bill.
I hope you will find it
different this amendment I hope
you'll find it a friendly one
and I suppose now I stand for
questions thank you.
Gentleman from Bernalillo Santa
Fe Torrance and Valencia is just
a friendly amendment.
Madam speaker I have a minute to
review the amendment.
Absolutely thank you time thank
you.
Madam speaker.
May I ask questions of the
sponsor of the amendment.
On the amendment.
Thank you.
You.
Mr Chairman.
It under your amendment house
the value of the trap right
that.
gentleman
I didn't spend a lot of time
madam speaker trying to
calculate the value of an
illegal steel trap.
Legally possessed I called to be
a legal still trapped I'd still
trapped that's illegal in under
certain circumstances now
possess legally by somebody who
can't use it under certain
circumstances legally.
So I believe that the straps
have.
A value in the market I don't
know what it is but I will
report gentleman that I checked
eBay last night.
In eBay has quite a.
Number of tracks both new and
used for sale.
And it seems to me that whoever
as this bill goes forward
hopefully with this ammendment.
That they will be able to make a
determination about.
The value of the trapped in
order for this New Mexico game
and fish department to issue the
certificate of value.
On which they will receive their
tax credit.
I hope that was an answer Sir.
Madam speaker Joe in.
It wasn't
Really answer I I guess I'm
trying to understand how much
you think these use traps might
be were.
Gentleman of the quick answer to
that is I'm not an expert on the
value of use traps however.
I do notice that the size of the
trap the condition of the trap
those are elements to the
determination of value based on
a quick.
Skin of eBay yesterday and I
hope that's a good answer thank
you.
Madam speaker Tallman my
understanding is you can buy a
new truck for about twenty
dollars.
So then to German would be fair
to say that you strap might be
worth ten or fifteen dollars.
Gentleman I had.
Prepared myself for this part of
the of the answer on the
amendment and the answer is I
simply will not speculate
because I don't feels qualified
to do so on the value of a trap.
I do accept the concept that
brand new traps can be worth
twenty dollars based on
A review of the inventory that I
saw last night I just think this
weather would no matter what
it's worth it is not.
A proper action for this
legislature to say this activity
will be illegal from this point
forward and everything you have
that you conducted this is now
illegal business with is value
looks.
I don't think that's right I
think it's anti business I've.
I think it is
destructive.
To individual livelihoods.
Especially during this pandemic
when everybody is seeking.
Additional waste provide
household income because we have
so many New Mexico's unemployed
today.
So I think this ammendment is
actually.
A very legitimate effort to say
if this bill passes.
And I hope it does.
If this bill passes.
At least of these New Mexicans
who now own.
A number of traps have a way of
saying well if I decide not to
trap any more.
And it.
You know we talked earlier this
evening madam speaker
gentleman's not everybody who
traps is doing it for fun and
profit.
There is a very real economic
interests for those New Mexico
those New Mexicans farmers and
ranchers who make their
livelihood and defending their
livestock is part of that.
And sadly much.
Much of the predators predators
on livestock are not elected in
that does not allow one to sit
out in the daylight and watch
their herds so to speak
gentleman so I think this is
simply an Avenue at the other
end of the spectrum which says
if we took might make one more
legal business in New Mexico
illegal then we must start a
practice of saying we will do
everything we can to make you
whole.
That's my point chairman would
you care to respond.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentleman
yeah I understand what you're
getting at I think there are a
lot of answer questions about
your proposal.
How child to be valued how the
program would be administered of
the fiscal impact of course
although from what I can tell
the the fiscal impact probably
would be that great just by the
number of traps and assuming
they're all used
they would be worth that much
you know I'd be interested in
looking at this Madam speaker
German in future session
however at this time I have to
say that this ammendment is in
front.
And finally for two reasons one.
Too many unknowns into the stage
we are at hearing such that we
can't a yes this ammendment.
This bill go forward in meeting
then select.
This bill is important I think
the issues you're raising are
legitimate but can be addressed
and finally I would note that
we're not outlined position of
trucks.
We're not outlawing use of
trucks.
The straps are still lawful for
use on private lands on tribal
lands and just to be clear.
Mr chairman that's of course
with the permission of the
landowner you don't get to just
start going on the prevalence of
tribal into trap of course with
the permission of the landowner
they're still used for these
traps so then speaker of this
amendment is on tribal.
Thank you gentleman I'm.
Madam speaker I'm sorry you take
this amendment is on friendly.
That is discouraging that is not
what I set out to do.
Your analogy reminds me
gentleman madam speaker of
saying we should make drones
illegal only if they fly in the
air.
Now that is the same logic that
says somebody who owns steel
traps.
That are now illegal activity on
public lands in New Mexico.
They're just out a lock.
That kind of anti business
philosophy is not what this
state needs to be doing and
thinking about going forward.
So I am the not going to.
Argue any more about money
anymore.
I think it's a good one I think
it's legitimate I think part
giving people the opportunity to
surrender their traps so who
wouldn't surrender and perhaps
those that have private land and
tribal land.
Perhaps those that want to trap
bill legally.
But I don't think that's what
this ammendment is directed
directed at I believe this
ammendment is directed at almost
individuals who would like to
stay that way and they believe
this.
Is a way in which those that
have traps in New Mexico can
legally dispose of them that's
my point gentleman thank you.
Is there debate on the
amendment.
Madam speaker.
Gentleman from Dona Ana grand
Sierra Representative us us.
Madam speaker with the gentleman
yield.
Yes I will.
Thank you madam speaker you know
I know that what you're trying
to do.
my friend.
Trying to help someone that is
about to be put out of business.
I was actually shocked to hear
that.
How the just disregarded.
Person's ability to.
So in their family some of these
people actually live
based on tracking.
And you know I it you know I
appreciate what you're trying to
do to help them.
And I just wanted to say you
know removing the.
We are.
A trap or of a person's way of
making a living which is a tool
it would be like removing the
hammer from a from a carpenter
and so you know I think there I
I just was shocked to hear the
this regard to
A person with making a living
for those honest
people making a living that's
all I have Mister that.
Thank you.
Is there for the debate.
On the amendment.
Gentlelady from McKinley and San
Juan.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Johnson.
Madam speaker.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon.
I move to table.
We are on a motion to table.
House floor amendment number
one.
To Senate bill thirty two.
In the affirmative.
And the minimal be tabled.
Hello to the negative.
The vote is now open.
What.
Thirty seconds to vote.
The electronic portion of the
vote is now closed with the
clerk called the members that
are recorded that.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative Gail Armstrong
votes yes.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Chandler both yes
Representative Cook.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Eli.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative
Johnson.
Representative Johnson both
know.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lord.
Representative Lewis.
Representative Matthews.
Representative night for.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Ortez votes yes
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Stansbury.
Yes the table please
Representative Stansbury both
yes Representative Stapleton.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of forty eight in the
affirmative and ten and the
negative the amendment has been
tabled.
Gentleman from Chavis Liam was
about.
Thank you madam speaker of I
believe all.
Grow my remarks this evening to
a close.
Tonight Madam speaker gentleman
we have a bill that is packed
with passion and emotion.
And yet I believe I'm here to
make decisions not based on
passion and emotion.
I believe my decision this
evening on this bill is one
about what is the best course
forward for New Mexico I am.
Disheartened to know that the
size of the problem is undefined
therefore we should just say.
Make it illegal.
And that's the conclusion of my
remarks Madam speaker thank you
thank you general.
There is further debate of the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Serrato.
Madam speaker with the gentleman
yield.
Madam speaker tell eighty are
you.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you John earlier in your remarks
you had mentioned a bit about
the outdoor economy and how you
felt this would benefit the
outdoor economy I just want to I
was hoping you could talk a
little bit more about that and
what I mean any any insects you
have into the outdoor Connie at
sizer and their contribution
jobs to Mexico.
Madam speaker gentle lady thank
you for that question because it
you know we we have a debate
judgments amendment which I
appreciate.
This bill is more than just.
Thank you one activity in taking
it off of the publicly.
This bill is about enhancing our
public lands this is bill about
is about making sure that New
Mexicans can enjoy their public
lands and making sure that we
have you know the these I mean
because we do write these
beautiful open spaces.
Want to be able to feel safe
coming here enjoying the.
And their surrounding states the
band trapping.
And we have been working and
we're kind of behind on this and
we are working to build our
outdoor Fund.
And that includes things like
hunting and fishing that's a
that's a big part of our outdoor
company but it also includes
hiking camping and just enjoying
what New Mexico has to offer
it's a it's a growing industry
that's one of our fastest
growing industries so we talk
about diversifying our economy
this to me is is one of the
areas where we can really
succeed in diversifying our
economy it's about it depends
how you measure it potentially
in the well it's a multi billion
dollar.
Business in New Mexico multi
billion and the gentleman with
the amendment you know suggest
the trappings of Business.
For a small number of people it
is.
But it's nowhere near the
economic impact our outdoor
recreation business has here in
New Mexico and that's the other
recreation business is the
business benefits communities
you know people come the visit
they stay in hotels the shop
they spend money they don't just
take a poke and ship it
overseas.
So our outdoor recreation I mean
people people always ask me okay
what we can do about the economy
us in have to diversify our
economy so if I have in the two
biggest example I can think of
our film and outdoor recreation.
Thank you Mr thank you madam
speaker thank you gentlemen I
apologize in state accounts
before thank you gentleman from
Bernalillo Santa Fe Torrance and
Valencia I wanted to check in a
little further and so when of
folks and I mean that you know
especially this past summer for
my has my daughter and our dog
and I you know a lot of what we
did was going outdoors a lot of
what we did was camping on
friends lands up in whatever and
you know one on public lands out
in
you know in in Los Alamos County
just really across northern New
Mexico and it was an opportunity
that you know we love camping
anyways but really the the the
crisis the pandemic really give
us that opportunity there people
from all over on that we're
coming here and I I wanted
clarification says a little
confused earlier one of the
other members of this of this
body had mentioned that the rate
should be leashed but I was
under the assumption that PED's
could also be if they were
contributes controlled they
would also be allowed to be
awfully if they were voice
control is that correct on state
lands that right.
Madam speaker tell eighty.
District my understanding is
that on majority of public lands
of pets can be awfully age
but I would also know we have
incidents were were pets get
caught in traps well there on
the beach so it's not just
animals running loose it's
really you know people enjoying
the outdoors responsibly in
another thing about dogs are not
pets but working dogs search and
rescue teams use animals to
find
lost and injured hikers in we
heard public testimony
repeatedly from members of
search or rescue teams they were
concerned about using their
animals in areas where there
could be trucks.
Thank you Mr thank you madam
speaker thank you gentlemen
that's very helpful to now I I
had no you've heard that that
that testimony I'm not in the
committees that had heard this
that's very helpful to
understand you would mention
that our neighbors had been had
some of these laws already in
the books on in curious which of
our neighbors or those other
states that you're referring to.
Madam speaker I'm shuffling
papers the other states include
other western states over the
Colorado California Washington
and there's a.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen so there are
states that are similarly sized
with similar populations with I
even you know frontier
communities that we have that we
hold dear in New Mexico there
part of that the fabric of our
communities you would choose
that I mean I would say that for
Arizona and Colorado at least
would you would you agree with
that but Madam speaker Kelly
absolutely I would agree with
that and we also compete with
Colorado and Arizona for those
outdoor recreation dollars thank
you madam.
If I could I would note that you
know we we've heard about
some really horrific examples
of.
Nation here in New Mexico the
states that have already been
trapping have lower or
equivalent depredation rates so
so one thing we got to ask
ourselves is is the trapping
really helping with the
deprivation.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you telling you you caught my
next question so thank you for
having me I appreciate that you
know it's it's and one other
thing I'll ask actually is I I
would presume no interacting I
mean just driving up today I
guess also many plates for the
or from out of state and that's
very complicated as a Santa Fe
and as we're getting through
this pandemic representing the
places of the hardest hit but
again those first dollars
mounted for state may help I
mean at the end of the day
that's that's that's really
tricky and you know obviously
these folks have a choice of
where they're going to visit and
where they're going to access to
take takes very in the southwest
are are wonderful culture on the
one thing I'm I'm curious about
from my perspective I feel that
our biodiversity and and the
amazing of you know we we have
bobcats we have we priorities we
have you know big a long term
health we have so many different
animals that are here you know
I'm curious if you feel that
biodiversity fuel some of that
tourism and some of those that
that and other recreation a
comedy.
Madam speaker the the only
absolutely and I know that you
know for me.
A high you know just being
outdoors and anyway that the
balls of wildlife siting this is
special that you know you know
it's something that's memorable
Madam speaker gentle lady I'm
told that there are tours
offered in Germany and Europe
that will bring for interest to
New Mexico not just to the
United States but to the Mexico
in the human reason region and
they just want to hear the walls
it might so madam speaker gentle
lady wildlife I honestly believe
it's worth more to us to live
then it is that.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen you know I I
couldn't agree more I I when I
when I was growing up I grew up
in a town that had more housing
people and we're really proud of
that we used to talk about our
our per capacity cal you know
that there was a lot of them and
that that town has changed a lot
that happens organized it's it's
unfortunate to see that culture
disappear
but you know I I love growing up
you know around areas around
that experience but I didn't get
as much out out outdoor get that
biodiversity that we have so
plentiful here in New Mexico and
I'm soul so thankful that my
daughter gets to experience that
to be honest with you you know
she she it exactly right I mean
she's seen owls you know with
baby all the time there have
been the issue we had a bobcat
sighting in our neighborhood and
I live in Santa Fe and what what
Preciado it was I I let my
neighborhood association that we
had seen it they said great just
keep your distance keep your dog
close you know be very careful
we're doing what we can but we
know we want to do this in a
responsible way that you know
moves the bobcat in that and
that was you know comforting in
that sense but then you know
again we've been out and she's
seen she's just seen on tracks
we went up to let's go that we
you know we could point out you
know bear droppings we can point
out you know these different
bird species that against so
many of our kids don't
experience and so I think you
know with a bill like this
started to kind of go around I
think with a bill like this it
really is in my opinion
protecting the biodiversity of
our state I'm curious if you
would agree or if you feel like
that and it that is an accurate.
Madam speaker gentle lady you
know I think.
One one the.
Ways people try to explain
trapping is a wildlife
management.
But it's it's not wildlife
management it's just chilling
predators.
Yeah in a lot of those predators
things like bobcats foxes are
things that people really the
lights in the same.
In you know the predators you
know I live in a very rural area
the I see wildlife frequently I
hear them almost nightly the
coyotes in you know I know they
help keep down the population of
rodents rabbits because that's
what's plentiful around me up
but yet are we protecting
biodiversity absolutely you know
a bobcat sighting.
Is a special experience for a
lot of people you know there are
You know if you have chickens
you're gonna want to make sure
they're secure if you have house
cats I guess I can we don't have
a dog but you know cats all my
life I've always lived in
the areas there are frequented
by coyotes and I've never lost a
cat to kind of I mean my cats
now Senator Wirth.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentleman you know I I
briefly mentioned our dog he is.
I would say he is just a coyote
pre size to be entirely but with
you he's about forty pounds and
he's a fast guy but you know he
if you wanted to interact on
that level and you know the
thing that that that I have to
way oftentimes because our dog
is a member of our family and in
fact it's often times my
daughter us we'll go we have any
brothers or sisters that you
have a brother attending what
he's a good dog is a good thing
he's a member of the family and
so you know what to me there
there is you know we we all have
to weigh these kinds of things
of you know what's the what's
the loss and what's the benefit
cost benefit on these things and
again we have a burgeoning you
know outdoor recreational
industry that attracts people
from out of state that may have
their dogs on voice control that
maybe out on our trails and I
don't want their experience of
New Mexico to be out of the
trap that makes them lose a
family member because that's the
experience for so many folks and
and I appreciate the stories
we've heard today because you
know it's not just dogs are
family members right the all
kinds of animals are but you
know what you know I think that
again trapping because of the
you know because I mean there I
mean all of us to receive so
many emails on this and one of
them that struck me was just
finding a bobcat you know after
it like in the middle of winter
that had been there for for days
or you know even longer anyways
just this this fact this person
felt so bad that this M. and
suffering for days and this
isn't you know nineteen I
tracked this is a modern trap
the December was talking and so
again you know I I look at that
I consider that I consider you
know our outdoor recreation and
and and and these folks are
coming to our state and doing so
many things madam speaker and
gentleman and I and I think of
my own family by on top and you
know
You know heaven forbid my
daughter will have to deal with
this loss one day because that
is that is growing up in this
life on that you should not
experience what some what folks
whose animals have been trapped
have had experience in caring
their animals down happens in
those conditions
I I and I and I know I usually
districts that the job numbers
in those things like that but
you know it is touching on on a
family member and I think that's
what matters Madam speaker and
gentleman I I just really have
one more question for you you
know again we've invested in in
the outdoor recreation as as a
as an entity and and that we're
seeing it grow do you feel that
you know because our neighbors
already have rules about
trapping on the books that might
enhance even further I mean
we're we're going very quickly
outdoor recreation do you think
it would enhance even further
seeing that New Mexico is is
also joining with our state
surrounding us.
Mr telling do I do I do think
there's a certain synergy to
having a you know the the wild
open spaces of the west and
having that be an appealing
destination of four perhaps
easterners or foreigners I think
that's a good thing I think it
it makes it will make us more
competitive because as is you
sort of alluded to not only can
people come here and feel safe
you know with their pets are
with their family members but
there's also there's been number
of incidences of people being
out hiking camping coming across
an injured animal the start
contract and that that's a
distressing thing to see or
coming across skinned carcasses.
Behind by trapper.
so these are things we want to
consider as we find our outdoor
economy and I think I think
banning trapping on our public
lands.
I will make us more competitive
and I think the fact that our
neighboring states have already
done that with success but will
add to our success.
Thank you thank you thank you
for reminding me about about the
that is public land to private
land and still be able to on to
to track should they need to on
that and thank you so much I
thank you madam speaker thank
you chairman I yield.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Colfax curry
Harding quay Roosevelt San
Miguel and you County thank you
madam speaker does the gentleman
yield.
Madam speaker Tallman ideal.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman
Madam speaker gentleman it may
not surprise you to know that
I've watched the debate on this
bill a timer to I never watched
it all the way through but I'm
watch snippets of the debate as
it went through the other
chamber.
And as I watched I I just saw
that the we're we're banning
trapping from public lands and I
saw a great misunderstanding of
exactly what those plans work
and how they were manage so I
would just like to talk a little
bit today about public lands.
Madam speaker gentleman the
first.
The first thing I'd like to talk
about is for service lands.
Which was set aside in eighteen
seventy one by the forest
preserve Act.
To provide a supply of timber
and water to our nation in
perpetuity.
In eighteen ninety seven the
organic Act created before
service to take care of those
lands.
In nineteen sixty.
The multiple use sustained yield
act.
Diversified the use of those
lands for all people for variety
of uses they were still to
supply timber and water.
Although I think today they have
over growing to a point where
they don't do that as well as
they used to they've been grown
up so sick that force fires
destroyed part of them and the
thickness of the timbre has
made the diameter of remain
small or it's not know what we
once had there for logging in
and so on I remember when I was
when I was child going with my
grandparents up to harvest
premiums up in the forest and
the we had a lot of fun and I I
think people still go up and
harvest premiums and and I see
that the.
Alongside the road sometimes.
So
Madam speaker gentleman I think
we would agree that this is
public land and that's a come
under your bill.
Madam speaker Tallman public
land is covered by the bill.
So the Mexican land I'd like to
talk about is BLM lands.
In nineteen forty six the Taylor
grazing act March the US grading
service and the general land
office.
In created.
BLM bureau of land management
lance.
these lands are managed under
the under for that month the
federal land.
Management.
And policy at.
It also provides for multiple
use grazing a variety of
different types of use of.
There's.
Madam speaker and gentleman two
hundred forty five million
acres.
Is encompassed by that.
Do you agree that would probably
be public landing would be
covered by this bill.
Madam speaker German.
The plant is covered by this
bill notably the only publicly
in New Mexico.
So back when for service was
being created there was another
type of land we had railroad
barons.
Putting railroads across the
United States.
They were gifted large tracts of
land or easements to put the
railroad on but they were also
gifted a checkerboard of lands.
To fund that railroads.
You could buy a piece of this
road lands.
And you could move it.
So some of the rights is in New
Mexico.
were you put together using
railroad land somebody would buy
a so this railroad land they
would move several pieces of it
together and have a range of one
ranch that I know of in southern
New Mexico as a leverage and it
was put together at least
partially using railroad land
Madam speaker German are you
familiar with this.
Madam speaker of German yes.
And madam speaker gentleman is
that public land.
Madam speaker down and I believe
the letter ranchers privately
owned and that is not public.
Madam speaker gentleman's
correct.
Madam speaker gentleman the next
kind of land that I would like
to talk about is national
grasslands.
Not for a list of we have a
little thing called the dust
bowl.
And people moved in there during
the during what period of of us
don't know what cycle.
Because our weather goes in big
cycles up there.
They play out of the land they
planted farms and things grew
well then they went into the dry
cycle.
Of the lambs blew away the crops
that made.
Back then you didn't have a
truck to be able to haul freedom
for your livestock
Will took their livestock to
other states the government
brought in Chatham.
my father in law tells about
having a rope strung from the
house to the barn so they can
get lost in the dust storms
people's faces were covered up
in that time leaving their
homes.
People with.
Drove the cattle out in Arizona
lived in the mountains and today
heard of them it was a really
hard time.
So the government created the
banquette Jones farm tended Act
the bank kid Jones important
tenet Act was the first.
Bailout by the government of
banks.
And they came in and they bought
the.
The bank's loans on these
properties of these people that
just through their mattress on
the top of their pick up and
went to California or someplace
else where they could make a
living they defaulted on their
loans.
And they just left and
Madam speaker gentleman's the
bank in the Jones Farm tenet
Act.
Is what created the national
grasslands the madam speaker
German you know if this is
private or public land.
Mr Chairman.
If the land is owned by the
state or the federal government
it's public if it's not this
price.
Madam speaker gentleman that is
not correct the national
grassland the some of the only
private lands it is actually the
only private land it is fee
simple private lands on.
By the federal government.
It is the only case of that type
of land in the United States.
But it is only by the federal
government is managed by the for
service for a multitude of uses
you can go there and how to
know there birdwatch you can go
to mills canyon where I've done
some restoration work and it's
the number one bouldering.
Destination.
In the United States of America.
But it is free samples private
land that belongs to the federal
government.
It is accessible to the public.
Speaker gentle in the last.
Land the state of the last lands
that I would like to just talk
about.
Is state lands.
State Land as we know it.
Was created by the Ferguson Act
in eighteen ninety eight.
Senator state trust lands
granted to the state by the
federal government.
They were granted actually by
Congress to the territory of New
Mexico.
They were.
Granted crossed.
To bring revenue to support
various institution in the state
of New Mexico.
some of those institutions are
UNM NMSU New Mexico tech any
more money.
The school for the blind and
visually impaired.
for the deaf.
Three.
Las Vegas Medical Center.
Miners Colfax hospital.
Rio Grande improvements in water
reservoirs as beneficiary are
some of the beneficiaries.
So.
Madam speaker gentleman's.
Are these public lands.
Mr chairman these lands are held
in trust.
For the state.
So madam speaker gentleman
you're correct they are not
public lands.
My expert witness.
Yes sirree.
And you can go to the.
You can go to the State Land
Office frequently asked
questions scroll down to.
How can I.
Obtaining right of entry permit.
And it will tell you and bold
taxes state lands.
Are not public lands.
That you need to get a right of
entry permit.
from the State Land Office.
To go there.
State lands are used for
multiple multitude of things
they're least for oil and gas
drilling the service is leased
for grazing.
There are.
Areas that are.
Set aside for recreation.
the hunting rights released to
the game and fish department so
if you have a valid hunting
license during a valid hunting
season forage species that exist
in that game unit you can go on
those state lands to go hunting.
But if it's not.
Hunting season.
If you do not have a hunting
license.
And if you do not have
permission from the surface
lessee you need to obtain a
permit from the State Land
Office to go there unless it's a
recreation area.
Not each of state land
commissioner.
Has enormous latitude.
In administering these lands I I
have known
commissioners that ban trapping.
I have no commissioners that did
not been trapping
but the one thing that they all
agreed on this this is not
public lands it's land this
Helen crossed.
For the state of New Mexico.
So madam speaker gentleman's
thank you for your time are you.
C..
For the debate Representative or
I'm sorry the gentleman from Rio
Arriba Sandoval and so on one.
Madam speaker I assume you're
probably speaking about
resentment thank.
Yes thank you madam speaker will
the gentleman from Bernalillo
Santa Fe torrent implants you
County please yield.
Madam speaker tell then I yield.
Thank you gentlemen you know I
I sat here and listened to the
debate and I wanted to myself of
through the day after after you
and I spoke to madam madam
speaker and gentleman on whether
or not it I I should I should
debate this this issue knowing
the make up of our body knowing
that it will be likely passed
through the body
but yet I still have a bit of
reservation in regards to to do
and not wanting to the basically
because of the make up of being
a a native American within this
legislative body that has a
perspective that is quite unique
that many.
The.
Not share would be and so over
the past fifty eight days at
this point in time I've sent
here in this room and I've I've
I've attended committee hearings
and floor sessions I've heard
Bates but in this room right
next to right next to me I I
have a room or we have a room in
our family house where we how
does many of our religious
regalia for our pueblo
ceremonies in and reduce
activities
not just for me but also for my
wife.
my daughter my two sons my
brothers my father and and and
in that room the very very safe
and very well protected are
items like like belts in in in
kilts bells and sashes and and
and feathers of all types of of
species in addition to help.
In addition to help us the great
boxes hi you skunks bobcats and
this is the list goes on and on.
And and and perhaps the body at
this point in time is thinking
what what what kind of house
that this land to live in if you
have a a room dedicated to those
type of things and and I can
tell you the house I live in is
is a native American house it's
a Pueblo home that is shared
because of likely there are many
other public homes and native
American villages across the
state have rooms just like this
right next to me because of the.
Importance of our culture and
our history and our resilience
in the state that makes us you
need to wear.
We don't just take an animal
what I really miss it taking the
and many times those animals
live beyond the original person
that took the animal.
Meeting it handed down the act
of over over generations and so.
If you've ever been to Madam
speaker and gentleman of public
the state of the these issues
hit very close to home because
in any one of those public feast
days you have hundreds literally
hundreds of people then.
Of with with the part of their
their their regalia as a fox
really behind them because of
the significance of that animal
because of the power of that
animal because of the beauty of
that animal.
You also have the other animals
like skunks worn on feet for
instance in in some of the
problems again for the same
exact reasons.
And so Mister Madam speaker and
gentleman what when I thought
about whether or not to debate
in this matter I thought it is
rather important to me to be a
matter like this simply because
of the perspective that I think.
No one else in this chamber has
a perspective to.
Perhaps in appreciation of
another perspective to.
And so when I talk to the Senate
sponsor when I talked to you
earlier made a gentlemen and and
Madam speaker and and I asked in
regards to some of the
protections and you mentioned to
me
The Senate provided some native
American car about.
And and part of me is thought
well Madam speaker and gentleman
maybe I should just shut up and
and take those in and not make
an issue of it because we have a
car awesome good to go we're
fine.
But part of me also goes back to
think about.
When an after thought.
Native American pueblos tribes.
And people we're to that not
only just this piece of
legislation but to so many
others that I've had I I've
heard of in other forms over
over my past five years being a
legislate tore.
And and and that type of
perspective and that type of.
Constant.
Forcing me to play a defense in
regards to the potential
religious and and and cultural
Matters that that that brings to
mind it is one that.
I take seriously because I know
that I am part of this body
because I am a voice for the
people that I represent and the
people that are representative
madam speaker and gentleman are
are those native American
villages I have seven pueblos in
my district.
I have I Navajo Nation chapters
within my district I have the
three Apache nation within my
district all very much native
American New Mexico and proud of
it.
No matter madam speaker in and
gentlemen the reason I bring
this up is because.
that Harmon.
So when the bill would be some
legislation is voted on and I've
been signed into law later on in
the in July.
Madam speaker and gentleman and
the only ones that are left to
track.
On public land in this case and
and yes I understand that the
whole aspect of private and
tribal but in regards to to to
to the public lands.
Which were once native American
land.
That once this practice begins
up where only native Americans
from across the country as as as
you as you explained earlier
that it's not exclusive to just
tribes pueblos and nations with
the New Mexico Way The
provisions in your bill open it
up to any.
Native American person across
the country which I think is is
is a pretty brought up so we're
we're a bill like this but.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
When the trapping begins or
continues for purposes that I
mentioned earlier which many in
our body embrace and the
appreciate that they live in
such a diverse state with such
beauty with such issues such
culture.
But when it continues on on on
on prior public lands.
And it there begins to be yet
be.
And and a dog track.
In any one that.
Who's to blame at that point.
Mr miss madam speaker and
gentleman who's to blame at that
point.
It then becomes unfortunately
the Indian problem.
Madam speaker gentleman it
unfortunately becomes an Indian
problem because then we have the
one society the one car out of
people that are still allowed to
track on public lands.
Then here goes the fight of well
let's take that away from them
because they apparently aren't
following the rules they
apparently aren't doing things
correctly so madam speaker and
gentleman it becomes yet again
in Indian problem.
Of which many can relate to
perhaps we're Indian problems
just like.
Education for instance.
Many of the unfortunately made
American children in our
educational system lag far
behind their peers not because
they don't try simply because
the the the geographical
technological deficiencies that
they have to live by.
It becomes an Indian problem by
way of well our state would be
doing so bad educationally if it
wasn't for the lagging behind of
those native American children.
Or another example could be
madam speaker and gentleman.
The the pandemic last June when
the pandemic was at its height
and there was a special part of
the newscast specially devoted
for the Navajo Nation numbers or
the native American numbers that
will the fighting and then it
wouldn't be so bad.
We actually have pretty good
numbers if it wasn't for the
native American population and
not being able to perhaps follow
some rules.
This Madam speaker and gentleman
analyzing my concern that this
could begin as I mentioned
become a native American
problem.
Now I realize that this issue
has become very emotional it's
talk on my heart strings we have
pets here in this house we love
them dearly we have we have farm
animals and and and and the
like.
But at the same time.
When I do well against this this
measure and I do get that
negative remark from the animal
protection voters and and and
other people I hope that they
can understand and appreciate.
Truly appreciate what the
perhaps are unintended in the
our our the unintended
consequences that are being set
up.
For the first inhabitants of the
state with the last two which
does public land once where
there's no madam speaker and
gentleman I may have assisted
people with these comments and I
Madam speaker and gentleman.
I'm not a part of this body to
follow and direction or follow
orders or or button my lip when
matters so sensitive.
The cultural religious.
Practice is.
This is that have withstood the
test of time for centuries were
people text tried to extinguish.
My people maintenance go
underground to practice those
ceremonies only yet to know that
we all live does rex of
extension.
Of expulsion.
Only to find out that we
bypassed threats from Spanish
government Mexican government
United States government and the
list goes on and on into the
night madam speaker and
gentleman continues that thread
against the unfortunate aspects
of what could be.
And as I sit here tonight and
ready for.
This presentation.
Just like many others in the
body receive the letters and
emails of those for and those
against.
And and and I have to go back
and look at some of the the
words that were utilized that if
native Americans are carbon up
then so be it but as a native
American building a car at does
that mean then that native
Americans by virtue of us and
who we are and what we practice
what we believe is early today
and into the future remain T. V.
track in the past who are
practices because again reading
some of this language in some of
the letters it's cruel.
Indiscriminate it's
unscientific.
It's barbaric.
Those types of issues.
In the years in in this time
frame of when we're talking
about equality and equity and
that we should all embrace each
other as brothers and sisters I
get that.
But I think there's underlying
tone the sentiments of.
We're still more more we're
still savages we're still going
to be identified as something
else even if.
To my face they will say we've
other ceremonies we love your
pueblos we want to come visit
you.
And.
Those are the systems of
systematic racism that we are
attempting to break down within
this body that should be able to
be discussed publicly.
But it's matters of these issues
Madam speaker and gentleman that
I believe bring to life bring
the focus make it seem to talk
about this issue because until
these issues are brought up more
more we're gonna just bite at
tongues hold our breath and hope
that it won't affect us but I
think matters like these while
the for and against are very
strong very emotional come to
mind that.
There are those unintended
consequences that when those
pets continue to be tracked it's
only a matter of time that the
Indian problem becomes one that
the state needs to address to
rein in as well so with that
madam speaker and gentleman
thank you for your time tonight
I appreciate you listening to
me.
And I I conclude my comments
thank you.
Thank you gentlemen seeing
further debate the gentleman
from someone.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo Santa
Fe Torrance and Valencia kindly
old.
Madam speaker chairman I yield.
Madam speaker and gentleman I.
As I understand you would in
Santa Fe County suicide burnout
Bernalillo Santa Fe towards once
is quite a mouthful.
Madam speaker chairman I do live
in Santa Fe county I live in the
village of Coliseo in southern
Santa Fe county.
Madam speaker Johnson Senator
thank you for that I will I will
try to follow after the
representative from Rio Arriba
Sandoval San Juan his comments
representative Lente.
that's a tough one to follow
that but those are some very
powerful and moving comments.
In appreciate what you have to
say now we Madam speaker
gentleman from Santa Fe I I a
difficult notes during your
introductory remarks and I
appreciate her more to do it
because I haven't read this bill
yet.
but I I what I understood you to
say is that the purpose of this
bill least a problem there might
be others that I didn't catch at
least a couple that stood out to
me was was both public safety
and precluding the cruelty of
animals is that correct.
The Mr Chairman that is correct
and I I personally think.
There has been too much emphasis
placed on.
Family pets.
Frank the bubbles that.
I agree with the telly from from
Santa Fe in my family that Sir
members members of my family.
yeah I taking care.
But there are
other reasons why.
Trapping should be banned all
our public lands in New Mexico.
Madam speaker gentle from Santa
Fe and the way I don't
understand what this bill does
it it's set sort of this over
arching ban on trapping on
public lands but then it's
details some exceptions to those
to that overarching rules that
correct.
Mr chairman that's correct it it
it starts with the band I think
that's.
In sections three.
So the pre simply stated Dan.
Four we started to go into.
All the things that the band
does not apply to.
Madam speaker gentle from Santa
Fe New and I think if you know
it's one of the one of the types
of trapping that this bill does
not ban is ecosystem management
trappings that correct.
Nancy retirement that is correct
there are some
Requirements are restrictions on
what constitutes because system
management but that is correct.
In Mr Starr madam speaker John
from Santa Fe that eco system
management trapping would be
done by a governmental entity
or their ages at correct.
Mr chairman that's correct.
Madam speaker gentleman.
And so the these would be.
Actual traps that we've placed
on public land for the purposes
that are stated under that
definition of ecosystem
management.
Mr chairman that's correct.
Madam speaker Johnson sent Santa
Fe and so I'm wondering is it
still possible though that since
we have traps under this
ecosystem management.
trapping definition if they're
still gonna be trapped up there
on public land Jan to mess again
we'll still get caught in those
traps.
Madam speaker John absolutely
Mexico I think traps the nature
of traps is that you know
they're they're sent their
beaded.
They're left
Mr chairman I I presume that
domestic animals can get.
Caught in traps in private the
wonder into.
So Mr Chairman you know I think
this bill takes is a really big
step in the right direction.
But by no means Mr Chairman do I
think it eliminates domestic
animals getting caught in traps.
Then speaker John from Santa Fe
and another exception is
trapping for scientific research
is that correct.
Madam speaker John that's
correct.
Madam speaker John from Santa Fe
I'm not familiar with the
trucking industry what would be
the purpose of trafficking.
For bona fide.
Scientific research.
Speaker and gentleman I I would
note that the example that comes
to mind the this is the Mexican
wolf occasionally the wheels are
trapped and that is part of that
that reintroduction program that
scientific process I'm sure when
they're trapped you know they
are.
Yes there are checked for any
injuries they're probably
weighed and measured it's part
of the scientific process.
Madam speaker gentle from Santa
Fe are is a lethal version of a
trap permitted under a bona fide
scientific research drop.
Mr Chairman I do not believe
that we specified the type of
trout.
In the scientific research
accepting.
Madam speaker gentle from Santa
Fe is a person conducting a bona
fide scientific research wrap up
precluded from using a wi for
trap.
Gentleman part of the exception
for both I tend to pick research
is intended to exclude trapping
in people just calling it
scientific research and it's
notable your I. number from for
memory
there is I believe an
international commission on
waiting.
In Japan harvest a large amount
of whales in the state over the
scientific research.
When it's not and so so what
this is intended to give that is
scientific research is.
Able to continue but not just
labeling something scientific
research that is not adequate.
Madam speaker gentle from and
from Santa Fe I I appreciate you
explain what the purposes that
I'm asking about the text of the
bill is there anything in the
text of the bill that would
preclude the use of a of a
lethal trap for
bona fide scientific research.
Madam speaker German not that I
recall but as I noting there are
other reasons why you would not
use lethal traps in most
scientific research I suppose
it's possible in some you what.
Madam speaker gentleman from
Santa Fe another exception to
the general ban on trapping on
public lands is depredation
trapping is that correct.
Madam speaker tell then subject
to the restrictions yes.
master gentleman bring Santa Fe
waters what are some of those
restrictions.
Madam speaker gentlemen of.
The restrictions are they need
to be done by the department or
designated agent.
The department use non lethal
traps.
In the post notices of the
presence of the box.
Mr digital from Santa Fe I do
note that you do expressly
define deprivation trapping.
It's under.
Section two program D. as in
delta.
And it means the act setting
traps snares poisons on public
land.
And I I'd I'd take this next
section I mean sort of what what
depredation trapping is intended
to do.
Intended to reduce or prevent
damage caused by wildlife to
property or waterways.
Harvested and stored crops and
livestock.
No with regard to depredation
trapping it it is specifically
nonlethal trappings are correct.
Madam speaker German.
As described in this bill yes.
Mr Johnson Santa Fe and so that
would also.
mean and I I noticed that this
is referencing of Bill the
Conybeare traps those could not
be used in deprivations trapping
is that correct.
Then.
Lee that's for.
Madam speaker John from Santa Fe
are you familiar with the most
common form a trap used to trap
beavers for example.
Madam speaker German I could not
tell you the most common form of
trap use truck Peters.
Madam speaker gentleman from
Santa Fe.
My understanding is that these
of the Kona bear traps are the
most effective.
and to try to trap of reader
Deaver by any other means Is
highly ineffective.
and so let me ask let me ask the
question this way.
We're talking about
exemptions we we mentioned sent
tribal government we we've
mentioned are was mentioned from
the previous gentleman religious
exceptions are there any
exceptions in this bill that
would apply to a safety is for
your donation associations.
Madam speaker development
The bill does provide a
privately owned land.
Among other things.
Mr Johnson Santa Fe
so.
There are no CEOs that go across
public land.
Mr chairman I am sure they cross
on public land I think the
nature of safe use in northern
New Mexico's predominantly part.
Mr Johnson Santa Fe I I do think
it's important.
The body does understand
one of the things that not
allowing safety is addition
ditches.
To be able to do the the
Conybeare type of traps is
beavers can be.
Particularly destructive.
To water way.
you know I I spent a lot of time
in the wilderness is both in New
Mexico and Colorado I tend to hi
can back back deep into the
wilderness is that I've seen
from one summer to the next.
One of the population in due to
a string how they not only down
it up with the action can change
the course of that water way if
they're left on checked and so I
think we need to understand as a
body if we do vote in favor of
this this could have a real
impact on our state was on our
irrigation districts in a result
that I don't think is intended
but nonetheless I think as a
result.
Now I do wonder there is some.
Some conversation about another
exemption and Mr speaker
judgments in Santa Fe.
There is.
An exception for.
Our ranchers farmers but they
are only allowed to use change
trucks is that correct.
I don't think there is an
exception directed at ranchers
and farmers for state I think
there is language in the bill
allowing for these patients.
Madam speaker gentle from Santa
Fe New and quite frankly I think
that's a learning problem with
the bill.
We are a very rural state there
are tremendous contributions.
That are activity adds and the
not have those kind of
exceptions I do find to be
problematic but I do think they
could still use cage traps.
If they use what's your program
G..
But again we're back to the same
problem with the bureau which is
how effective.
Is a cage trap when you have a
coyote when you have a bobcat we
have an outline of other
predators so I'm not a rancher
I'm not a farmer but I can
assure you that I filed
livestock.
The fact that you tell me all I
can use its chance traps I I
would not take crime that.
Now the last exemption I I would
like to discuss national body
understands there are there is a
very specific religious
exception madam speaker
gentleman's and Santa fe's not
correct.
I need to clarify that.
Nor do we say that all you can
use this contract.
Mr Chairman teachers are
permitted but alternates are
permitted on private property
in the predominant form of
present control shooting is
under strict.
Mr gentleman from Santa Fe but
if I leased public lands and
graze cattle on public land as
part of that lease madam speaker
gentleman's Santa Fe I'm I am
restricted using cage traps is
not correct.
Yes speaker John and now you can
still shoot predators on public
Mr Johnson Santa Fe if I have a
lease on public lands I graze
cattle.
The only form of trapping that I
can use its cage trapping is
that correct.
Madam speaker John of that is
for.
Madam speaker gentleman from
Santa Fe so the last exemption I
would like to discuss the
mission about instances.
Religious exemptions and there's
a very narrow religious
exemption the way I understand
exemption is you have to be part
of us to be a member of a
federally recognized Indian
nation is that correct.
Mr Chairman yes.
And madam speaker Johnson Santa
Fe I assume the reason for that
is we want to respect the the
sincerely held religious beliefs
of our local tribal members is
that correct.
Mr Chairman is applies to local
New Mexico tribes in any tribe
in the United States.
Mr Chairman Santa Fe and so I I
I assume though the purpose is
to respect.
Of the members of a federally
recognized Indian nations are to
respect their sincerely held
religious we expect record.
Madam speaker German yes.
Mr Johnson Santa Fe then I guess
I wonder of white wiring making
this delineation between having
to be in a role number.
Of federally recognized Indian
tribe it's my understanding
there are there are members or
non members to practice
traditional religions and the
way I understand this bill is
they would not be allowed to do
this type of religious trappings
even though they may have all
the saying sincerely held
religious beliefs and so Mister
speaker gentleman from Senate
next point why we would exclude
those people.
Madam speaker Tallman this
language is consistent with
other federal law in case law.
It is drafted to.
Protect and respect.
Need ceremonies.
It's fairly state.
Standard way of approaching the
issue.
Mr speaker Tallman
I think the January sixth.
And the attack on our capital in
one particularly.
We call on colorful usual.
his.
Least maybe deeply held to him.
To the best of my knowledge he
is not a member of a federally
recognized tribe.
She would not be eligible for
this provision.
Mr Jim from Santa Fe
Said that you went in that
direction I'm talking about
people Sen disappointed that we
would try to service somehow and
it's happened I'm talking about
people who practice native
religions as part of their
ordinary lives.
it is their religion they may
not have enough percentage to be
a full member.
Yet they have sincerely held
religious beliefs and so I don't
understand why we would treat
that person any differently I
don't believe it's my position.
To help to tell him or her how
they should and should not
practice religion but that's
exactly what this bill does.
And so I want the body to just
understand what we are voting on
today okay if the purpose of
this bill is public health.
It is to preclude cruelty to
animals this bill does not
accomplish that.
What this bill does is it allows
traps to continue to be on
public land nothing about this
bill is going to change that.
The only thing that this bill
changes is the source of those
traps and so what this bill does
is it essentially tax private
industry in a tax people who
regularly.
Or maybe not regularly just
occasionally trapped on public
land but if we're concerned
about our animals getting caught
in traps if we're concerned
about public health and safety
this bill does nothing to
prevent that outcome because
again as we highlighted there
several exceptions all of which
allow for trapping on public
lands.
And.
I I guess I'm also a bit of a
loss out how we can.
Dan something on public land and
try to connect that to outdoor
recreation economic development.
that's contrary to how I
understand.
Outdoor recreation it seems to
me as you start to limits the
activities even if you disagree
with them you are thereby
limiting the industry and I can
treat so I'm I'm someone who
spends a lot of time outdoors I
spent a lot of time running
specifically trail running and
two thousand twenty I spent more
than four hundred hours on the
trails all on public trails.
I ran more than eighteen hundred
miles into doing more unsettled
Americans and I can assure you
not one time did I run in
England said.
I'm afraid to come outside with
my dog on the ball travel
because there might be a trap
out there I don't believe that
exists again this does not
remedy the problem of animal
cruelty it does not remedy the
problem of public safety all
this does is limit New Mexicans
their freedom to travel plans
and I would urge the body to
vote against this thank you.
General there's further debate.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Madam speaker do you need any
Ana County.
Representative Ferrary.
Yes.
Thank you madam speaker and
while the gentleman from Santa
Fe and other counties please
feel.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
yield.
Thank you
Madam speaker and gentleman from
Santa Fe I just want to help
dispel some of the
Believes that
this is a business concern you
know that we are going to keep
people from making a living
is it true Madam speaker and
gentleman that you know the
average
Compensation annual
The profit that people make from
trapping is only between like
two hundred forty five or six
hundred dollars a year early.
A lady that's that's my
understanding that's the
information I have my
understanding is that the the
sale of health
has not been a strong market of
late that the vast majority of
them are exported.
That's the come back to the
United States as for Trammell
the coat.
but they're they're exported and
there is
Approach growing popular
distaste for wild animal for.
So Madam speaker and gentleman
or excuse me generated from
going into we're getting a lot
of the.
The committee I if you wish to
make comment on the bill please
I've never signed up for an
opportunity speaker it's not
appropriate in nineteen with
decorum have the kinds of
comments in audible statements
made during the debate.
Thank you gentlelady identically
species.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm sorry I
didn't know that you change
so Mr speaker and gentleman yes
I think it is it's a declining
market and that's what I think
people are referring to is
archaic because this industry is
declining it is something that
people don't
you know I want to condoned by
buying such things but we do
have a deep respect for native
American of tradition and
symbolism
that is incorporated into their
recent religious
practices and I think there
should be no
It made clear that in no way do
I think people are insinuating
that
You know those practices are
Kate they're very do we deeply
rooted and we respect just like
when we see a our state
Pledge that we respect the
cultural differences and
that trapping for profit or
pleasure or recreation or for
whatever reason other than that
is.
Other than deeply rooted
religious beliefs and practices
I think is what we're
trying to change in our state
and Mr speaker and gentleman
from Santa Fe would you agree
with that.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes.
Thank you and Mr speaker and
gentleman so there isn't a great
profit being made in our state
that this is going to hurt
people for their livelihood
there might be one or two people
my understanding is Mr speaker
and gentleman that might make
you know I don't have to make a
living but.
That it seems like that is not
the X. what we should be so
worried about
we should be more worried about
our outdoor recreation as you so
eloquently talked about how we
expand our outdoor recreation
how do we make sure people feel
safe in our state you Mr speaker
and gentleman you mentioned
California years I mean
California Arizona Colorado
where there are few other states
that have also been of the
Michael trapping.
But.
Mr speaker gentle lady in
western state also the state of
Washington.
Washington to Mr speaker and
gentleman
I think of because we do share
so much of the outdoor
recreation with these others
western states that this is
something that's really
important for us to keep in mind
as were voting tonight as we're
trying to expand these
Economic development in this
area it far outweighs what the
reduced
trapping of benefits are to just
a few people and not very much
money and a lot of people are
from out of state so why are we
worried about
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa Fe wire we worried about
Yeah protecting their own self
interest and not those of other
people and the humaneness part
of you know protecting animals.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
was another point that I don't
think we've really talked much
about but
when there there's been research
published research that actually
confirms that mass trapping of
many of carnivore species
results in overall population
increases and Mr speaker and
gentleman I have experience of
working with the coalition for
pets and people here in Los
crucis and when we were looking
at how to reduce or community
tax or feral cat when they were
we locate trapped in cages and
relocated to other areas they
found that that other cap came
into the same area that the
others were removed from so what
the conclusions Mr speaker and
gentleman are that you leave the
cats in the area you trap them
you can do to them and then you
return to that area and have a
cat Madam Madam chair I should
say and so that has been found
at the NMAA you Mr speaker and
gentleman they found that that
was able to.
Reduce the population slowly but
surely and to make it so that
other cats didn't come into that
area to just replace that boy
eight and Mr speaker and
gentleman I think that's what
happens when you have mass.
Hi very killing which I'm so
glad we've been able to stop but
you know having where you track
the animals when it's
indiscriminate thank you catch
not only other pets such as dogs
but also people have been you
know stepping into those tracks
and hard so I think it's really
important that we keep in mind
that there are ways to reduce
You know that
Population in a certain area and
the argument Mr speaker and
gentleman that people have
watched your cattle
being destroyed there is the
option of shooting them and who
goes out into there ranger ranch
without a gun.
I had twenty acres a long time
ago in the seventies and we had
a few
We were like gentleman farmers
and we always had a rifle with
this and whenever the cattle
were out in other areas we we
would always you know be really
careful we never had any attacks
that you just that's just part
of it and there's nothing that
stops a rancher from being able
to shoot that coyote or animal
that to tacky there
Hello so I don't understand how
people have staff and watch
these horrible things happen Mr
speaker and gentleman if they
didn't watch them without you
know shooting or or doing
something to protect their
animals dax gregis and I just
want to say that
Mr speaker and gentleman
This is an important bill it's
been worked out for many years
and we as New Mexicans need to
bring our state to where we
protect people cats and also be
able to
Make sure that we can expand our
outdoor fire environmental
economic
impact for New Mexico to improve
that and to make it so that as a
recreation and as a humane
effort that we support this bill
so I thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I yield.
As for the debate the gentleman
from you Representative small.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentleman from Santa Fe
Torrance's one stadium.
Thank you Mr chairman I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John I just want to ask a few
questions Mr speaker John Mr
speaker gentleman does this
change the status of.
A common for bears that would be
Mr speaker gentleman spaces like
covers species like coyotes
understanding Kroger's or
protect against these Mr speaker
John priorities are not what
this change that.
Mr speaker gentleman that.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so this would not
change the current situation Mr
speaker down where I can go out
and harvested many priorities as
I choose that correct Mr speaker
and gentleman Mr speaker telling
that is correct okay thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentlemen
Mr speaker government I came
across a really interesting.
part of the statute it's my
understanding that we we've
heard discussion about how the
game investor has really
advanced to move things forward
Mr speaker gentleman it's my
understanding there's different
rules currently at the rate of
the trapping regulations verses
regular hunting and fishing
regulations that you understands
is background on.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
have detail information about
that with us for.
Mr speaker down to my
understanding you break the
rules trapping it's a it's a par
last suspension of those
trapping privileges Mr speaker
and gentleman then if you're if
you're out hunting Mr speaker
gentleman.
Are you familiar with the north
American model of wildlife
conservation.
Mr speaker Tom and I have some
passing familiarity with okay
thank you Mr speaker thank you
don one of the core pieces of
the north American model Mr
speaker gentleman is that the
direct selling of wildlife the
would you say that's a part of
the north American model Mr
speaker down or not a part of
that model.
Mr speaker Tallman my
understanding is that the north
American model.
Dictates that against the
commercialization of wildlife
that when you hunt or harvest
wildlife and for personal use
that's my understanding Mr
speaker tell thank you Mr
speaker thank you John that's my
understanding as well Mr speaker
down
for the bodies benefit that came
up Mr speaker John Lennon right
you know as we came into the
twentieth century as we saw
wildlife populations actually
becoming extinct.
being or at least extirpated Mr
speaker down a lot of that was
due to market funding with you
agree with that Mr speaker.
Mr speaker chairman that's my
understanding.
It's my understanding also Mr
speaker and gentleman that that
market timing that market driven
approach to wildlife management
in fact led to Mr speaker
gentleman
the extirpation and elimination
of many wildlife species Mr
speaker down
many of those actually here in
New Mexico Merriam's up and
others Mr speaker gentleman.
That market is that your
understanding of what drives the
trapping industry Mr speaker
down.
Mr speaker German
The trucking industry yes us so
Mr chairman there are
recreational trappers in
probably a very small number of
trappers to.
Consider this a business the
vast majority of testimony we
received was for recreational
crabbers that this is something
they enjoy doing it in a they
make maybe they make some money
are.
you Mr speaker gentleman there
is of course the the the
provision trapping which is a
different reason for trapping
but in terms of the trucking
industry in the for industry
that's correct.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John and I so that that industry
piece Mr speaker and gentleman
the lack of limits on tape or
things like bobcats and other
species Mr speaker down I think
it actually speaks to our long
history of no scientific
management of these programs Mr
speaker gentleman very little
oversight and Mr speaker
gentleman I think that is
actually unfortunately help
build us up to this point Mr
speaker and gentleman when it
comes to.
So you're understanding what I
just heard is that a lot of this
and really focused on on the
recreational folks who would do
this recreationally maybe take
health sell those if it's in
season and that sort of thing Mr
speaker John.
Mr speaker telling yes.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John
We are I say this as a as
someone who has been very
privileged to grow up hunting
and fishing in the state Mr
speaker John I just put in my
applications The Hobbit gang for
New Mexico yesterday and I'm
waiting Mr speaker government
with fingers crossed for about a
month to see what comes out of
that Mr speaker and gentleman.
I sometimes honestly wonder what
it would be like if I had not if
I growing up as a proper Mr
speaker down on my I have not
grown up as a trapper
and I recognize Mr speaker
gentleman a heritage elements to
it Mr speaker gentleman.
In the management of species
this is guided it best and as
you pointed out Mr speaker
gentleman.
Counterproductive often and
worst by because of the
indiscriminate nature Mr speaker
gentleman in terms of protection
of livestock and also personal
pets and and things of that
nature.
There are.
It is a
Deeply emotional issue as it
should be Mr speaker down both
livelihood and also on March
twenty one of take on that
responsibility Mr speaker
gentleman the fact that traps
can still be set on private
land.
Which is going to be the base of
all rental properties Mr speaker
down and and all farming
properties especially farm
properties gives me some comfort
there Mr speaker gentleman the
fact that this doesn't change
the ability of a hunter let me
ask Miss Mister speaker German
are you limited the hunting
coyotes or bobcats for that
matter during the daylight hours
like you are the gangs pieces.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe bobcats are protected
for bears okay these are not.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John but I think in both of
those cases you can still
harvest them at night Mr speaker
down at least that's my
understanding on please correct
me if I'm wrong
Mr speaker gentleman I can go
out with a
Night vision if I had it which I
don't even on like to Mr speaker
John you can go out and.
Sure a priority at nine if that
coyote is committing depredation
and then on your livestock on
the property is that actor Mr
speaker John.
Mr speaker I think you can see
that coyote regardless.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
agree and I would also agree
with the comments I've heard
earlier.
That managing predators managing
ecosystem we've learned a great
deal is more complex in fact Mr
speaker and gentleman the more
pressure that's placed on
priorities in particular the
higher their little letter
counts are is that your
understanding Mr speaker
gentleman's.
Mr Mr.
I really appreciate you bringing
up that point
that is fine understanding that
indiscriminately killing these
breaks that the tax structure it
disperses the protector and
actually stimulates.
breeding yeah and Mr speaker
German I believe there are two
reasons why we have so many
because these in one of the I
believe is that we keep shooting
them and we keep stimulating
reading.
Mr speaker John thank you for
that not only I think is that my
understanding I think Mr speaker
and gentleman that's right they
generally accepted understanding
without a value attached to it
and understanding of the
situation so Mister speaker
government to manage those it
takes a different approach to
balance a non indiscriminate
approach to that balance that we
see here Mr speaker gentleman I
want to ask you of these one
final question Mr speaker
government.
It's my understanding that I've
heard from you that California
Colorado are two of the western
states that currently have
similar laws on the books
compare to what's being
discussed the line.
Mr speaker gentleman in Arizona
as well okay thank you as on as
well Mr speaker down so I I in
particular I actually love
looked at the beef cattle herds
for both the numbers when it
comes to California and Colorado
and Mr speaker gentleman what it
surprise you to know that there
be cattle they actually have
more be cattle than the state of
New Mexico on ball state.
Mr speaker telling.
I never thought about that
question but I guess I would not
see would suppress okay thank
you Mr speaker John yeah I the.
These are deeply emotional
issues as they should be and
understandably still but when it
comes to to the states that have
larger B. Battlefords one just
in our to the north of us with
similar rules Mr speaker
gentleman with the ability to
manage including way fully today
I always other sorts of animals
that may be predating on
livestock that also give me
comfort Mr speaker gentleman.
Even though this is.
The idea and and the the reality
of what predators you is a is a
tough one Mr speaker John one as
an on air one in many sports of
waste Mr speaker gentleman.
Help your ecosystems ecosystems
that have a balance of prey and
predators that have more
wildlife Mr speaker government
seems to have a it is not one
where the the ratification
Management approach.
Yes I would you agree with that
Mr speaker John.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Mr chairman thank you.
This would not be legislation I
would bring Mr speaker dollar
however I stand in support I
stand in support of Mr speaker
gentleman knowing some of the
challenges in the trade offs but
believing that the ability to
manage our ecosystems manage our
wildlife.
To leave early today priorities
that there are threaten the US
someone's livestock or or animal
what have you remains that the
danger posed by trapping which
we've seen in the state of New
Mexico unfortunately with the
managed perhaps non managed up
many times.
I see pads and other sorts of
things.
And the indiscriminate approach
to the eco system management
that is ultimately predicated on
the market commercialization of
wildlife.
it convinces me Mr speaker John
learned that now that this bill
is before the body that I we can
support it Mr speaker gentleman
we can continue to go hunting Mr
speaker gentleman we can
continue to raise livestock we
can continue to enjoy those
sorts of things that make our
state incredibly unique and do
it in ways that potentially have
a healthier more balanced learn
thank you Mr speaker thank you
John.
At the Johnson Chavis and
Lincoln representative my
bridge.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Right John from Santa Fe
Torrance and Valencia yield.
Mr speaker tell me in Bernalillo
yes thank you.
Mr speaker John R. for got to
have a little part of Burnley's
sorry about that.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
trying not to repeat them ever
payments that have already been
discussed but I would like to
point out a couple things in the
legislation.
The first one appears on page
five one four.
The word falconry equipment is
years that I'd like you to
explain to me what the staff is
very quick.
Mr speaker Telamon
I actually appreciate you asking
that question.
But Mr chairman we worked on
this bill we had quite a
discussion about the term
talking re equipment and whether
or not that is the correct term.
Mr speaker German.
People with problems and we
don't think the birds themselves
as equipment.
hunting with falcons would be
permitted under this bill
Sandra.
Recruitment as it was explained
to me was you could use to catch
all kinds.
Next and so forth in this bill
does not apply to point so it's
sort of
I think it's particularly
critical to the bill of but it
was included in our list and it
was it is a way of of hunt.
So Mr speaker and gentleman that
word is not hunting with falcons
it is Quitman utilized to
capture options with which you
would have the means of hunting
with falcons.
Mr speaker Tom and my reading of
the word is it in fact applies
to pull their let me actually Mr
chairman let me rephrase that my
reading of the bill is it
possible.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
would be maybe the only statute
I'd be aware of that.
An animal whether B. livestock
or wild would be referred to as
a quick much generally
requirement is a employment.
Generally can noting
something other than a living
are thank Representative that's
what it means I will accept your
explanation.
My next question touches on one
of the issues that the.
Representative from from Santa
Rio Arriba.
M. San Juan issued or talk about
a little bit.
And that's on page six lines
five to seven.
And that particular issue is the
exemptions.
Four enrolled members of
federally recognized Indian
nations.
I just
I know your dresses maybe
briefly earlier but I'm just
wondering if
any thought was given as to
whether or not that particular
provision would be violative of
the state of New Mexico
prostitution able protection
provisions of the bill of rights
for the federal constitution.
Mr speaker Tallman my
understanding I have not
personally read the cases but my
understanding is that this
language is consistent with case
law in the tenth circuit.
And I say that because you're
the same as a maybe one recourse
for ranchers throughout the
state would be to.
and employee.
They made of Americans to engage
in that activity on their lands.
To to continue to
be able to use some of these
methods to try
these are the predators off of
off of their lands and your
question.
Rise and have do you have any
thoughts in that regard.
Mr speaker tell men
That's certainly not what the
language is intended for and I
do I don't think.
You could.
Hire a native American and.
To come trap on public land so
that you can do your own
trapping of pride.
In some say it was for religious
purposes.
You know we heard earlier from
the gentleman that plea from
Bernalillo.
The room in his house and the.
Religious.
Items that he takes care of and
there have been passed on to him
and that the death you will pass
down to his children.
this isn't something that's done
on a mass scale.
Mr speaker German I believe it's
something that is done
sincerely and respectfully and
has not done for higher.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman of.
Now to the point stretch
Really concern my district and
and.
It really affects the entire
state because this state has.
For centuries now had a very
help we.
Sheep and wool
Industries will.
In fact in the early nineteen
eighties.
There were over five million
head of sheep in the state of
New Mexico.
There were over fourteen million
pounds of oil produced.
At the height in the eighteen
eighties.
She wore a very valuable
commodity should work for.
**** are just part of the fabric
of society very important fact
go over to the end of the
governor's you'll see.
Boards of wool and the
importance of of how people in
our state.
Utilize these animals for
virtually.
Many purposes.
What
food
certain extent clothing and and
shelter so.
The sheep industry Benham
Horton that it continues to be
important parts of the in parts
of the state.
In fact I'm proud to say that
Rossell will head quartered in
Roswell New Mexico is the
largest school marketing firm in
the United States right now.
Thanks a lot.
And.
Oil produced in New Mexico
Worldwar.
And oil production in New Mexico
was noted to be some
requirements and you're in the
world.
Although our numbers today from
that higher five million have
admitted committees.
As one little down to about
ninety thousand head that's two
thousand sixteen
Services us months.
About ninety thousand have
produce six hundred forty five
thousand pounds of wool in that
year I do not have the remains
of two thousand nineteen figures
for the.
I think we might see them be a
little depressed from from that
ninety thousand more.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Thirty two of our thirty three
down to use.
Have sheep populations within
those counties.
So this is a statewide
industry and and and impacts and
you probably wonder Mr speaker
and gentleman where my going
with this
Okay.
And.
In my district and I'm not gonna
speak to your the other thirty
counties in the state but my two
counties.
The sheep industry has been
depressed and a lot of that
depression as a result of
predation and the inability of
the.
She ranchers to stay ahead of
the president's.
And that problem's been
exasperated over the last twenty
or so years when the federal
government has really cut back
on their predator
the services that they provide
to our ranchers.
And that has resulted in
ranchers having to
abandoned sheep appropriations.
And have moved more to cattle
operations and we've seen it in
status County with senator
Lincoln town.
And the so those numbers have
declined over the years through
the numbers I've stated.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
At all ranges in our part of the
state and I would submit
throughout the state are
composed the.
Multiple are.
And I say that there are a.
Mishmash of private land.
State Land.
And federal land as the gentle
lady from Travis county
indicated earlier with our own
ranch.
And so you have a range in
operation that has.
Basically three statuses of
ownership and this.
measure your set up time and
again Mr speaker and gentleman
that you could allow trapping on
private lands ensure you can but
when you're ranchers composed
of.
Private lands.
And then Nexter State Land.
Right over here federal lands or
may be.
Patches of checker boards
throughout it.
You can not expected what.
Where you use your private lands
in your ability to put traps on
the private lands and have any
affect overall on predator
management activities that you
might wish to purser.
And even yes that public lands
is completely landlocked in
other words the public has no
legal ability to access that
land other than by helicopter.
The.
The rancher would not be able to
use traps on the public lands
that that no person could
legally come on on to that land.
And so that hampers for ranchers
ability to protect our livestock
check there are our livelihood
and protect that there are
way of life.
And that's a real concern that I
have from my district is a this.
The taking away this tool to
manage these vast.
Rangelands throughout my
district.
Are going to
further because of the
management of their sheep
industry in New Mexico.
That's going to affect not only
my County but it's going to
affect.
Thirty two of the other thirty
three counties and and.
I'm really concerned about that
and and the horror stories that
we hear I don't need to repeat
what the other representative
that but.
These predators are not time so
when when they go into our super
it's not a pretty sight.
And it's not even a pretty sight
on the farm when they did get
into the trip the group either
but
We have to have.
A variety of tools to deal with
these issues.
And and one comment was very
good to you your team go out
insured or that your gap that
twenty four hour surgery to to
to accommodate that
and so what these tools allow
our people to reduce the broader
population with means that are
working twenty four hours of
their.
And should be able to deal with
the our production on our
livestock.
so with that Mr speaker and
gentleman I cannot support this
legislation and I I hope that
people will look at not just.
This set of animals look at the
other side of animals that are
affected by this in tremendous
ways and I just throw out our
sheep industry has seen a
tremendous decline
and a lot of that is due to
predation and the inability to
control that prevention thank
you Mr speaker thank you to all
the challenges for the debate
the gentle lady from Los Alamos
Representative Chandler thank
you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Santa Fe yield.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the gentle lady and my co
sponsor.
Thank you very much at.
To kind of review where we are
we had a long of a long and
winding road Mr speaker
gentleman and I think it is
really helpful for the bodies
for us to review all the reasons
why it's important for us to
band trapping on public lands so
the first one where we Senator
amount of time is talking about
the safety aspects of trapping
and
how that how that it the
indiscriminate piece of trapping
really affects safety for those
of us who use public grants to
to expand upon that we
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I
believe the safety comes in a
couple different ways
it it is safe to people and
safety to their pets and Mr
speaker gentle lady well it's
much more likely that
Yes get contracts and people
people do occasionally seven
trucks but usually it's the pets
they investigate the sense where
there's a bait and you know.
When I've had dogs if we can't
keep away some away from
something it's built that in
people end up getting hurt.
We may try to rescue their pets
who are panicked because of the
truck.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa Fe we heard a lot of
testimony from people who came
to our committee hearing on a
scale a week or so ago talking
about about them being spiritual
about going on public lands
because they were worried about
the safety for themselves maybe
their children and and and their
pets and since we heard word not
just that they were worried that
they would get caught in the
trap Mr speaker and gentleman
but that in the effort to
extract there are some of from a
trap they or they're they're
they're companion would be kept
by the animal because of the
intense excruciating pain that
the animal was suffering from
and Mr speaker and gentleman and
and absence and I'm just
watching the animals just scream
this unbearable scream and and
our that the path just lashing
out at anyone who was in the
vicinity do remember that
testimony Mr speaker and
gentleman from Santa Fe.
Mr speaker gentlelady yes they
do and in particular
the pet owner talking about the
screen and how.
She can she was by the spring.
Thank you for that answer Mr
speaker and gentleman and we
talked a little bit about the
economy and how important it is
to to
Have people come to the state
and I remember thinking you two
years ago on are working on the
still on being asked by one of
the opponents on the other side
of this deals and so you know
why don't we just put up a sign
to let people know there are
traps potentially along the
trail and the vision I had Mr
speaker and gentleman was just
you know New Mexico truth we can
put it on a banner with a huge
sign come to New Mexico but
please watch out for traffic
plan on using our public lands I
remember thinking that the of it
late and I think it's one of the
ladies sort of the a way of
thinking about this let's just
put up a sign when we know that
that what kind of how would that
reflect on our our community in
our state having to sign like
that Mr speaker and lastly Mr
speaker and someone from Santa
Fe and this is the argument for
the the reason why I really do
support banning tracks and
public lands.
And it we've talked a little bit
about it Mr speaker and
gentleman but
It's the humanity of it it's the
morality of the.
And we hear about examples from
opponents of the health yes
coyotes attacked Charles no
question about it it's for
respect.
But it's it's quick and and and
people in the animal
kills the animals for food and
to see their tax we understand
the rationale for that but as
humans we're a species that's
different from that we many of
us think we have souls.
Many of us
You know I have great empathy
for those animals are
individuals who are in pain.
And that's what makes us
different from.
The other our other species on
this planet our sense of Essex
and morality and that's what
touches me when I think about
tracking it's the Essex and
morality knowing that and animal
and animal.
To whom we have embassy I hope
we all have and see for an
animal who was withering in
screaming and less to die
potentially for days in a trap.
Are so terrified of that trap
that it will not cost its leg to
get out of that I would like to
think that we now are at a place
in society where we recognize
the morality and the Essex in
manatee and our hearts and that
is why we should ban trapping in
the state of New Mexico Public
friends thank you very much Mr
speaker and thank you gentlemen
from Santa Fe.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker.
This motion having been debated
for three hours I move that the
debate sees no objections
ordered John Nicholas.
Mr speaker.
Members of the body.
This bill is a compromise bill.
Is the result of work over the
years.
Lots of consultation.
With that community.
For for truckers they're
specific changes in this bill
the requested by director slope
at the department came to each.
It allows for trapping on
private land.
Does nothing to limit.
Shooting predators for hunting
and anyway.
The last through the provision
trapping by the department of
game and fish.
Is reasonable exceptions.
For health and safety
scientific research New Mexico
system management.
And it has strong protections.
For native American religious
and ceremonial practices.
Mr speaker members of the body
what this bill does.
Take a big step.
Towards ending the archaic
cruel and unnecessary.
Practice issues shooting which
is.
Mr speaker.
So.
Mr speaker members of the body.
Sen bill thirty two as three
times amended do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill thirty two as
amended the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
Critical members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Barreras.
Representative Eli
Representative Ely is yes.
Representative era.
Representative Lord.
Representative Lord is no.
Right make sure and
Representative Herrera who are
passionate about I have Mister
Mr speaker yes.
Representative at both yes.
Close by vote of thirty five and
he's permitted thirty for the
negative Senate bill thirty two
as amended has passed the house.
Great I am number one gentle
lady from McKinley and San Juan.
Are you ready on that item yes
Mr speaker will you get me to
that point.
That the record reflect that all
action necessary conflicting
Senate bill ninety three as
amended on final passage take
the gentlelady to explain about.
Senate bill ninety three as
amended is sponsored by Senator
Padilla Senator ninety three as
amended creates the New Mexico
office of broadband access and
expansion with seven
deliverables which have been
negotiated by both houses the
offices will produce a
documented New Mexico broadband
plan to include a financial
plan.
The office will managed
statewide bulk pricing
agreements your that the office
will produce and keep that
facial New Mexico broadband map
as relates to the federal
commission for communication
commission and the US department
of agriculture requirements will
be office will negotiate rights
of way an easement access and be
a central repository for all
rights of way and easements
related to broadband.
The office will produce and.
Well produce reporting and
analysis of the state of
broadband in New Mexico to the
people of the New Mexico
legislature and governor the
office will contain three to
five specialist that will work
with other political
subdivisions to design develop
fund and implement their
broadband plans the office will
also leverage New Mexico
investment dollars with other
funding sources.
Mr speaker I have an amendment
to forward.
Gentlelady to the amendment I
move the amendment number one to
Senate bill ninety three as
amended the number is point two
two zero six three three point
six.
Germany's the amendment the two
oh two number he's been giving
it is distributed and on the
website.
Gentlelady to explain in that.
The house floor amendment will
strike the Senate finance
committee amendment which
created a council and a fund
this will become the content of
house bill ten House Bill ten
will straight any reference to
the creation of the office an
agreement between both houses.
The amendment excludes the New
Mexico DO need from the rate of
weight requirements as they
already have existing federal
processes they must adhere to.
The amendment ensures that the
Mexico house The New Mexico
office of broadband access and
expansion becomes the central
river.
Repository for all right of way
an easement data for broadband
deployment purposes.
And the amendment revises the
definition of quality of service
to adhere to Federal
Communications Commission
definition further declining New
Mexico to federal funding Mr
speaker I stand for questions.
Okay Is there debate on the
amendment.
Is there objection to it.
Hearing none house one in the
everyone to Senate bill ninety
three is that it is Dr.
there is debate in the Dail
generating this you'd like to
make for the comments for I go
to Jonathan court.
I am I stand for questions
there's a gentleman curry
Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker jollity
please yeah.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
are I'm trying to look through
these parties requests the
secretary of the room I don't
see it so I'm okay now I see
thank you to all right
I just always try to make eye
contact with your around talking
to so thank you Mr speaker July
to.
Of generating would you ask your
expert.
How much money has been
accumulated for broadband
through the finance process the
session I know there is a
considerable amount of funding
that came through on the Senate
side and different.
Areas and I'm sure just how much
money we have set aside for
broadband in total and how much
money we have set aside for
doing it.
For their portion of the Mr
speaker John.
Mr speaker gentle man that would
be one hundred and thirty three
million in total appropriated
for this project.
Mr speaker generated and and all
of that one hundred thirty three
flows through joint is that
correct Mr speaker John.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
will be funneled through a
council that will have oversight
through this office.
Okay and and the Mister speaker
July.
I'm assuming when it came to the
house we were looking at the
funding being appropriated to do
it and and do it would handle
that money but I think your
amendment may have changed that
and directed these funds to a
different mechanism is that
correct Mr speaker dollar.
Mr speaker and gentleman house
bill tend created that fund and
these but and the council.
Will but well that projects
through that office.
Okay and and I appreciate the
the I think.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm I'm
probably not asking more
questions programs like.
I know there was some funding
that was directed from the house
to do it.
To house all of the equipment
and.
establish a statewide broadband
program is that still in place
or is the council taken over.
Well you know what.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
office.
We will manage the process for
implementation.
And just be ten has created the
council and the fund to bet the
programs.
Of HB ten.
Okay
gentlelady I'm I'm gonna have to
Passing the back and look at V.
ten R. I wasn't.
Are prepared and haven't read
that bill so
I will investigate that perhaps
I can come back on a little
while and and.
Get clarity to my questions
thank you Mr speaker technology.
The gentleman Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you Mr speaker well would
gentle lady from McKinley county
New Mexico Mr speaker I yield to
the gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker of like
major couple questions regarding
this.
It looks like this is a
Formation of a.
A group of people who will
oversee the administration of
grants and I I was really hoping
to see that this
brand would really look at ways
of getting broadband.
Connectivity throughout the
state and so my my question Mr
speaker gentle lady as will this
be just ensuring requests or
will it be doing oversight and
trying to coordinate getting
broadband to each and every part
of the state.
Mr speaker and then.
The office will produce a
documented New Mexico broadband
plan to include a financial
plan.
And the office will manages
statewide bulk pricing
agreements plan.
The office will produce and keep
current the official New Mexico
broadband map as relates to the
FCC and the USDA.
The office will know should
negotiate right of way easement
access and be the central
repository for all rights of way
and easements related to
broadband the office will
produced reporting and analysis
of state of broadband in New
Mexico to the people of New
Mexico the legislature and the
governor.
And to your question and
concerns the office will contain
three to five specialists that
will work with other political
subdivisions to design develop
fund and implement their
broadband plans and finally the
office will leverage New Mexico
investment dollars with other
funding sources.
So so Mister speaker and gentle
lady it it appears to me that
this office won't be.
The office that insurers of
broadband you're disconnected
that reporter of the state but
that they will assess every
corner of the state and they're
all plans to bring broadband to
their community I understanding
that correctly.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes it
is all of that do you
deliverables are required to
make that work.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm I'm a
little concerned because some of
the communities that I represent
I don't think
Well they needs broadband to
really allow their communities
are to keep up with the rest of
the state.
I'm not sure that they are big
enough for have in place the
person to really engage in these
projects and so I'm I'm
wondering how do we get
broadband the some of our small
rural communities.
Yes this Representative that
were forming does not actually.
Engage them bringing broadband
to those communities.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
So the office will.
Contain three to five specialist
that will work.
To design develop fund and
implement their broadband plans.
Now that my concern Mr speaker
gentle lady is it's it's their
plans and I'm not sure they're
going to have plans they may
have some desires but they're
going to lacked the expertise to
have the plan and so I was
really hoping that this will be
the vehicle or the legislation
that would really reach out and
bring broadband.
I'll Rio Grande border or in
that every quarter and the state
regardless of.
whether those communities
already have the expertise and
the knowledge of the people in
place to.
Think of a plan and come up with
a plan and maybe even develop
some of the financing mechanisms
for and so I really was hoping
that this will be the goal for
that this would be the
implementation of an
organization that good.
Help those local communities get
broadband to them but maybe IBM
this wrong in there what my
hopes and what I'm seeing are
two different things Mr speaker
and gentleman that is exactly
what this office will create
that is exactly what these
deliverables entail.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
what you're saying is that that
for communities that don't have
the people in place of the
expertise that this will be the
body that assist them in getting
broadband to their community.
Mr speaker yes you are correct
gentleman Mr speaker gentle lady
I'm much relieved them the to to
see that what might second thing
I'd like to explore briefly as
I was watching CNBC the other
day and they were talking about
a lot of us and you know some of
his plans and.
She's noted to be someone who's
looking to.
Way into the future to solve
some of the world's problems and
one of them is using.
Satellites as a mechanism to
bring broadband to every corner
of the globe and Rossell
actually there's a
an after call Scott in there now
of morality and their goal is to
to use
hi helium balloons to bring cell
service and potentially internet
connectivity to to very remote
areas of the world Africa Asia
and in places that are way Oscar
true to our and and so.
I'm I'm wondering with this
group also be contemplating
maybe some of the security
advances that that people say
we're we're going to grants for
the next ten years of we have
since the industrial revolution
started which which I can't even
get more money around the it's
in the next ten years we have
those waves and technology with
this be the office that's going
to look at new technologies to
assist in getting those
communities connected.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes all
options are on the table this
includes the most rural and
difficult locations and this
office will coordinate.
Those types of projects.
Because Mr speaker gentle lady
the advantage of those
technologies are graph ability
to go into space or Galle at
very high levels of the
atmosphere
means that you don't need rights
of course you don't need copper
and and the last in the ground
you don't need
those things it's all done
through the.
Our connection between the
satellites and I guess a
receiver and all
Whatever the other involved
sending signals up to the
satellites and are getting
thanks dispersed that where so
I'm pleased to hear your answer
there Mr speaker and gentle lady
that this group will also be
forward thinking and looking at
new technologies to accomplish
the same goal maybe even was
less intrusive mechanisms of Mr
speaker gentle lady thank you or
clarifying those things and and
I think that this is a very
need to have a of our rural
communities are going to have
any chance of thriving is
because we can connect them to
the world and we live in a
global economy and this will
bring opportunities to even the
remotest parts of New Mexico so
Mister speaker and gentle lady
thank you very much.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Santa
Representative Harper.
Thank you kindly Mr speaker will
the gentle lady from McKinley
and someone please you all Mr
speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank speaker and gentle lady
your expert witness I know it's
been working on these
telecommunication guardianships
for a long time and it's a great
to see all the momentum that's
built top and and it really
feels like this is the session
where are these things are
finally happening so are I want
to speaker gentle lady in
senators and knowledge that an
intrusion you
Mr Julie I just have a couple
questions are piggybacking off
of comments from the gentleman
from Chavis and Lincoln.
so I am I am very sure just
muted was all the work your mask
is doing and you look at
everything is going from
electric cars from the boring
company into space access to
starving it's all to get us to
Mars.
Not just that's fascinating to
me it it which that sparks my
imagination and I'm really
hopeful that you'll have
something exciting in our
lifetime wage folks remember
that the apology.
Miss Julie so are you familiar
with the starlink
programs Mr jelly do you know
how many satellites they
actually have up right now.
Mr speaker and gentleman we
don't right now but we can
certainly put it be enough to
cover that New Mexico area.
Speaker and gentle lady
yeah it's it's incredible they
have one thousand four hundred
satellites up right now.
That's roughly a third of all
this functioning satellites
around the world right now.
And every launch remake with
these reusable rockets eight
point sixty more up in the air
and they're doing these lunches
about once a week.
So much bigger generally.
They are hiring this program
right now it is mostly in the
northern areas like
Canada and Washington Mr
generally these beta testers or
getting cable internet speeds.
Which is.
It's mind boggling.
Mr jolly the plan is that North
America will be covered by the
end of this year.
And it's higher world they have
I believe approval from the FCC
for forty three thousand
satellite deployments.
So.
Speaker gentle eight nine.
I can't help but wonder though
and if you can help me
understand.
Now that we finally have gotten
always motivation all this
momentum or funding crossing the
finish line it seems.
I just I honestly believe in
about two years half of us will
be getting not only are internet
or cell phone coverage.
From our starlink.
And are we just gonna be rushing
the pledge a bunch of fiber in
the ground YH.
Appropriations for this all
important.
Mr speaker and gentleman we will
still need to aggregate those
technical signals on the ground
to deliver to homes and people.
Mr speaker in some places.
Yeah Mr speaker and generally
I'm.
I'm not sure maybe.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
is no action assurance that that
will cover all of that areas
because we have desolate areas
and complicated toproperties.
The speaker and gentle lady
I appreciate those those answers
are I think the when you think
about the thousands of
satellites will be up there I
don't think the desolate areas
will be a problem all one needs
to do is buy a little bit
shorter additional work to
ensure.
And install it on our.
Home or land and you'll have
access.
Speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
one of the great options that
will become a result of this
office.
Yeah so I I think that's I think
that's right because I want to
support this legislation I want
to say that it's important it's
going to be meaningful.
I know that starlink is really
gonna be useful in rural areas
but in urban.
There is it's not as useful
still need I need internet and
that all still need brought to
you
thankfully most of our urban
areas already have a good
backbone.
But.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think will still need to be
broadband development mostly in
urban areas will this help and
and urban areas as well.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
that is the beauty of having
this coordinated office.
Yes so Mister Joey I and and
senator I just I think this is a
good idea I don't think it's
obsolete but I really believe in
the next two years the focus is
going to change dramatically.
Thank you Mr speaker and as we
move forward and continue to
develop the focus of this office
will change.
That must be gradually are I
appreciate your help thank you
hi I look forward to supporting
the bill and I'm looking forward
to this dramatic change in two
years.
and I appreciate that this group
will be dynamic be able to adapt
to those changes thank you Mr
speaker.
There is for the great
gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative you got a lot.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady yield.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker I am
excited to see this legislation
on the floor of our house
gentlelady meet Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
What is the problem that this
legislation is going to address
what is the obstacle for the
state of New Mexico in getting
internet connectivity to every
corner of our state.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
economic development telehealth
and distance learning are the
major goals that we would like
to address with this office.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady yes those are
the reasons we need to get every
corner of the state elected the
connectivity well is the late.
We need access to telehealth in
every corner we know our
educational system needs access.
And the places that need
economic development the most
are the places that have our
least connectivity outside of
our populated area.
Nearly
forty to fifty percent of the
population does not have
reliable internet access
that's simply not acceptable Mr
speaker and gentle lady I'm
gonna rephrase my question a
little bit.
Why why does internet
connectivity not reach every
corner of the state is New
Mexico what are the problems in
our particular state that keep
us or have kept us from reaching
that goal up to this time.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
would be the did the the
difficulty use or the lack of
efficiency of money and the
difficult topography and rural
areas.
And the coordination of this
project.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady.
Yes I agree money is always an
issue.
And Poverty.
The discography is what makes
New Mexico beautiful that's our
strength but when it comes to
internet connectivity makes it
difficult.
It is the third one and that
makes me really appreciate this
piece of legislation you are
bringing before the house Mr
speaker and gentle lady a piece
of legislation that is long
overdue that brings together
under one office and won broa
all of the standard and
piecemeal hi Pogge internet
search of the state of New
Mexico that are happening in the
cultural affairs department the
public school finance authority
and inside do it inside economic
development.
Everybody has broadband projects
happening and no one has the
over arching plan so the beauty
of this legislation Mr speaker
and gentle lady is that it's
coming under one arching
umbrella.
That will pull all of these
efforts together and coordinate
them sh according to a plane as
strategy to reach and make sure
that the twenty percent across
the state who are unconnected.
Com connected that we focus on
the rural areas and to bring.
In two connectivity.
I'm I really.
Can't.
Emphasize enough what a
difference that is going to make
to broadband development across
the state.
We'll be able to Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Minimize duplication and waste
be more efficient with the
dollars that we have we'll be
able to leverage the assets that
the state has Mr speaker and
gentle lady I believe in your
legislation it says you're gonna
hold the information about where
we are connected as a state and
information about where we have
announcements.
Information about federal and
state funding that's available
so that all of it is in one
place.
And can be accessed and
leveraged to build out the
infrastructure where we need.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
would also highlights page five
section G..
A crucial element.
One of the other obstacles in
reaching our unconnected spaces
has been in small rural.
Corporate it perhaps areas.
There isn't the technical
expertise to write a federal
grant and pull down a few
million dollars.
The federal monies available.
The rural areas needed to.
This office is going to supply
the technical expertise section
G. gives them that mandate
technical expertise and support
to those areas to draw down that
federal money.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
just rise to stand in support of
this legislation tonight thank
you for caring it's.
I appreciate it and I look
forward to seeing broadband to
move forward in New Mexico.
Mr speaker I yield.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from some of all
Representative Powdell Culbert.
This will be generating yield
the right.
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady Mr speaker gentle lady and.
I have a couple questions you
know I was from the very start
you know
Committee and we look at the way
spaceport America develop.
Time and I think still spaceport
America is still one of the do
you introduce and this.
That have.
Told me no I don't have the dark
stars
because when we talk about there
is.
This call spoke part when you
have all these little companies
that run along the the
Way for lack of a better word so
legislation and I think about
again I broke last night the
money this is been put out
there.
We'll also be able to both
throughout our communities and
really pull together all the
existing fiber and utilizes.
We will help extend much
further.
Reach out of the dollars.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady yes that will be item as
deliverable number four which
will negotiate rights of ways an
easement access and this central
repository.
And then the reporting and
analysis.
Telling us where it is.
Okay.
Mr speaker generating I'm not
going to Los Alamos lab said it
has brought the fiber down to
the bottom of the so are you all
going to be coordinating with
the centerpiece of already live
Los Alamos.
Already.
The fiber.
And do you think these
individuals will be able to
Existing fiber.
With less cost because it's
already in place.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes
that is an excellent example of
what this office will be
producing.
Okay.
Speaker Mr speaker generating.
I see on page three that you
have under G..
Joint powers agreements with
County municipalities and.
The different public entities.
Rob and I are to your knowledge
already in these are areas and
all it needs is going to have to
go in and.
Come up with agreements to
utilize the existing.
Mr speaker and gentleman maybe
yes and this new office will
help you apply for those
projects.
Looting Mr speaker and gentle
lady including easements and
rights of ways.
Is not roads was the.
The lady Mr speaker.
Thank you very much the lady
there is further debate the
gentleman from Dona Ana grant in
Seattle Representative that are.
Thank you Mr speaker.
sorry I was being which is let's
see here we're the only
piecemeal.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman thank you Mr speaker
sorry I was busy reading trying
to keep up your
The lady I just want to thank
you for this legislation
in my district.
I have an area
several areas but one in
particular that the children
there are the parents that it's
in a just part of the district
where ninety percent of the
people are.
Under the poverty level and so
the parents of get your money
together and so the kids can
have internet for school so
these kids were literally
patchwork.
All the money together so they
can get that kids would get
together to go to one household
and that's what it would that's
where they would study.
So sad to hear stuff like that I
heard it in different places all
over my district and it was it
was built very I mean it was
very concerning to me.
In my little town
I have one of my businesses
rights outside of schools or
city Santa Clara.
School kids out there in the
parking lot.
Little kids are out there
alright so they can get wifi so
they can go to schools the
strangest thing see it can
outside injured in a car is
parked outside the school
attending school.
So I'm very very.
Thankful that you guys are that
you're working on on this
legislation.
Because there's a lot of parts
in rural New Mexico the
definitely this is one of those
examples of how different urban
and rural districts how we live
we live in different areas have
different needs and this is one
of the big ones.
So I I want to tell you it's
it's even even myself well Mr
speaker gentle lady in my area.
In my own business I have I try
to get cable internet.
It literally did not have the
strength to sustain my mic my
net connection.
We have the try two or three
different satellites to get the
the internet that was needed.
that my other business I have to
get I have to get cable cable
internet and satellite to
sustain the internet use their
so this is a very
it's very much needed and so I
just want to thank you the
gentle lady and I want to thank
the senator for for previous
legislation I've told you guys I
think in the hall of it was
very.
Use the ask about supporting
this this legislation and I
really really appreciate it I
can't tell you
how much I appreciate that so I
just have a quick question so
it's a statistic I.
Is it can can you tell me of a
time line of how long you feel
that this once these I I know
this increases how many people
is it going to affect and how
long do you think it'll take to
make this a reality that will be
able to see the the the impact
of this legislation.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
need is still one point three
billion dollars.
For the state and we currently
have one hundred and thirty
three million dollars invested.
So we're still out one billion
dollars and we're able.
And we're gonna be able to
leverage one.
One hundred and thirty three
million.
And it will take about one to
five years.
Mr speaker gentle lady you know
what you know I know that that
sounds like we're we're just
making a step and you know it's
a step in the right direction
it's a wonderful thing and
anytime we can do that bring
your state up to par with all
the other states I I I
definitely on supported and of
course you know seen those
images of of the children
outside the schools I'm hearing
from superintendents and and
some of those disks and some
parts of my district saying that
we have children doing what I
was just describing earlier
definitely I appreciate it very
much thank you so much for we're
doing this for us that bless
you.
Thank you gentleman there is
further debate the gentleman
from Lee Representative Scott
thank you Mr religion lady from.
It would help Mr speaker I yield
to the gentleman.
Speaker gentle lady our state.
Well more sure leading.
Appropriations one time money.
Is that.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes you
are correct so Mr speaker and
gentle lady search.
Would support the bill down to
planning and build out of the
systems but not necessarily a
long term operations and
maintenance is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
will be private dollars invested
and the one hundred and thirty
three million will be invested
and leveraged with the one
billion in federal funding.
So.
Mr Chairman wedding will be
responsible for the ownership.
Operation and maintenance of the
systems once again.
Excuse me debate up and running.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
will be at a number of public
private.
Individuals who will manage.
To keep it current.
Mr chair waiting for those.
A private entities anticipated
debate folks already in that
business or we start over again
from scratch.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes you
are correct that is very
possible.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
very much for your actions are
would.
So.
The gentleman from Sandoval's
comments about the pace of this
technology.
And I would certainly have to
carry.
For this are planning and build
out group.
To look down the road.
Across the services or short
white.
Going to get illustrious and
less expensive as the technology
improves thank you.
Thank you John would ranchers.
Thank you very much downturn
there's further debate the
gentle lady from graphic novel
in the state are.
Representative that thank you Mr
speaker will the gentle lady
please yield Mister speaker I
yield to the gentle lady thank
you Mr speaker and gentle lady
and in the beginning when we
were asking about the image that
total the total amount of money
we're investing in broadband I
thought I heard anything.
And fifty or sixty million how
much is that was coming from the
reverted school reform Fund.
Mr speaker and gentle lady would
you please explain for their Mr
speaker and gentle lady when the
Senate Bill came over it hard I
saw at a hundred and ten million
dollars for broadband that was
coming out of the P. E. the
school reform Fund is what it
said and so I was it just
sounded like that was in
addition to the other funds are
being appropriated.
Mr speaker and gentle lady we
are not aware of that and I
believe that is part of that HB
our bill.
The fund that's going to be put
together Mr speaker and gentle
lady thank you Mr speaker and on
I'm I'm surprised that you're
not aware that I was I I it just
caught my attention because I
have been watching how that
school reform Fund was growing
and so when I see an expenditure
coming out of it because parks
my attention so it was pretty
substantial I thought was like a
hundred million thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman.
And then I would is there an
actual F. T. E. being hired to
oversee this work Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady The
appropriation was taken out.
And.
In lieu of re purposing.
Head count from do it.
So there's no additional cost
thank thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentle lady but it's
it's so it's in the budget or
they're going to fill a vacancy
with this position Mr speaker
telling.
Mr speaker gentle lady they were
re purpose vacancies thank you
Mr speaker gentle lady and is
there sufficient office space
and capacity to house them
without additional these or that
additional cost Mr speaker
gentle lady yes thank you Mr
speaker thank you already and I
do I do want to commend your
cosponsor as well as you for all
your work on this and when you
mentioned that we are billion
dollar shortage of addressing
the broadband need in New Mexico
is most of that need in rural
areas or we're we're items gaps.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Primarily rural.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady and I am by no
means an expert on these areas
and I I know you're expert
witness is I just happen to live
in Sierra County the home was
spaceport America and it is a
very very interesting to see all
these emerging space companies
that are investing and in five
G. technology and and
I I don't I'd like to hear I
mean I know we're not hitting
the whole billion but technology
is obsolete so quickly and so
these emerging technology can
you explain to me what I
understand is that as technology
progresses that the need for
broadband is not diminished in
densely populated areas but it
does become less necessary in
rural areas when we try to her
transition to other technologies
like you know we need it for
cell towers we needed for urban
areas that will be able to
transition into wireless
communications and provide
additional Brandt Dan what's
that are needed to satellites
and Mr speaker gentle you can
you can you explain that to me
do you think we were really need
a billion dollars would be able
to make different types of
investments satellites as we
move forward.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady that is certainly a
possibility and the reason for
this office is to be proactive
and think down the road about
those types of projects thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady we had a bill I can
remember I think about it
yesterday that was solar it was
a singularly focused on solar
credits for solar energy and
some of the body brought up
other really innovative emerging
renewable energies and so do you
believe Mr speaker and gentle
lady that this bill was brought
up that as technology advances
that we can be innovative and we
can and we can at and that's the
way that's needed.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes
that is absolutely correct and
with the map we will be able to
see where we need to expand and
where we are efficient and plan
in those efforts thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady the way
that I read it the maps are to
decide where there's no
broadband service but what if
there is a emerging technology
or different service that would
be more appropriate and
broadband.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes that
is always possible okay thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady I I I got I have the
privilege of visiting spaceport
and there's a really cool
company called environments and
they had a nondisclosure
agreement but now they've gone
public because their research
development has been pretty
successful out at spaceport
America it's a three hundred
foot basically a glider that the
weavings are covered in solar
panels and they were sub orbital
and the recharge by the solar
energy and and they glide glides
in sub orbital it well what it
is supports I need and it
projects I need help just
project that I need with the
additional bandwidth for a two
hundred mile radius that is
pretty cool Mr speaker and
gentle lady I I are you familiar
with that development out of
space for American.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes
football sized drones very
speedy thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady I I just I
think it's it's a reporting by
that Mr speaker and gentle lady
what are you most looking
forward to over the next year
when your bill passes.
What do you think the the
coolest thing is going to happen
with this plus the other
appropriation of these landmark
built in the past what should
New Mexicans expect to see as a
result of this Mr speaker and
gentle lady extreme focus of
development in rural New Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady and thank you
senator expert witness for your
time this evening.
Thank you very much the only
thing no further debate gentle
lady to close Mr speaker I move
would you pass on Senate bill
ninety three twice amended we're
on passage of Senate bill ninety
three as price and number the
vote is now open.
Thirty seconds.
More like trying portion of the
vote is now closed where the
remaining members.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Cook.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
yes.
Representative ended up.
Representative hope yes.
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Robin Hood yes.
Representative Andrea Romero.
Representative cut us off.
By a vote of sixty one in the
affirmative four in the negative
Senate bill ninety three as by
amended has duly passed the
order.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objections so.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker it now being eleven
fifty nine AM I move we adjourn
until twelve OO one PM the house
will come to order Mr speaker I
ask unanimous consent that the
rules be suspended and that the
journal show all those present
in this morning session are
present in this afternoon
session if there's no objection
it is so ordered Mr speaker I
ask unanimous consent that the
rules be suspended and that the
record show that has been
reading for rural subject to the
approval of the rules and out of
business committee.
If there's no objection it is so
ordered.
Eleven fifty nine AM I move with
Jenna ten twelve oh one PM house
will come to order
yes.
Consent that the rules be
suspended and that the General
Joe.
This morning session are present
in.
There is no objection it is so
ordered.
I ask unanimous consent that the
rules be suspended.
The record show that the general
has been read in full.
Subject.
One of the rules of the business
committee if there is no
objection it is so ordered.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
messages no objections so
ordered.
Click to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the do we
enrolled in gross copies of
house bill forty one house bill
forty three admitted house bill
sixty seven house bill one sixty
eight house bill one eighty five
House Bill to twelve House Bill
to twenty four how state
government elections Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill to fifty as amended
house bill two seventy one have
been read in full and signed by
the officers of the Senate in
open session and we turn same
here with respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk message will be
answered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Education Committee
substitute for House right
resolution one as amended by the
Senate and request the
concurrence of the house and
Senate amendments respectfully
submitted Lenore and Lara host
Senate chief clerk.
Message will be answered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed house bill one well as
amended by the house.
House bill one seventy eight.
House bill one eighty eight
amended by the house House Bill
to sixty one as amended by the
house house bill two seventy
seven as amended by the house
and returned same here with
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
message will be and.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business.
Reading of legislation no
objections so ordered.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
are you ready on that on item
sixty four.
Yes Mr speaker I am.
If you would get me to that
point.
Let the record for.
Let the record reflect.
That all action necessary for
placing Senate bill three
seventeen on final passage has
been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment for
substitution gentlelady to
explain about.
Thank you Mr speaker
House Bill three seventeen our
removes all costsharing for
behavioral health services
Behavioral health is one of our
most critical issues in New
Mexico substance use disorder
another behavioral health issues
as as this body knows behavior
health services have been
within working to rebuild them
but Mr speaker and and body the.
When you have behavioral health
issues that are not addressed.
Your
Use of health care emergency
room hospitalizations is
significantly increased as well
as are your chronic health
conditions are significantly
worse if you behavioral health
issues are not addressed and are
costsharing on behavioral health
is a significant barrier for
people seeking behavioral health
services and maintaining them.
And there are a number of
studies that show that if you
find behavioral health services
that consistently that you save
money on ER visits
hospitalizations and the costs
associated with chronic disease
there are and there's at least
one insurance company in New
Mexico that has done this
already and
does not to costsharing on any
behavioral health service and
the cost of cost savings have
been realized from that in the
ways that I described so this
bill proposes to remove
costsharing from
Large and small group us
the state employees the I. back
as well as
individual plans and of Medicaid
of course there's not any
costsharing already and it has
no jurisdiction we have no
jurisdiction over Medicare or
federal employees or self
insured plans other than the
state the state plans a public
employee plans are so that's
what this bill does and
Mr speaker I also have an
amendment when you're ready for
that.
Thank you gentle lady can you
please read that road to number
for that amendment sure the two
oh two number is two two zero
nine seven five point two.
Thank you gentle lady gentle
lady to move the amendment.
Yes I noticed I move the
amendment.
As the chair that gentle lady
has moved house floor amendment
number one to.
Senate bill three seventeen.
Gentlelady to explain the
amount.
Thank you Mr speaker
this amendment amends of the.
equivalent of executive
privilege of house bill one
twenty two that moved out of the
house passed the house a couple
of weeks ago which creates the
health care affordability fund.
So it was that C.
the increase surtax to insurance
companies to create an
affordability fund to
be able to provide assistance to
individuals on the exchange and
small businesses to afford their
health insurance.
With that
Mr speaker I stand for questions
thank you gentle lady has moved
the amendment gentlelady has
explained the amendment Is there
debate on the amendment
gentlelady from graphic novels
and.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield I'll gladly
yield to the gentle lady thank
you Mr speaker gentle lady and
why is why is it necessary to
make this amendment to this
bill.
This evening.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think this is a really a
critical built it goes to the
affordability of health care and
it was on not heard in the
Senate.
Mr speaker I'm adding it to this
one.
Thank you Mr speaker internally
and it wasn't hard at all in the
Senate no no Mr speaker gentle
lady now.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so then with this amendment
and this bill will have to go
back for concurrence.
Mr speaker gentle lady that's
correct.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and so you're putting the.
If I remember correctly this is
the
The surcharge of which I
introduced an amendment to
eliminate the the imposition of
a cost on small businesses that
correct Mr speaker generating Mr
speaker and gentle lady if my
memory is not completely shut at
this point I believe that's
true.
You Mr speaker and gentle lady I
I concur with that I'm I'm
thinking it's the same bills and
and so Mister speaker gentle
lady did you include small
businesses in this
US three percent increase in
that search hard the surtax on
the premiums did you exempt
small businesses are they also
included in this ammendment Mr
speaker and gentle lady this is
exactly as it left the house.
So it's it's a it's a surtax to
the insurance carriers not to
businesses and part of our
intent on using the frontier if
you recall Mr speaker and gentle
lady is to offer
assistance to small businesses
so that there are they can
their premiums are more
affordable thank you Mr speaker
and thank you gentle lady to
offer assistance to small
businesses that small businesses
have been asked for Mr speaker
JD the small businesses import
us to exempt them from the bill
and not supposed to cost on them
as they try to recover from
COVID and Mr speaker and gentle
lady so as before I would
encourage your bill thank you.
Reserve Rudy made on you gentle
lady from
from Catherine and support.
Mmhm thank you Mr speaker order
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield
Mr speaker I gladly I yield to
the gentle lady from can't turn.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so it looks like you're
amending the whole title of this
our house the Senate bill three
seventeen is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady to
add on the details from the
title of of what was house bill
one twenty two.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
I
I don't really have a question
on the amendment Mr speaker but
I'm I'm just concerned about
doing.
Doing something like this.
to a bill Senate bill three
seventeen that came through the
house health committee the other
bill that you're amending it
into it came to the house
committee.
And we tossed
that they both passed out
separately I'm concerned about
doing this process I'm I know
Madam Mr speaker and gentle lady
that you probably know the
process better than I but I I'm
concerned about doing.
Legislating this way in the
house Mr speaker kind lady
To.
Very controversial bills being
combined in my opinion
that are not helpful.
In my opinion to the state of
New Mexico in the crisis that
they're in right now and I I
cannot support your amendment
that it's just very concerning
to me Mr speaker and currently
thank you.
Thank you John lady there part
of the bank number San Juan
Representative Eli.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman from Bernalillo kindly
yield Mister speaker I kindly
yield to the gentleman from San
Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
don't gentle lady from
Bernalillo seems like we're
always discussing math topics
after nine PM I apologize if you
have questions about that
subject so
the way I and I'm trying to
understand the minutes as a
religion online bill where
understand online bill Mr
speaker gentlelady from
Bernalillo the purpose is to
make our.
Behavior health services more
accessible.
To the public by over time
phasing out the requirements for
copays co chair and those kind
of things that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman both
speak to affordability the
underlying bills affordability
of behavioral health
specifically and the amendment
is B. as affordability overall.
With costsharing and and
premiums.
Mr speaker agility from
Bernalillo so does this house
floor member number one to
Senate bill three seventeen does
it speak to behavioral health
services.
Mr speaker and gentleman it not
specifically to behavioral
health but to health care health
coverage overall so it also
touches the eight as the same
individual and and small group
of coverage.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
And I like you I I have slept
many times since this original
Bill and I don't remember what
the House Bill number was if the
gentleman could recollect for me
Mr speaker and gentleman it was
house bill one twenty two.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo thank you for that
and I I am trying to dust off
the recesses of my mind but want
to think back on H. B. one
twenty two.
It it was adding a the.
Surtax on to the surgeon
premiums is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman it was
all replacing of federal C..
To insurance companies that went
away this year with an
additional surtax is that so
essentially equivalent.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so so it's a surtax
on whatever the my monthly
premium would be is that correct
whatever that premium amount is
and any that may be split
between employer employee but.
One of the total premium is work
what time of surtax on that
monthly premium is that correct
Mr speaker and gentleman what's
important to remember and and I
apologize it does what's been
frustrating it's been a couple
of weeks since we've heard this
bill in the house is that a
Medicaid actually pays for on
ninety percent of this because
By the time we have it's also to
the Medicaid MCO is and then
it's eligible for match and so
on the vast vast majority of
this program is is funded by
Medicaid and federal match and
then about ten percent of the of
the cost actually goes to to the
private carriers and that is
part of their cost of doing
business that make it spread.
across their book of business if
they can show that they need a
premium increase because of the
US thank because there it's not
a straight
passed through tax accept
Medicaid is straight through
into their rates but for other
for private insurance it is not
a straight pass through and by
doing this and making insurance
more affordable more people will
be insured and so if there will
be a larger pool of people the
insurance companies will have
more enrollees and so state this
increase
costs to them on on this will be
spread over more people as well
more premiums business if you
will and so it's not a straight
pastor attacks.
Mr speaker gentlelady from
Bernalillo I I appreciate the
they expelled answer because of
the soft on some of the gaps for
me.
Does this amendment this version
of HB one twenty two does it
also added surtax on to public
employees helping pro health
insurance premiums.
I'm Mr speaker and and gentleman
no.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
can you explain to me why that
is is is that the state
employees have a completely
different system more or why
would we tax the private
taxpayers but not the public
employee taxpayers.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
state employees are a self
insured plans so we don't have
authority over self insured plan
and we didn't add specifically
added and the.
Does employees to
to do that but but Mr speaker
and gentleman let me just double
triple check with my experts and
for the body to know my experts
are secretary Scrase
superintendent till and
secretary Schardin Clarke and
for Senate bill three seventeen
Senator Martin Hickey hold on
just a moment thank you
generally please take the time.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
that's true or not
it's not on state employees.
No self insured plan.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo I didn't realize
that all.
I guess state local government.
And County.
and I just school districts
they're all self insured.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
they are.
Mr speaker gentle lady in and
I'm I I recall you use the word
forty so is there something
within our statutory scheme that
doesn't allow.
Us to tax self insured type
goals.
Mr speaker and gentleman federal
law
these are called the risks of
plans self insured plans we
can't we have the superintendent
has no authority over those and
we have
we have limited authority over
it yes
public employees because those
are our public employees and we
can we can dictate what those
plans are but the US the state
pays those pesos claims as
opposed to being a premium
business sense that self insured
we did not include
public employees in the US
they're not currently taxed so
Mr speaker and gentleman maybe
another way to explain this and
replacing this fee that was
imposed under the affordable
Care Act we are applying it to
the same insure types which did
not include self insured plans.
In New Mexico and we're doing it
by adding to a surtax that was
already in existence so that
it's easy to administer we just
change the percentage of that
tax but that's a tax is not we
don't tax ourselves on public
employee on plans if that makes
sense.
Mr speaker gently from
Bernalillo burn the that does
make sense I appreciate the
explanation.
And I'm looking through the
paragraphs and I.
I apologize seven pages not just
got the equipment and I don't
fault you for that I will assess
the process through which we.
We operate but I also recall
there was
I recall there being some
breakdown percentages about
a certain percentage in certain
years ago went to I think it was
maybe call was the patients.
Protection for repair Fund sound
familiar.
But generally you're muted Oakes
going backwards I'm trying to do
my and apologies Mr speaker and
gentleman it's the affordable
Care fund
in the portability Fund I'm
sorry health care affordability
fund and yes
the the tax will start in
January because it's tied to
calendar years which is
insurance plan years will start
in January of twenty two.
And
And then the the program for
providing assistance won't start
until January of twenty three
but they the tax that is
collected it is split between
the affordability fund and the
general fund.
So because we'll be halfway
through fiscal year when
when we start collecting the tax
it will be
less in the first fiscal year
but I think fifty two percent
split to the fund in the first
fiscal year and then it goes to
fifty five percent.
And and then in the year after
that it goes to thirty percent
of the fund and seventy percent.
To the general fund
to kind of that kind of balances
out that front loading if you
will of the first year and and
by then we will have enough
information an actuarial
analysis of how on the uptake is
how much how we're spending the
money what the phone looks like
and can then
the legislature can decide what
the split is after that.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
for that and would you mind just
show me
I'm trying to find where in the
amendment that breakdown of
years of percentages are to be
helpful to me as we're
discussing this sure Mr speaker
and gentleman just at the bottom
of the first page.
And the top of the second page.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo Casey that now the
section one subparagraph eighty
that's the first time rate of
fifty two percent is that
correct
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Mr speaker gently and then I see
continuing so programs B. and
C..
Now we keep referencing the.
The patient protection and
affordable Care.
Fund what does that frontier
actually do.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
fund is going to be used to help
a subsidized premiums and cost
sharing for low income
individuals on the health
insurance exchange.
And then we're going to develop
a program to offer our
reinsurance to small businesses
and it and then there's a
possibilities of doing other
programs but we will have to for
all of this the legislature
appropriate so we will have to
present a plan each fall for how
it's going to be used so it
could be put in the budget for
appropriation
so this legislation just gives a
general authority of what the
plan can be used for but the
legislature has to appropriate
and I guess responsibility to
the office of the superintendent
to develop those plans and to
provide actuarial analysis and
report back to
the LFC and and the legislature
and it also requires in here
that LFC actually do a program
evaluation I think in fiscal
year twenty five if I'm not
mistaken.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and so on that that
issue of reporting back and and
while also is.
What what is it that we're
asking all see to do with the
data that they do receives.
Mr speaker and gentleman to to
make sure that were
appropriately using the frontier
and to be able to approve the
plans that we put forward about
how we're going to use that to
make sure that that's
actuarially sound and that we
are achieving goals of
enrollment and
expanding our our coverage in
New Mexico and decreasing our
uninsured rate.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so when we talk about
actuarially sound
and I'm glad I could actually we
are to do with that we're we're
almost at the ten o'clock hour
action where we is not.
Something
lasted used everyday so but I
assume what we're getting at is
I for example page through
amendment in on July one of
twenty four.
The percentage of this tax
that'll be going into the
sponsor describing we'll go down
to thirty percent seventy
percent will be going to the
general fund so I soon will be
part of that houses will be okay
now we're at thirty percent we
were previously.
as far as I it is thirty enough
to cover the cost of the phone
is that what what they will be
assessing.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo if.
If they do that analysis and
they determined that thirty
percent is not high enough what
what would we as a legislature
be required to do.
Mr speaker and gentleman and
this act.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so whatever I I
assumed they would they would
say you in order for this.
Fund to remain in the black or
at least break even you need to
bring it up to say thirty eight
so whatever whatever the data
actually shows is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes or
they could tell us we need to
speak you know we need to scale
back the program and can't offer
as much assistance so I think it
could go either way.
Mr speaker Mr speaker journaling
from Bernalillo carefully almost
almost on I can certainly talk
about maybe drop in taxes that
are but as I understand our
current law it the as it stands
right now this bill doesn't pass
a budget current.
Surtax is currently at one
percent.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Mr speaker gentle lady the what
this amendment then would do is
take it from one percent to.
I'm looking at the number here
three point seven five percent
is that correct Mr speaker John
yes.
And Mr speaker gentle lady
why the why the jump from the
one to three point seven five.
Mr speaker and gentleman of the
US federal of state it was a
quick want to honor two point
seven five to three percent it
was a fee not I
not as tax so we we took two
point seven five as as the
number
that would be a pretty
equivalent to of the state that
had been applied federally
that's now gone.
Mr speaker gentle lady one when
I was that federal she removed.
Mr speaker and gentleman
that C. stopped this year.
Mr speaker gentle lady so.
January one I'm just I'm just
trying to figure out if
You know for our our private
insurance folks if they saw a
decline in their monthly
premium.
And then they're going to see an
increase in their monthly
premium or if they're just going
to see a flat rate because these
two of.
Taxes and fees come in at the
same time.
Mr speaker and gentleman it they
did see some decrease actually
there some more than that
decreased because at a decrease
in medical terms of so and there
could be a slight bump on next
year but again that depends on
what their medical trends where
this year and what how much
enrollment is anticipated so
that they can can figure out
what those premiums need to be
there is a lot of factors that
go into establishing of the
premiums and this would be one
of them but again it's not a
straight are passed through tax
so are you not won't necessarily
see and equivalent increase in
premium Mr speaker and gentleman
the other thing that I will tell
you is that if the carriers are
increased their rates and they
have to get those rates approved
by the superintendent of
insurance to does their own
actuarial analysis and
negotiates those rates.
But should those rates be higher
than what they need to pay the
medical costs that they have
during the year they have to
refund part of those premiums
because they have to
it's called the medical loss
ratio yeah so
it's how much of the premium has
to be used for direct service
for the individual direct care
and depending on the kind of
planets eighty to eighty five
percent.
And if they don't spend that
much they have to respond part
of the premium.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
Eight again the details so for
me who does not have a medical
background and and I think an
important part of this amendment
as I recall from our discussion.
On house bill one twenty two.
Is on page three of this
amendments.
There's a new paragraph F. as in
Frank.
And Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo would you just
explain to the body what this
program does.
Mr speaker and and gentleman of
this was
I added on in negotiation and
conversations with the carriers
who were concerns that
potentially the
the federal government could we
decide to reimpose R. O. C..
And so this is just a in case
they do.
And it's are for the same or
similar of purposes and to the
same type carriers that we would
just the see on our and
accordingly so there's there is
currently to my knowledge no
talk of reinstituting SB.
And yes there were we wouldn't
know when and we wouldn't know
how much this was
part of the affordable Care Act
that that that pieces was
repealed and us
yes is no longer happening so
this is just a just in case to
assure everyone it's not our
intent to double tax should the
federal government decide that
that was a really nifty way to
raise funds and they decide to
re impose it then we will adjust
accordingly.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
really I appreciate the.
Caution in the way I read the
language in here I noticed that
use the word shall.
so I take that to mean we
wouldn't have to reconvene the
body if the feds change their
mind we would have to reconvene
the body to try to get a bill
passed signed by the governor
did reduce this tax is that
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
of that's exactly correct.
And Mr speaker gentle lady you
you referenced the federal
formal Care Act.
So I assume that.
Either they're producing
charging was established by
statute not more regulation.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes I
believe so.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo in.
We talked about the issue of not
double taxing.
but I I do know one thing of
concern though is that this says
that the.
Yeah look on page four the
second line of the surtax.
You'll not be less than one
percent is that correct
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
because that's in existence now
so we're not going to we
wouldn't go down less than what
we already had in existence.
Mr speaker gentle lady
so it's possible that the Feds
could transmontaigne go back to
the three point seven five.
And the New Mexico would have
the one so then we would be at
four point seven five is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman at the
Feds decide to do it they do
that directly it doesn't it's
not collected by the state.
We would go back to our pre
existing long existing one
percent surtax.
Mr generated so I guess I didn't
understand that point when you
say long existing one percent
how long is that taxed post.
Mr speaker a gentleman let me
check with with secretary
Schardin Clarke.
Hold on just a second.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
secretary's gonna check but it's
been well more than a decade.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
so
I am curious when when you do
get answered for **** that
but I think my initial fear
though was we were just we were
basically at zero the fed's rate
three point seven five.
And we're gonna come down to one
the Feds be at three point seven
five so our private consumers
would be at four point seven
five but it sounds like that's
not the case is that correct
that's correct Mr speaker and
gentleman the the feds were it
at about between two point seven
five and three so we added two
point seven five to our existing
one to make it a total of three
point seven five.
Thank you Mr speaker I
appreciate the clarification
gentlelady from Bernalillo I'd I
do think this is a good.
Paragraphs that's added on and
Mr speaker gentle lady.
When we talk about house bill
one twenty two.
Was there anything in one twenty
two that's not in this amendment
to make sure I'm not missing
anything.
Mr speaker and a gentleman no I
I had them bring it to create
the the amendment was exactly as
it left the house so all the
amendments that we put in in the
house I in House Appropriations
and on the floor.
Mr speaker generated thank you
for the clarification I know
there's others that want to ask
questions and I'm sure your
favorite thing is not to be
asked questions by me but
there's just one.
One subject area that I'd I
really didn't get my hands
around last time and so I'm
hoping that I will be able to do
it this time and that is this
idea of.
How adding the surtax on to
existing small business plans.
That how that help some old when
I know you had a response but it
quite fall if you could explain
it to you.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I I live and breathe
health insurance for the more
than a decade so I I apologize
if I
am not explaining it well enough
but the more people that you
have insured it creating what's
called your risk pool so more
people you have to spread that
risk so the smaller group you
have the more volatile it is so
for instance if you have a small
group of say ten employed ten
twenty employees and you get one
employee that has a really
expensive conditions so you get
employed that gets sick and
needs a liver transplant.
that one employee and their
medical costs is borne by the
group and it drives everybody's
premium up.
If you have a group of a hundred
or five hundred.
Sen and in the exchange we've
got currently a group of about
forty five thousand thank you
can have at a case like that and
it won't create much of a ripple
across the entire group.
So the more people you have
insured.
More stable your premiums are
and so what I was saying about
this increase.
Are in Sir taxed out one at a
very small part of this program
actually goes to the private
market individual or group.
And
because most is picked up by
Medicaid through the state share
or federal match but
by making insurance more
affordable which would that's
what the intent of using the
fund is is to create ought to
help subsidize the cost of
premiums and the really high
deductibles that we see.
R. more people will get insured
because they can afford it and
they'll stay insured because
they can afford it so you have a
larger pool of people across
which to spread any risk and
stabilize your premiums so in
the end in the small group
market what we are intending to
do is creating a reinsurance
program and what re insurance
does is it picks up your out
liars that liver transplant K.
for instance so that your
small group can state stable in
their premiums because you don't
have one or two really sick
people drive up premiums for the
whole group so what we're hoping
to do what we're planning to do
is to offer a reinsurance
program that picks up those
hi wire costs to stabilize the
small group market that's what
it looks like it kind of in the
end so this increase in tax that
is.
That were imposing is not a
straight across the board.
Increase to a premium it doesn't
work its way as a straight three
point seven five or two point
seven five percent increase in
premiums you have to it but as
part of the whole in considering
what the cost of doing business
is and your medic and your
medical claims etcetera and how
big your pool of insured is and
so it's not
we think that that by doing this
will actually drive down premium
costs and costsharing in both
the individual and small group
market.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
I I think I tried almost all
that need and you're doing a
very good job of explaining the
I think the breakdown is not and
your inability explained but
just my I'm familiar with this
area
The I think the piece that
didn't quite sink for me though
is.
it seems like the winch premises
we need to get more people into
the insured pool that therefore
spreads the risk.
And representative in our lives
like the gentle lady proposed
about if you have a liver
treatment for example when you
only have ten people and not
that cool everybodys premiums
going up.
That concept makes sense to me
But I think the more I'm having
a hard time connecting the dots
is.
How adding this surtax on to the
premiums.
Is it going to cause people to
drop out of.
The health insurance pool can
you help me with that.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
thank you so it's how we're
going to use the funds that we
generate so that this a tax of
Mr speaker and gentleman will
generate about a hundred and
fifty eight million dollars news
new dollars into the state
annually.
About a hundred million of that
are a little more will go into
this affordability fund and with
that fund we will help subsidize
of premiums and cost sharing for
individuals
who are purchasing insurance and
that to make it more affordable
for them and because it's more
affordable they will state
insured and we have still a
significant uninsured population
in we've got a number of studies
that show that the when you
decrease the price of our
premiums for the cost sharing
you more people get insured and
we are anticipating that that
the size of our health insurance
exchange which is the mechanism
to sell insurance to individuals
will
grow by fifty two or even a
hundred percent it might even
double in size so we can touch a
lot of lives get them insured
and make a significant change in
that responsibility people over
which that risk is spread and
which will Vigil and it will
also then have the effect of
of the secondary effect maybe us
less strain on our indigent
funds and uncompensated care
yeah and our hospitals.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
for that clarification that
certainly helps.
Now with the is when we talk
about the the small business
plans that that could be
eligible
And I'm sorry I forgot the
terminologies of bait in my mind
is almost kind of a rebate but I
know that's not the right term
what's the what's the term Mr
speaker and gentleman just
called reinsurance.
It's insurance on insurance.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
it's almost like we're at The
Twilight Zone of deja talked
about this a few times now we're
talking about insurance upon
insurance so the reinsurance
plan does that only apply to to
my small business plan and I
happened to buy that off of the
experience.
Mr speaker and gentleman this is
a at an idea that we use we
still have to fully fleshed out
and and put it together we were
hoping that we can offer it to
to any small business plan and
small business in New Mexico is
defined as fifty or under and
number of employees.
And so we're hoping not just on
the exchange but that we have to
we have to put together a plan.
Mr speaker gentle lady so when
you say
we are you talk about the
superintendent insurance through
rulemaking or what exactly Mr
speaker and gentleman yes the of
the larger out we it's it's the
office of superintendent of
insurance has to develop the
plan and present it to the
legislature with and
appropriation
proposal that would be tied to
that and so
Again this legislation.
Are just provides the general
authority of
what the fund can be used for
what the legislature can
appropriate from it to to use it
for what purposes so small
business is in there but that's
what we are what the
superintendent is is planning to
do and has started talking to
the carriers and and
thinking through that plan but
that was an idea actually of
that came up during the session
it which was so it's an
amendment in there on the way to
add and small businesses are
based on the feedback from the
business community worrying
about their in our premiums
going up because of this tax so
rather than exempt the
business's page
Mr speaker and gentleman we
actually can't do and still make
it work for Medicaid that has to
be broad based across all
of plans it is so but what we
can do is develop a plan that
helps them through reinsurance.
Mr speaker gentle lady are that
part I think it's over my head
the first time we talked about
that it I didn't understand at
all
that the or would there be a
time later for this legislature
we actually implement looking at
the plan itself.
So is that does that take the
form of a traditional bill are
or how did how would that
happen.
Mr speaker and gentleman I guess
so the tax doesn't even start
being collected and till next
January of twenty two we can't
begin using it until twenty
three calendar year twenty
three.
Because our plans are operate on
a calendar year and a half to be
built into their right so we
can't be implemented in the
middle of the year when the
rates are already set so we're a
couple years out and up yes a
plan will have to be provided
and depending on what it is and
whether it's it within the
authority of the superintendent
of insurance or whether that be
a needs additional authority yes
we may need a legislation to go
with it.
Mr speaker generated thank you
for that and so
I guess the the missing piece
for me on on whether a small
business not purchasing on the
The is the market I'm sorry what
is that but the problem that the
health insurance exchange Mr
speaker and gentleman Mr speaker
Julia thank you mentioned so I
think the missing piece for me
is
is it that the tax will generate
enough dollars to where we can
say with certainty that the
small businesses to permit
purchased outside of the
exchange won't receive the
subsidies is that is that sort
of what the question mark is
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
it's just making sure that we
have the authority and ability
to do that off the exchange but
I think my understanding and if
you'll give me just a moment
I'll check with the
superintendent to
clarify his and his our thoughts
on that
moment.
Mr speaker and gentleman
a couple of things one the
secretary Schardin Clarke of
found that the one percent
surtax was enacted in two
thousand and four also about
fifteen years.
That's been in place and
the superintendent reminded me
that only about a quarter of
small businesses currently offer
health insurance because most
can't afford it so their
employees are either on Medicaid
or other purchasing through the
health insurance exchange and
getting some subsidies if
they're under four hundred
percent of poverty or they're
going uninsured and so by
offering our reinsurance to help
the small businesses and and yes
he's of thinking we can do it
both on the exchange an off for
small businesses that more small
businesses might actually offer
insurance because we can get it
to be much more stable and
affordable.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I appreciate that I I had
forgotten about that there are
other questions so appreciate
now I know it's two thousand
four
so if there are.
Twenty five percent that.
Offers some form of.
employment planet that still
seems like a pretty large amount
and I I do think also there's
one other category maybe.
where a small business doesn't
offer a plan.
But it's possible that the
spouse works for state the local
school district or state agency
and so the family receives
insurance through that state or
school plan I think that's
another possibility to is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
that certainly always a
possibility that on a spouse it
may have insurance to their work
Mr speaker Julian so I I think
you want to talk about the
twenty five percent though our
general fund to funds that we
want to make sure that we have
you can the data.
Thank thank you all thank the
government you to them thank you
Mr Gruber appreciated on that
actually thank you
So that the I just want to make
sure that I understand
So I can go back to my
constituents who are small
business owners and let them
know what would be the last
trying to keep them from being
out there being able to
participate in this rain turns
plan.
That's the thing the pieces go
missing for me is it just that
but the.
The two point seven five percent
increase isn't going to be
enough still to allow this
twenty five percent group in.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm not
sure I'm I'm not following you
work of the two point seven five
percent at tax will create all
significant funds and all right
yes it we think it'll be
sufficient funds to offer a
program to small business but we
have to
and map all that out in in
detail as to how much subsidy we
can offer and how much
re insurance plans would would
cost and so
yeah and and I just what we can
offer accordingly and develop
those plans and bring them to
the legislature for
appropriation and if necessary
legislation.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Santa Bernalillo seasons it's
probably because I didn't
articulate the question very
well and so I think I'm just I'm
just want to know because it
sounds like the re insurance
plan is a good idea that it does
it has the potential to help
small business.
Plans whether you're on the
exchange or off exchange
regardless
I'm just wondering you know why
are we not able to say for
certain that we will include all
small businesses whether you
purchased off exchange or off
exchange that's really one of
the stronger stand.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's C.
and and tension I think to offer
both but we still have to put
together that exact plan no who
who and how many of those small
employers there are make sure
there's not any any legal
constraints going off to
exchange I don't think we don't
think there are will be so it's
our it's our and intent to do
that but yes by chance were only
able to offer
that to reinsurance if you
purchased your our group health
insurance through the exchange
then that would be an option for
for those small businesses to
change their insurance to
purchasing it through the the of
the group
health portion of the exchange
so that they could do that just
like it individuals can purchase
they don't have to purchase
through the exchange they can
purchase directly from from
insurance carriers but if they
wanted to subsidies they have to
purchase direct exchange the
same could potentially be true
when we get down to it for small
businesses that if they want the
assistance than they would
switch to purchasing their
exchange their insurance through
the through the exchange.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo thank you for the.
The answer I think that doesn't
make connect the dots and and
please tell your experts thank
you for the the health
information I do hope that they
when they put this plan together
and I do hope starting point is
that all small business so we
said the choice whether to
purchase their insurance whether
they buy off exchange or not and
when we talk about this this two
point seven five percent
increase I realize that doesn't
just affect people who are
working for small business now
that also includes retirees so
how does this two point seven
five percent fit in with folks
that are on some form of whether
it's through like the pair of
Original that your be version of
that retirement health insurance
or they don't have any kind of
training increases while.
Mr speaker and gentleman no it
doesn't have anything to do with
those plans.
Mr speaker gentle lady is that
because that those are private
plans is that the reason why Mr
speaker and gentleman yes we're
not taxed we're not taxing that
book of business of carriers
now.
Okay.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady thanks for your
patience at this late hour I
have a better handle on on this
and I appreciate development
getting thank you I appreciate
the questions thank you very
much down and the gentleman
further debate on them that the
gentleman from per
Representative thank you Mr
speaker gentlelady from
Bernalillo please your.
Mr speaker I gladly yield to the
gentleman from curry.
Thank you Jody generally in the
the conversation with the
gentleman that just finished up
you might comment that the state
does not have authority.
Over self insured bonds.
For taxes for the surtax.
I believe I heard you say that
was a because of federal
regulations or something that
can you going up just a little
bit deeper Mr speaker dollar.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
self insured plans the
superintendent doesn't have any
authority over there they are
controlled under federal law
called and it's too late an hour
I'd have to have helped to to
figure out what the acronym
stands for but they're called a
wrist some plans and they are
they are controlled by federal
law.
In the Mr speaker gentle lady is
that all self insurance plans
statewide private self insured
all self insured early
governmental self insured gentle
lady Mr speaker Mr speaker all
also if insured plans at the our
own of public employee plans
that is a self insured plan self
insured plans we have some
control as a legislature because
it's it's our public employees
if you will to set budget and
and certain things about those
plans but
it just as an employer would set
the benefits of their plan they
the rest of controls how
a self insured plans work and
and are the rules around that.
Thank you generated very helpful
Mr speaker gentle lady I I'm
curious this kind of a quick
sidebar but is that all self
insured plans not just health
insurance this.
Are you able to charge surtax on
other types of self insurance
plans
Mr speaker and gentleman the
surtax that we're talking about
is only to health insurance
plans and it's only
Medicaid and individual and
small and large group
plans that are that the tax goes
to and no self insured health
insurance plans.
Okay and I appreciate that I
know your put your bill deals
with health insurance and that
that I get that.
Right now I'd like to.
See if your ask your expert does
the state have the authority to
tax work comp self insurance
plans.
Mr speaker and gentleman I will
ask but this particular piece of
the law is only applying to the
health insurance plans.
I'm.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
section of law that were that
were amending at has nothing to
do with any other kind of
insurance other than done these
health insurance plans.
Okay thank you gentle lady I was
kind of hoping to learn a little
bit right there but to to do
that another time
Mr speaker gentle lady I want to
move forward to an F. I. R. no.
Senate bill one twenty two I
believe it is House.
House bill one twenty two and
NFI are on that news of
paragraph near the says
the increased insurance premiums
surtax will produce a total
revenue of about two hundred
eight point seven million in FY
twenty three.
The two point seven five percent
increase portion of the surtax
would generate about a hundred
and fifty three point two
million in FY twenty three of
that amount hundred fifteen
million redeposited healthcare
affordability funded thirty
eight point eight million we're
going to that general fund.
So I think that that correlates
well with the number you just a
little while ago about a hundred
fifty million so
I want to I want to work off
that hundred fifty three million
eight hundred fifty million
number for a little bit.
Of generating one of the other
S. wires are read today or
yesterday or.
You know generally I can't
remember what I had for
breakfast so I don't remember.
To date me either thanks.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
it's it's getting late so be a
challenge for both of us maybe
thank you generally but
somewhere and and all forms of
that that about fifty percent of
New Mexicans are on Medicaid is
that a fair statement
Yep Mr speaker and gentleman I
think currently it's forty three
percent okay as a forty three
percent of New Mexicans are a.
On Medicaid.
And gentle lady I I heard you
say that the state government
employees the school employees
of public
local government employees all
those are exempted from this
surtax is that correct July Mr
speaker Mr speaker and gentleman
that is correct.
So if you have any idea what the
total number might be gentle
lady.
Mr speaker at and gentlemen I
don't off the top of my head.
Mr speaker gentle lady would one
of your experts have to have a
pretty good idea of all part
number of how many employees are
how many people are actually
exempted because of the work
comp exemption.
you Mr speaker and gentleman you
just confuse me with your
question because of the workers
comp exemption.
Public employees.
Would implies thank you inject
everything.
At of that thank you hold hold
on just a minute while I ask.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman about a hundred and
sixty of public employees.
Okay so about a hundred sixty.
Hundred sixty thousand.
Thank you were you scared of
their.
there there's that many over
here on my door help me out so
**** the
So I think we have a population
of somewhere in the neighborhood
of two million people.
And forty three percent of of
those two million would be about
eight hundred and sixty thousand
we have about a hundred and
sixty thousand that are simple.
So that would be about lower
that cost a million.
There are several private
companies that have.
their own health insurance plan.
The.
Would not be charged surtax.
There are a lot of veterans and
federal employees in the state
of New Mexico.
They're on different plans that
and then generate I'm I need to
ask the question are or the
federal employees the veterans
and retired are their insurance
is taxed with the surtax of exam
Mr speaker gentle lady and Mr
speaker and gentleman thank you
for that question no they are
not taxed of federal employees
are tax Medicare tax retirees
aren't retired employees of
state employees and education
employees aren't it doesn't
apply to their tax it doesn't
apply to large companies are
self insured I assume and I'm
making this making this up sort
of but I assume like PNM might
be self insured and Sandia and
and Los Alamos I think the
university I think Presbyterian
are all self insured it doesn't
apply to them it only applies to
Medicaid and we we charge it to
Medicaid because then it's part
of their rates that is done
eligible for match so it brings
in most of this
the income or the revenue for
this program is actually coming
from Medicaid and Medicaid
match.
but so it applies to Medicaid
and it applies to individual
plans small group and large
group that are not self insured
and that's it.
Thank you Mr speaker Jodie Jody
I I still want to go back to the
two hundred and eight million
dollars this plan is going to
generate this bill is going to
generate for the state and it's
very simple all sorts of yours
and all the hospitals and public
schools and everyone else I'm
trying to figure out what is
going to cost for family the
private sector.
How are the how much is going to
have to pay to come up with two
hundred three million dollars
because we've eliminated.
Three four some more of the
population has been exempted
from the US and so we're winding
up with a very small number that
has to generate two hundred and.
Eight point seven million
dollars so can you help me
understand what the impact is
going to be to each family
general life thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman first of
all the two hundred eight your
including the one percent surtax
it's already
being taxed so the new funds is
about a hundred and fifty
million.
And almost a hundred and twenty
million of that is is
from federal Medicaid match.
And that
implies there's a state share
that we're paying out of this so
only just under ten percent of
that total amount is what goes
to be
picked up if you will by
by the private market.
Thank you gentle lady I I would
some of the opinion that I am
part of the private market I pay
taxes well I yeah I would have a
little bit of a struggle with
that scenario.
Gentlelady might my last
line of questioning is is an
issue that we talked about it
house appropriation of finance
committee.
The superintendent of insurance
that you would get back with me
and I'm not.
I I believe that that your
commented I don't know that
answer I'll have to get back
with me but I haven't heard back
from you want to.
No idea on us again on the
private insurance that someone
on Medicare by supplemental
insurance.
are they gonna have to pay our
senior adults they're on
Medicare money supplemental
gonna have to buy or pay the
surtax.
I'm Mr speaker and gentleman and
now.
that that answer is is no
they're not subject to the
surtax now and so there they
wouldn't be subject to of this
increase.
Thank you generally that's good
to hear can you tell me what it
is that simple maybe but by that
private.
Supplemental insurance I I I
paid two hundred Bucks a month
for a private supplemental to go
along with my chair what in this
bill we're still language exams
that purchase from paying surtax
Mr speaker and gentleman and you
won't see it in here this is
applying to the existing
language of of where the surtax
is but I I believe that's
because that's tied to
to Medicare and it those plans
are controlled by federal law.
Thank you Joe I do I'll have to
go back and review that just up.
I I know that I would not shop
for private insurance through
private insurance companies and
bought my supplemental
insurance.
And this call after the
impression at our meeting HSC
that.
Well I didn't get in a straight
answer but I've done it and I
know that because it was an
unusual question I'm not
questioning you trying to
mislead more than.
but I don't see how that's exam
because I can choose whether I
buy that private insurance or
don't brought by that that's my
tools and so I have a hard time
understanding about by a policy
from farmers insurance company.
How I'm excluded from paying the
surtax.
Mr speaker and gentleman and I
apologize that no one got back
to but the supplemental plan
that you bought isn't called a
Medigap plans and Medigap plans
and what the benefits are in the
types of plans they are and I
think it's like a through G. or
something of the plan that you
can select those are all under
federal law under Medicare as to
what how those plans operate
what those benefits are and so
that you can you are shopping
for a Medigap plan is the is
somebody else shopping even
another state is is comparing
apples to apples in choosing a
plan to supplement their
Medicare.
It is very helpful thank god I
didn't know that a problem
plants all but I think I hear
you say is that even though I
went out bought private
insurance through we'll say
farmers insurance group or
something of that nature.
And and I went to my local agent
and they gave me a quote on
three different options to
divert things they could do and
I paid for that but because that
is supplemental to Medicare it
is regulated by the federal
government Zacharek join to
speak Mr speaker and gentleman
that's correct.
Thank you Joe I do that's very
helpful just let me that that's
a all of my questions that I
have on your amendment and I
thank you for your answers I
thank you for your time you've
helped educate well but this
evening and I'm very much
appreciate that thank you John
you Mr speaker Madam speaker
start up thank you for the
questions.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Lee County
Representative Scott thank you
madam speaker religion was only
of yield
Mr speaker I gladly the yield to
the gentleman.
Mr speaker generated looking
through the and then what this
appears to be.
One word text on a house bill
one twenty two as an actor Mr
speaker and gentleman that's
correct.
Speaker gentle lady.
We're seeing a lot of
legislation more.
A lot of requests over the last
few weeks could could you
refresh your memory.
On how much of this two hundred
and eight million dollars will
be raised on.
Years.
in the private insurance market.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
it's not the whole if we could
addressed your question to about
a hundred and fifty million give
or take the rest of it is
already being collected and has
for the last fifteen years as a
pre existing surtax one of the
new funds.
Out ninety percent of that is
going to be picked up by
Medicaid and the federal match
so about ten percent of it
and if my it had is still
working right about fifteen
million
is would be at picked up through
the private market.
And gentle lady informer calls
of master's program.
Last conversation.
The market was about fourteen
percent.
Is.
Close remember branch.
For Mr speaker and gentleman
The.
I'm I'm looking I'm looking at
my my cheat sheet Mr speaker and
gentleman.
And seventy two percent of it
is of the federal match but
ninety percent of the revenue
comes from the Medicaid MCO rose
seventy two percent of that
Is federal match nine point nine
percent is our revenue from the
commercial market.
Thank you for that Madam speaker
gentle lady and I believe it was
represented.
These are just two point seven
five percent George.
I was going to go to insurance
providers and not directly to
the.
Purchasers of these posters is
your.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady was also
represented the Z. score just
we're not necessarily.
Wong true.
What users of these policies
could you tell me why.
Mr speaker and gentleman it will
be a part of the insurance
companies a cost of doing
business that is one factor
built into their premium rate
calculation but because medical
trends could go up or down or
other administrative costs or
whatever it's it's not a
straight across the board
and Tax that they add on to the
premium before they calculate
the premium it is part of a
I have multitude of factors are
in what they are used to
determine with through actuarial
analysis what their premium
should be set at that also
depends on how many people they
have insured and again
we think that by being able to
provide assistance with premiums
and cost sharing more people
will get insured which then
spreads that cost
more and
the premiums are we may see them
go down because of spreading the
the medical risks costs so that
tax increase may get diluted if
you well in the total cost of
doing this.
So madam speaker and gentle lady
your Representative believes
that this.
Additional expense for tax if
you will would be absorbed into
the insurance companies
operating expenses.
Actor
Mr speaker and gentleman yes it
is part of their operating
expenses and it is part of what
they will use to calculate than
what they charge for premiums so
to to that extent it will result
could result in sick and not
some premium increases but it is
one of many factors and our that
has to be based on medical
trends to and if you're it if we
and and I'm just as an example
if you have and we have in the
in the exchange individual
market currently about forty
three thousand people if we were
to double that the medical costs
associated with that group
spreads out over a larger
population and that will
actually lower the premiums.
because you've got and ability
to spread that risk over more of
people because not everyone uses
every
medical costs every year it's a
premium our our developed based
on the side and then the trans
of the group.
And so the premium that cost of
doing business and that tax is
one of many factors that
the in this company
uses in determining their total
cost and figuring out than what
their premium will be.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
your internet is going to be
unstable all our call was.
With snippets of the.
Not much apologize for I
apologize I'll take off my I'll
take off my my video.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you John what do that'll be fine
with me would use restored that
last answer from scratch forms
okay so the the
increase in tax is one factor it
is is part of the operating cost
and is a factor upon which the
insurance company will determine
what their premiums are.
But if you have
a much larger group that you're
insuring new more people you're
insuring your medical costs and
medical risks spread further and
so those cost might be lower on
a per person basis and so you
wouldn't see the full impact of
that
tax increase and so it may or
may not
have any impact on any change in
premium costs.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you generated for that answer.
Do you know what the.
More could medical insurance
profit margin is.
In the state of New Mexico to
to.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
You know part of that that's
regulated by state and federal
law so depending on
A small individual groups is
this is called the medical loss
ratio so the percentage of the
premium charge that has to be
used.
For directly serving that that
individual so medical and
pharmaceutical claims and and
and some things like case
management and so forth can be
in there and eighty percent of
that premium charged in an
individual and small group
market must go towards direct
service to the individual
insured.
The rest and for a large group
it's eighty five percent.
The rest is for all
administrative costs
other operating costs fees and
taxes all all of those and
profit and I
in Medicaid which most of this
is charged to Medicaid that
profit part can't be any more
than three percent.
Speaker gentle lady do you have
that number for.
The present market.
Mr speaker and gentleman at no I
don't have that number for the
private market I we know how
much has to be to madam direct
medical services and the rest
for administrative overhead
profit and if they don't
use the full amount that they
need to use so for small and
group individual and small group
eighty percent of that premium
they don't use that much of the
premium charged for direct
medical services then they must
refund part of the premium.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
believe.
On Blue Cross blue shield
website.
They are representing their
profit margin is forty percent
does that sound line of all
parks were reasonable number to
you.
Up Mr speaker and gentleman that
does sound like a ball park
reasonable number I don't think
I it you can necessarily hold
that across the board for
Medicaid that is what it has to
the they don't allow more than
three percent profit but many
companies like Blue Cross Blue
Cross is a larger
a national company it's not just
New Mexico and it has a lot of
different books of business
Medicaid a small group insurance
individual large group and they
also third party administrator
for self insured plans so they
have all of a great mix of
business that all may have a
different rules on that.
Madam speaker gentle lady in
this circumstance we're talking
about the private market the
private market for medical
insurance and in that
circumstance representation of
the three percent sounds about
right to you is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes I
would say that's about about
right.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
We encourage for operating
expenses by two point seven five
percent or
just for a moment.
There are no or no additional
revenue streams.
As a consequence of additional
insured coming into the market
would you expect.
Most program premium most of
that.
Call increase.
Going through those private
insurers would in fact.
Still warm to their customers is
that a reasonable assumption for
sharing.
No additional customers.
Just just a moment
Mr speaker and gentleman and let
me consult my Act.
Mr speaker and and gentlemen and
if I understand your your
question correctly it it will
technically be passed on but it
will also as I tried to explain
before is just one of many
factors that goes into
calculating what the premium is
it's not like G. R. T. tax or an
excise tax that just pops
directly the full amount on it
is one factor in it that ways
into calculating what the
premium is based on medical
trends pharmaceutical trends
and how large of pool of people
who are insured and again we
believe that by getting a lot
more people insured because it's
more affordable that drives down
premiums for everyone and so the
tax increase we believe will be
out
what's the right word it's we
there will be more ability to
drive down premiums down the
what the tax would increase at.
Mr Madam speaker and gentle lady
nonetheless.
With a two point seven four
percent operating expenses
increase on this one.
With the same number of
customers in a three percent
profit margin you I believe
anticipate.
Most of this would in fact.
Long to those consumers I would
like to move on.
Madam speaker gentle lady to the
timing.
Of these are very us memorials
when does the tax increase
become affected what severity of
the increase on the other
surtax.
Mr speaker and gentleman before
I answer that I would like to to
follow up on something that that
I alluded to before but I have
up at a more exact
number and that is yes the R.
insurance companies.
Over estimate what their
premiums are going to be and
they they end up charging more
than they needed to because they
don't spend enough on medical
trends which I I a and mentioned
have to be eighty percent of the
premium in the individual and
small group in eighty five
percent and a large group then
they have to refund some premium
and I sought to Mr speaker and
gentleman you might like to know
that in New Mexico in twenty
nineteen the carriers had to
rebate fifteen million dollars
to New Mexico consumers so
again it's the tax is just one
one piece of of the puzzle and
if that were to happen again on
the medical trends for instance
that's more than the the cost of
this program and and not taxes
to that market but to answer
your next question Mr speaker
and gentleman the tax because it
is added in into premium
calculations we can't do it in
the middle of a plan here and
those are calendar years so it
will not the tax will not be
started to be collected until
January of twenty two.
And we won't start
the offering the program until
the next plan here January of
twenty three.
So.
Madam speaker gentle lady there
will be just full year.
Sharks increases imposed.
On individuals and small
businesses buying insurance
before there is opportunity to.
For this additional customer
base that you have described.
It will be.
What is.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes but
the really nice thing
coincidentally is that with the
COVID relief package passed
federally there are going to be
additional subsidies and support
to the health insurance exchange
this year and next so there will
be a support to making those
our plans more affordable for
people during this this year and
next year which should encourage
and increase the enrollment
just in time
as we implement this we might be
able to
depending on exactly what the
federal supplements are perhaps
individuals won't miss a beat on
what we offer when those federal
subsidy extra some cities go way
so we should see increased
growth in the and the number of
insured because of the federal
subsidies that are to be
implemented from the COVID
relations.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
want to need.
The tax increase.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
tax those subsidies for
that are being offered federally
are.
For just of this year and next
only because of of COVID and so
the timing is actually just
right for us to be able to
offer.
this as those and.
Madam speaker gentle lady LA
about to wrap up here but I
think.
We've demonstrated with this
conversation.
So we're getting a tax increase
next year.
For the promise of potential
story brings somewhere down the
road.
And the.
That are small businesses and
individuals have suffered so
much or coming up so short as a
consequence of this program
director.
How cold question whether.
Now is the right term.
To be implementing a two point
seven five percent surcharge on
insurance premiums for the
people that are in insurance on
the private work.
There's no question there Madam
speaker gentle lady.
It's just a comment and that
concludes for a lot of questions
appreciate your answers thank
you madam speaker thank you John
Lloyd.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman I appreciate the
dialogue.
Madam speaker.
The gentleman from Santa Fe
speaker Egolf Madam speaker I
move that we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Actually Services administer
generated will generally yield.
Mr speaker Madam speaker and
gentleman I I definitely will
yield to Mister speaker
administrative per no this is
out of order and like to ask
unanimous consent to pause or us
that is speaker gentle lady to
call your presentation of the
bill so that we can go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business please.
Madam speaker and and gentleman
I am happy to do so.
Thank you madam speaker a
resident when order by a certain
percentage.
State your point Mr speaker.
Thank you madam speaker I
apologize for a policy today
we'll get right back to it.
I'm not sure how many members of
the body had been watching.
The events in the other chamber.
Hi this evening as they debate
one of our bills.
There is a member of that body
who is using that bodies
consideration or house bill
twenty.
To denigrate to land asked.
Two million eight.
Senate sponsor of the one of the
bills in this chamber.
It is it should be.
Offensive and outrageous every
member of this legislature to
see what is happening on the
other chamber.
I understand madam speaker
members of the house.
It is highly out of order.
To comment on the proceedings in
the other chamber.
I myself are presiding over the
house I have asked the members
of this body not to refer to the
goings on which the receipt is
the other chamber.
So I say this knowing that I've
asked members not to refer to
the proceedings and other
chamber.
Madam speaker members of the
house.
What we're seeing over there is
a shown more on this
legislature.
It is a shame or.
On the notion and ideas of
decorum.
It is intolerable Madam speaker.
To have one member of that body.
I do not remember.
Viciously for nothing for doing
nothing more than presenting a
bill from this chamber.
For offering amendments.
NEC member of that body.
Hello Senator.
In a cruel and.
Vicious way.
Reeks of the worst.
Type of misogyny.
In mail areas that I've ever
seen in this body boarding any
legislative chamber that I've
ever seen anywhere.
Madam speaker members the house
I am outraged.
Manske Representative house we
should all be outraged.
It is.
So beyond the pale.
That I lacked the words to fully
describe the feelings that I'm
feeling.
Madam speaker members of the
house we have.
Members of our staff.
In two years in this building.
As they stand in witness.
Members of the Senate standing
in silence.
As one of their members attacks
the president pro tem of the
Senate.
We had a few members madam
speaker gentle lady Madam
speaker members of the house if
you members Senator produce
states that up what's right.
The silence is deafening Madam
speaker gentle lady.
Mexico members of the house.
I
am asking your members outside
again I want to acknowledge that
is highly out of order for me to
in a Representative debate is
making statements that.
Having seen we've seen.
Madam speaker members.
It is a very very very sad day
for this legislature.
And madam speaker members of the
house will also say.
It makes me.
Very proud of the members of
this body.
Because.
Madam speaker members of the
house we have had some hotly
contested issues in this
chamber.
As recently as just a few hours
ago.
And madam speaker members that
house the debate has been.
it we have to maintain decorum.
We have.
Not engage in personal attacks
vitriol and I'm proud of the
members of this body each and
everyone of us.
For keeping focus on the debate
introducing focus on the issues.
Madam speaker gentle lady at a
money to adjourn the house.
this evening.
At at at of the protest for what
we've been seeing in the Senate
because we are considering just
the bill from the Senate however
madam speaker members of the
house.
Our job is to consider the
legislation before us and you
decide how to best implement
policy for the people of Mexico.
You madam speaker just let
members of the house.
That's exactly what we're going
to do madam speaker I did not
stay silent.
And madam speaker members house
appreciate intelligence and let
me have the opportunity to
assist you marks that speaker
move we go back to that next
order of business third reading
of legislation.
I'm sorry about that speaker
that.
I will yield to the gentleman
from Chavis and Sheryl.
Thank you Mr speaker
Thank you for.
Madam speaker.
Mr speaker I
I am in the state agreement.
That is what I have heard yes
happened.
Is not.
What the anyone.
In this body.
On either side of the aisle or
either sex.
Should you into our.
I will tell you that.
I think both houses.
Have suffered a loss of decorum.
Including our own.
And maybe today.
Is the day that we wake up.
And say we're better than this.
Maybe that day is the day that
we say.
Another.
There have been instances that.
Even in our own.
House.
Where.
Members.
Have you had issues.
And they do all they have been
retaliated against.
And I am
It is not good
I said the other night that I
have not figured out whether I
love this place more than I hate
it or I hate it more than I love
it.
And I know we all go through
that.
And I have stood on this house
floor on a number of occasions.
And for what was right for both
sides of the aisle.
And I appreciate the speaker
coming in here tonight.
Even though he might have been
on out of order.
Probably not the first time I
thought the speaker was out of
order I have to tell you that.
But I appreciate income in in
here and saying what he said.
And I hope
everyone listening even those in
their pajamas at home.
Realize that the value of the
relationships.
That we have the opportunity.
To create.
And cultivate.
We all have the ability to learn
from someone with different
lifestyles with different
values.
And with different experiences.
I just watched the bill while
ago go through this house.
That absolutely devastates.
Secretary of our population.
Devastates.
And that bill passed.
And it's not good for New
Mexico.
It's horrible New Mexico.
So I think we need to slow down.
We need to think before we
speak.
And we need to think about not
whether we have the votes
to push something through.
But is it good for New Mexico.
Is that what we were elected to
do.
And when we finish the debate
and the vote is cast is our
state and our constituents any
better than they were before
that happens.
Appreciate the opportunity thank
you thank you Mr speaker speaker
I move that we go back to the
next order of business third
reading of legislation madam
speaker I could appoint Water.
We go back to the next order of
business through reading
legislation madam speaker I
might also weigh in on this.
Madam speaker a point of
personal privilege on this
Representative Rehm.
Madam speaker and.
There are several of us here in
the house who are senior members
not only on this side of the
aisle but the other side of the
aisle.
We do not denigrate our members.
So you know I'm extended by
that.
Hearing what's happening in
another house.
But more importantly we're here
to do the business of the state.
That is we're sitting here.
Today.
I mean we're we've got a short
time.
When you look at what was
happening across in the other
house.
And we look at the our.
That's on the clock we know
tomorrow night will be a late
night.
I suggest.
That we all step back.
Take rest get a good night's
sleep and come back tomorrow and
begins fresh.
With all of our motion Sir Tom.
When we can go ahead and begin
to work on what we need to do
for the state thank you madam
speaker.
Madam speaker this will be the
last item under consideration
are receiving that I would like
to get back to the people's work
that movie back to the next
order of business they're
reading of legislation.
Members of the house we will go
back to the debate on the bill.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
On the amendment.
Madam speaker I'm not sure who's
next with questions I I thank
the gentleman from from Lee had
finished.
Gentleman from Lee County
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair does a
gentlelady yields.
Mr Madam speaker I'd gladly
yield to the gentleman the other
gentleman from early.
Thank you all of that I don't
get it right yet
it's for everybody plan being
the study on breast.
There you go.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
gentlelady can you tell me how
this amendment improves your
current bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman of both
go to affordability the
underlying bill is affordability
for accessing behavioral health.
And applies to
to the same
introduce yeah but also the
state employees and retirees
and the amendment goes to the
larger issue of overall
affordability so that we
improved access to needed care.
Madam chair and gentle lady part
of that was a little globally
Lisa Myers can you go back to
the state employee portion
but it's all up to so I
apologize I'll turn off my video
so that might be helpful the
underlying bill applies to
behavioral health making
behavioral health more
affordable and it
it in addition to the same of
insurance that we the amendment
is addressing for affordability
it also applies to the state
state public employees.
Madam chair and gently as as I
understand your amendment it
applies to public employees as
well.
Madam speaker and gentleman on
apologize if I am I confusing
things the amendment does not
apply to public employees the
underlying bill of
no costsharing on behavioral
health services does.
Your point of order can we.
Tell.
Madam speaker in thank you.
All right
Madam speaker can going to and
generally going travel mark on.
Thank you madam speaker and and
gentlemen
the amendment.
For affordability the
affordability fund in the tax
does not apply to
public employees so the public
employee plans are not part of
that the underlying bill that
removes any costsharing for
behavioral health services does
apply to our public employees.
Okay so madam chair gently as I
understand it the amendment.
Excludes public employees.
And the underlying bill.
That you're amending.
does have public employees with
respect to behavioral health is
that correct.
Mr Madam speaker and gentleman
that's correct because the
underlying
bill is going to it addresses
budget and we have the ability
to design the benefits for
public employees to to dictate
of that so it all removes
costsharing including for public
employees the amendment goes to
attacks that creates a fund for
which we can help supplement and
not change the budget but
supplement the our premiums and
cost sharing to make it more
affordable.
Madam chair and gentle lady when
you say make it more affordable
who are we making it more
affordable for thank you madam
chair.
Mr speaker I mean Madam speaker
and gentleman up the subsidies
will be offered
in the exchange the health
insurance exchange where
individuals purchase insurance
and can get fat some federal
subsidies and we will at also
to small businesses.
Madam chair and gentle lady and
I believe that my cell
Representative from Lee County
discuss the potential impact on
on what.
This amendment would do.
True private employees and.
For the most part care providers
are making somewhere around
three percent and we're surtax
in of the two point seven five
percent increase in so.
I would venture to guess madam
chair and gentle lady the that.
There will be some push down on
that and I do understand the
debate madam chair that we had
tonight the talks about the
that's going to be spread out
based on the risk factor in the
multitude of other things there
are I don't want to get into the
calculations on tonight.
But
Madam chair and gentle lady
justice of those I'm trying to
go through and look at
typically Madam chair gentle
lady when I see an amendment on
the floor doesn't matter who who
presents the amendment.
The.
Actually specifically improves
the bill in one specific area.
And the presenters opinion.
They're not always considered
friendly
and so leisure myself freshman
which seems to be able to get
all amendments for but with
respect to that I'm trying to
figure out.
Madam chair and gentle lady.
It seems like these deal with
two totally different things and
so I don't see an improvement on
the actual bill.
I just see in addition to the
bill would that be an actor
statement madam chair gentle
lady.
Mr a madam speaker as apologize
I can't see who's speaker so I'm
assuming it's still madam
speaker and gentleman no I I
don't agree with that.
It takes a different approach
for different
portion of how we are provide
health insurance and get people
the the coverage and the access
to services that they need but
both
address affordability so that
people can.
Access can be insured and access
the services that they need
because they can afford it's
more affordable to do so.
Madam chair and gentle lady I I
I hear what you're saying that
our as as I go through my notes
from the debates that have
happened over the last.
I don't know two hours and fifty
minutes
I hate that I our.
Clearly see two totally separate
bills
and madam chair or member the
statement made early on in the
conversation that.
This ammendment mirrors a bill
that was run.
Through the house.
And the reason this amendments
being.
suggests the providers of four
member is because that the other
bill that stagnated.
And so it does seem like.
Is this they were madam chair
and gentle lady.
To those two bills that work in
unison together they probably
would have been.
Out that way to begin with us
that's a personal opinion madam
chair and gentle lady doesn't
have to be right is just a
personal opinion and so.
I was just trying to seek
clarification on that.
And madam chair and gentle lady
is right as I go through the
numbers that the.
madam chair been provided some
nice.
I calculate based off for.
Almost two point one million
population with forty three
percent on Medicaid and a
hundred and sixty thousand
people.
The employees that spoke with
public employees and I go
through the hundred and fifty
million and I take out all the
pieces are parts and pieces
madam chair delay that we've
been given that.
I see a potential increase to
every private company.
We currently pays insurance
outside of the of the government
plans.
Factor of about two hundred
dollars a month.
Now whether or not the insurance
company decides to eat that or
whether or not it comes back to
the employer itself of some and
as a rate increase over time.
Either way.
Madam chair and gentle lady over
the last fifty eight days.
All I can say the the house.
Has a multitude of bills.
That had the intent.
Of providing subsidies providing
assistance to.
Residents of the state of New
Mexico.
Because.
The majority of them were in a
lock down Madam chair gentle
lady and didn't have a didn't
didn't always have an income.
And so now.
Madam chair and gentle lady
we're suggesting amendment that
could potentially take people
that have had limited income.
Unlike the state employees that
have been exempted from this
madam chair gentle lady.
We're gonna add a potential
increase on their on their
insurance plans of up to two
hundred dollars a month.
Madam chair generated this is
not something that's acceptable
in my eyes and if I go where's
madam chair gentle lady.
The the speaker's comments just
a minute ago was the way that
works with the intent of what
we're supposed to be doing here
and the number of minority
leaders comments with respect
to.
You know is what we're doing
right for the state of New
Mexico.
You madam chair no idea really
thinks of the bill.
That with the sole intent of
making sure we get three one
match by adding more people
Medicaid.
so we get more money from the
federal government is a proper
approach for how we do this
what's that madam chair and
gentle lady.
I I just have to say I cannot
support this amendment and so I
yield back my time madam chair.
There's further debate
Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam chair will
gentlelady from Bernalillo
county.
Madam chair and madam speaker I
gladly yield to the gentleman.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
you earlier made the statement
that.
This amendment that's before us
is really Senator former state
was house bill one twenty two is
that correct.
Madam speaker and gentleman yes
that's correct.
And other any revisions and.
This
amendment that's before us from
what was presented and house
bill one twenty two.
miss madam speaker and gentleman
it's exactly as it left the
floor of the house.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady that's what what
I thought I'd I'd heard earlier
madam speaker there the reason
that I rise and by the way I
know time is creeping up on us
and you know I wrote down the
times correctly we speaker Madam
speaker came at about eleven all
five to make his announcement we
did not get back all the bill to
eleven twenty so you that about
fifteen more minutes to the
clock on I don't think I'll take
all that funding
we do need to have three hours
all on this bill Madam speaker
and gentle lady
I rise because the other day we.
salt to bills that there
appeared to be what is commonly
known as log rolling and and I
rise again to.
Make that same enquiring and I'd
like the US parliamentarians
available I'd like him to look
at these two measures because.
Madam chair and our madam
speaker and gentle lady Senate
bill three seventeen really bill
yield works behavioral health
and and as.
Discussed were for waste a few
moments all right it's it's
moving through the body and it
is close to the finish line.
House bill one twenty two
doesn't deal with behavioral
health at all in fact the.
It's a it's a health insurance
bill a tax bill it creates a
fund and.
I am concerned the the the
efforts to have an amendment
that does not deal with the
subject matter of the first bill
jeopardizes the whole quite
inside to
Madam speaker gentle lady our
house rules eleven dash one
eleven dash for
also constitutional article four
sections thirteen and sixteen
but I'd like to I'd like you to
look at these measures and state
of Senator parliamentarian
drinkers will.
With my assessment of these two
measures are unrelated that they
are in fact
Changing the bill's original
purpose and that it adds one
additional subject matter to the
original bill which is
prohibited by our house rules
eleven that for in articles Sir
are four section sixteen our
constitution
I heard the arguments the other
day that parliamentarian made
of of the Courts give us
brought.
Give us discretion and will view
Senator broadly.
But this one the only related
the only two things I find in
common areas.
They both deal with.
Some aspect of health.
And that they have the same
affected the.
Other than that to the amendment
to this bill are entirely
different subjects entirely
different purposes would be
codified in entirely different
sections of the statute the
first one being chapter fifty
nine a the second building Ms
and our
article seven.
So for that reason Madam speaker
I'd like you to check with.
With our parliamentarian get to
get an order or if you wish to
make the order self right now
this we can do and that the
I'm concerned that this is in
need of log rolling and I do
have a.
The chase from.
Our Supreme Court in nineteen
ninety five that essentially.
Says.
Is there further debate on the
amendment.
Let me get my glasses on our
read this to you.
the purpose of this provision Mr
productive use of practice of
log rolling whereby the
legislature goings two or more
independent measures to ensure
that.
voters who supported the one of
the measures will be co worst in
voting for the entire package in
order to secure passage of the
members individual measure but I
are I think this is a primary
example as shown in the
of additional statements of the
gentle lady
referencing that the house bill
one twenty two was hung up over
the center so.
For that are madam speaker
request your review in Rolling
or secure an opinion of the
parliamentarians where
diversity.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval Representative Ely
Madam speaker since I just
walked on the floor I don't know
who to ask to yield to the I'm
assuming is the gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln.
madam speaker I don't know what
the procedures would be here
it's actually black for I guess
but the I was questioning the
gentle lady of the and so we I
did ask you for a ruling from
the parliamentarian I don't love
it he needs to yield to me but
if he does all right I'd
certainly record.
Madam speaker I maker ideal to
to the gentleman from from Santa
to respond.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
from Bernalillo so because I've
been
on the Senate side which by the
way is the dysfunctional body
I
our team on to this so I I can't
say that I know the issue but I
can give general guidance to the
body based on last night's
discussed online world
Madam speaker of the if you like
me to give you a quick overview
I'll try to do so what we're
trying to do is is a man.
Make an amendment to how to
Senate bill three seventeen
Senate bill three seventeen as a
behavioral health bill
eliminates cost sharing the some
other things with respect to
behavioral health.
It changes section fifty nine A.
of the statuses.
What's being done is and the
representative from Bernalillo
are confirmed that the amendment
is simply a exact copy of house
bill one twenty two.
House bill one twenty two is not
a behavioral health bill it is a
health insurance bill that
creates a taxing creates a fun
and it is going the message that
modifies the tax administration
act and section seven and so my
argument the Madam speaker and
gentleman is that.
These are two different subject
matters and house rules eleven
dash for say that we can only
have one
One subject matter in a bill and
house rural Levin this one says
that no bill shall be altered or
amended to change its original
purpose so based on those two
house rules which are basically
essentially codifications in our
rules of article four sections
fifteen and sixteen that these
two measures stand on their own
we want is in the house right
now for consideration the
amendment is actually in the
center.
Held up in committee and the
effort is to tack it on to.
This existing legislation to try
to get it through the house and
and and act in the law and the
argument is that is the precise
definition of logrolling where
you're trying to tax something
on that side related so that
people will vote for.
So madam speaker the issue
before the bodies workers should
log rolling or not it's not
whether it's been on the Senator
where it's been or what
committee is a question of the
amendment has been presented and
is an unrelated subject and as
the body will remember from last
night on average sure the body
my notes on this which I have
right now the Supreme Court of
the state of New Mexico is given
wide latitude.
In interpreting the constitution
is what log rolling as and in
this case it.
Certainly not I'm just rooting
for my notes hang on just a
minute.
I'm going back to my normal but
in looking at this piece of
legislation both related to
health insurance bills that go
to affordability and access to
coverage so they are similar
subject matters the Supreme
Court is given wide latitude I
want to just express that over
and over again to this house and
its ability to combine pieces of
legislation and the example I
gave last night was literally
apples and oranges this is not
these are the same subject
matters and therefore not log
rolling thank you madam speaker
thank you the body and I
appreciate that I have a hard
time even having dinner being a
parliamentarian so I hope
somebody joins this job a couple
years now thank you madam
speaker thank you bye.
Madam speaker I'd like to
comment on that well the
springboard is given a wide
discretion to this body.
It still requires us and it says
or there is a decision of New
Mexico Supreme Court says that.
The sufficiency of a title to a
legislative actions question it
must be decided on that song set
up facts and circumstances and
and in this fact in this
circumstance we have a bill
that's hung up over the Senate.
And the representative simply
wants to add a bill that.
Was originally standing on its
own B. what's that added to an
entirely different bill because
it's not going anywhere and
wants to add it in this body so
to get some traction and in a
conference committee.
And.
That is the exact.
What rolling it's a fraud on the
people it's a fraud because it's
not in the same subject matter
the public doesn't have any idea
that house bill one twenty two
is being debated or not on this
floor.
That debate occurred a week ago
or so or earlier in the week.
The what they do know is that
we're discussing of behavioral
health issue on this Florida
not.
And that is the subject matter
that's before us and the
amendment takes us beyond
behavioral health enter the
arena a tax into the arena of
health insurance and creating a
fund to to deal with what I
guess high cost of premiums that
is unrelated to to the
behavioral health aspects so
madam speaker I would I would
the urge you to make a decision
that the this amendment is
improper and that we ought to be
discussing Senate bill three
seventeen on its own merits on
madam speaker if I if I can get
the gentle lady and gentleman
yield to me I'll finish my
remarks certainly madam speaker
so I'm reading Senate bills
three seventeen on the title
relating I mean literally the
original title is relating to
health coverage and the
amendment I'm reading health
care tax affordability fund
health insurance premiums
subjects when I read this spring
court decision the more
inclusion I'm reading directly
from the opinion of other
provisions logically within the
scope of the title and relating
to the general subject does not
violate the one subject
restriction this constitutional
limitation was designed for the
exclusion of discordant
provisions having no rational or
logical relationship to each
other and as our call is that
body will call from last night
the simple and that's by the way
from state verses were ball and
that same case which was in
nineteen sixty New Mexico
Supreme Court decision the
example they gave her of an
objectionable joinder G. two
subjects was election
legislation put into a piece of
legislation with alcohol sales
totally unrelated subjects I
read these titles they are not
unrelated that is the opinion of
the parliamentarian that is for
the speaker and for the body to
consider.
But that is my opinion thank you
madam speaker thank you John
thank you gentle lady.
Madam speaker further
discussion.
Is it on this point.
Madam speaker is on this one.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya thank you
madam speaker I don't believe I
have to ask the gentleman the
because it gave up its floor so
madam speaker.
The problem that we have with
this is that in the provision of
doesn't just mention similar
topics being able to be put
together on a bill but
specifically and section four in
an article four section fifteen
it says no law shall be passed
except by bill and no bill shall
be so altered as to then on its
passage through either house
has to change its original
purpose.
So madam speaker and body.
The problem is not intentionally
these are two similar issues
that can be put on one bill
Madam speaker and body and
parliamentarian is that.
I was told to this body.
At least on two occasions by the
bill sponsor that that site
House Bill.
One twenty two is stalled in the
Senate.
And madam speaker it was told to
us twice it was mentioned during
debate early on and it was
mentioned in debate at the end
or or in a subsequent.
Questioning by another member
that what is going on is that
the other bill is stalled in the
Senate in Senate of finance and
because of that house bill
twenty two has been house bill
one twenty two has been added to
Senate bill three seventeen.
That was stated to one member.
And then one question by another
member went back to the same
line of questioning and asked
again madam speaker that
if what was the reason that of
that this was taking place and
again the sponsor said that the
house bill one twenty two was
stalled in the Senate.
And because of that.
House bill one twenty two was
being added to Senate bill three
seventeen at this time at its
final stop in this chamber for
the very purpose of the
constitution says it shall not
be altered from its original
purpose even if the two items
are similarly linked there is no
doubt and by the very words of
the sponsor.
That this was being done because
House Bill twenty two was
stalled in the Senate so madam
speaker the the argument by the
parliamentarian is inaccurate
the parliamentarian is only
addressing a lot of rules.
What the parliamentarian is not
addressing is the fact that the
sponsor specifically said that
we are going to violate.
Article four section fifteen.
Misli to hijack a bill on its
way to passage because the other
bill is is hijacked and Senate
so madam speaker I ask that the
body reject this this ammendment
because this ammendment is
clearly once again by the
sponsor stated twice in debate
on this floor was purposely
added to Senate bill three
seventeen for the very purpose
of getting a bill stalled in
another in another chamber
passed through the backing on
this legislation so madam
speaker I am not addressing the
parliamentarian as to whether or
not these are similar issues.
But madam speaker that the
purpose the very of the very
spirit of the law in this
article four section fifteen is
being violated and we were told
twice on this for we're going to
violate that section of the
constitution on purpose tonight.
We just complain madam speaker
about shenanigans and other
things are taking place are
disrespectful to the body and
disrespectful to the people of
the state of New Mexico and I
tell you right now what we're
doing is we're disrespecting the
people of New Mexico and if we
vote for this we are
disrespecting ourselves we're
disrespecting this body thank
you madam speaker Madam chair on
that point Madam speaker a if
folks that are Florida
transaction among veterans
Representative Eli you madam
speaker there are at this point
the debate returns to the
amendment.
That's what happens procedure
the point is been made the
gentleman's maintenance point
now it returns to a discussion
on the amendment and then the
members can discuss the
amendment substance the
amendment and then we go to a
vote on the amendment for
tabling motion as the case may
be but the point is been made
and we move on that's what
happens down procedure thank you
madam speaker.
Reporter back to discuss madam
speaker point of order that is
not the case madam speaker the
state chair has to make a
decision.
And we cannot return to debate
until the speaker the chair
makes a decision makes a ruling
and then we can debate the oil
and.
Gentleman there's been no motion
made.
Madam has to be a ruling from
the speaker as to whether or not
the parliamentarian party is
sound or not and then we have an
opportunity to challenge the
ruling of the speaker.
David Jones Chavis and Lincoln.
Having reviewed the amendment I
determined that it is Germany
and how to challenge the ruling
of the chair what I'm in the
speaker we're question you like
a roll call vote.
Thank you Sir.
Okay members the termination of
that house parliamentarian is
that the amendment offered by
the generating Bernalillo
is Jermaine Department during
his term but it is.
The gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln is challenging I have
sustained your ruling of the
committee the gentleman Chavis
and Lincoln challenges by ruling
that is subject to border body
motion is not debatable.
The question before the bodies
shall the ruling of the chair be
sustained
yes in my determination will be
sustained.
Is a roll call vote your vote is
now comment.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Harper.
Representative at a.
Representative Cadena is yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative Thomson yes
Representative Thomson is yes.
Representative Trujillo.
The vote is now closed negative
forty two in the affirmative
twenty four in the negative the
ruling of the chair has been
state.
Mr speaker I believe it's still
money for online your question
Mr speaker
I don't have any further debate
but I wouldn't I did request of
the speaker or earlier to add
fifteen minutes to the time
blocks for debate sense we.
Are we went off debate at the
level I and we came back on the
budget of about eleven twenty so
down the time clock is being
meetings act as possible and we
okay thank you Mr speaker.
Are you.
There is for the debate the
gentle lady from capture Sapporo
and comments.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm on the
main bill not on the amendment.
These are for the debate on the
amendment.
Gentlelady from.
I know Santa Fe amber we are and
Torrez Santa close all there's a
report thank you Mr speaker I
know that it's late and we're
tired and everybody wants to go
home go to bed the only thing I
wanted to address on this man
meant.
And this is most of the yes I
yield Mr I'm sorry yes I'm sorry
I apologize to yield your time I
Mr speaker I gladly yield to the
gentle lady thank you so much
and I apologize for that work is
that it's late I think the most
frustrating I just want to send
this and I'll be very brief.
It's so hard when we're in a
committee and we hear these
bills and we debated brought in
they go all around and then they
come back and then I have a
seven page amendment.
Then I'm supposed to read and
figure out of though not for the
people.
And it's really hard to do that
at twelve will I not impossible
but I just don't think it's fair
to the people because also the
people at home.
Don't get a chance to be up at
twelve oh five and read this and
I don't think it's fair to them
that's All I Want to say of my
time.
Is it for the money then the
generators many.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
will the gentle lady from
Bernalillo please yield I'm
happy to yield Mr speaker to the
gentle lady from Eddie.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so I do have a couple
questions about the amendment
and the first question is what
is the effective date of this
bill and year of your amendment.
I'm.
Generates many did not.
Generation related you yield.
Mr speaker I yielded yes the
general insurance I was
momentarily distracted
apologize lace midi.
Thank you Mr speaker so gentle
lady again the question what is
the expected date of the bill
New York your amendment.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
the effective date of the bill
is so usual I think it's June
eighteenth but that that taxed
the amendment won't start until
January twenty two.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
so I I did not select the text
of house bill one twenty two
which is actually the amendment
verbatim so of our assume that
that is that is accurate I did
want to ask also Mr speaker
gentle lady a little bit about
section one of your amendment
it's of the first page of the
bill.
And it's
A new section to the tax
administration act.
And what it does is called for a
distribution pursuant to a
certain section of law this is
it shall be made to the health
care affordability signed.
And in an amount equal to the
following amounts of net
receipts attributable to the
health insurance premium Sir yes
so her date that talks about
starting January first twenty
twenty two and prior to July
first of twenty twenty two so
short period there are it's just
you two percent.
After that Mr speaker gentle
lady it goes.
Two fifty five percent.
Beginning July first of twenty
two and prior to July first of
twenty four so that's a two year
period and then beginning July
first that's the fiscal year
start of twenty twenty forty
thirty percent.
So it goes from fifty two
percent.
For a spell to fifty five and
then to thirty so Mister speaker
gentle lady I was just wondering
if you could explain why this is
graduated the way it is.
Of.
Thank you Mr speaker and of
gentle lady are distribution was
on negotiated and House
Appropriations but the the fund
in the in the first year is only
in the first
of fiscal year twenty two is
only us six months because it
four one yes the last half of
fiscal year twenty to and then
it goes to full months but
because it's starting to be
collected and in calendar year
twenty two but won't go into
effect until calendar year I
won't be expended I should say
until calendar year of twenty
three the fund to build up in
that first year where it's not
being expended as it's taxed and
collected and so then a couple
of years of full funding in the
amount that we agreed upon with
Health up on with on house
appropriations the split between
the fund and general fund and
then then and the the year after
that fiscal year twenty five it
drops to thirty percent that's
that's actually that's happy
here again but we had if you
will front load in the first
year.
So it really is provides us for
three fiscal years
stable funding in which to find
the the supplements and help
people with the affordability of
their health insurance and
during that time we will be
doing actuarial analysis LFC
will do a program evaluation and
will
after that of the legislature
can readjust and decide what is
the appropriate split between
the affordable and fun and the
general fund but the dip in that
for fiscal year is because we
front loaded in the in the
earlier.
Thank you very much Madam and Mr
speaker so I I think I fall
under a little bit of the
largest air just was running if
there is any special magic to
fifty to fifty five and thirty I
understand kind of the address
of what's happening so that was
that was really more my
questions are but let's let's
move on Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo so section two
of your amendment.
Us is that the tax the taxes
imposed iterativ three and three
thousand percent of the gross
premiums and.
Excuse me membership of policy
fees received or written by a
taxpayer Mr speaker gentle lady
could you identify to the
taxpayers please.
Mr speaker and gentle lady can
you direct me to where exactly
you're reading.
Mr speaker gentle lady I am on
it's page two of your amendment
is sat under section two and
it's that paragraphs and may.
I'm.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
that's existing language that
we're not changing the change in
the surtax to health insurance
is on the next page paragraph E.
but this
that's there is all existing
that has that is not related to
the amendment.
Mr speaker gentle lady so I'm
I'm looking at it's marked as
section seven dash forty dash
three and the heading is
imposition of rate of tax
denomination of premium tax and
health insurance premium tax so
I see that it is existing
language but it's still a
question that intrigues me I
believe the answer is the
taxpayer is in this case of the
insurance company would that be
correct up Mr speaker and gentle
lady yes.
Thank you so much R. Mr speaker
gentle lady so I just have to
ask this next question it is
existing language but it does
have bearing on on your bill and
it talks about the Republic of
New Mexico.
And it says for a taxpayer that
is an insurer loss we organized
pursuant to the laws of the
Republic of Mexico the premium
tax showplace solely to the
taxpayers gross premium
receipts.
From insurance policies issued
by a taxpayer in New Mexico that
cover residents.
Insurance policies that spiral
issued by the taxpayer in New
Mexico that cover residents of
New Mexico or property or wrist
principally domiciled Our Lady
located in New Mexico so Mister
speaker and gentle lady I just
curious why the public of New
Mexico is mentioned here and how
that has very on on of the of
the premium surtax.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
you've stumped me as well let me
ask my the sector secretary
Schardin Clarke hold on just a
moment.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
I think pre dates all of us I'm
not sure exactly where or why
that came from but there are no
insurance companies are
currently
that are organized New Mexico
that we are taxing.
Thank you gentle lady and and Mr
speaker so I'm there's also
referenced here in the system
this is drugs C..
It refers to property bonds men
or bail bonds so once again I
guess we're stumped a little bit
about that but some.
Not sure what that all has to do
with health insurance premiums
but.
let me ask you one other
question if I may gentle lady Mr
speaker and.
There's a reference in here to
and we're talking about surplus
lines broker and so on and so
forth.
And it says that I guess is
supposed to your bill the
premiums shall not include any
additional amount charge the
insured for local state or
federal taxes.
Regulatory authority sees or
examination these are Mr speaker
gentle lady so I'm if I'm
understanding this correctly
what this means is that some
when there's a premium tax there
will be no tax on any assessed
local state or federal taxes or
any regulatory fees were
examination is that correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady let me
just confirm with the secretary.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
and means that there are there's
no peer amending these are of
this tax is a tax on the
premiums not tax on other taxes
and fees so there's not
there's not permitting and
stacking of those taxes.
Very good thank you Mr speaker
and and gentle lady so I do have
just a couple other questions
and I appreciate your
indulgence.
So I understand that if the
United States Congress and this
is there's Burbage and your bill
about this that US Congress
signed into law the annual fee
on health insurance providers
that was just taken off I would
kind of question the article
used to in the in the wording
here it says imposes the annual
fee on health insurance
providers for section section
ninety two chairman of the
federal patient protection
affordable Care Act I would say
eight and and and and you will
see but anyway it it provides
that here in the bill that the
rate of the health insurance
premature tax will be decreased.
At a rate equal to the range of
the annual C. imposed provided
that.
Right of the health insurance
premium surtax shall not be less
than one percent I'm.
Mr speaker gentle lady could you
explain that one percent so
they're still going to be even
if the federal government
revert.
Makes does disconnection they're
still going to be a one percent
could you explain that please.
certainly Mr speaker and gentle
lady glad to there is a pre
existing surtax of one percent
that has been in place since two
thousand and four if you look up
and the paragraph above in
paragraph ET you'll see that one
is struck and instead are
replaced with three ends in
seventy five hundreds percent so
up it if we adjust the the
surtax we don't want to go below
what we had before it would just
be a tribute double if you will
against the additional two point
seven five percent.
Thank you so much very
appreciate much appreciated I I
think my final question has to
do with page for the amendment.
Mrs section for.
And I seen this language in
other bills that we've we've
dealt with.
this is new material and it's
for your bill and it's health
care affordability signed.
And it says that the health care
affordability signed is created
in the state treasury.
The fund consists of
distributions appropriations yes
grants and donations.
So Mister speaker gentle lady I
think we understand
appropriations and distributions
but how realistic is it in your
opinion or the opinion of your
X. for that this fund would
receive any gifts or donations.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
would say very highly unlikely
but as you noted I think that
standard language and creation
of funds in the event that there
is some other source of funds
to contribute to the fund.
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
you're right it's boilerplate
language and I'm I'm just really
more curious than anything to
know we have when these funds
exist in state law if if people
do get donations are gaps are B.
happy if that happened I think
in a lot of cases but I'm not
I've never heard of that.
Occurring so.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
sure do appreciate your time
really this morning and I will
you'll deal you'll before thank
you thank you for the questions
gentle lady.
The generating granted all
programs C. R. thank you Mr
speaker allegedly the yield.
Mr speaker and I gladly yield to
the gentle lady from Sierra
thank you Mr speaker I'm just
sitting here just kind of it's
been an.
In the evening and both chambers
it's late in the evening when a
lot of.
Decisions seem to be making
being made that should wait we
are about to vote on an
amendment that imposes a hundred
and twenty million dollars in
taxes that will be passed on to
the fourteen percent of New
Mexicans to pay for private
insurance.
It's being done to a bill that
prohibits behavioral health
providers who are already
struggling to be prohibited from
collecting copays and
deductibles and premiums.
We have a shortage of healthcare
providers and behavioral health
providers in the state and it is
really quick of this body to
blame it on our former governor.
Counting the problem tonight I
feel like to the consequences of
all teams playing you and.
You.
And when it doesn't work out
your way now we're breaking the
rules why do we have this book
Mr speaker I hope that the
public is paying attention it's
middle of the night but I hope
the public paying attention to
what's happening on this body
look at the numbers and you
still have to manipulate to win.
Question for the body shall we
adopt House floor amendment
number one is Senate bill three
seventy.
It is a roll call vote of yes
the amendment will be doctors
lawyers know anyone not.
The vote is now open.
The clerk of the members of that
recorded the.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Baldonado thirty
three to thirty one.
Representative Eli
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Madrid.
Three stores are closed regular
thirty six in the affirmative
thirty one the negative the
amendment is a doctrine known.
There is debate on the bill
generate from catching cigar and
let's see here Representative
Gail Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker whether
gentlelady from Bernalillo
yield.
Mr speaker I gladly yield to the
gentle lady from capture.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I have a question on
House Bill three seventeen as
amended number on page three
line seven eight
it states and tell January first
of twenty twenty seven so is
this can you explain that to me
that date and I I know this is
very repetitive Mr speaker
gentle lady throughout the whole
bill there's a lot of repetitive
language and can you explain to
me what that date.
Means in this bill.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it is
only in here as a as a mandate
for five years we could the this
body could adopt that at that
time or we are the the Sanchez
Senator Hickey and I are hopeful
that this will prove so cost
effective in saving other costs
that are the carriers I don't
need a mandate to continue it
they would do it voluntarily
because of the cost savings on
E. R. as in hospitals and
management of chronic disease.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
lady so why do we put this date
instead of a sunset clause.
Mr speaker kindly.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I can
pass on the Senate sponsor
you'll just give me a moment.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
of the house sponsor on the
Senate side it had it drafted
that way for the reasons that I
said five years to to prove the
long term effectiveness of no
copays on behavioral health and
then they carriers can continue
that we hope on their own.
Thank you Mr speaker and the
kind lady.
I think the state instead of a
sunset and and with the sunset
we would make sure that we go
back and look at it and I was
just curious why not a sunset
instead of a date in the bill.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
don't disagree with you that
would have been another way to
do it but on the sponsor was not
thinking this would have to go
on a long time and because there
is also because there's parity
between physical and behavioral
health you don't want this to go
on as a mandate for a long time
you you just are calling a
moratorium if you will for a
period of time on costsharing
and then the carriers
we hope build that into their
benefit plan design are going
forward.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
kind lady I fine it's just a
different way of doing it Madam
Mr speaker kind lady and then
kindly can you give me the
definition of behavioral health
services in this bill.
Mr speaker and gentle lady hi I
think that's used broadly but
let me let me check with let me
just check.
Mr speaker and gentle lady on
page to.
Of the of
the original bill before the
amendment page two aligned three
through eleven defines
behavioral health services and I
can see you don't have to find
it I can read it to you means
professional on ancillary
services for the treatment
habilitation prevention
identification of mental
illnesses substance abuse
disorders and trauma spectrum
disorders including inpatient
detoxification residential
treatment partial
hospitalization intensive
outpatient therapy outpatient
and all medications including
brand name pharmacy drugs when
generics are unavailable.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
kind lady so we're we're
removing the co pays for all of
those issues that you just
stated is that correct
Mr speaker and gentle lady
that's correct no costsharing
for any of those which means
that Mr speaker and gentle lady
the insurance covers the full
cost it doesn't get put on
providers that just can't
collect it it is there's no cost
sharing at all in the budget
design.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
lady and so does this when it
states partial hospitalization
does that mean for behavioral
health only.
Mr speaker and gentle lady you
yes this is referring to
behavioral health.
Okay thank you I just wanted
clarification on that and then
madam Mr speaker kind lady
including brand name pharmacy
drugs and generics when generics
are available.
Can you explain that to me Mr
speaker kind lady I know we just
passed and step therapy bills in
the past and so can you explain
to me how this that sentence
works in conjunction with step
therapy.
I'm.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
there's there's actually very
few and drugs that are a new
brand name drugs most behavior
health drugs are generic but
there are some for certain
psychoses and
because there's no are
costsharing this doesn't go to
the benefit of the so the step
therapy that a provision in law
still applies whatever it is
allowed or not allowed on step
therapy that doesn't change the
benefit it just changes the cost
sharing for whatever is
is provided but this has a
certainly has a preference for
generic.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
lady of those are my my
biggest questions.
But health committee the other
day Mr speaker kind lady and
with all due respect to this
falls on the fourteen percent of
New Mexicans that paid for
insurance.
No matter which way you look at
it.
That's what it does.
And Mr speaker kind lady when
we.
Our.
Helping some New Mexicans.
Feeling like we're helping some
New Mexicans and trying to help
some New Mexicans or hurting
others.
And businesses were hurting
businesses that offer insurance
or hurting anyone in this.
State that pays for insurance.
And if the majority is half of
the state is on Medicaid.
And we've passed legislation in
this house Mr speaker kind lady.
To
Mandate paid timely paid time
off with past.
I can't even count them all but
they're all building up to Mr
speaker kind lady.
To socialized medicine.
And I don't know why we just
don't call it that.
And Mr speaker kind lady this is
something that's going to it's
going to be devastating.
To the people who actually pay
for insurance.
And I didn't support this bill
in committee and I darn sure
don't support it now especially
with the amendment thank you Mr
speaker panels.
Here is for the debate the
gentleman from Dona Ana
Representative small.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
Mr speaker with the gentle lady
from Bernalillo you.
Mr speaker I gladly yield to the
gentleman from Dona Ana.
Thank you so much Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady Mr speaker
gentle lady I have a number of
questions I want to walk through
a few things.
And I guess I'll start Mr
speaker gentle lady it is true
that we have more New Mexicans
on Medicaid now Mr speaker
gentle lady than before the
pandemic the COVID nineteen
pandemic began is that actor.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
partly that's because of people
losing jobs and becoming
eligible for Medicaid but it's
also true because because of a
COVID there is
of the we're not allowed to if
you will to
to terminate people from
Medicaid on let's say you know
voluntarily get off themselves
because they've gotten other
coverage so we're we have a
number it and that was for
maintenance of effort so we have
maybe sixty thousand people that
we anticipate might may no
longer be eligible for Medicaid
ones that
that prohibition is lifted at
the end of the pandemic.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and I know that that
term maintenance of effort thank
you for putting that out there
Mr speaker gentle lady and I was
referred to earlier in our
debate and I
but Mr speaker gentle lady thing
remind us how many New Mexicans
are currently on the New Mexico
health expands.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
about of about forty three
thousand I believe okay thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady so that's fair to say that
Mr speaker gentle lady that
we're looking at a scenario
where
ABS a doubling of the healthy
stranger over the next few years
that could be a scenario Mr
speaker gentle lady that we
could be looking at from the
perspective of the New Mexico
about these things.
Mr speaker and gentleman we
could easily double the size of
the exchange both from those who
are coming off of Medicaid who
are.
Low income but no longer
eligible for Medicaid as well as
the US studies that we have
indicate that we could have
as much as
I can't I can't remember to I
think twenty eight thousand are
actually more than that but not
everyone in rules so
conservatively speaking another
twenty eight to forty thousand
who are eligible now excuse me
eligible now for supplements on
on the exchange but have not
rules probably and we think
because it's still on affordable
and even with subsidies that
help on on premiums there's
still a high deductible and out
of pocket costs and so we think
there's between those coming off
of Medicaid and those who are
currently uninsured but who
would qualify for help that we
could easily double the size of
the exchange.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady that
it seems to me that looking at
doubling the health explained
one obviously underscore the
importance of making sure that
the state of New Mexico are
prepared for that but you Mr
speaker and gentle lady that
seems like an exciting prospect
for the health expand but most
importantly Mr speaker gentle
lady for New Mexicans who are
seeking insurance for their
medical care and also Mr speaker
gentle lady.
For medical providers in our
state would you agree with that
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes of
the medical providers on now
hospitals are turning to
indigent fund providers
have a limited amount of of
ability to how much they can do
and it but if you give people
access to health care that they
can afford they will seek the
care that they need will be
healthier healthier for a
healthier workforce but less of
a burden on
indigent funds and also less
expensive when they do seek care
so rather than waiting until
they're in a crisis and do end
up in the highest level of care
which is that we are in the
hospital they instead are
seeking care and managing their
conditions much earlier on when
hospitalization wouldn't be
necessary but
earlier medical care lease to
lower cost medical care.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally and that was certainly
seems like one of the important
areas we talked about it in a
number of the conversations
Madam Mr speaker gentle lady but
the budget for the overall cost
of care that cost goes down one
to have more people who are
insured able to to spread out
across the care Mr speaker
gentle lady into if folks have
the insurance that they need
you're saying that they're going
to get care when it's not when
they're not is that in as and I
you the situation so the care
they'll get maybe is more
perhaps Mister speaker gentle
lady more regular but less
costly would that be fair to say
Mr speaker gentle lady up Mr
speaker and gentleman yes you
you hit the nail on the head so
one costs of premiums go down
the more people you have in the
risk pool two if you have access
to Care because you have
coverage for that care you seek
it earlier and can manage your
health conditions before they
get I really high cost of crisis
mode and three to tie in our
original bills that we have
before us behavioral health
alone giving access to
to behavioral health drives down
the cost of health care because
it significantly decreases the
access to E. ours and
hospitalization and improves the
ability to manage a chronic
health conditions so the both of
these working together will
drive down healthcare costs for
everyone.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I really appreciate
you walking through the areas
and we can all thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady
of health conditions left
untreated on the grass when they
build up the extra cost and of
course Mr speaker gentle lady
most importantly the actor
danger to the New Mexicans who
don't think that care Mr speaker
gentle lady you're also talking
about how with behavioral health
care that can also have left
unaddressed and laughed at folks
don't seek that care that has
its own Mr speaker gentle lady
higher if you cost is what
you're telling us you're nobody
right.
Mr speaker and and gentleman
that so that's correct and.
At behavioral health is a a key
factor in being able to manage.
Of care cost is on providing
access to and support for
behavioral health and of Mr
speaker and gentleman I might
add in regards to behavioral
health money by people knowing
that they have coverage and
knowing that they don't have to
worry about coming up with a
a copay or cost sharing deal
they can maintained and their
treatment to fulfill their
treatment and.
For providers that is a much
more reliable also of funding
when they know that people won't
just start treatment and drop
out because they can't afford
the copayments and so it we hope
also helps to
Crease of the of the providers
and the the attractiveness if
you will to providing behavioral
health services in New Mexico
thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally I think so it's really
helping.
NFI this together Mr speaker
gentle lady
thinking about healthcare the
acute care that Bob Seger but if
they haven't been regulates
thing our position are there are
there health care provider Mr
speaker gentle lady in the same
way you're explaining that that
applies with behavioral health
care Mr speaker gentle lady we
have this conversation and I
think it's such an important
conversation and now going to
that would you started there Mr
speaker gentle lady.
How does more coverage more
insurance coverage Mr speaker
gentle lady on the health
exchange for more New Mexicans.
What does that do to the health
care provider community in New
Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
a really important question and
I I thank you for asking at it's
I may be an expansion of my
answer on behavioral health of
having us
assured payment source for
providers and private insurance
usually pays higher rates than
Medicaid or Medicare but it is
certainly a better pair source
and indigent care have to tap
indigent care for or go
uncollected and so by knowing
that your patients have
insurance coverage and so have a
pair stores that's much much
better for providers and much
more
solid foundations for making
sure that our the stability of
our entire health care system.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally that seems to me so
important Mr speaker gentle lady
and I really appreciate you
helping lay it out for us Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Does that extend into the types
of health care providers both
health care about behavioral
health care providers and some
of the primary care Mr speaker
gentle lady providers that this
body of work are the number of
different ways over a number of
different we are to try and
support here in New Mexico.
I'm Mr speaker and and gentleman
absolutely because part of the
benefits required under the
affordable Care Act in insurance
is no costsharing for primary
care so for preventive for
preventive services I should say
that not for all primary care
doctor for preventive services
and low cost sharing for also
primary care in it is so that
you it's affordable to get to
access those services early and
not wait until you are so sick
that you end up
and it in a crisis and and in
that aw E. R. and in the
hospital those are the most
expensive places and not to
treat someone you want to have
regular preventive care and
having a coverage that is
affordable and that is not cost
prohibitive for costsharing to
get that that kind of what I
would say upstream preventive
care and basic primary care and
behavioral health services will
I I think improves the health
outcomes for for New Mexicans
thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally I think that certainly
seems to me are very likely an
important and positive outcome
of this legislation Mr speaker
gentle lady the fact that we are
in the north tying together
behavioral health care as well
as other primary health care
that was.
And that they're connected it
seems to me Mr speaker gentle
lady you're telling us that the
same sort of approach that is
regular care that's not
interrupted when somebody
doesn't have that all a Mr
speaker gentle lady when someone
can't find the money that month
or that we go in for the visit
that they need that that sort of
regular Kerr clearly is better
for the New Mexico and who we
represent that's going to be
better for the New Mexico Mr
speaker gentle lady I know we
all know this and we saying this
repeatedly but we have a number
of underlying health conditions
that can present really awful
thank you consequences would you
agree with that Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and and gentleman yes
we we have some of the highest
behavior health issues suicide
substance abuse but we also have
really high incidence of
diabetes heart disease and other
chronic diseases that
that we could manage better and
I think improve the lives and
health of New Mexicans if we
were able to provide access to
health care that's affordable
and
Earlier in the course of any
disease so that you can manage
it at and keep it from getting
as as that is it will be
us far more costly to treat in
the hospital or an E. R. but
also not is not nearly nearly
nearly as effective in in
managing that the course of that
disease.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and so pretty
clearly and I think conclusively
Mr speaker gentle lady the case
that this that more regular care
behavioral health care as well
as the primary health care for
New Mexicans is going to yield
better out Mr speaker gentle
lady it's going to create things
earlier it's going to treat
things as you point out Mr
speaker and gentle lady in a
more effective way that earlier
something used for you to the
more chances are there are two
of actively treat that and Mr
speaker gentle lady that
provides this the better our
living environment for those New
Mexicans much last speaker
gentle lady or the state the
ability for a healthy workforce
for a vibrant for vibrant
communities a vibrant workforce
that sort of thing would you
agree with that Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentleman exactly.
You thank you Mr Romero lady.
When we look at the health care
providers something that's body
has work to support and
different sorts of ways
especially in rural parts of the
state Mr speaker gentle lady
you're telling us that doubling
the number of New Mexicans on
the health insurance expand.
Putting that private pay your
health care into the mix that
that's going to be very
important for those health care
providers they can look forward
to a stronger more stable source
of revenue to support their
businesses there are their
families where they choose to
live in our communities would
you agree with that Mr speaker
and gentleman Mr speaker and
gentleman I think that is very
well said.
Mr speaker down late so that you
know to be able to better
protect New Mexicans to get a
stronger healthier New Mexico a
New Mexico that is better able
to go to work Mr speaker gentle
lady able to enjoy a lifetime
and beautiful New Mexico with
their families
it seems important in and of
itself Mr speaker gentle lady
diversifying stabilizing and
strengthening the crop of the
provider the provider health
network through this expansion
of private paying health
insurance seems like it's going
to help bring more providers The
New Mexico support more
providers in New Mexico keep
providers in New Mexico
Mr speaker and gentle lady so
those really seem to kind of
synergistically work together
would you agree Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
absolutely agree with you.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady the fact that we're
you are now adding behavioral
health care to this which is
been such a.
Glaring example Mr speaker
gentle lady
a glaring lack of New Mexico
with some very terrible
consequences across our state
Mr speaker gentle lady seems to
be a positive improvement as we
work ball fund primary health
care and behavioral health care
Mr speaker gentle lady I want to
compliment ultimately the
product that we see that says
behavioral health care is just
as important as primary
healthcare it is part of it in
fact Mr speaker gentle lady.
The amendments made in house
appropriations and finance Mr
speaker gentle lady where as you
reminded the body the
All right something like eighty
percent of this will come from
the federal government
from the Medicaid program and
the amendments to ensure that
the general fund the the is able
to support that and actually
increases Ms Brandt and Mr
speaker gentle lady you put
amendments and your that
contemplate if there are federal
changes then we would also
change at the state level so
there's not double taxation does
all that sound accurate Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
gentleman you're doing an
excellent job at summing up
This this bill and my I might
add miss Mr speaker and
gentleman something that you had
on about of parity between
behavioral health and physical
health some of the most
effective systems of behavioral
health for early intervention
and for for managing of the
behavioral assist health issues
surrounding chronic disease is
to actually have an integrated
behavioral health primary care
practice and we have a number of
them around the states and are
federally qualified health
centers and some other community
health centers but having
behavioral health hand in hand
with the physical health
providers is very very
effective.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
gentle lady
it seems to be a a a unique but
clear and improvement Mr speaker
gentle lady I know we've
discussed these issues and
different sorts of ways
repeatedly on the floor as well
we should Mr speaker gentle lady
because the they are of the
utmost importance importance for
all New Mexicans so I'm you know
I think we're all getting more
and more familiar Mr speaker
gentle lady the combining of
this approach and support for
New Mexicans who need health
care The New Mexicans want to
provide that healthcare.
Convinces me that it's something
that is a is a big step forward
in a positive way for our state
thank you very much Mr speaker
thank you very much dollars
thank you gentlemen.
Si no further debate.
Representative Montoya UTV
having too much fun.
with the gentleman clerks please
let the record reflect that the
gentleman from San Juan the
Republican whip is having a very
good time that conversations
with the
major asal leader and what we
appreciate the spirit of
bipartisanship chamber.
Si no further debate gentle lady
to close.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you members of the house for the
discussion in the questions and
I I believe the last discussion
with the representative from
done analyst sent some help to
me summon up nicely and so now I
move that Senate bill three
seventeen as amended to pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill three seventeen is
amended the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote
Representative Anderson.
Yes Representative Anderson both
yes Representative Baldonado.
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Lente votes no.
Representative small.
Representative small boats yes
forty three in the affirmative
twenty six and the negative
Senate bill through seventeen as
amended has passed the house.
Gentlelady from army.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
messages.
No objections so ordered clerk
to read message from the Senate
Mr speaker I'm directed to
inform the house of the Senate
has passed house bill seventy
five as amended by the house and
for their amended by the Senate
and request the concurrence of
the house and Senate amendments
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
yes you'll be entered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
committee.
no objections so ordered.
Surgery Mr speaker you're
rolling in and roasting
Committee tomorrow it's been
referred house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill for as amended house bill
forty seven as amended house
bill sixty eight house bill
eighty nine house bill two
thirty as amended house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill two thirty eight house bill
two forty four as amended as
Adam under consideration the
point that they have been doing
rules of the gross preparatory
signing by the officers of the
house respectfully submitted
Brittney Barreras chair.
We are adoption of a safe level
committee report on house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill endorsed netted
house bill forty seven is that
it has to Sixtyeight is that it
has forty nine is that it has to
thirty is amended as
appropriations and finance
committee substitute rascal to
thirty eight is that it now so
to forty four as amended all
those in favor please signify by
saying hi.
On this day.
Committee report is adopted let
the record reflect that the
duly rules ending grossed copies
of House Judiciary Committee
substance process of course
minute house bill forty seven is
that it has to Sixtyeight is
that it has forty nine is that
it Bill two thirties managed
House Appropriations and finance
committee substitute Roscoe to
thirty eight is vented and
house bill two forty four as
amended.
Have been signed by the officers
of the house in open session.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
The gentleman from the
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker I just.
Wanted to take a minute and
Sure my disappointment and then
what happened tonight here on
the house floor.
Mr speaker a.
We had a Senate bill that came
for.
That went through this process.
And deserve the right to be
debated here thank.
Unfortunately that bill was
hijacked.
But somebody the.
Wasn't even a sponsor of the
original bill.
I find it very disappointing Mr
speaker that that
The clear and open language in
the Levin point one.
Says that we can't do this Mr
speaker and yet we chose to do
it.
Mr speaker of the even more
disappointed.
That the debate those being had.
With respect to the amendment
tonight was not heard by the
parliamentarian that came in and
made a decision with the at.
So I just you know I feel like
our our residents the people in
the state of New Mexico deserve
better from us and expected more
from us.
And so I appreciate the
opportunity to speak my mind Mr
speaker.
Other announcements thank you
John Arthur their **** the
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan thank you Mr speaker
there will be a major democratic
caucus meeting tomorrow at nine
thirty AM we will send you the
agenda item is only never say
no.
Are there further announcements.
I really hope the gentle lady
from Valencia Representative
Fajardo is listening because I
think we can all use a joke.
Please gentle lady
Representative Fajardo of each
of their would you please offers
a job.
Mr speaker what do you call.
Thank you.
Gentlelady from generated from
Olympia Mr speaker what do you
call it when you.
Who do you call when you step
your toe.
I don't know generally what.
Mr speaker I tell track.
Thank you generally we all
needed that the gentleman from
both Bernalillo Representative
Maestas.
Thank you Mr speaker I want to
wish a happy belated birthday to
my beautiful wife and just all
of the every other year I don't
get to spend birth the weather
but I wish you a happy belated
and I love you misspent a
solidly thank you Mr speaker.
Happy birthday are there any
other announcements.
Okay the general lady from
Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that the house
stand in recess until ten AM
tomorrow morning.
Thank you members for the work
today.
We'll be back here it's in the
morning in ten of the morning
today enjoy the rest of the
morning stay safe wear your mask
