Eight folks present.
Thank you thank you everyone I
must confess that my alarm it
was never set last night so I'm
running a few I'm running on
fumes at this point but I'm I'm
so happy to be here and to see
you all secretary Santa has
already been promoted
to panelist welcome back
secretary I know that we've had
a number of Committee members
who have been just asking about
the federal funds that are
coming down from the recent
stimulus package specifically
related to transportation and
secretary I I recognize that we
don't yet know what what's going
to happen with all of that and
so but we we're we're grateful
that you're here I know that
there's just there's there's
some there's some uncertainty
moving forward with a lot of
things and I think members are
just kind of curious and
interested on on what your
thoughts are so thank you for
sending a presentation and and
all all all handed off to you
know.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee good to
see everybody again I guess
we're getting close to the end
so thank you for all of your
hard work over these last of
fifty five fifty six days I know
you guys have been working long
hours and all of you have been
very supportive of our
department
in a lot of different ways
postal voting for bills and in
supplying us with some funding
to get our work done so I just
want you to know that I
appreciate everything each and
everyone of you do appreciate
all the work that you do for the
citizens of our state I know
we're in the homestretch and
again there in Saturday at noon
will come soon enough so just
wanted first of all thank
everybody for everything they've
been doing and all the
sacrifices they've made over the
last several weeks madam
chairman to go ahead and share
my screen right now so I can to
show The presentation.
It's a short presentation but I
think it hopefully addresses
some of the questions that I've
been getting about the DOT can
everybody see that.
Okay I think everybody can see
that and I'll give you my best
guesses as to how fundings in
the be where we are now in in
our budget and then what type of
funding maybe we can look
forward to in the next nine
months or so so
yes to kind of give you where we
are now we're pretty happy with
our budget as you know coming
out of this committee it was
over a billion dollars the first
time that's happened in quite
some time and as long as I've
been here which is over twenty
years
it's it's about half state half
federal but we're pretty happy
with that I think the only thing
that obviously we wish would
have been different with some of
the changes in the operational
budget but we're gonna figure
out a way to work past that the
other change that probably
happened that you guys are not
aware of we're maybe not aware
of is we are going to be
providing ten million dollars to
help shore up the Brian well
situation in the southeast part
of our state so
they're still about eighteen
million dollars short we're
providing ten and then I think
there's eight million dollars
coming from somewhere else in
the budget so just to kind of
give you an update on that over
the last several years we've
provided from DOT funds about
forty one million which will
include this ten million help
shore up Brian well and then
we're getting paid back from
motor vehicle excise tax at a
rate of about six million
dollars per year so after this
year will have been paid back
about nineteen nineteen and a
half million and so by about
twenty twenty four twenty twenty
five with this new allocation
will provide the breakeven and
then continue to to work our way
into the black but it'll be a
few years before we're paid back
with that particular money but
that's something that kind of
changed after the the budget
left this committee.
As you're aware we're very
thankful that in house bill two
there's about a hundred and
seventy million dollars for DOT
I'm gonna kind of go over those
projects really quickly in just
a minute in about a hundred and
twenty million or so of money
for our local happy to say that
the bill moving that money into
the local transportation
projects fund is already passed
the house and the Senate in that
thank getting in the in the
right now and will be at the
governor's desk soon so we're
happy that that this money will
be going there along with the
reoccurring revenue source for
motor vehicle excise tax and in
so that that fund will see money
now every single year moving
forward probably to the tune of
about forty million a little
more than forty million.
We're also happy to report that
our bonding bill has passed both
committees on the house side it
had already passed the Senate
will be next up on the house
floor would ask for your support
on that bill is Senate bill one
twenty one we're estimating
somewhere around three hundred
million dollars in proceeds I
put here two hundred and ninety
million is to be on the
conservative side but
we are going to put that
together with the hundred
seventy that we received put
together a plan and then as I
committed to you madam chair
will go ahead and sit down with
you and anyone from your
committee that wants to be
involved in kind of go over
that.
D. much going off the list that
we have been for the last sixty
days so I don't see any major
surprises there we just want to
work on getting those projects
funded and being as equitable as
possible across our districts so
assuming that bill does pass and
we start the bonding process
we'll go ahead and and put the
Maria gather for our plans for
that and of course involve you
back in December I had mentioned
also that we received about
ninety one point eight million
dollars of federal recovery
funding.
We're after all the formula
based.
Reductions were done some to the
Albuquerque and the MPO some to
the el Paso MPO the DOT's
and it's received about eighty
million in direct funding
that'll also be part of the pie
that we're putting together I
don't know that we're gonna
spend all eighty million into
projects but we need to make
sure that a lot of these
projects have enough money to
get finished so absurd there
some odds and ends some projects
are quite fully funded we may
pull from that eighty million to
go ahead and make sure that we
have a full project and we can
let you move forward and then
we're working on the summary but
we do have a lot of capital
outlay money that's out there
that's coming to the DOT some of
it is flow through but we're
still working our way through
that
that big process of identifying
where those that money will go
and and if and how it will
support any of the projects that
we have on our list so for
example one of the projects in
our list is still billable con
there are some private capital
outlay money into passive input
towards that and so we want to
make sure we have the complete
picture then we're putting these
projects together so getting
close now the summarizing that
in and of course one we'll see
what's what stays in there's any
vetoes and then at the end we'll
put all those projects together
into one spreadsheet so we can
have a good idea so that's where
we are with this session
right now at this point
everything is looking good like
I said I appreciate everything
that that this committee is done
to help support the DOT.
These are the projects that have
been put into house bill two of
half of this money is you know
was put in through the through
the house process the process
that madam chair uses and of
course madam chair lunch tribute
uses more was half of the money
was divided equally among six
districts and actually the
Senate did that also on their
side and so what you're gonna
see here is that full allotment
of having projects assigned to
it in the past the Senate and
the left their house loan and
the house is kind of put your
marks this year that the Senate
decided to do that in the Senate
went strictly off the list that
we provided them and so what
this spreadsheet shows is kind
of this are you have a big
picture of what was finally
going to be in house bill two
The ex in that I'm showing our
in district one two and three on
the right column you'll see
whether N. M. D. O. T. this was
on the list there was a couple
in district one that we're not
on our list but for the most
part most of these projects came
directly off the to this that we
provided and so that's good
because these are projects have
been vetted
not only by our district
engineers but fire design folks
and everything that and have
good timelines as to when this
money will get out so this is
for the first three districts
and then this next pages for the
the last three districts and as
you can see there that all adds
up to the hundred and seventy
million that's provided in house
bill two and there's about five
or six projects they got in here
that weren't on the list and
we'll we'll do our best to make
those work
but if it's a good snapshot of
the state and I think a good
equitable accounting the across
the board of that money for on a
statewide basis so you should
have that if you want to take a
look at that in more detail I
want to spend too much time on
it but we're happy that the
majority of those came off the
list that we provided.
So
this is kind of just to
summarize for more smaller list
we had a hundred and fifty two
million identified the H. B. two
section allocated about eighty
five million of that so we're
still sixty six million dollars
short often small project list
many of the major projects we
had over a billion dollars in
major projects of allocated
about sixty million in house
bill two that still leaves over
a billion dollars worth of
projects and this is probably
we're we're going to focus the
bonding money is to help shore
up some of those major projects
over a billion dollars worth
that we are
still short and then like I said
there were some projects that
we're we're on in house bill two
but not on our list in those
totaled about twenty three point
four million so this gives you a
good idea what what is in house
bill two.
So what is our future funding
look like we we expect the new
stimulus or or from the new
stimulus package I'm sorry that
that president by then signed a
few days ago I think it's been
pretty well documented how much
the states to get somewhere
around one point six billion
dollars there isn't anything
that I'm aware of that directly
comes to the D. O. T. unlike the
December recovery package that
came directly to us the new
stimulus package goes to the
state as a whole and I know
there's a spirited discussion
about where that money goes and
who decides where it gets put
between the governor's office
and legislature
I have heard in people have told
me that in house bill two
there's been another two hundred
million identified from that
federal money going to D. O. T.
I have not personally seen that
but that's what I heard and
whether or not that stays in
there I have no idea but if it
were in fact true and it's in
there and that we're the state
and that would be another two
hundred million coming to the
Department and then we would put
that towards the list on that we
put together so we'll see how
that goes like I mentioned
before there's nothing directly
coming to the D. O. T. so of
that one point six billion will
just have to see how that
ultimately gets allocated across
the state and across departments
in the needs the many needs that
the state has.
I also the new transportation
bill as you know the fast that
expired last September so we're
in a continuing resolution all
indications are that there's a
lot of push to get a new
infrastructure package at the
federal level done sooner rather
than later we would expect that
to pass no later than September
thirtieth when the continuing
resolution Anne's we would
expect there to be more money
overall as a nation for for
infrastructure how much money
New Mexico would get out of that
I don't know we're really
pushing to keep the formula
based funding so that if there
is an increase in the overall
New Mexico will get their fair
share.
However there is talk of
increasing some earmarked
programs competitive grants
those type of things
which we would have to compete
for with other states and so
what we're trying to do is
position ourselves with projects
that are shovel ready that would
be good for the state that if we
had to compete we would
hopefully be successful in
competing for that new money but
we do fully expect that to get
signed I think there's a lot of
motivation a lot of promises
that have been made how they're
going to fund it I don't know
doesn't seem that they want to
increase the federal gas tax I'm
just not sure how else they're
going to do it is frightening to
be some type of comprehensive
approach but I would expect some
new federal money to be
available sometime in October
that can certainly help our
state as well
so those are kind of the three
future funding items that we're
just not sure about we expect to
get some money from from all
three of those how much I don't
know but we as you all know have
plenty of needs and so there's
not a shortage of places for
that money to go for for the
state and for the D. O. T..
I just wanted to kind of give
you an update as to where we are
on some of our bills I won't go
over all of these on the left
side you'll see we had a twelve
DOT agency bills this year that
were introduced now we already
have to on the governor's desk
for the past four chambers right
now we have five on the house
floor you can see the numbers
there one of those being like I
mentioned Senate bill one twenty
one which is our bonding bill.
We have one bill on the Senate
floor and so I those I heard on
the house floor that one bill on
the Senate floor we do have one
billion house judiciary has not
been scheduled yet but we expect
that to be scheduled tomorrow
and we have on one bill in our
Senate tax business and
transportation committee that
hasn't been scheduled yet that
is a duplicate of another one so
we're confident one of those
will pass and then one billion
in Senate finance out of the
twelve Bills we're pretty
confident that eleven of the
twelve will pass.
Our construction management
general contracting bill for the
second straight year has been
stuck in Senate Judiciary it got
over there on February tenth so
it's been there for about thirty
five days or more with no
movement for communication and
so we're we're pretty upset
about that it's something that
could really help the state but
for whatever reason it's just
not being heard there have been
no there is no opposition to
that
last year we started on the
house side it passed the house
unanimously without any
opposition so as a bipartisan
support but whatever reason it
stuck in in Senate judiciary so
that is the one casualty that
the department has this year
what are the other eleven bills
on more looking good at all I
passed on the right side just
some other notable bills that
we're supporting there's two
airport built the rural
essential service act and so we
are supporting those at least
one of those looks like it's
going to pass so we're very
happy about that in the forward
to implementing that program our
house bill two seventy I should
say are but that's
Representative Lundstrom said
Thomas vehicles is on the Senate
floor so that looks like that
has a good opportunity to pass
we have some other bills on
there that we're following and
then at the bottom on some
couple broadband bills that we
came to an agreement on
yesterday on some amendments to
help make sure that our
interests are protected and so
we expect and Cyndaquil ninety
three and house bill tend to
both pass and we put this on the
past two in improving and
increasing the broadband
availability in our state so
those are kind of some of the
bills that we're supporting and
following and and helping
hopefully move through the
process.
So with that madam chair wanted
to be shortened that way would
leave plenty of time for
questions I also have on standby
R. six district engineers and so
if at any point you feel like
you need to bring them in to
answer questions please feel
free to do that if I can answer
but otherwise we're I'm I'm
happy to answer any question
that the you are the committee
may have so thank you for the
time.
Thank you so much Secretary and
I don't think I'm the only one
alone when you and I aren't the
only ones along saying and a lot
of our bills are dying Senate
Judiciary so I think it's just
been a common pattern the
session so we do have questions
again thank you so much for The
presentation first we have
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and I
could not help but here the
secretary mentioned yes six
district engineers on stand by
and now I've been curious to the
district to engineering this.
Mr secretary are you are you can
reveal it to us or.
Representative county let me
text Rick Padilla and and make
sure that I can announce that so
give me just a second while
we're talking I'll text him or
he'll text me and let me know I
think.
Everything all the paperwork I
think is getting close but I'll
let you know in just a few
minutes all right thank you for
that I I
Are they really caught my
attention when you said six and
I thought we're gonna find out
so I appreciate that
I noticed on the district one
through three years out on
highway thirty nine it talks
about re doing that was hot in
place.
Instead of male and female are
or whatever what what exactly is
that process compared to we go
in and mail it out and and and
put it back.
I I just I don't know the
difference right Madam chair
representative that would
definitely be a question for
either it could do are one of
our district engineers
yeah I'm not that familiar with
the different processes and I
would probably answer that
question incorrectly so I could
either get back with you on that
or madam chair if you want to
let in different videos on our
one.
Provided him over okay thank you
very much so Rick did you hear
the question.
I did I believe the question was
related to Good Morning madam
chair and members the committee
again repeat the executive
director for I we appropriations
yes I believe the question was
talking about how to place
recycle.
Yes it I noticed some of the
roads and I believe is district.
Three or four I can't I don't
call it is how we thirty nine is
work caught my attention to talk
about how to place the paving
project immediately below that
was a bill and still do melons
dollars off like that and and
I'm just curious what the
differences.
Madam chair representative
potter please recycle used a lot
on what it does is will recycle
the top two inches two and a
half inches Max what what we do
is is it'll it'll be developed
and that will mill the amendment
the material up it'll be moved
to a next another piece of
equipment where it's crushed and
screened moves to another piece
of equipment where a animal sin
is added it's heated up and then
it's placed back down and roll
just like general your comment
hot mix it's not conducive to
every application it is a long
train you know six or seven
pieces of equipment in tandem so
there's it's a great process but
what happens is after that that
process is done we usually come
back and either chips sale it
put a driving course on it a
thin overly we did that to the
we're proud about I don't know
four years ago we did a two and
a half inch hot in place and
then we pay do with three inches
of hot mix on top of that we're
expecting to get ten or twelve
years out of it I'm so it is a
great process and just depending
on the location AT TI's you know
in the oil field that's why we
did the extra three inches of
hot mix on top but it just
depends on the location and we
can address a lot of things with
that it is a
early you know economical
process so it's good for DOT
integrate process okay I just
didn't understand it thought I
would just thank you I
appreciate it.
It's
it's on my questions madam chair
thank you next we have
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair
Chair secretary for district two
for US fifty four we're we're
set seven miles of roadway at
exactly thank you.
Thank you madam chair and
Representative and well I'm
answering this madam chair if
you could bring in Francisco
Sanchez and.
Available and I'll just say to
answer Representative Crowder's
first question well we bring and
Cisco in we do have a new
district two engineer all the
signatures are finalized yet but
it's it's just a formality at
this point because everyone's
been notified but it is going to
be and I want to welcome
Francisco Sanchez as the new
district two engineer I will
tell you that it was a very
competitive process we had some
really good applicants both
internally and externally as a
matter of fact when we were
making our finals as decisions
we have to meet a couple times
to go over everything because we
just saw had so such quality
folks that had applied we have
some quality internal folks that
were there
but we chose Francisco Sanchez
and so he'll be leading district
to and taking tempore Chris
place so I hope all of you get
to know him and work with them
he's been with the department
for a while and I know we'll do
a very good job and I want to
thank all of the folks that did
apply
because it was a tough decision
because I was just so many
quality folks so Representative
Crowder that's who your new
district two engineer will be
and then I'll turn it over to
him to answer Representative
pedigrees question something.
Good morning madam chair
representative of of that
section of the US before that is
there the last remaining section
guess point fifty four that
needs improvement near the
Corona area.
When I appreciate the
And congratulations voted for to
continue to working with
Francisco.
That I look forward to working
with with all the
Representative.
In the.
Thank you madam chair you about.
Thank you Representative next we
have a chairwoman Lundstrom.
Thank you madam chair I want to
thank the cabinet secretary for
the report this morning it's
always very helpful to actually
see how things are going to be
budgeted and and put forth in
the upcoming fiscal year a
couple things I wanted to share
with the secretary first I want
to extend my sincere
appreciation to the DOT staff
that have helped with both house
bill two seventy and Senate bill
one thirty three.
we've had excellent staff
support on the economists bills
and acts so instead of support
on the rural air service bill
both were fairly complicated
their new initiatives but the
staff the DOT staff were
excellent in in helping with
getting that right the one thing
I would like to advocate and and
maybe this is an action from
this committee would be a letter
to speaker Egolf requesting that
we continue the interim
transportation committee I each
year Legislative Council decides
what committees will be
established throughout the year
throughout the summer and
unfortunately for the last I
don't know if it's been the last
two or three years the interim
transportation committee has
been a sub committee of the tax
revenue stabilisation.
Which doesn't make sense to me
when it was first created it was
a standalone Committee and then
there was complaining from the
senators that they didn't have
enough people
to assign to these interim
committees so then it just
became a subset of track taxed
revenue stabilization which
means that we only got two
committees to meetings for full
interim which was ridiculous I
mean that doesn't even make
sense to me we met two times in
the entire for the entire summer
and it was only for one day
each.
The reason I ask for this the
madam chair and committee is
that on our economists bill I
made a commitment to the work
group that we would continue
that process in collaboration
with the interim transportation
committee.
if this bill becomes law which
we've got our all of our fingers
crossed that it will it's still
needs work it still needs
the rulemaking case where
there's input by the legislative
body so I would like to ask
madam chair the letter come from
this committee to speaker Egolf
us that we continue with that
interim transportation committee
but not a sub committee of
somebody else that means we're a
second thought instead of having
a full agenda on our
transportation concerns I think
it's also important because we
may be looking out I don't know
if that two hundred million will
hold which is federal money as
something that Senate finance
did House Appropriations did not
do that we did not budget
federal stimulus money in house
bill two but the Senate did and
that's what the secretaries
talking about that two hundred
million I'm not even sure if
that's eligible I I I just I
don't know you know if that's an
eligible use of those funds.
So.
I just think that we've got
enough cooking they'll be enough
activity statewide enough
projects to be updated with us
and.
Hopefully we'll be able to
travel like all the other
committees have over the past I
know this last summer was all
virtual but I don't think you
look at infrastructure you don't
look at transportation problems
from assume meeting I think you
get out there and you go look at
a menu do site visits that kind
of thing so that's why I ask
madam chair and again I want to
thank the secretary Perry for
providing the information today
and for all the very good staff
work the certainly I and others
and worked on these bills have
received.
Thank you.
Thank you.
We can certainly work on a
letter I agree a hundred percent
about or.
Just your vision in terms of
what they should look like so
thank you
Next we have Representative
Garrett.
Thank you madam chairwoman and I
I want to thank chairwoman
Lundstrom for what she said we
we really need to go hike that
Brian well to be honest and some
of the other projects.
And also just taking a deep dive
where the the six engine Harris
like we have these six districts
but it would really be excellent
if the legislators from that
each district could mate may be
associated with the interim
meetings so we can really look
at the roads for example many
people on this committee are
from Bernalillo and Sandoval we
have all these roads but to
really take a deep dive with the
secretary or that are specific
engineer would really be
beneficial
in shaping what has to come plus
the whole issue of gas taxes
electric vehicles it's just so
many issues that we don't have
time so I just want a second
that letter idea thank you.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Thank you madam chair I just
like to first of all thank you
for the job that you've done in
this in a room for being your
first year you got a great job
certainly
You know a second third or
fourth.
On chairwoman left from.
luncheons recommendation.
Having served on this committee
as long as I have it really
makes a difference when you can
get out with the engineers and
see what they're doing and see
the impact that is really having
on your district or not see what
it's you know what it's doing to
you district and be more
realistic about what is needed I
think one of the shortcomings
that we've had in this entire
session is usually at our annual
meeting you know we all have the
opportunity to support one
another on those projects
because we've been out together
to see him so I think that
there's just just very very
important and I also think it it
both for better legislation when
we come into the sessions
because we have a better idea as
to what is needed.
Versus what is wanted.
And so that makes that makes a
big district a big difference I
have district forty four we've
been battling with five fifty
now I think my entire tenure.
In going from my twenty five to
Five fifty to five twenty eight
and this is it's been
interesting to watch how is
disrupted even though the
majority need is there and I
think by the time it's finished.
It's still not going to be
enough.
But but I also how have been all
that construction has disrupted
the business quarter that we had
been working on as well during
this period of the ABA of time
and so
Your nose is real important and
and I think people finally
realizing the major role the
transportation really plays in
each one of our districts so
that's kind of my spin on things
and again madam chair thank you
madam an awesome job.
In this committee this the
session thank you.
Thank you so much Representative
I really appreciate and like I
mentioned to you several days
ago it's it's it's a really
great compliment to to get that
from you
I I think Representative
Pettigrew did you want to ask
another question.
Thank you madam chair.
I got home last night and at
about two or three hours worth
of work and then got up this
morning and work together so the
far my manners are there I do.
Appreciate the way you run this
committee of and the the effort
you put into this I do want
Madam chair of the also support
gentleman on streams request for
letter as well unite madam chair
talked about this at the very
beginning of session and I think
this is critical and whatever we
can do to continue to support
secretary Sierra six district
engineers we're.
Accomplishing their mission is
is well worth the time
investment for my side to make
sure we get that done so once
again thank you madam chair for
where the you run the committee
and thank you chair wh what
for further suggesting that
letter thank you.
Thank you Representative and
thank you Representative
Powdrell Culbert did you want to
make a comment yeah thank you
madam chair I forgot to say
something about the secretary
you know you're not have grown
together on this committee have
been there almost twenty years
then you're nineteen years and.
And so he's you know our had my
hat is off to a secretaries
sensible because he's done a
really great job so I think we
need to recognize you know what
he's done
as well as the secretary of
transportation I think he's not
fourth of this.
Secretary of transportation.
And so it's interesting to watch
how each of these individuals
have
continue to improve the quality
of New Mexicos highway so.
Secretary Santa might thank you.
Thank you Representative I had a
good mentor Representative Mr
this Tom church there but also
have been working with for over
twenty years I spent a lot of
time in his office is last year
they're just soaking up
everything I could so I
appreciate those comments and I
had a good good person to watch
inner and to come in and and
replace them so thank you.
Thank you Representative and
thank you secretary again I
appreciate your flexibility in
coming in
to to do this presentation I ate
I ate I have certainly learned a
lot this past session and I know
that I'm gonna continue to learn
a lot as well I've I've had
conversations with full time and
and I know Representative
Garrett and a few others about
my commitment to transportation
and public works and
infrastructure and how I just I
nerd out over it I think it's
it's part of what my my I
realize that it's part of my
lane here in the legislature and
and so I'm really looking
forward to the future and and
I'm again with Representative at
chairwoman Lundstrom
Having the ability to have to to
be a part of this process
through the legislature outside
of just this being a
subcommittee I think is really
critical because there's so many
of us who do have a lot of
really important expertise and
and and in my case while like I
mentioned this before while
district thirty five the
district that I represent is is
it is a place that I love and I
care for I also see this whole
process as as a whole as an
entire state because roads and
infrastructure they don't see
they don't see lines or borders
or anything like that and so I'm
I'm looking forward to six days
visiting all the projects soon
and and and really I guess
getting my hands dirty when it
comes to this stuff and so I I
look forward to meeting you all
in person and it has been a
great pleasure serving you all
as chair this the session and
appreciate you all being so
patient with me and with with
our staff time and and Mario
have been amazing and I hope
we've been able to to help you
all out as much as possible I
always I I always feel around
this time that it's like senior
year and it's like.
It me getting signatures for my
and my of your book because it's
always the Santo at the end of
the session but I appreciate you
all and and and happy to to work
with you all and I look forward
to to stay in touch in the
interim and and seeing what we
can do between now and and next
session.
Madam chair.
Go ahead representative madam
chair I apologize I tried to get
my hand up but I'm on my mobile
phone and I can't do it so if I
could speak a little bit.
Meister Garcia sure go up
solution.
Thank you madam chair Mr
secretary I just want to say
thank you for all you've done
for our state your you know we
talk about fairness and I see a
lot of fairness coming out of
all your departments like to
diet thank all you department
workers.
You have a local group people
and we look forward to working
with you I really what I
appreciate really want to thank
you for us to forty not helpful
seven and what thirty one that
can work to our state at the end
of the day it's gonna be an
economic by writing so I'd
really appreciate that support
and that to reenter it reiterate
we're Representative Lundstrom
said we really do need to write
a letter to the speaker about
this standalone Committee could
it's very important for our
state in our committee also once
again our state thank you thank
you staff will be working on
this thank you madam chair.
You vice chair and thank you all
I don't Representative
Representative Crowder did you
have any comments you know madam
chair I have absolutely enjoyed
this committee this year it's
been awesome great leadership
from from both you and and chair
Lundstrom of please sign me up
on that letter I think it's a
great idea I think it will
really benefit the state of New
Mexico to to get this committee
even more educated than they are
it's real pleasure to be part of
this committee thank you for
your leadership I'm sure you did
a very good job your phone what
you always answer your phone
when I called in the I really
appreciate the so.
That's on my comments thank you
madam chair thank you
Representative and thank you all
secretary again thank you for
coming at the a short notice on
this but we really enjoyed the
presentation at least I did I
will Representative gear it has
already contacted me letting me
know she would help me draft a
letter so we will certainly get
that going and and and if we can
get some signatures before the
end of the week we can certainly
send it to the speaker's office
and see if we can get something
done in the interim before it
for now it does
not go ahead secretary I just
want to know if I can make just
a closing comment whenever
you're ready for that yeah
absolutely go ahead.
I like I mentioned in the
beginning thank you and and your
committee for all your hard work
and and what I wanted to just
close with was just I think my
staff they've been working long
hours as you have over these
last almost sixty days and it's
been a of the big challenges you
know doing the session virtually
they've had to buy work twice as
hard to get things moving
through and I show that list of
legislative bills that we have
in only to have one casualty
speaks volumes for what my
staff's been able to do I just I
can't say enough about the
talent that we have a department
right now and and that's why I
feel very confident whenever
we're provided funding at its
name be used appropriately and
be used as a very well to help
support our state and so I just
want to publicly thank them for
all their hard work and
recognize it the department only
successful because of the work
that they do so thank you for
letting me say that.
Thank you Secretary thank you
very much and yes to the to your
staff they've been really really
great and I look forward to
meeting you all in person and
and I'm I'm looking forward to
that I'm I really am so there
are no other questions but I
want to thank everybody again
and we don't have any referrals
from the Senate right now or any
other bills
leading up to the next four days
but if I don't see you all in
this committee anymore will will
certainly see you on the floor
but again it's been a pleasure
and and and certainly will will
be in touch in the in the
interim.
So with that.
It do for well for now thank
you.
Thank you all have a good
morning and we'll see you on the
floor.
And thanks to Mario for doing a
great job as a committee
assistant.
Thank you Representative.
And our fabulous analyze
secretary Tom church.
Absolutely thank you joy.
Madam chair.
It appears to help authority
might wanna try calling.
