Members we have a quorum.
All calls now closed
gentleman from.
Representative Chatfield we
would send you the case in
place.
We thank you for all the
blessings in our lives we thank
you for these good people that
have cable.
Forced to manage the resources
that we have to make the wise
decision for our state and the
way that it proceed forward we
ask you tonight that you give us
wisdom and we ask these things
in Jesus name amen.
With the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative day
Hochman Vigil do this the pledge
allegiance.
The gentleman from Lee Lee this
in the salute to the New Mexico
flag.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo thank
you Mr speaker if we had
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Other announcements.
There are no announcements we
are going to be expanding Mr
speaker.
I'm sorry yes one person
publicly someone from San Juan
Representative Lord gesture Mr
speaker I'm I'm pleased to
announce and inform the body
that in this day in two thousand
six.
My youngest son Evan was born he
turns fifteen today so I wish
him Happy Birthday.
A teenager congradulations.
Whether any further
announcements for the next
budget committee report.
All right we are with the
leadership's consent I
understand the speaker has
consulted with major with the
minority leader house bill one
twenty two as amended will be
expunged and.
From the house appropriations
and finance committee.
Yeah is there any objections the
committee reporting experiencing
nine the committee report report
will the expansion.
Members are you should have
gotten a list of the items that
will go through.
We may be going in a little
different or will do messages
first then committee reports
than third reading we may move
things around Representative
Chandler is I understand in a
Senate committee were hoping
that she gets out of it she does
will go to that bill first if
not we'll go to the second item
on the agenda all right
Find one final announcement we
adopting the favorable committee
report for house bill one ninety
five one.
Yeah one twenty two as amended
there being no objections the
committee reports of that.
Now we will go back to gentle
lady from Dona Ana County.
Thank you Mr speaker window
reading of messages please click
to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in gross copy of Senate bill two
as amended with emergency clause
has been read in full and signed
by the officers of the Senate in
open session and request the
signatures of the officers of
the house respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk.
Will be honored.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate bill twenty nine.
Senate bill fifty Senate bill
seventy three Senate bill two
seventy one and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief
clerk.
This is really a.
Gentlelady from Dona.
Thank you Mr speaker if we can
go to committee reports.
Click to read.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee team is
preferred house bill one ninety
one has had it under
consideration of course it was
recommendation that I do passed
as amended respectfully
submitted Patricia A. Lundstrom
chance.
Mr speaker move adoption.
Reduction of the federal
committee report on house bill
one ninety one as amended.
Those in favor please signify by
saying aye on a macro a
committee report is adopted.
Mr speaker your local government
land grants and cultural affairs
committee team it's been
referred Senate bill one eleven
as amended has had it under
consideration point same as
recommendation that I do path
and then three for today
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Miguel P. Garcia chair.
House speaker move product that
report that only that.
The option of the favorable
committee report for Senate bill
one eleven as amended all those
in favor please signify by
saying aye.
All of us may committee report
is adopted.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee to home it's been
referred house bill one eighty
nine has had it under
consideration point thing with
recommendation that I do pass
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
We're on adoptions.
The option of a favorable
committee report for house bill
one eighty nine all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
All of the day the committee
report is adopted.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
tomb is been referred Senate
bill one fourteen has had it
under consideration reports
things recommendation that I do
pass respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Move adoption.
We're option of favorable
committee committee report for
Senate bill one fourteen all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye aye all opposed day
committee report is adopted.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too it's been referred
house bill fifty as amended has
had it under consideration point
things recognition that I do not
passed the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill fifty two passed
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
That option.
There's no objection to the
point three read together but
reflected in the journalist
being acted on individually the
clerk what we did together.
Seeing no other option the court
to read together.
House consumer and public
affairs committee substitute for
house bill two eighty six do not
pass House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House consumer
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for house bill two
eighty six to pass.
House joint resolution twelve do
pass respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Move adoption.
The option of house bill fifty
as amended.
we are an adoption of a I'm
sorry an unfavorable committee
report on house bill fifty as
amended a favorable committee
report for House Judiciary
Committee substrate for House
Bill fifty as amended and
unfavorable Committee report for
House consumer Public Affairs
committee substitute for house
bill two eighty six a favorable
committee report for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House consumer public their
substitute for house bill two
eighty six and a favorable
committee report for house joint
resolution twelfth.
All those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
All opposed may committee
reports are doc.
Mr speaker Education Committee
was been referred house bill
three thirty one has had it
under consideration forcing with
recommendation that it do not
pass but that house Education
Committee substitute for House
Bill three thirty one to pass
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair.
Mr speaker move adoption of the
committee report
Jackson reports we read together
by the clerk as reflected in the
journalist if they were acted
upon individually.
Seeing no objection the court to
read together.
House memorial I do passed.
Senate bill two seventy two as
amended to pass and thence to
the labor veterans and military
affairs committee.
Senate bill three forty one do
you pass and then city
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andrés Romero chair.
Speaker I now move adoption of
the committee reports.
One.
The option of an unfavorable
Committee ripple for House Bill
three thirty one and a favorable
committee report on house
Education Committee substitute
for House Bill three thirty one
of favorable committee report on
how strong memorial I a
favorable committee report for
Senate bill two seventy two is
amended and a favorable
committee report on Senate bill
three forty one all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
Eight.
This may.
Committee report is adopted.
Mr speaker your commerce and
economic development committee
to it's been referred Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
help public affairs committees
sets to Senate bill forty nine
has had it under consideration
report same as recommendation
that it to pass and then just
refer to the taxation revenue
committee respectfully submitted
on twenty Maestas chair.
There's no objection the point
will be read together by the
clerk but reflected in the
journal as individually acted
upon seeing no objection of.
So ordered.
More to read Senate bill sixty
four do pass.
Senate bill ninety four as
amended do pass respectfully
submitted a twenty molasses
chair.
Mr speaker thank you.
We're in adoptions Senate tax
business and transportation
committee subs.
Percent of bill through forty
nine favorable committee report
a favorable committee report for
Senate bill sixty four and a
favorable committee report for
Senate bill ninety four as
amended all those in favor
signify by saying aye I'm.
All of those may committee
report was adopted.
Yes.
Mr speaker your state government
elections Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill two oh nine has had it
under consideration point thing
with recommendation that I do
not have but that house state
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill two oh nine two passed
respectfully submitted Georgene
was charged.
Move adoption Mr speaker is no
objection the clerk is to read
all of the items as if acted
upon individually seeing no
objection it is so ordered.
More to read.
Senate bill twenty seven do you
have.
Senate bill ninety three as
amended.
Do you pass.
Senate bill two sixty six.
To pass and thence to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate Joint Memorial as the
Senate Joint Memorial one as
amended to pass respectfully
submitted Georgene Louis chair.
Move adoption.
The option of an unfavorable
unfavorable Committee report for
health health insurances
substitute for house bill two oh
nine a favorable committee
report on house state election
in the act.
And any Affairs Committee
substitute for House Health
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill to on
line a favorable committee
report on Senate bill twenty
seven a favorable committee
report on Senate bill ninety
three as amended a favorable
committee report on Senate bill
two sixty six and a favorable
committee report on Senate Joint
Memorial one as amended all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
I I all of those may.
Committee report is adopted.
gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Armstrong are you
ready on item number twenty
four.
I'm not your I know we're not on
third reading and I'm just
asking.
I mean if we have to yes Mr
speaker I can be ready whenever
you are thank you very much.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business third
reading of legislation.
All right we will go to the
second item on the calendar
which is item number twenty four
our gentle lady are you ready on
our house bill one twenty two.
Yes Mr speaker I'm ready on
house bill one twenty two if you
get me to that point the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
one twenty two as amended on
final passage has been taken and
that is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
one twenty two creates a health
care affordability fund
replacing of C. that was
against health insurance
companies under the affordable
Care Act a federal city with the
state
in addition to our existing
surtax to create a fund to help
us subsidize people are in the
exchange and are also trying to
help us small businesses in
affording insurance and Mr
speaker I do have an amendment
whenever you are all ready for
me to present that as well.
Gentle lady it's been
distributed we are ready wanted
to go ahead and explain the
amendment and thank you if you
are gentle lady if you would
please read the two oh two
number first thank you Mr
speaker the two oh two number is
point two two zero five five two
point three.
And Mr speaker this ammendment
we've had lots of conversation
with with the carriers about the
eventuality yes the federal
government reimposed of C. R.
yes they had seen under the
affordable Care Act and so this
ammendment makes it clear that
if that were to happen so the
same or substantially same.
type of C. two the same
taxpayers are what your health
insurance
companies.
We would adjust.
The surtax here accordingly
because we don't know if one we
don't know if they ever will
impose a fee and if they did we
don't know how much it would be
and so we would adjust the fee
if it's
this is the same it would be
removed altogether if it's less
than that it would be just
adjusted down but at no time go
less than the existing one
percent surtax and it would go
into effect on the leader of on
ninety days after signed into a
law or on the effective date of
the attacks we also don't know
if they were to do it how much
notice would be provided so
with that
Mr speaker I stand for questions
on the amendment.
Well let's start with the
amendment Is there debate on the
amendment.
The representative from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does a
gentlelady from Bernalillo
yield.
Mr speaker I gladly yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so
Once again trying to get through
this quickly as it.
Read in the
In the bill and then we'll see
other amendments
So what I understand there was
some discussion about this in in
committee is that correct to
that that the.
A federal surtax could
potentially be reinstated is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
was a little bit a discussion in
the in the committee but it's
been a discussion I'd say all
through the session with our
with the carriers it's kind of
tricky to write so we hadn't
we hadn't landed on an amendment
on it yet but we have come to
agreement on this language that
would take care of this issue.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so
This okay so the the Sir taxes
taken out what it two years ago
it or last year or something
like that at the at the federal
level.
we introduced at that time as.
A replacement tax that that New
Mexico would pick up.
The that same amount that was
being charged at the federal
level
but that was not being
reinstated but we.
Want to head and reinstated that
so the if the average person at
that time who was paying that
surtax.
Did not see an increase to their
taxes but New Mexico realized an
increase is is that correct I'm
trying to remember this.
In context and so what this is
doing.
Is if that surtax were
reintroduced at the federal
level then the surtax would come
off at the state level is that
correct or just.
What is being imposed at this
time as compared to what we
imposed last year.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman let me clarify I
proposed it last year we did not
pass anything last year so the
bill that's before us actually
imposes the surtax to take on
the place of what was of federal
see that went away this year.
And so that's what I'm impose a
yes Sir tax increase effective
next calendar year and the
amendment just says if by chance
some of State of fate is
reimposed at the federal level
we will adjust the state surtax.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady that that is now I
do remember.
It was it was a.
Introduced
and the idea was that a a
insurance hare someone who is is
a few at paying for their own
insurance that they were going
to realize a.
As we're a tax break from the
federal government and then we
were and your legislation last
year was two.
Impose as it is now to impose
what would have been in.
and no increase to the overall
policy but this year they have
recent reality realized a
savings from federal taxes and
what this is looking to do is to
reimpose at the local level that
amount and this.
Amendment is that if that were
to be reimposed at the federal
level okay that helps me
understand
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
Thank you.
The other gentleman from San
Juan Representative Strickler
yesterday.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
and gentle lady from Bernalillo
please yield I'm gladly able to
the other gentleman from San
Juan thank you.
Let me let me work on my.
Thank you
I really appreciate you doing
this I had a similar amendment a
prepared ready to go and you can
kind of beat me to the punch but
I'm glad because Mr speaker
gentle lady of this was brought
about to our it was brought up
in a committee hearing the
chamber of commerce is really
concerned that if we didn't have
a Twitter like this it would it
would really be hard on on or
ratepayers in so really want to
really appreciate keeping us all
if if Mr speaker gentle lady if
the federal government ran poses
is this a two and a quarter is a
two and a quarter of what the
old the federal tax surcharge
was.
Mr speaker and gentleman it was
of it's a was a fees so it's
kind of a formula what between
two point seven five and three
we've added a two point seven
five two are okay surtax but but
the fed okay with what your
dentist you're replacing the
federal tax with this with the
additional sites state tax and
estate taxes currently at one
percent so won't fall below the
the the existing state.
Surtax.
General gentlelady.
and Mr speaker and gentleman
that's correct.
Okay thank you and the the I'll
be speaking further on the back
on the bill that appreciate this
amendment.
Jenny for the discussion on the
amendment the representative
from the gentleman from Chavis
and Lincoln Representative not.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county yield Mister speaker I
gladly yield to the gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady this is
the first that I've seen of this
bill that I'm looking at the
amendment paragraph else.
And really the you for fifth
line down.
There's a a statement the right
of the health insurance premium
search search surtax shall be
decreased at a rate equal to the
right of the annual fee imposed.
Quickly looking at the bill it
looks like the.
surtax that were taxed as a
percentage and yet the.
Right that you're going to
reduce supply is the right of
the annual fee imposed.
So I'm I'm wondering how do you
reduce the percentage by a fixed
amount.
I'm Mr speaker and gentleman
that's maybe the tricky part so
we we increased our surtax here
by the lower of what that C.
generally ran in and converting
it to a percentage and so I
think we would we would do the
same but this is
mantis to say it is essentially
equivalent to whatever the C. is
raised at the federal level we
would decrease the surtax here
Mister Mr speaker and gentleman
we did it as a surtax because
that's the easiest way to
administer because we already
had as a surtax and so this
makes it
the simple to implement.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm just
looking at the language and it
just seems that the formula
that's provided in this
legislation.
May not get us to where you're
intending to go so you have a
percentage shall be decreased at
the rate equal to the right of
the annual fee and posed which
is I.
Set amount of dollars as I would
understand that.
In my reading that incorrectly
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman what we
have been imposed at the federal
level under the affordable Care
Act was in the form of the fee
as opposed to a tax.
Mr speaker gentle lady us see
being a set amount of money not
a percentage of.
Something.
That be after Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman could
you repeat that.
You stated that it was a C. and
so when I heard here the term
three I'm thinking of a set
amount at finite number.
And so if that is reduced of a
finite numbers reduced.
How does your language
calculated.
Or how does a calculation work
that you're trying to to reduce
the state premium surtax which
is a percentage.
Mr speaker and gentleman of.
In the same way that we have
reduced it to a a percentage
for the surtax.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I guess
I'm not familiar with that
process I'm just looking at the
amendment and and so it looked
to me like we were taking a
percentage and that percentage
is going to be decreased at a
rate equal to the rate of an
annual fee.
So they reduce a five dollar
charge down the.
Two fifty.
I suppose that that's a.
Fifty percent reduction.
But I'm not sure your language
on this ammendment allows us to
do that I'm just reading the
language wondering if you're if
the calculation that's provided
the committee members.
Gives you where you're intending
to go with that Mr speaker
gentle lady that that's my only
my only concern reading your
amendment thank you thank you.
Is there further debate on the
amendment.
See Nanzer objection to the
amendment.
No objection to the amendment
the amendment is adopted.
We're back on the bill
gentlelady.
I believe you have the floor
thank you
Mr speaker I stand for
questions.
Debate on the bill itself the
gentle lady from Katrin Sapporo
influencia Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo that
Armstrong caucus will be sealed
thank you Mr speaker I gladly
yield to the other member of the
Armstrong caucus and my favorite
Representative from cap.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
lady
I I really like the amendment
thank you very much for doing
that I really appreciate that Mr
speaker and crime lady that that
eases our attention on the bill
just a hair but I wanted to ask
a couple of questions so Mr
speaker and crime lady will
will our increase on that surtax
be the highest in the United
States.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
With the surtax a premium tax it
may be one of the highest tax
rates but it's also imposed on
one of the lowest average
premiums and so it's
And and again it's not Tax to
Are all to the general fund but
so that we can get more people
insured which will
help with with the entire
insurance market and provide
more business for the insurance
companies are more affordable
care for individuals and small
businesses in New Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
lady so from the information
that I have it will be the
highest in the United States the
highest tax price premium tax
and so one of the things of that
I'm concerned about is Mr
speaker translated you know that
percent of New Mexicans that
will be.
Thank you for that as we all
know that the insurance bill
will pass that on to New
Mexicans are paying for the the
paying for insurance and you
know the percentage of New
Mexicans that that that will be
passed on to madam Mr speaker
kind lady.
Thank you
Mr speaker and
And gentle lady.
They are the vast majority of
this actually about seventy five
percent of the of this will be
passed on through Medicaid.
As part of and will be
incorporated into the Medicaid
rates which will then draw down
of federal match so the vast
majority of this is it and
because we have more than forty
percent
of New Mexicans on on Medicaid
the vast majority is paid for by
Medicaid.
the rest
we'll get
I'm sure distributed or around
two other books of business if
you will but.
When you increase the number of
people insured it also helps to
stabilize and lower the premiums
for everyone else because you
spread the risk.
Thank you Mr speaker and prime
lady so
I I'm I understand the Medicaid
match but it's still match means
dollars out of taxpayers are the
reason the way that we pay for
that we pay for that match Mr
speaker and kind lady is the is
the people that are actually
buying insurance and and the
taxpayers of New Mexico will be
paying for that and so even if
it's a match.
It's still money that we have to
write a check for and Mr speaker
and kind lady about fourteen
percent of New Mexicans are the
ones who are purchasing actual
insurance off of not off of the
exchange and our offer Medicaid
and Medicare
So about forty percent of New
Mexicans will be putting the
majority of that bill and I
think Mr speaker and kind lady
that.
What with your with the changes
in the bill because I've heard
this is the third time effort
that they all Mr speaker income
lady Mr harden Health along
you're the chair of health and
the it was different and became
different there and then we
heard it in probation and it got
amended and I like the amendment
that you put in appropriations
and I like this and then I'm I
still can't support the bill
mainly because
Madam Mr speaker kind lady.
It's just it's just more money.
I understand that you're trying
to I understand what you're
trying to do and I appreciate
what you're trying to do I just
think there's a better way to do
it and
thank you for for always trying
to listen and try to make it
better and understanding other
people's points of view but at
this time Mr speaker kindly I
don't have any more questions
but I cannot support the bill in
this form thank you Mr speaker.
I'm sorry that there is further
debate the gentleman from San
Juan Representative lane.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from Bernalillo yield.
yes Mr speaker I gladly yield to
yet another gentleman from San
Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker the the
gentle lady from Bernalillo is
getting a lot of questions from
the general from San Juan
as maybe a little bit a helpful
dialogue for me and maybe others
that aren't health care experts.
This bill does implicate the
health care affordability fund
would you mind just giving me a
thirty thousand foot sort of
overview of what that phone
actually does.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman by creating this fund
where we will be able to offer
for individuals purchasing
health insurance on the health
insurance exchange we'll be able
to offer subsidies to try and
get the printer premium costs
down in their out of pocket
costs down.
So in addition to what subsidy
subsidies the federal government
provides we can provide some
additional subsidies and
in addition we're looking at how
we can help us support small
businesses are the vast majority
of small businesses don't offer
health insurance there is there
employees actually get covered
under Medicaid or of or in the
exchange as an individual or go
uninsured but there are small
businesses struggling to
provide insurance to their to
their employees and we are
intending to put together a
program to help small businesses
through our reinsurance so this
will go back directly to helping
individuals and small businesses
be able to afford to purchase
and state insured.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo thank you for for
that overview.
And I'm looking at the equipment
in context and as I understand
the the current amendments to
the bill there's a couple of
different time frames that
affect the percentages of this
tax that go to the health care
affordability fund and how
understand is for from July one
of twenty two and and till July
one of twenty four fifty five
percent of the taxes earned or
or collected underneath this tax
will go into that health care
affordability fund is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and then I also note
that starting in July one of
twenty four and and similarly on
going after that until the
legislature changes this that
decreases to thirty percent
meaning thirty percent of the
taxes collected go into the
health care affordability fund
is that correct.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
that's that's correct.
Mr speaker gentlelady from
Bernalillo would you mind just
educating white with it you know
I I just given what you explain
sort of what the health care
affordability fund is is seeking
to do
why are we reducing this from
fifty five percent for for two
years down to thirty percent
permanently.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I know it's a little
confusing the the tax will
start.
January of because health
insurance doesn't go on the
fiscal our state fiscal year the
tax will start in January of
twenty two.
We can't start offering the
budget until January of twenty
three.
So there's a little bit of a of
overlap in so in twenty two.
On the latter part
the latter part of fiscal year
twenty to which is January
through July twenty two we'll
also be collecting money into
the fund but not spending it
yet.
And then there's two fiscal
years of pretty state stable
solid funding to give us an
opportunity to get the program
started and be able to do
actuarial analysis of that so
that we can determine what's
kind of the right funding level
if you will.
That last fiscal year twenty
five it drops down to of the
thirty because it's half of a
plan here and we will have
presented in a and and we've got
the the left over if you will
for back from twenty two that we
hadn't spent yet because we
couldn't start offering the
program to get through the year
and at that point I don't know
that it stays at thirty percent
but we will have on annual
actuarial analysis presented to
LFC LFC after a couple of years
into this will be able to do a
program evaluation we'll see
what else the feds do or don't
do and will be able to have much
more data to
determine what's the right split
but we did it knowledge that
because we've kind of front
loaded if you will and twenty
two
twenty five is a little
less but it keeps it keeps for
several.
Fiscal years are really are
calendar years are really stable
funding so we can initiate the
program and get it going solid
and then come back to determine
what's the right split after
that.
Mr speaker and gentleman for
rural thank you for the
information there.
If if the legislature if the if
we get then also is back to the
gentle lady described
and it turns out that thirty
percent is too low we would have
to amend the statute is that
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
that is correct.
And you know I just sort of the
the flip side of the discussion
we're having is you know we've
been focusing on the health care
affordability fund and we talked
about fifty five percent of that
initially is going into of this
taxes going into the fund and
then that decreases the thirty
percent while the the flip side
of that is initially forty five
percent of the taxes.
generated going to the general
fund and that increases to
seventy percent of the general
fund is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct and that split is one to
cover the pre existing one
percent tax and also to cover
the Medicaid share of the
increase in and not rates
associated with the increased
tax.
Mr speaker gentle lady and.
I'm confident you'll correct me
if I if my understanding is that
correct but the way I understand
sort of the Russian also about
targeting money towards the
general fund.
Instead of just putting a
hundred percent of these taxes
into the health care
affordability fund is this
allows us to take advantage of
the federal match is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
exactly correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo and that makes sense
to me but I I I just have some
concerns I think.
When we put money in the general
fund is there any way that we
can guarantee our taxpayers.
That once those dollars actually
get put into the general fund
that they will only be spent on
of these type of.
programs like the health care
affordability fund.
Mr speaker and gentleman well
the funds that go to the
affordability fund our
that's a certain what they're I
used for the funds to go to the
general fund we know that a one
percent surtax is already there
so we had to accommodate that
and that that we need in the
Medicaid budget to cover the
medication share beyond that is
up to the legislature and wells
of the legislature for all of
that to appropriate and spend
that money
as as as we see that.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I think that the
highlights my concern is.
We can't promise the taxpayers
that once that money goes into
the general fund it will only
speak spent on on medical care
medical expenses things that are
around the theme of this bill
and when we talk about the the
percentage that's going into the
general fund increasing over
time I have concerns about that
and how that's written in the
bill but at my last line of
questioning revolves around of
page five Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo and again on the
on the amendments in context.
Let me get there Madam.
Mr speaker gentle lady from.
Only auto and when you do get to
that page and looking at the new
subparagraph two that was added
in in appropriations.
Okay gentleman can you tell me
what page you're looking at
Mr speaker gentle lady I am on
page five.
Of the equipment in context.
Okay.
Wow I understand sort of what
these programs are doing is it's
it's making expressed what are
what our intention and purposes
of the legislature in creating
this fund.
And one of those is to reduce
premiums for small businesses
and their employees purchasing
health care coverage in the
fully insured small group
market.
And so my question Mr speaker
gentle lady from Bernalillo is
really just a practical one half
how does this actually reduced
premiums for small businesses.
A lady if I grew and
Representative just like to make
sure we're on the same page so
when you're looking at the
amendments in context they do
not necessarily reflect the
amendments that have been made
so for example the amendment
that came out of the
appropriations and finance
committee do not appear to be
reflected on the amendment to
kind of some not a hundred
percent sure about that but you
might want to be careful about
that.
Mr speaker thanks for the
clarification images ask
question make sure we we are
talking about something actually
was adopted by amendment is in
our.
so Mister speaker generated from
Bernalillo do you.
See that subparagraph two that
that reads reduce premiums for
small businesses and their
employees purchasing health care
coverage in the fully insured
small group market.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman and
that was adopted in House
Appropriations.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlelady from Bernalillo
would be helpful for me to
restate my question.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
I understand your question and
if I could put this and a little
bit of context and that what do
you use of paragraph B. I. and
sub paragraphs one to.
Of three and.
Our for our is the general
purpose of the funds so it's
it's a broad authority of what
the fund can be used for.
And so are.
As far as our number two
premiums for small businesses
it's our intent to establish a
our reinsurance program but that
has that is something that came
up in discussion during the
session which is why it got
added in appropriations and not
one that we have slowly are
priced out and determined
exactly
How that is to be done we have
enough information that the
superintendent of insurance
believes that we can do that so
we wanted to add in here the
general authority of the purpose
of the funds so that funds could
be appropriated from of from the
affordability fund specific to
small businesses.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo and I I I I'm
confident part of the reason why
I don't understand because I'm
really just not familiar with.
With the health care insurance
process and and that industry
but are you saying that.
Russian of the.
Health care affordability fund
will be distributed to small.
small groups insurance plans.
Mr speaker and gentleman in no
we can't distributed directly to
small businesses what we can
create a program that they could
tap into that would help
stabilize or lower their
premiums I providing a
reinsurance product.
Mr speaker gentle lady and and I
just just.
My my overly simple way of
looking at things as I I just I
guess I struggle with the
premise of of how imposing a tax
can ultimately imposing Tax
specifically on a premium can
ultimately lower that premium so
can you help me understand that
that concept because it seems
very important to me.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
Apps to be helpful in explaining
in this in a for a small
business in a small business
they have a group plan that is
based on the health on the
experience of medical experience
of that group that employer and
so in establishing those
premiums if you have someone an
employee you've got a small
group of ten people twenty fifty
up to fifty is small group and
in the insurance code.
Our state you have twenty
employees and you get our group
insurance for them for that
group and you have someone who
comes down with cancer or you
have another employee that turns
out needs a kidney transplant
these are very high cost
conditions and the medical costs
of that individual but because
the premiums are based on the
group as a whole will increase
everyone's premium in order to
cover the cost of the whole
group so reinforced reinsurance
does is
it's another insurance product
that picks up those out liars if
you will so that the full cost
of someone that is really costly
isn't are spread among that
small group.
Does that make sense Mr speaker
and gentleman Mr speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo that that
explanation of reinsurance does
make sense is that something
that the state of New Mexico is
currently offering for small
business insurance programs Mr
speaker and gentleman now.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentle lady
And is there anything in the
statute itself that would
actually put into law the
process that the gentle lady
from Bernalillo just described
in terms of of reinsurance and
that program being initiated to
the state of New Mexico.
All Mr speaker and gentleman of
what we do what this requires
that we do is that the
superintendent comes up with a
plan that has to be presented to
LFC and LESC has to make the
appropriations out of the fund
based on the the plan that we
develop in their rule making
rulemaking follows that.
Mr offices superintendent of
insurance.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo not.
That office of the
superintendent of insurance
that's a that's what we would
call the ministry of agency here
an agency that's appointed by
the governor is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
superintendent is actually by
state law it's a nominating
commission that hires the
superintendent of insurance but
it's a it's a of freestanding
agency of the state.
Mr speaker gentle lady thanks
for the clarification.
I think it you know it raises
another concern for me is when
we just talk about us as
legislators in our role as as
lawmakers and crafting and
creating laws and in
particularly talking about
creating new a government type
programs I think I I prefer to
have things more express more
explicit in statute and and less
discretion for administrative
agencies I think that's part of
the purview of us's legislator.
and so the the reinsurance
program to straight make sense
to me I think there's more in in
that idea but I do have concerns
when we did lose Lee up all of
the flushing of the rules and
and actually requiring that type
of program to an administrative
agency and and so I you know I
share your goal in in flight
hoping to see small businesses
be able to offer affordable
health care private health care.
But I don't necessarily see what
you described as actually being
in in the statute itself
So again I I'd that just.
Thank you back to you know we
would have to I guess assume
that that will happen through
the rule making process.
And that ultimately the the
adding on additional taxes on
the small businesses will not
result in them having
increased premiums over time and
and I have concerns about that
and Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo I I appreciate the
dialogue I think it's helpful at
least for me as a non medical.
lawmaker to to have this kind of
debate to flush out some these
points it's been helpful to me
to better understand your your
bill so I appreciate your time
for this afternoon.
Thank you.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county yield I will gladly yield
Mister speaker to the gentle
lady from Bernalillo county.
Thank you Mr speaker
Gentle lady I was wondering if
you could talk a little bit
about the anticipated impacts
that this might have on the
provider community here in New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady it is very hard on the
provider community when you have
patients that you want to
deliver care to that don't have
a pair source It are it pushes
it into a
into the indigent fund if the
particular service that you are
offering that that provider is
offering is
covered or going to be covered
to some extent under the
indigent fund so it
it helps all.
of the provider community the
more individuals who have with a
pair source for coverage.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentlelady from Bernalillo
county one more question up
could you please you touched on
it but could you explain a
little bit more the rule of
federal match is and why this is
so important this bill and how
it.
We can additionally leverage
federal funds thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady for the question so for
every dollar that of the state
puts in towards Medicaid we get
approximately three dollars
and in federal funds to match
that.
And in this case
this tax is added into the our
premium rate for Medicaid.
So and in the state will
we there's enough funds in this
to go to the general fund to
increase the rate paid to
Medicaid providers.
Are equivalent to this tax and
so at a higher rate of premium
rate means a higher amount of
dollars to draw down federally
so for every additional dollar
we pay in a premium right to
Medicaid providers will drop
down an additional three into
funding Medicaid.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I have no additional
questions I appreciate that.
You.
There is for the debate the
gentle lady from grant had
although and zero Representative
death.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you representative from
Bernalillo you'll please thank
you Mister speaker I gladly
yield to the gentle lady from
Sierra and thank you for your
your continued efforts over the
years and bring affordable
health care high quality
affordable and stable health
care to New Mexicans on this
particular one I just want to
make sure that I understand
we're at this increases the
insurance premium serve tax from
one percent to three point seven
five percent is that correct Mr
speaker Mr Mr speaker and gentle
lady that's correct it raises
that on two point seven five to
a total of three point seven
five thank you Mr speaker I
think it's a as other people
mentioned that's a two hundred
percent increase in Woodford
make bringing us to the the
highest surtax in the nation and
I remember this bill previously
whenever this this is Congress
repeal this tax to reduce
premiums and it was a bipartisan
effort and it was
at leader Pelosi who said it was
one of the greatest bipartisan
efforts over time to to reduce
that premium I also understand
the intense of replacing what
was removed by the federal
government we're going to impose
at the state level in order to
leverage for Medicaid dollars is
that correct.
that I'm sorry Mr speaker and
gentle lady could you repeat the
question.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
federal government they did away
with this tax they repealed
health care taxes permanently
and that was led by speaker
Pelosi and her statement was
that we are protecting the
quality affordable health care
of millions by permanently
repealing health care taxes
however in this effort we're
taking the amount that was
repealed permanently by the feds
and we're imposing it at the
state level Mr speaker gentle
lady is that right.
I'm.
Mr speaker and gentle lady a
seed to the health insurance
companies that was under the
affordable Care Act you're
correct has gone away and we're
we are
doing the equivalent as a form
of a state tax.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and we're doing that
in order to generate revenue new
revenue that will then be used
to leverage more federal dollars
Mr speaker gentle lady is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it
will be it will level leverage
more federal dollars but the
intent of this is to be able to
turn around and make health
insurance for non Medicaid more
accessible and affordable.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady how can you guarantee that
those small businesses that have
to pay the surtax will actually
receive the benefits of the
premium relief.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
I having the up most small
businesses as I said before
don't offer health insurance
they're relying on Medicaid in
the.
And the
health insurance exchange for
individuals to get insured and
so making sure that people can
be insured not just lower
premium but lower out of pocket
costs is
is the intent of the bill and
additionally as I said there are
there's actually not a lot of
small businesses I think only I
think I remember seeing only
about thirty percent or so of
small businesses actually offer
insurance and part of it is
because they can't four when
there is a high cost
individual in there or more than
one in their in their group and
so I think it is an advantage to
to small businesses if their
employees can get insured
affordably so that they can
remain as healthy as possible.
Thank thank you Mr speaker and
and thank you gentle lady yes
the health care affordability
fund is so important then why
are we decreasing the amount of
the funding going into
subsequent years.
Mr speaker and gentle lady as I
said before we're front loading
it and twenty two and so it
actually balances out for three
solid fiscal years.
And so that we can establish the
program and have actuarial data
on how many people are enrolled
how the fund is being you being
used and what the balance of the
fund is so that then we can
establish what the right right
right of allocation is in future
years.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady will any of this
money be used to fund the health
security planning and design.
Mr speaker and gentle lady of
that's not the intent of this
bill the intent of this bill is
to address individuals and small
businesses to get.
Insurance.
Mr speaker and gentle lady then
why would we tax them instead of
just giving them a portion back
how do we ensure that they
benefit from lower premiums an
amount equal to or more than the
amount that we are going to that
they're gonna pain Sir taxes.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
not quite sure I understand your
question but if we don't do this
in the form of a tax then we
don't get any federal drawdown
and match thank thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady so
I I correct me if the numbers
are wrong because I've read a
lot of emails and there's some
different figures but the
estimated revenue revenue to the
state from a tax to the users is
a one hundred and ten million
dollars is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
I'm I'm the I'm looking on my.
Chart the total percent the
total New revenue.
Is yes miss madam chair mass Mr
speaker and gentle lady it's
it's about a hundred and ten in
New dolorous thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
and is that also accurate that
about eighty five percent of
that is pretty much a tax on
federal budget the Medicaid
Medicare B. I. eight those types
of programs so that's about
eighty five percent of it.
madam chair I mean that Mr
speaker and gentle lady we can't
tax self insured plans so the
only federal program getting
taxed as Medicaid.
Mr speaker and gentle lady but
isn't about fifteen percent of
the tax on the small businesses
in these these are private
market insurance programs.
Mr speaker and gentle lady are I
don't think that I can can say
that that's not a a percentage
that that is resonating with me
yes and we're not taxing the
businesses were taxing on the
small businesses or individuals
we're taxing the insurance
companies.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady if you were
going to okay and do you believe
that the NCOs would pass this
cost on to the consumer on
business and on to the person
who's paying the premium.
Mr speaker and a gentle lady of
they may do that but they're
also going to have greatly
increased number of people
and rolled in and and purchasing
insurance and so they're
actually will come out
financially ahead by having more
people enroll in which there's
it also of which I think negates
that tax increase on existing
people thank thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady I
think I'm I'm following your
process however my my question
is why not just exclude those
small businesses and those those
businesses that are paying
privately that would see that
cost I believe if I read the FIR
and the data and information out
there correctly we would be
generating ninety five million
new dollars instead of a hundred
and ten new dollars that we be
passing no cost on to our small
businesses and our private
businesses here in New Mexico
that are just hurting so much
from COVID right now did you
consider just excluding them and
what would be the impact of this
bill if you only had ninety five
million new dollars instead of a
hundred and ten.
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
we chose to do instead was to
provide help to small businesses
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
is not specifically and directly
described in the bill.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it is
specifically in the bill that
one of the uses of the funds is
to assist small businesses to
purchase health insurance thank
you Mr speaker and thank you
gentle lady but with forty five
percent of the dollars going to
the general fund and as much as
seventy percent going to the
general fund moving forward
where is the guarantee in this
bill that your intent is what
actually happens.
Mr speaker and gentle lady we
have to come back to on LFC with
those specific plans and
at every year as what and
appropriations.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady so so there your
intent although very worthy and
very good is not guaranteed you
have the master the reserves to
ensure the small groups will
actually benefit or are we also
hoping that that's what happens
in the future.
Mr speaker and gentle lady as I
mentioned we've done initial
research on the small businesses
and do believe that we can that
we can offer a reinsurance
program that will help small
businesses thank you Mr speaker
and thank you gentle lady I do
have a an amendment that I hope
we just assure that that would
be the case and I do hope that
you find it as a friendly
amendment the amendment simply
and and by the way I I this
amendment was drafted before the
your amendment was adopted so
I'm hoping of if the speaker Ely
slash parliamentarian can help
you make sure that it's still
correct in context.
Are you asking me to wait Mr
speaker yeah gentlelady we've
just got it so we're gonna need
a passed out and put on the web
so give us just a few minutes
and everybody just hang on just
a minute.
And gentle lady just be clear
you you can get a four minute I
just I just wanted everybody to
understand that the amendments
in context are necessarily up to
date thank you Mr speaker and I
don't know if page numbers
change I may need some help here
thank you.
All right we're ready to go.
Representative Dow if you could
read the two or two number thank
you Mr speaker point two two
zero zero two nine dot one
gentlelady to explain the
amendment thank you Mr speaker
at this ammendment what it does
it exempt small businesses from
the surcharge that's what it
does it does that on page on
page one line thirteen after the
Senate semi colon insert
excluding additional types of
premiums from the surcharge and
then on page four line line
before the period insert health
benefit plans for small
employers pursuant to the small
group right and renew ability
Act and multiply and employer
welfare arrangements pursuant to
section fifty nine A. dash one
dash eight dot one and Mr
speaker and gentleman I bring
this ammendment our small
businesses across New Mexico.
Have been closed.
They have seen a depletion of
our unemployment fund.
They are facing liability for
workman's comp claim under
COVID.
We may impose on them.
A paid sick leave mandate.
We may that includes comment as
an additional eighty hours.
We may they have no certainty of
when they will be open or if
they will remain open.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady I
appreciate your intent.
And again we have made it clear
that we must rely upon in future
years to guarantee that the
small businesses read leave
receive the intent of this bill
appropriation and legislation
that we do in future years what
we can do right now.
Is a sure our small businesses
that we hear them that we are
sending the relief that they're
asking for and make a commitment
now that we do not impose the
surtax on our small businesses
there suffered enough.
They need to know that we hear
them and that we care about them
there are neighbors they are
home schooling their children
while they're running their
small business.
And this simply codifies what we
intend to do.
In this piece of legislation not
a future one Mr speaker gentle
lady I stand for questions.
All right so let's go back to
the sponsor representative
Armstrong gentlelady from
Bernalillo first of all have you
been able to pull up this
ammendment are you able to see
it Mr speaker yes I can is this
a friendly amendment Mr speaker
this is not a friendly amendment
and I would like to tell you
why.
Thank you and that is because
under federal rules on of CMS
A tax like this has to be
brought face to everyone and as
to carriers is not to employers
it is to the insurance
companies.
I'm all accept Medicare and
Arissa plans so it has to apply
to everyone otherwise it
disqualifies it from of federal
match.
All right is there debate on the
amendment.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative Andrea.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
Would your amendment somehow
disqualified the overall bill if
your amendment were enacted at
Mr speaker if the purpose and
gentleman from from San Juan
County thank you for the
question if the purpose is to
draw down federal matching
dollars then we can do that we
can just focus attacks on the
health care providers which will
reap the most benefit Colorado
just at this.
And
our.
The legislature just approved
similar legislation to put a
start surtax on long term care
providers.
And that legislation exempted
immediate care facilities with
less than sixty budget we just
did it so now I I do not believe
it jeopardizes if we want to do
this we can do this.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady yes that is my
understanding as well that we do
have the opportunity to do this
and considering that we still
have a lot of businesses that
this could apply to that and
they're not even back to work at
Mr speaker and gentle lady
although I did here shifts
within the last several minutes
that maybe all schools are able
to go back in person learning so
maybe our businesses legal be
able to go back into in person
selling of their products that
would that would is gonna be
necessary at some point if we're
gonna continue to settle them
with further mandates and
expenses and taxes so Mr speaker
and gentle lady
there's a reason that I actually
that that I I like this
ammendment and that is I'm
concerned.
That this could have potentially
backfire on us
I believe of Representative Rehm
is going to
bring this up but it's it's
My recollection as we try to do
something similar with the bed
Tax.
with hospitals during the
Richardson administration.
And it was my.
Recollection that we had to come
back and remove that because the
federal government said you
cannot take our money and then.
Increase on us
so I'm not exactly sure if if if
we don't put this in this
possibility if we don't put your
amendment in Mr speaker and
gentle lady it's possible that
what's the only piece that could
remain in place is a tax on.
Private insurers and private
businesses so Mr speaker and
gentle lady I I support your
amendment thank you Mr speaker
thank you Mr speaker thank you.
There's further debate on the
amendment the gentleman from
Dona Ana Representative small.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
Mister speaker what the gentle
lady from grant you doggo and
Sierra you thank you Mr speaker
I yield to the gentleman from
the unit.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
so much gentle lady
Mr speaker and gentle lady
I I believe in the discussion
about whether or not this
ammendment was friendly one of
the reasons that was pointed out
that it was friendly was that if
it's simply.
Slowly focused on the federal
portion on the Medicaid
specifically then that could be
easily disapprove was at your.
Not saying right or wrong that
was what we just heard from from
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
the sponsor of the bill is that
your understanding also Mr
speaker and gentle lady I heard
something like that but we just
passed similar legislation what
we did is we passed a surtax on
long term care providers but we
exempted facilities with less
than sixty care beds so in that
bill we cut out small providers
there which tells me we can do
it here as well.
Exact same scenario different
tax same leverage federal
dollars.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady but in this case
this proposed surtax goes solely
to the carriers the and aunts it
does not it's not assessed on
any individual person business
or otherwise it simply goes to
the insurance carriers is that
your understanding Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentleman I do understand that
that is what is being said but
those of us who paid for goods
or services now that those costs
are passed on to the consumer.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so I'm glad that
we've established that it's on
carriers Mr speaker gentle lady
further it's my understanding Mr
speaker gentle lady that some
insurance carriers specifically
energy.
Senator automobile insurance for
instance have given significant
rebates back to to their
customers during the pandemic is
that also your understanding Mr
speaker gentle lady simply
because people weren't driving
as much for instance Mr speaker
and gentleman I that those
conversations have not gone to
my committee but I have seen the
news and read some articles that
would lead to that yes Sir.
Thank thank you Mr speaker thank
you gently thank with that
definitely we've been we've been
looking at the same news reading
the same articles that's my
understanding as well Mr speaker
gentle lady it's also my
understanding
that
the the access for medical
services for folks who've been
insured that's been quite
difficult to access during the
COVID would you agree that
that's that's the case and
master of what.
Mr speaker and gentleman and I'm
assuming that you're reading
because of the health orders and
only essential and and urgent
services being able to provide
building I will be provided in
the early months.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I would say that
there's a wide variety of
reasons clearly Mr speaker
gentle lady nationwide the focus
on conserving PP at the
beginning of the pandemic
especially and the limitation to
only essential services would
totally agree Mr speaker gentle
lady it's also my understanding
that as a body we've worked hard
to get more providers here to to
our state but
to I I would say it's also my
understanding that there's just
some limitations on the
provision of some of these
services separate from public
health orders once we get out of
COVID we simply need more
providers so it's going to be
pretty backed up for a while
with would you agree Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman I mean
I think it's a a strong a strong
assumption and that would be
correct Mexico thank you thank
you Mr speaker thank you John
ladies certainly agree there and
I think although I know there
there maybe to other discussion
all all really dive into one of
the points that has weighed
heavy on my mind during this
conversation which is Mr speaker
gentle lady for the multitude of
reasons that there's been less
service delivery in health care
including public health orders
including the many things
nationally including just the
number of providers Xcerra.
Even during that time Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Anecdotally what I've heard is
that we actually haven't seen
folks getting rebates you know
they pay their health insurance
month after month to their
carrier they don't they haven't
seen anything back Mr speaker
gentle lady at the exact same
time this is the part that gets
me district eight at the exact
same time as the automotive
industry others have been
returning money to New Mexicans
are.
New Mexico that the carriers
here when it comes to health
insurance even though folks can
go to the doctor having on the
doctor for a number of reasons
they're not getting those same
rebate so that's frankly a
concern of mine it's not exactly
in this legislation although I
think it speaks to
some of the continued work that
has to happen Mr speaker gentle
lady I guess then my my big
question is and one.
I I know there's some discussion
back and forth I would certainly
not one to make this to narrow
up to see it thrown out and
therefore doing lose the
possibility of of covering folks
I guess quick question on that
Mr speaker gentle lady right now
we've seen an unprecedented
increase in folks on Medicaid is
it your understanding that the
end of this year that's the end
of fiscal of the calendar year
twenty one the maintenance of
effort requirement that the
federal government has that will
likely run out so we'll likely
see upwards of probably fifty
thousand folks who have been
kept on the Medicaid rolls my
very quickly when it comes to
next year be forced to provide
health coverage elsewhere.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm not
familiar with those figures that
also seems like reality at some
point the fact that the
maintenance of our state budget
has been relying upon federal
dollars and those have been laid
off as well I will definitely
hit us and the reality is going
to be hard to deal with but it
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
that is the case then I would
like to have seen a bill yes the
NCOs were bad actors if they did
not provide rebates if they
could have done better which you
know you mentioned that's not
what this bill addressed then we
need a bill that addresses that
writes it out makes the planes
of those that read it can run
with it and then I would also
expect to see that the amount
going to general fund would
decline not increase and less
there's something that's not
transparent in the intent of
this bill and so I I don't
disagree that there's an urgency
there will always be an urgency
to figure out how to provide
health services that are
affordable and reliable and
sustainable to New Mexicans I
just in this time and this bill
that's not I'm not disagreeing
with what what you're pointing
out among NCOs just not sure
that does the way this bill
addresses that is the solution
sure.
Thank you Mr thank you gentle
lady really appreciate the the
nuance of the conversation the
the shared agreement around the
need to offer coverage and find
ways to support coverage for
more New Mexicans and I think Mr
speaker gentle lady
unfortunately that's what would
convince me to not support this
amendment again.
And we'll be able to the this
conversation will happen later
on the bill but the the
targeting to additional programs
specifically to support small
businesses the incoming scores
of thousands of New Mexicans who
may very well need this coverage
and the elegance of the approach
that has come with this
legislation and its broad based
approach I think Mr speaker
gentle lady it holds at least
wrong opportunity to solve some
of these issues but it really
appreciate your time gentle lady
and this conversation thank you
Mr speaker thank you generally.
There is further debate on the
amendment the gentleman from Lee
Representative paper.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from grants no Dogo
and Sierra County yep thank you
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman for any parent.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
I understand the thank you just
for your.
For a moment it is to exclude
surtax from small business is
that correct thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman that's
correct.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady
would you agree that.
The majority of businesses out
there that are government run
When when provided the tax
server required to tax something
were required to pay.
The higher seeds for goods and
services ultimately end up
passing along those expenses to.
Whoever to consumers Mr speaker
and gentleman that may be the
case for some but many of these
small businesses they are
contracting with the state of
New Mexico to provide a service
on behalf of the state and I
think you've heard me mention it
before our contract that we pay
them do not cover all these
increased costs and in many
cases whether it's personal home
care whether it's period care
whether it is childcare they
take the state right and they
cannot charge the difference so
many of the small businesses
exist because they work on
behalf of the state and we
continue to exempt the state
from these these impose costs
but putting a burden on these
businesses that have no other
revenue besides a state revenue
that we provide them to the
services but yes if someone has
a a private business and they do
not receive government contracts
or those government contracts
allow them to charge at the for
the difference of what the state
pays and what the cost of doing
business with the state as they
could raise the cost yes but in
the instance where they can't
we're gonna see businesses
closed.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady the
In your in a previous debate we
talked about different things
that that of the curvy.
Mr speaker and gentle lady over
the last twelve months and and
you know we can all understand
the PPV was a moving target in
the last twelve months all the
way from the federal level to
the to the state level.
What mass mass no mask what type
of mask.
This was debatable all these
different things but one of the
other patients that they can
then was the availability to
care and clearly our
availability there was based
only on our public health order
would you agree Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentleman I would say that
almost accurate I think because
the public health work health
orders when folks were allowed
to receive care they were so
scared of COVID and so scared of
what would happen if they went
to a hospital that may have a
break out that even at the point
when that the Health Care orders
allowed emergency orders allow
them to go they were also told
only an emergency shelter in
place and so I think people made
personal health care decisions
that will cost us tax dollars
and probably cost them their
quality of life is the need for
it it wasn't quite prohibited by
the health order at that point.
Thank you Mr speaker for that
clarification
one of the other statements was
enterprise previous debate was.
This bill is necessary for the
scores of thousands coming and
to New Mexico Mr speaker of the.
One hundred census New Mexico
with the exception Hansell
counties has lost a significant
population so Mister speaker
words each course of thousand
come from Mr speaker and
gentleman I hope the sponsor was
able to tell you.
Okay well this is part of the
the amendment debate so that's
the reason why I was asking you
on on that so that'll be
something that I see
clarification on I'm truly
hoping the that we're not
planning on on scores of
thousands of that that don't
apply.
Revenues personal income tax and
property taxes and all the
different things that.
But
citizen would would would
provide so with that I I'm
support your amendment gentle
lady and our thank you for
bringing up for a year but all
right is there for the debate on
the amendment gentleman from San
Juan Representative Strickler.
Mr speaker at a.
Yeah let me if I can't look both
ways.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
a place you'll Mr speaker and
gentleman from Santa Ana yield.
Generally I just want to clarify
a few things the the insurance
industry
testified on this bill and and
and their concern was this
premium tax will be passed on to
their customers and there's an
interesting to be able confusion
about that would my
understanding is is that.
Is that the.
Years ago and the playing
playing of this tax we sent.
Is that your understanding or Mr
chairman gentle lady Mr speaker
and gentleman from San Juan
regardless of what we hope the
NCOs would do it these funds Mr
speaker and gentleman regardless
of what we believe the carriers
are able to do.
Mr speaker and gentleman of
their own words they will pass
it on to the consumer and
there's nothing in this bill
prohibiting that from happening
anything any more than there's
anything in this bill
guaranteeing that this will
reach small businesses and lower
their health care costs Mr
speaker generally well that's
what the insurance folks were
telling us to commit that they
should be charging the past on
much like Mister speaker July
when I get my utility bills from
city department and I cover the
lecture state water and sewer
and and and and waste management
and we pay the government's
gross receipts tax on those on
those items so those taxes are
passed on to to the concerned
person in Farmington in
Albuquerque New you know where
however their provider is so
that compensated checked and
she's like I want to five
percent is passed on to the
customer and all our disparities
also our Comcast there on we
have Comcast up in our country
and we we we are also charging
you can see it on the statement
the compensating tax again.
Is passed on to consumers and
this is what's going to happen
here so I just want to clarify
that out I was you know I heard
that the church companies are
paying for what loan they are
and then there passionate that
burden on to the yes Sir
it you know and I like your
manager's assessment small
businesses are thank you Mr
speaker gentle lady point out
that this body is already past
our
income tax increases
sick leave requirements that
continues that burden on small
businesses we try to get those
exempted were unable to all six
here a sick leave and it's just
a it's just Harper small
business that has eight
employees of destroying hang on
in my area got to respond Mr
speaker general and the
gentleman the owner of she's
trying to do is I'm going space
agency has accepted paycheck yes
rate itself in six months
because he wants to keep those
folks facing any had shut down
one of his one of his
restaurants and these down to
one so.
This is a good change I think we
need to simple are the small
businesses where we can gentle
lady and in a prior data
believed New Mexico's blessed
with
fifty four percent of all of our
businesses and our state for
small businesses and we right
north of the country I think
that's a good thing I mean we're
we're the home of the small
businesses and we're just we're
just not happen amount much
thank you Mr.
Speaker thank you gentle lady is
further debate on the member of
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative chase.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
will the gentle lady.
All.
Thank you Mr speaker yes I the.
Yield to the kind lady from
Bernalillo county.
Thank you very much I really
don't want to ask a question I
want to.
I want to affirm the fact that
this legislature while trying to
protect.
Workers.
Not ignored the needs of small
businesses we have constant.
No
covered relief measures we have
worked very hard to try to
accommodate small business what
I understand from the sponsor.
And you know we do have certain
experts in this on house on
certain measures like.
I look to Representative by
asked us what we're talking
about the law I.
I look to the gentleman gentle
lady from.
Bernalillo Representative Lewis
when we it comes to you payment
issues my experts on health care
financing is sponsored to spell
the lady from Bernalillo
Representative.
Armstrong.
L. Armstrong.
So.
Did you leave her when she said
that the way this bill is
constructed is actually to
assist small business.
Making health care affordable
for their employees so that is.
That is the purpose here I'm
afraid that the proposed
amendment.
Is misguided.
Despite your good intentions and
that will make the bills on
workable and I I will hope that
the sponsor gets an opportunity
to address that.
there in others you date thank
you Mr.
Is there for the debate on the
amendment.
Seeing none the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
stable.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment.
There is a motion to table the
floor amendment is a roll call
the vote in the affirmative and
the amendment will be tabled
about the negative and we will
go back to the more.
Vote is now open.
Protocols in thirty seconds.
Our electronic questions close
the clerk to call the remaining
members.
Representative Dixon.
Representative or yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
By a vote of thirty nine in the
affirmative twenty six negative
the foreman the number one is
been table.
Number two has been terrible.
Gentlelady from granted Dogo and
Jerry Stiller report thank you
thank you Mr speaker and and and
thank you gentle lady and I do I
do believe the bill is much more
targeted than it has been in
past versions I still remain
concerned that we are not
assuring and affirming where
these dollars that are going to
be increasingly going to the
general operating fund will be
going Mr speaker and gentle lady
without that assurance this is
simply just another tax on New
Mexicans thank you Mr speaker.
Well we're back on the bill the
gentleman from Chavis Eddy and
Otero Representative Townsend
thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady you don't.
Mr speaker I gladly yield to the
gentleman.
I have been getting.
Text them emails from
constituents and I have been
listening to the S. and they.
And many of them do not
understand.
So I'm gonna try to.
Captors form and I'll need your
help.
The.
People that are being taxed.
Our new.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
the insurance company that's
being taxed.
Well
Mr speaker gentle lady who pays
for.
Mr speaker and gentleman for
Or call.
The carriers providing all
insurance calculate the premium
rates not however Mr speaker and
thank
a pastor yes like an excise R.
G. R. T. to there have to prove
the the cost of the cost of a
lady can I interrupt you I have
jobs we we cannot right you're
cutting in and out are you might
want to turn off your video and
just try the audio and if you
wouldn't mind college eyes I
should cut you off earlier and
kept thinking it was going to
come through but it didn't so he
would start again in mind thank
you.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman hopefully this works
The attacks is not a pass
through tax that goes unlike the
next size R. G. R. T. tax so for
Medicaid is built into the range
that will then draw down match
and and for others
yeah and it's a tax to the
carriers not to the business or
not to the individual doesn't
get passed straight on it as
part of their cost of their
doing business that enters into
the calculations for their
premium rates however have to
prove that they need.
that that cost and.
If they have more enrollees
which we also and assume process
that for instance we are
assuming that enrollment and of
coverage on the exchange may
grow by as much as fifty percent
then that cost of doing business
if you will is it spread further
and just an example last year
the superintendent of insurance
when the tax way for this year
actually negotiated on the range
then rates far lower than what
that just the loss of that tax
was because the costs of
providing the.
The cashier was not as high
based on actuarial studies so
it's not a straight across the
board tax on individual premiums
it's much more nuanced than that
if you will.
Thank you for that the gentle
lady Mr speaker so.
Is that is the answer
to I mean what.
But I do trust all.
If I answered my constituents
and said you none of you will
see an increase in your
insurance because of this.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
may see an increase in their
premium for a whole host of
reasons including partially this
but I don't believe in the
superintendents from my
conversations with him does not
believe that it will be a twelve
want to what the taxes are that
we are charging to the carriers
because they will have a far
greater enrollment which spreads
their business costs.
Well Mr speaker and gentle lady
I'm I'm and read the analysis.
on the US and.
It is and I think others have
to.
So.
The dollar value of all of the
taxes that are captured.
Is is what what what is the
estimated to be.
Mr speaker and gentleman on the
surtax is three point seven
five.
And what is the total dollar
amount to be collected on that
three point seven five.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
approximately a hundred and ten
million new dollars.
To the state.
Okay Mr speaker and gentle lady
so somebody's gonna pay a
hundred and ten million dollars.
And that new money whether it
comes from.
Of the insurance company or
those people who are purchasing
private insurance from those
insurance companies.
That money then goes into a pool
to help those that either don't
have insurance.
Predominately those that don't
have insurance that will help
them purchase.
insurances with that money and
the match is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman of
about seventy five percent of it
will be covered by Medicaid
the rest will be
on on others but.
What was it can you repeat your
question beyond that.
Sure I'll try.
Yes Mr speaker and gentle lady
if we're going to collect a
hundred and ten million dollars.
Of the new tax money.
We're going to take that hundred
and ten million dollars.
Plus the federal match and we're
going to with that money we're
going to help supply.
Insurance for those people that
currently do not have that is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
includes the the federal match
that that of the total number.
Right and gentle lady so the.
What would be.
I think your testimony was.
And I've heard it before that we
get about three dollars for
every dollar.
That we put in Medicaid is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
approximately correct.
Give or take a little bit it
fluctuates a little bit but it's
about that.
Eight Mr speaker and gentle lady
so in round numbers for those
that are watching.
This proposal.
Will will
Tax does providers.
A private insurance across New
Mexico.
And.
Choose the this is a cost of
doing business and the company's
going to absorb that and I
suspect.
That is only short term they
will pass it on in their
premiums.
Center later they're going to.
I I doubt very seriously they're
gonna let that much money go by
without trying to collect it but
be that as it may.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
whatever money they collect.
We'll put it in a pot we'll take
a three to one match round
numbers.
Federal money and then we will
find those that don't have
insurance.
money so that will be about.
Four hundred and fifty million
dollars round number Mr speaker
and gentle lady that will be
collected from either providers
or the federal government to
help find New Mexicans in charts
that don't have it currently.
Mr speaker and gentleman when I
said there was about a hundred
and ten new
million new dollars that
includes some federal share.
Which is actually I'm getting
from my my experts and I should
tell the body Mr speaker my
experts are secretary Scrase and
us superintendent till that
about eighty percent of this
will be covered by Medicaid.
And that is included in that
that hundred and ten million new
money.
thank you for that young lady
that's that's good to know
that's not the way I had
understood
But.
The gentle lady
Sierra County.
Said that this would be if not
the.
Hi just tax on providers.
In the nation is that was that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that I
believe that's what she said I
don't think that is the highest
but it's also on
just about the lowest insurance
premiums in the country.
So explained that Jimmy General
lady are you saying that the.
Private insurance provided to
the New Mexico not New Mexicans
on the market today Mr speaker
and gentle lady yes last the
national average.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
it's that we're one of the
lowest in the country in premium
rates.
And the Mr speaker and gentle
lady what should we contribute
that.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
cost of providing medical care
in New Mexico.
So
Mr speaker and gentle lady
providing medical care to those
people that are just.
Private need
policies that more brackets
those that are purchasing
private policy
would be up a lower risk I guess
the national average is that
right Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and and gentlemen.
Both
individuals that and the and
Medicaid as well have or have a
cap what's called the medical
loss ratio of how much
of the premium has to be used
for a direct benefit to the
insured and how much can be an
administration and overhead
and profit if you will and so we
those premiums are not just
set arbitrarily they have to be
actuarially sound and prove the
amount of that is provided
indirect benefit to the
individual.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady would you have to be a set
us on in order to be covered by
this
plan.
I'm Mr speaker and gentleman
right now not only can.
Yes citizens it has to be
citizens to purchase on the
health insurance exchange on
non citizens and not just on
documented but even daca cannot
purchase on the exchange.
Thank you for that gentle lady
and again G. question just came
in as this bill expected in your
mind to trigger any increase in
insurance premiums.
I'm Mr speaker and gentleman I
think I've answer that that the
increase in enrollment will
counter whatever increase might
be attributable to the passing
on of the this tax.
And Mr speaker and gentle lady
has an actuary backed that up I
mean at at do you is there a
document that will them that's.
I'm I heard you loud and clear I
heard you earlier I'm just
trying Mr speaker and gentle
lady to ensure those people that
are listening that this bill
will not cause an increase and
that the growth of the pool will
cover those
the rest of those new people
coming in.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and I'm relying on the
expertise actuarial and
otherwise of the I Human
Services Department those
director Medicaid in the office
of superintendent of insurance
who do this work and these types
of projections and actuarial
work all the time.
Thank you gentle lady one final
question.
How do you believe this bill
will affect indigent care cost
the county to cross New Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you for that our
question I think the if more
people are insured in a way that
is affordable to them meaning
they can afford even their
deductible and out of pocket
costs there will be less need to
tap into the indigent fund.
Thank you and I guess I story
Jerry I thought of one more
question.
Yes Mr speaker and and gentle
lady.
If you.
If by the people.
It may be in New Mexico now that
are undocumented are excluded
are there any documented people.
In the sense that would be
excluded from this insurance
pool.
Mr speaker and gentleman of.
Native American are often.
Yes forces voluntary you have to
purchase insurance so no one is
mandated
is so
no I don't think so.
Thank you.
Medicaid if you have Medicaid or
Medicare you wouldn't want to
and and couldn't purchase
insurance I because that would
be duplicative but other
individuals or
would be able to purchase
insurance on the exchange.
Thank you gentle lady Mr speaker
thank you for your answers thank
you for the questions there is
further debate the gentleman
from going on a Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield I bluntly yield to the
gentle lady from from Dona Ana.
Thank you
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
was.
I'm just so impressed that this
has been an opportunity for New
Mexico to leverage that a
hundred ten million dollars and
to make it so that we can have
this affordability fund I think
it's going to be a big pay off
for New Mexico and expanding
coverage and driving down costs
across the entire healthcare
system I am stands are
independent small business
owners and entrepreneurs and it
is really difficult for them to
afford impact one son doesn't
have insurance right now because
when he went to pay for his
insurance his insurance over the
exchange he wanted to reduce his
cost because he was starting.
A new venture that he had to
invest money in his
Products that he invented and
to.
Make sure that he could have the
funds to do that he was going to
try and lower the cost of his
healthcare and when he went to
do that he found out that not
only if he reduced his
coverage and his
Adoptable that not it was going
to be more expensive than what
he just had but also that he
would have less coverage so he
had to opt out to not have
insurance healthcare insurance
so I see this as a great
opportunity to help our small
businesses owners and for their
employees to be able to
improve and increase the number
of people who will have health
insurance and that Mr speaker
and gentle lady am I right that
this will else also help drive
down
across the entire insurance
market when more people are
insured that it will help drive
down costs for everyone.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
that's correct the more people
that are insured the lower the
cost overall by individual
because that risk.
Is spread.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady I think this is you know
just such a great opportunity
for New Mexico to
capture that funding that would
have been going to the federal
government and we have the
support of that health insurers
And also because we're reducing
the costs and getting more
people in the exchange or
you normally couldn't afford it
like my son
this will also make it so that
We can improve their health and
I believe it's like twenty
thousand more New Mexicans will
be able to have their cost lower
just by having this
affordability fund is that Mr
speaker gentle lady is that
true.
Mr speaker and gentle lady there
are studies that show that by
additional subsidies to coverage
on the exchange we could see
upwards of I think the figure I
saw was twenty three thousand
who are currently uninsured
get insurance but in addition Mr
speaker and gentle lady there
are
there are quite a few of persons
on Medicaid and I I'd have to
look for the number I don't
remember off the top of my hand
more than that more than that
the twenty three uninsured who
have been remained on Medicaid
during the pandemic who once the
once the emergency is over won't
qualify to still stay on
Medicaid and will be dropped and
of those individuals they've
gone from no costsharing to
suddenly having
a substantial costsharing if
they were to purchase on the
exchange today and so by being
able to offer greater subsidy
not just in the premiums but an
all out of pocket costs will
provide tens of thousands of
people who will lose Medicaid
coverage with without a soft
landing that they can
potentially four.
Mr speaker and gentle lady this
this sounds like something that
will provide an option instead
of having to click back that we
talked about so often in so many
different things that this will
help offset that cliff the fact
is that correct Mr speaker and
gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentle lady that's that's
correct that is the cliff
effect.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
know that so many of us have on
both sides of the aisle have
talked about this being so
important and I think this is a
real motivation for everyone to
be supporting this bill I also
think that
You know if we have ninety
percent of New Mexico voters
states important for the state
to make health care more
affordable and thirty nine
percent of New Mexicans gifted
or refuse to medical tests
recommended by Dr because they
couldn't afford it in there's
another forty four percent of
uninsured New Mexicans who say
they don't have the coverage
because premiums are too high
and twenty one percent state
wasn't worth getting coverage
because of the high deductibles
and that sounds exactly like the
conversations I've had with my
son so Mister speaker and gentle
lady I think this is a bill that
we should support wholly it's a
good opportunity to bring in a
hundred ten or more million
dollars to
not have this back to make it so
it's more affordable for
everyone in our state and Mr
speaker gentle lady hi wholly
support additional thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and I have the numbers of
about all rolling off of
Medicaid will be about sixty
thousand.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
that that's a great number of
people that we need to on help
of.
To support their continuing on
their health care so that Mr
speaker gentle lady thank you
again thank you all right there
is further debate on that the
representative from gentleman
I'm sorry from Lee
Representative Scott.
since he does not appear to be
here I will I will come back to
the we will go to the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
police yield.
Mr speaker I gladly yield to the
gentleman from San Juan it's my
it's my favorite County today.
The.
Very good
gentlelady.
You know this is I mean bottom
line this is a hundred fifty
three million dollar surtax and
and I know you've got a
dedicated to their pots but is
that is that Zacharek gentlelady
we're talking about.
Fifty three million dollar
surtax.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
what it is about that's it's
about that a total but remember
Mr speaker and gentleman that
includes the one percent surtax
it's already in existence.
My my number service or little
different when you add all the
taxes it's two hundred eight
million.
And you take out the and then
you you called out to two point
seven five percent increase in
this bill and it it equals a
hundred fifty three million is
is that not correct
Mr speaker and gentleman I
misspoke the hundred ten is what
goes to the affordability fund
yes John is apologize Mr speaker
Joan yes yes ma'am you have it
you have a divided the hundred
fifty million would be deposited
Health Care for Bailey Fund and
and thirty nine million would go
the general fund so we're
talking about roughly a hundred
fifty two million fifty three
million dollars.
And.
We have nine hundred thousand
Bucks on Medicaid is is that
right gentlelady I know it's
it's gone up because of the
pandemic.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's I
don't remember exactly the
number of the Medicaid director
might a text me quickly gets it
nine hundred thousand or or a
little bit north of there.
Okay so.
Thank you thank you
And nine hundred five thousand
missed gentleman.
Not not five thousand yes okay
so that's a that's forty three
percent of our since since and
right in our state so that's a
high number compared to our
surrounding states so you know
we're a poor state were forty
seven.
Our state in the nation and are
for other states have done what
you're trying to do and I
believe that's Colorado Delaware
Maryland in New Jersey and
gentle lady do you know off the
top of your head
their per capita income I mean
just ballpark.
I know Colorado that's I think I
know that off the top of my head
Colorado which is eleventh.
Intercapital income they're very
they're very faster state and
I'm not sure that Delaware
Maryland in New Jersey that are
I have a feeling you're in the
top top ten this is that.
About why gentle lady in Mr
speaker Mr speaker and gentleman
I wouldn't
like to guess on that I don't
know.
The
But I believe that Delaware
Maryland and integers or are in
the top ten and I of of thank
you got a little cheat sheet on
that so what my point is you get
the four states have done this
there are some of the wealthiest
states in the country.
And and I know in Colorado
Representative Dow Mr speaker
gentle lady pointed out that
they did have an exemption for
small businesses and Colorado
Colorado's water pretty creative
things
and and and protecting our small
businesses was one of them and I
don't think it would they
obviously didn't feel like it
would interfere with with
federal matching dollars are you
aware that gentle lady Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman now.
Well.
My concern is.
And the.
That the the pool that sprang
this one hundred fifty three
million dollars in extra surtax
are are very very yes a small
small percentage of our
population this your bill
general Aidid exams state and
federal workers is is that why
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman it does
because those are self insured
plans which are yeah we can't we
can't tax on any emissions.
Right here that and the
company's so again I shortage
support even greater Purcell
those are going to be paying
this surtax are are pretty small
you know.
It's not small but it's our it's
a year.
It's less than fifty percent of
of the rate payers do you have
that number I mean who's
actually on the plane just.
gentlelady Ms and Mr speaker.
Mr speaker Mr speaker and
gentleman I I apologize I was
looking at the text message on
your on your earlier question in
that
Colorado doesn't have Medicaid
managed care so they weren't
getting any federal money.
for four years so they can
exempt too they are want but can
you repeat the I apologize I got
distracted by that message can
you repeat your question yes
ma'am since since we're we're
narrowing the pool of people
that that are going to be paying
the surcharge is going to be the
premium is going to be the
customers and
You know we we have not heard
thousand nine hundred five
thousand on Medicaid.
And that's about forty three
percent of our population and
then state state per workers are
exempt because they have their
own populate your self insured
and I I would assume any
businesses out there in large
businesses that are self insured
they would be exempt as well.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes any
self insured plans okay so that
so the big companies it's been
my experience.
I haven't worked for three big
big companies multi billion
dollar companies
they're all self insured so they
will be paying this premium tax
so it's just this chart of small
businesses in the mid size
businesses that are going to be
paying this plan and.
And my questions for your or
your do you have an idea how
many
people that that comprises and
and then we can figure out the
percentage of our to call one
million of the population.
What I'm trying to get to the Mr
speaker gentle lady that there's
a small bucket of people of
paying paying this hundred fifty
three million dollars additional
surtax.
I'm Mr speaker and gentleman
about a hundred and seventy
thousand New Mexicans have
private fully insured health
insurance but again I just want
to remind you Mr Mr speaker and
gentleman that eighty percent of
this will be paid for by
Medicaid.
The Medicaid portion
okay you say her city five
thousand insured folks will be
paying the the bulk of this and
that's that's that's less than
ten percent of our population so
explain to me of the Medicare
Medicaid
premium yeah I didn't think the
post I Medicaid premiums.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
don't pay Medicaid premiums but
when you count in the federal
match.
Medicaid the state and federal
Here picks up about eighty per
eighty percent of the cost of
this okay so the okay so Mister
the federal.
Is is eighty percent or seven
include the state match.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
that's the of federal match.
Okay.
That's pretty much that's good
information so the federal
government.
When they pick up the Medicare
Medicaid premiums they're gonna
be paying this premium tax so
the feds of the.
The federal government's gonna
be paying a lot of this hundred
fifty three million dollars you
know about how much they would
be paying.
Mr speaker gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentleman.
I'm looking on my.
Sheets
Well it's about as I said
because of of them the match.
Medicaid of federal state would
be picking up the majority about
eighty percent.
In in the in the in Mr speaker
gentle lady and then a hundred
seventy five thousand privately
insured we picking up the rest
of this hundred fifty three
million and and you just on off
the top of your head what the
private folks are paying you
know what what shared paying
fifty percent of the plan you
know forty percent the.
can you give me a ballpark on
you may not have the exact
number but can you give a call
ball park on what's a hundred
seventy five thousand are gonna
be paying
This is a additional surcharge.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
not of that would leave twenty
percent to go to private of
privately insured but again it's
not to the individual it's to
the insurance companies which I
know they have to build into
their on their book of of there
are a cost of doing business but
it's also balanced against
whether you have more people in
rural and the more people you
have Raul the lower the cost is
for everyone that drives your
premiums down if you get more
people rules and so part of this
on in trying to make it more
affordable for more people to
enroll well actually that in and
of itself we'll drive premiums
down and we think we'll balance
off the the the increased cost
of the tax.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
And there's there's a.
A lot of
interesting parts of this
I I know ultimately the those
hundred seventy five thousand.
individual private
Holders will we'll be picking up
you know they're sure tap on
this and and according to court
your estimation maybe twenty
percent or more of the total and
that of the the federal.
Okay so we the eighty percent so
that's that that helps but
gentlelady I'm I just think that
When the conversation repeal
this this surtax it was a
bipartisan effort a past so
savings on to us in addition I
hate to say aspect out
hundred fifty two million out of
the economy a granted eighty
percent or that is inspired by
the federal government with that
twenty percent to forty having
more moms on the folks that have
private health insurance so
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady from ranchers thank
you there is further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thompson.
Mr speaker to the gentle lady
health.
Mr speaker I'd gladly able to
the gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you so I just have a
couple of questions so.
I'm how many people in New
Mexico are uninsured at this
moment.
Mr speaker and gentle lady we
think that could be I think it's
upwards maybe as high as two
hundred fifty thousand two
hundred fourteen thousand I'm
being told.
Thank you gentle lady Mr
speaker.
Can you talk a little bit about
why it's so important for people
to have health insurance
coverage what are some of the
negative things that happen
particularly when people delayed
care because they don't have
insurance.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady for that question
You know when you don't have
health insurance of the you have
to decide whether when and if to
get medical care and I think
that the of any kind of study
will show that the earlier you
seek medical care the healthier
you are and if you wait until
you have no choice which is what
people do if they are.
So low income that they can't
afford to by insurance and we
even see those for those who do
slide premiums but can't afford
the deductible is that they
don't see care until they have
no other choice and when they
don't have any other choice it
means there in the E. R. or the
hospital with a much more costly
condition.
And a much more detrimental to
their long term health and if
you have insurance and
particularly insurance that
structured to get you access
which most plans are these days
have get access to primary care
and some basic preventive care
even without meeting a
deductible then you can't do you
will stay healthier and stay out
of a a health care crisis that
that will be costly
void medical bills and
bankruptcies there's still a
large number of people I think
that and up in bankruptcy
because of of medical bills but
our our health indicators in our
our chronic diseases and the
overall
the ability of people to work
and everything else is all it
negatively impacted if you don't
get the care you need early in
the course of any disease and
seek that and get the primary
care and the preventive care
that is appropriate.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
so do you have an idea of what
portion of uninsured people are
in New Mexico will actually
qualify for assistance on the
exchange.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
not sure that I have a number
because on the exchange you have
to be a citizen to purchase
coverage on the exchange so we
are estimating that there will
be about twenty three thousand
currently uninsured that would
elect insurance
on the exchange that's not
necessarily that there's only
twenty three thousand out there
that would qualify but that
that's the our projections from
the urban institute study that
based on affordability
we could expect to see about
twenty three thousand currently
uninsured.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
and I'm looking.
A recent national survey seventy
three percent of uninsured
individuals step four ability is
the main reason they remained
uninsured and you've been
talking about that.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm
know maybe one of your experts
know this it may have changed it
may have gotten worse actually
so I have read through the years
that the number two cause of
bankruptcy in the US is medical
debt is that still the case or
perhaps now it's the first the
number one reason do you have
that information.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
don't have that the latest on
that is that certainly and is
what it has been done
yeah and I I don't know if that
was recently changed but that's
consistent with the last that I
read and Mr speaker and gentle
lady to further answer your
your other question I have
information that the urban
institute estimates that about
twenty five percent of the
uninsured qualify for our
coverage in the exchange.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and I think this is my
final one but can you talk a
little bit about how this bill
will help make the cost of
coverage more affordable.
Thank you
thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady you know currently the
federal government under the ACA
find some subsidies for low
income to reduce their premiums
and out of pocket costs and yet
we have individuals.
Even our with some help facing
of thousands of dollars in
deductible to before they can't
before their insurance kicks
kicks in if they have anything
beyond a primary care visit so
by lowering it more and in
particularly being able to reach
up into a little bit higher
hi rank of of income a still
targeting the low income but
maybe a little bit closer to to
more moderate income will
make it possible for people to
access the care and state
insured because I can afford it
and particularly those who are
uninsured and that sixty
thousand people that we estimate
are going to come off of
Medicaid
to be able to afford to to get
insurance and have some help
with both the premium and the
deductible in out of pocket
costs.
Thank you and I don't this is
not a question but a statement
people with Mr speaker and
gentle lady people who don't
have health insurance frequently
don't get the same level of care
or the same kind of care that
people with insurance to I know
I told this story on another
bill about my brother dying in a
hospital and now he it when he
first went in he had he had
heart surgery and the surgeon
came out and told us she didn't
know whether he had insurance or
not so she use a cheaper stents
and it's hard and we and we
asked her you know is that is
good so well it's not as good as
what I would have chosen but not
knowing if he had insurance or
not we use the cheaper one and
that isn't I mean I'm not saying
that's the reason that he died
in that hospital but it points
out and and and to just for the
win appropriations my brother
was a veteran of both Iraq wars
he spent time in Iraq in the
first and the second war and yet
he could not get the appropriate
equipment because they didn't
know whether he had the right
insurance and I know more Mr
speaker and gentle lady that
that happens more often than we
care to think about so thank you
for bringing this bill it's
really important to a lot of New
Mexicans thank you Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
Further debate the gentleman
from Lee Representative Scott
welcome back.
Thank you.
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
from Bernalillo yield I will
gladly able to the gentleman
from Lee.
Mr speaker gentle lady Dressel
program more continues to probe
the piece of legislation.
So what.
Let me start.
With the question of.
Private insurers.
For providing coverage for
ground subsidized Christian.
The.
There are.
Grange dollar increase if this
legislation passed what is the
tax rolls insurers in the
proposed legislation passed.
Mr speaker and gentleman
the increase in tax to the
insurer.
is a two point seven five
percent that does not mean that
that's what a premium will
increase for an individual force
for small business it is not it
passed through tax hike in
excise R. G. R. T. tax it's
built into the cost of doing
business.
Mr
representations for returns two
hundred can you tell me how many
million dollars that represents.
Mr speaker and gentleman how
much how many million dollars
the the increase Tax
representative.
Discouraged General Fund.
Mr speaker and gentleman for
annually about a hundred a
little over a hundred and fifty
million.
No Mr speaker gentle lady
dressed for.
Those insurers providing private
plans subsidized policies to
those people paid for them.
Mr speaker and gentleman since
Medicaid will pick up about
eighty percent of it that would
leave about twenty percent.
Mr speaker gentle lady on
subsidized private insurance
which would not have anything to
do with Medicaid.
What what.
Number be the millions of
dollars through the insurance
coverage point.
Mr speaker and gentleman as I
listen to your question a second
time I don't think I can answer
that about eighty percent of
that hundred fifty million is
picked up by Medicaid and the
rest may or may not be
subsidized depending on whether
they are purchasing on the
exchange or whether the
individual whether it's an
exchange policy or not.
Mr speaker gentle lady to do you
have that number for just non
experience Paul since.
Mr speaker and gentleman
I do not have the number.
Let me just let me say
I'm asking about
The dollar amount attributable
to that I just think according
to my experts would be about
twenty two million.
Mr speaker gentle lady that
comports Russell Weston number
of thirty million which would be
eighty point twenty percent of
the one hundred and fifty three
so some of that forty million is
actually on the well known
Mexico with that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
correct.
So Mister speaker gentle gentle
lady doctor.
Twenty two million dollars will
be increased.
The insurance companies
providing private insurance two
one surgical arms crossed which
is.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes the
the Tax is on all the insurance
carriers for their book of
business that's not chair and
that is not a self insured
plans.
Mr speaker gentle lady and the
twenty two million dollars will
be.
The number that will go to the
insurance programs.
Because they are providing
coverage to run subsidized.
Not only experience customers
who are not part of Medicare
twenty two million dollars is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman as I
get tired during the day I I
think that's approximately
correct but all of
when you.
I get more people covered
yet that twenty two million will
spread out over more people.
Mr.
The cost premiums.
I'm sorry for the interruption
Mister speaker gentle lady and
that represents a two point
seven five percent increase over
what.
Is a small charge those
insurance coverage Strickler is
that also correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
correct as of
as of January first.
Because they were paying that up
to the federal government as of
last year.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady do you know what the
process more June being reported
to well Bob BlueCross BlueShield
is that.
Mr speaker I do not but
no carrier is allowed to
Remains have to be at least
eighty five percent of the
premium has to go to direct
benefit of the individual and
the rest has to be
administration and
and profit in New Medicaid that
profit can't be more than three
percent.
Mr speaker gentle lady what a
surprise you.
To know that number is three
percent.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is
three percent in Medicaid.
So Mr speaker and gentleman
laden with a two point seven
five percent increase on the
three percent and our chances
with respect to a three percent
profit margin what you expect
the majority of that increase to
us all warm.
To customers barn private
insurers.
On the phone subsidized market.
Mr speaker and gentleman of that
three percent is Medicaid and of
the cost of this is is covered
by this fund the state share of
that Medicaid so they're not
and
for our private insurers
fifteen percent is administered
a combination of administration
and administrative costs and the
profit.
All we're discussing here is the
private insurance market and our
current profit margins and that
is three percent.
Has no bearing on Medicaid
Medicare this is the product
unsubsidized market there more
is three percent.
Do you will this item number
that you can occurs Mr speaker
and gentleman I don't know what
that profit margin is on the
private tickets
it's limited to three percent in
Medicaid but it yet I don't know
if it's limited to three percent
in not in the commercial.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
Blue Cross blue shield in the
commercial market is
representing their margin
three percent now okay let me
ask.
If the two point seven five
percent increase in American
expenses would lead to more
virtual rest legislation.
Would lead you to wear your
that the vast majority.
Inspection crews will be passed
along to unsubsidized consumers.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
I've answered that as best I can
answer it in that it is not a
straight across the board pass
on like an excise tasks but if
they have and and it's it's
it is not on all their lines of
business so it doesn't count
their Medicare business it
doesn't count their business as
a third party administrators for
for self insured plans and so
it's much more complicated and
nuanced and done a straight
number that you are providing
and so it is
I can't I don't know what's
attributable to adjust their
fully insured commercial market.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
would submit that eight point
zero to five point.
On the.
Commercial line of business
would be insufficient brought
many people and provide market
what one of our current Jordy
these taxes are going to be
collected.
Immediate was starting in FY
twenty two is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
won't be collected until January
of twenty two because they're
all already part is they would
development of their rates and
their rates are won't get reset
for next year until that time so
January so halfway through
fiscal year twenty to.
Yes Mr speaker and gentle lady
FY twenty two actually starts in
July so they would be collected
in taxes on past.
school year is that correct Mr
speaker and gentleman that's
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady has been
Representative.
That just money will be that
we're collecting.
Will.
Stricter rules for.
Right.
And my insurance more affordable
for small businesses.
That also for insurance is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman it will
make it more affordable for
individuals and of and small
businesses.
Mr speaker gentle lady is that
program current statutes.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is
authorized in this bill for
these funds to be used in that
manner but requires that a plan
three presented to LFC and that
appropriations from the fund
being made by the legislature.
Generated today the health
insurance exchange or not
excerpt appropriations act.
Mr speaker and gentleman not
these appropriations.
So.
In terms.
Collecting taxes to burn on a
promise that somewhere down the
road.
We are going to make insurance
come coverage more affordable
for small businesses is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman we're
not collecting the tax today
the tax will be started in
January of twenty two and the
program offered in twenty three
January twenty three.
Mr speaker gentle lady that
program is yet to be determined
is that actor.
Mr speaker and gentleman
what we want to do is determined
to but as outlined in the in
this the specifics of exactly
what the subsidy will be and how
much
what the income qualifications
will be how it will be
administered it etcetera that
still has to be developed.
And presented to LFC so that
they can appropriate the funds.
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
you have adequately answered all
of my questions.
With more are you.
Thank you.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Thank you Mr speaker hello
yellow.
Mr speaker I gladly be able to
the lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker and forgive
me but I got the message that my
internet so stable so I've
turned off my didio.
Lady from Bernalillo out I
wonder if you could.
Rick reminds me what.
The figures for on the eight
dollars that would be available
to the it is and if your bill is
sent act.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
to the fund will be
approximately a hundred and ten
or so a year.
Million.
Ten million dollars between a
hundred and ten hundred fifteen
million dollars a year.
And could you remind me because
it seems to have been lost
somewhere in the discussion how
this is going to help for small
employers.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady.
A couple of ways one at you know
according to
to the information I have most
small employers like seventy
percent of small employers don't
offer health insurance to their
employees because they can't
afford it.
so their employees get covered
under Medicaid or on the
exchange as individuals for
those that remain in yeah that
do provide
health insurance to their
employees it becomes
near impossible to do that if
they have any of the employees
that become very sick because it
of those a high cost claims
increase the premiums for the
whole group which is why small
groups really struggle to find
health insurance.
So what we you intend to do is
develop a program that would
offer
eight our reinsurance to small
groups in other words that would
take care of their high cost of
liar claims so that the premiums
for the rest of the group didn't
have to increase to cover those
high cost claims.
So if I'm a small employer and
right now I am getting.
Annually for group health
insurance from my.
Glory days.
With this tend to stabilize my
costs to help.
Make sure that my employees are
getting
Average they need.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes
exactly it would help stabilize
the premiums for a small group
so that they wouldn't increase
just because of some out liar
high claims and for those small
groups that have hi claims that
is increase their premiums that
may be able to take their
premiums are down and by taking
care of some of those high cost
claims that they are happening.
So Mr speaker in the lady from
Bernalillo does this put them
into a larger pool.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
for the small groups it it does
not but it does help stabilize
by
taking care of those high cost
outlined plans for the
individuals for the increased
enrollment by individuals that
does become a larger pool that
spreads the the a cost.
Mr speaker lady who are the
individuals who are speaking up.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
individuals to purchase health
insurance through the health
insurance exchange.
I see I see so they and
With a clear benefit and but the
small employers also profit from
nine in profit that they it's a
benefit to them in keeping their
costs down so they can continue
to offer health insurance even
if this is work for a nonprofit
to.
you Mr speaker and gentle lady
yes.
So the non profits.
Who would have to figure out
where they're going to shop for
their insurance or how to keep
the premiums down for the
individuals would benefit by
this.
As well you're telling me right.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes
any small employer with fifty or
under employees.
Could.
That's how we envision it that
they could participate.
Mr speaker I didn't really off
do we not have most of our
businesses at those lower
numbers in New Mexico
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
believe we do I don't have those
numbers right off the top of my
head but I do know that all of
those a small employers of fifty
employees are under the vast
majority are not able to offer
health insurance.
So this would actually then Mr
speaker lady from Bernalillo
open an entire new benefit to
small employers to attract and
keep person and get them you
know a benefit that they deserve
and need.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it
would make it more affordable
for them to consider offering
health insurance status for sure
and for those who don't their
employees if they're not on
Medicaid are either going
uninsured or their purchasing as
an individual on the health
insurance exchange and so by
offering the individual
subsidies that helps it the
employees of those small
employers that don't offer
coverage their employees can get
affordable coverage on their own
through the exchange and then
the employer has healthier
workforce.
So Mr speaker in lady from
Bernalillo I'm I guess I'm a
little confused about
the.
The contention that this is
going to raise everyone's cost.
Can you clarify that for me
because I've sort of felt like
we were talking about two
different bills.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady for the question
because I do think it will lower
the cost for everyone it's the
more people you have insured in
the individual market.
The lower the cost for those
individuals.
and the more you're able to
protect the small employers from
their out liar high plains the
more you stabilize and all
lowered their premium costs if
you have a a mechanism to pick
up those individuals that
suddenly have been diagnosed
with cancer or fell and broke
their hip for need a liver
transplant or it have had a
heart attack and are in the
hospital
with a variety of things and
have
at any or diagnosed with some
condition that is
extraordinarily expensive to
treat and manage.
So
Mr speaker in lady from
Bernalillo if.
This funding actually is money
that's coming in from the
federal government and we're
leveraging is that right.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
to the extent that we are of
passing the tax on to Medicaid
as well a yes so about eighty
percent of the of the funding
for this is actually coming from
the federal government because
of Medicaid match.
Mr speaker and waited for first.
Down.
When Congress actually cut the
The tax to companies they meant
that.
What to benefit the large
corporations.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
the see that was imposed under
the affordable Care Act was
meant as assistance to help
start up the exchanges and and
get the affordable Care Act
going and that expired.
On that on C. expired and I
think that we are using it for
similar purposes by expanding
our coverage to those who have
not been able to afford it or
have not been able to afford to
stay are covered with insurance.
So Mr speaker and lady from
Bernalillo.
We we what we do is we take the
The bill to the.
Large corporations and we allow
now more than twenty thousand
state uninsured people to get
health care coverage is that is
what we're is that the trade
offs.
Yes Mr Mr speaker and.
Yep Mr speaker and gentle lady
yes about
about twenty five percent of the
currently uninsured would would
probably be eligible for these
new subsidies and a potentially
get insured on the exchange.
So as I understand it
Mr speaker in lady from
Bernalillo you have protected
the
the insurer
The insurance companies with
more than that you put on in
that should that federal tax be
reinstated there will be an
adjustment here is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is correct.
Yes it will be adjusted
commensurate to whatever seeing
might be imposed federally
although I I not heard is that
that's in the in the works to do
that
but in the eventuality that that
the federal government decided
to re impose some sort of see
them this could be this would be
adjusted.
Mr speaker and lady from
Bernalillo I noticed this bill
is had a a long path to the for
you've gone through three
committees is that right.
Mr speaker and gentle lady as we
were to the fore once and got
pulled back out to
appropriations and
actually that was that was a
good thing we amended in New
House Appropriations to be
really clear about
the percentage break out of
state distribution between
this affordability fund and the
general fund and also added and
reporting requirements sent and
actuarial analysis and reporting
requirements as well as a
program evaluation by LFC.
He was.
I was looking to see
Mr speaker in lady from
Bernalillo I'm looking at some
fact sheets on this and
There are some other states it
looks like who have already
Passed legislation to collect
the fees at the state level
Colorado Delaware Maryland New
Jersey have you
Looked at to see how that is
going or that they just recently
done that.
Mr speaker and gentle lady they
wouldn't have a full year yet it
just because the it just stops
this year we tried I tried to
pass legislation last year and
we actually we passed the house
ran out of time in the Senate
but
I tried to do that last year
ahead of time so we wouldn't
have any kind of the LFC going
away and then imposing the tax
leader but we didn't get it done
so back again this year but this
that it just stopped for this
our current calendar year who.
However Mister speaker lady from
Bernalillo it seems to me that
looking at New Mexico in
comparison with those other
states we have a a larger
portion of our population
covered through Medicaid is that
right.
Mr speaker and General Fund
it is
we definitely have more Medicaid
but in addition and I think I
mentioned to the previous
gentlelady honor reference to
your amendment that Colorado.
does not have Medicaid managed
care so they didn't have a
mechanism when they did this to
to tap into Medicaid match.
I'm sorry Mr speaker in lady
from Bernalillo I don't think I
understood what you just said
I'm sorry sorry Mr reading.
It's it's my fault and a reading
something what you're talking so
to stop doing that is this.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
Colorado doesn't have Medicaid
managed care so they don't have
a mechanism to do the same kind
of tax on the M. CEOs and get
match.
I just did it straight on to the
insurance carriers.
And it's it's really just it's
simply a transfer of IP.
It was being collected at the
federal level.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes it
was a C. at the federal level
here we've made it a tax rather
than a CD because it's the
easiest to administer since we
already had I a surtax.
Okay.
The bill is the bill designing
page for full compliance with
federal laws.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes
it in particular because of
Medicaid in order to get the
Medicaid match it has to be
broad based and apply to
to everyone alike except our as
I said we can't I tax chair or
recipients under federal law.
So I guess.
Mr speaker in lady from from
Bernalillo.
It seems to me.
Correct me if I'm wrong even
though we don't have a long
history with what the other
states have been
doing.
The.
Opportunity this presents.
Is really a good one.
Because this
Offering an opportunity for much
greater coverage in New Mexico
find more individuals and more
on small groups.
Employers that want to offer
some kind of a plan and it also
seems to me that the explorer
amendment that you put on makes
it a lot less likely that
There will be any harm to the
The insurance provider so I
guess I really don't I still
don't understand what the
And certainly just about somehow
making health insurance costs
more yeah I do know that it's
when I did run a small company.
We were always getting
increases.
And the owner of the company I
was that I was just the
operating percent
I had an agent who would shop.
Our our plans and try to find
the best deal so that we can
continue to offer group health
insurance to our staff so
wondering
If.
If somehow there's a
misunderstanding.
About this being the trigger for
higher premiums.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
Think it I think it is because
again it's not a straight pass
along tax except for Medicaid so
we get the match but for others
it's part of their cost of doing
business and they have to
justify those premiums
actuarially and as an example
this last
premium and negotiation by the
superintendent for this year's
premium rates the premiums
dropped more than the what's
attributable to the.
this a tax decrease that the
elimination of the sea at the
federal level I should say
because they didn't have as many
many
costs that justified their rates
and so again if you have more
people insured that spreads the
risk and do you have
and ability by the
superintendent to negotiate
rates there would have to be a
lot of justification and
actuarial soundness to all right
being increased at exactly the
amount of
attributable to this tax so it
is it's not a it's not a
straight it apple's
thing.
And Mr speaker and lady from
Bernalillo do we know now
One most Mexicans are uninsured.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think it's
largely due to cost
because it is a costly to
You know there's a lot of people
where court state which is why
we have so many on Medicaid and
for many people they have to
weigh whether they are
going to put food on their table
pay their rent and they're a
elector bill or a purchase
insurance and for many people if
they are
reasonably healthy or not
stream the sec they forgo health
insurance and take their chances
and so that's the that's the
other thing that when we get
more people enrolled it's likely
be a larger percentage of people
who are just a little bit
healthier than those who are
currently.
So Mr speaker in lady from
Bernalillo I've really really
thank you for explaining this to
me better
at I've I've been in the
position of trying to get health
insurance for employees I've
been in the position of trying
to get it for myself
I thought this is what you were
aiming at and I was just a
little confused by the debate in
the on some of the.
Is that I think now my
interpretation is those were in
on warranted appreciate your
your working this out it's a
very complex but in.
Also elegant.
Solution to the problem so thank
you very much for your link to
my questions and I wish you all
the best thank you for thank you
for the questions gentle lady.
There is for the debate the
gentleman Dona Ana
Representative small.
Dona Ana Representative small.
Romeo Representative read.
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
from Bernalillo county you
general's very weak we do the
job done in a just muted so I
called him but he didn't answer
so John you representative more.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
I apologize my video went out
for a second Mr speaker with the
gentle lady from Bernalillo you.
Mr speaker I gladly yield to the
gentleman from dynamic.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
have a lady I appreciate very
much the chance to ask a couple
of questions picking up from
some of the earlier conversation
Mr speaker gentle lady I want to
try to get a sense of The New
Mexicans that we could be
looking at first of all Mr
speaker gentle lady it's
accurate that some of the
nonpartisan expert work that has
gone into this estimated twenty
three thousand New Mexicans in
this space where they needed to
see.
Insurance through the health
exchange is that accurate.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
twenty three thousand number I
believe you're referring to is
from an urban institute study
that that thought the twenty
three thousand
would in role of more than that
would be eligible but probably
twenty three thousand would
enroll in addition there will be
about sixty thousand people come
off of Medicaid a once the
pandemic and emergency orders
sees and
so that to Medicaid has to do
recertification.
And currently I think there's
about about fifty five thousand
individuals on the health
insurance exchange.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
and I I that that sixty thousand
number that will likely be
transitioning off of Medicaid
that to caught my attention so
Mister speaker gentle lady we
could be seeing a quite a
substantial increase in the
number of New Mexicans who would
be covered at it through the New
Mexico health exchange
Mr speaker gentle lady I know
we've talked about it a little
bit but
is it your sense that.
Bringing on these tens of
thousands of New New Mexicans
what does that do to
the stability first of all for
the coverage with Mr speaker
gentle lady with that helped
carriers offer more stable more
comprehensive coverage if we had
tens of thousands of New
Mexicans receive insurance
through the health exchange.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
they they have to already
provided comprehensive coverage
so the and executive budget
wouldn't change but what it
would do is it would bring
significantly more business to
the insurance carriers they
would have more people and
rolling and more premium income
and
yes to the carriers and there
would be with more people
insured and as I think I
mentioned earlier probably the
people who are uninsured now
probably don't have as great a
health care the Crisis needs if
you will because they have four
gone insurance I mean they're
going to have of need but they
will
rationalized not being insured
In managing their health care
without it so that
if they are indeed healthy here
that also lowers the overall
cost in the pool of people who
are insured so all of that I
think drives down stabilizes
premiums and a likely drives the
premiums lower.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady that's positive to
hear and when we're looking at
the fifty five thousand folks
New Mexicans who are currently
on the exchange adding this the
the tens of thousands of New
Mexicans more I think your
explanation seems quite
plausible to me Mr speaker and
gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentle lady
that increased pool the
increased market opportunities
for our carriers do you think
that creates greater competition
Madam Mr speaker and gentle lady
that again could help improve
the care offered to New Mexicans
and the long term affordability
of the air.
Mr speaker and gentleman before
I answer that I I want to
correct a misstatement I made
it's more like forty five
thousand give or take a little
bit who that are on the exchange
now at fifty five I have mine
numbers wrong so thank you to my
experts
You know when we expanded
Medicaid what we saw was the
what does one of the greatest
economic boom for the state are
the fastest growing economic
sector was a health care.
because you had more people
insured you had more payer
source for people to get the
care that they need
you have more revenue source
other than a limited indigent
funds for hospitals and
providers and it so is a it's in
addition to
being more affordable for
individuals purchasing so that
they can get the access to care
that they need it is an economic
driver as well when you've got
individuals who can purchase
insurance
and I hope that answers your
question I'm I'm I'm I'm lost on
what your question costs that
that thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady it does go to a
key part of my question which is
Mr speaker gentle lady looking
at the need for health care in
our state
at in looking at you said Mr
speaker gentle lady during kind
of that lost ten years as I
recall Health Care primarily
through Medicaid and tourism
where the only things that grew
during a recent ten year period
so Mister speaker gentle lady
the fact that we're as has been
established I think repeatedly
and with great clarity during
this debate and conversations
with you Mr speaker gentle lady
the fact that we're using the
federal match to fund eighty
percent of this
Seems like we're taking that the
Medicaid health care expansion
we're now Mr speaker and gentle
lady taking that a big next step
to cover more New Mexicans
through the health exchange Mr
speaker gentle lady I wanted to
ask a couple other questions or
several actually in a few other
areas before leaving this space
of what this means broadly for
the state Mr speaker and gentle
lady including economically Mr
speaker gentle lady would you
say that
adding tens of thousands of New
Mexicans to the health exchange
with this coverage that will
likely be more affordable more
consistent Mr speaker gentle
lady does that that help us.
In the short and especially mid
term both the tract and keep
more providers who Mr speaker
gentle lady will be compensated
from carriers for the care they
provide for New Mexicans.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for that question and that
is an excellent point that that
I have failed to make as yet in
this debate and is that that's
that's true if you have
Karia sources for providers you
keep them yeah in the in the
state and the private insurance
coverage generally pays
providers more than Medicaid
does and so it's really
important to have a healthy mix
of privately or commercially
insured individuals two as a as
some as part of the mix with
Medicaid and yet it improvements
the
What providers can do if they
have a payment source as well as
hospitals it's it's critical to
have a good payer source
reliable payer source that's not
just looking at indigent fund or
writing off bad debt.
At.
Thank you Mr stern thank you
gentle lady I'm just add to that
assumption seems to be quite
plausible Mr speaker just bounty
the ability to both attract and
especially the key more health
care providers in our state
diversifying deepening
solidifying the the needed
revenue that they need to build
families careers serving in
keeping New Mexicans healthy Mr
speaker generally would you
agree that that's been in the
furthest are the numerous pieces
of legislation
prior to tonight's conversation.
yes yes Mr speaker and gentleman
yes we've talked
certainly and
many venues and this and this
body and committee in and around
about how we attract providers
how we keep providers how we
adequately pay providers so that
we have access to much needed
care and how we incentivize our
providers state rural areas it's
cetera and the payment mix for
those providers is a key
component it's really hard to
sustain
a healthy workforce healthy
students in our schools and a
healthy communities if you have
a large portion of your
population uninsured and with no
payer source for providers when
they seek much needed care.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady
Yeah that seems it is just a
very this this can be a very big
and positive step forward Mr
speaker gentle lady we as a body
take and as you say diversifying
that payer mix so little flying
in strengthening this.
Internet to cover tens of
thousands of New Mexicans it of
course is critical Mr speaker
and gentle lady for those New
Mexicans who received that I
coverage in there for that vital
care Mr speaker gentle lady the
governor the the support for our
medical providers
strengthening our health care
providers system in a network
that seems to me another great
feature of your legislation and
another reason that I'm proud to
stand in support of it this
evening thank you very much Mr
speaker thank you very much
gentle lady gentlelady from
Bernalillo.
Mr speaker.
This motion having been debated
for three hours I know that it
seems.
No objections.
Right is included gentlelady
from Bernalillo to close.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you members of the body for the
debate and for the questions and
yet so health care financing is
indeed complex but I appreciate
all of the questions and ability
to try and explain this
initiative and with that Mr
speaker I now move that house
bill one twenty two as twice
amended to pass we are on final
passage of house bill one twenty
two is amended the vote is now
open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call the number
without a recorded vote.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
No it's not close by a vote of
forty three in the affirmative
twenty five negative house bill
one twenty two as amended has
duly passed the house.
Next we'll go to item nine
generations house are you ready
on that are.
Thank you Mr speaker can you
please get me to that point.
The record reflect all action
necessary to placing Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for House Bill to sixty five as
amended on final passage has
been taken gentlelady to
explain.
Thank you Mr.
Speaker members of the body HB
two sixty five is
straightforward this is a simple
bill that offers technical
updates to an existing frontier
committee in programs the bill
does not rewrite the purpose of
these existing acts the natural
lands protection act from
nineteen eighty eight or the
natural heritage conservation
act from twenty ten the bill
does not contain an
appropriation.
It's simply updates existing
programs to meet the
requirements of federal programs
like the land and water
conservation fund so that state
and local communities can meet
matching requirements and
leverage federal funding to
protect our working lands are
hunting and fishing of lands and
outdoor recreation
opportunities.
This bill will prepare state by
giving it the ability if the
when the programs are funded in
the future to distribute
conservation and restoration
grants the end okay and the NACA
our existing programs and these
are voluntary programs that you
know help our private landowners
tribes political subdivisions of
the state including ask yes and
land grants for conservation
purposes so what this bill does
is it allows the state the
ability to conserve New Mexico's
land's wildlife outdoor heritage
by restoring are working lands
and watersheds wildlife habitat
purchasing conservation
agricultural easements acquiring
key lands to create new parks
wildlife areas local open spaces
with that do recreation and
conservation benefit and finally
to protect lands of cultural
significance the bill also does
something important increases
representation within the
natural lands protection
committee which oversees the
fund to be used by those
programs it provides greater
equity and inclusion of for that
project review by adding
representatives from the Indian
Affairs Department department of
cultural resources in the
outdoor recreation division.
Our neighbors Colorado in taxes
have a conservation grant
program with dedicated funding.
Date that allows local
communities to apply and match
federal funds we do not and we
need it so this bill would
create a shared project fund
across the and PA and the name
NACA which could be used with
greater flexibility to issue
grant to local communities and
private landowners as that
flexibility to meet the
requirements of federal
programs.
Important note here that by
adding recreational access as a
criteria while preserving the
regional conservation purpose
these existing programs will now
meet the requirements for
federal funding under the land
and water conservation fund
state and local assistance
program last year the great
American outdoors Act was passed
and now the LTZ if it's fully
funded we're expecting to have
somewhere between three and four
million dollars starting this
year all of that requires a one
to one a nonfederal match so
this bill really gives our local
communities and our state of the
the opportunity to apply for
this funding and we can also
leverage philanthropic funds for
conservation when you do a lot
more of this to be clear into
right no appropriation in this
bill no money in the fund is
being amended right now there's
no money in it a new money is
moving we're really just
creating an opportunity in the
future by bringing in more
equity and flexibility to
existing conservation programs
so that we can really take you
take advantage of those federal
dollars that are out there and
protect our natural resources
are working lands and outdoor
opportunities with that simple
questions.
There's a gentleman from San
Juan Representative monthly.
Thank you Mr speaker actually
I'm gonna jump off the board and
waiting for me and.
The general John chat is at the
end of terror Representative
Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady your.
I thank you Mr speaker I I
gladly deal to gently.
And ladies
I'm trying to figure out what.
Your designation changes.
How is that any usage of any
lands today that are for example
an agricultural use.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman there will be no
change at all.
And in how currently answer
managed or how you know folks
from around the state has been
able to a conservation easement
on their property or
agricultural easements no
change.
So gentle lady
If there's no changed any of the
current designations with that
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
appreciate.
Exactly.
What is the purpose what.
But I think the blade does this
piece of legislation to that
well again that needs to be done
or that will enhance the use of
that property.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I'll tell you what the
bill does it expands it creates
the natural lands protection
committee which which will now
be much more diverse that that's
the committee that you know that
approves all the projects for
acquisition or or recreation
that's the first thing secondly
it adds recreation as a factor
for consideration under the an
LP the natural lands protection
act that with that addition and
with a couple of other factors
that we've added for
conservation lands that allows
us to tap into the L. W. C. F.
funds you know we're leaving
millions on the table right now
and I I have to apologize the
gentleman I.
I don't think I answer yours
yours your last your very last
question so if you don't mind
repeating that.
One of miss grand and John
lighting what exactly how will
this piece of legislation
enhance the lives of New
Mexicans or maintain.
What real difference is it going
to make to the average system
and what you're trying to do.
I thank you Mr speaker and and
gentleman I think that's I think
that's a really good question
you know there are communities
all over the state that would
love to work with private
landowners to
to protect their lands
potentially to turn their land
into a park for the community
I'm gonna give you one example
of of something that's happening
in the house right now I work
with our our our second
association here there's a five
acre parcel of land adjacent to
the forest but that's where the
head gate the main head again
for the made a second that comes
through our town feeds acres and
acres of fields of the executive
association would like to
purchase that property created
trail so that people can access
the forest and also be able to
put a little fence around the
head K. so nobody gets there
except for those who need to get
their input and protect that
land and not have to keep
calling the private lenders who
desperately want to sell this
plan to them so this is this
this change would allow us to.
To to tap into those federal
funds and and potentially get
state funding to make that
acquisition that's one example
but I want to I want to be clear
here you know there you know we
we will continue This these acts
continue to support
farmers and ranchers who want to
protect their working lands and
restore their working lands you
know it all all over the state
so that's you know that's
something that can be done
through habitat restoration or
conservation easements and this
that is not changing at all.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
noticed in the analysis that I'm
reading.
That the Mr speaker and gentle
lady that The New Mexico cattle
growers are are close the.
Yes can you explain to me why.
Mr speaker gentleman I I can't.
Well
gentle lady I am reading
HB two sixty five changes the
fundamental purpose.
The national lands protection
act and the national heritage
conservation that from
educational and research and
preservation arms to include
recreation.
And that M. I see.
Is when I asked you earlier does
it change the.
The use are how
State Land in particularly
issues today.
There's there's a lot of issues
with State Land and a and
private land a job.
Mr speaker and
And in lady that.
Is complicated to endangered
species.
Other conservation acts.
Access.
Endangered not only animals but
and and plants reptiles and I
think that is the major issue
that they believe that opening.
These lands that.
For recreation is going to
complicate their pre existing
agreements.
Is there anything in your bill
gentle lady that assures them
that they have a seat at the
table and that their concerns
are heard.
Mr speaker and gentleman of the
natural lands protection
committee has a spot reserved
for for folks that are from the
farming and ranching community
and and I think that that is
something that that is really
important here
I want to be clear Mr speaker
and gentleman that the purpose
of the natural and protection
act and that and H. CA natural
heritage conservation act that's
where you do the conservation
easements and restoration
projects the the the purpose
stays the same we're we're
adding recreation as a criteria
because hunting fishing and
hiking those can all be
compatible with with wildlife
habitat and that is what allows
us to tap into the BCS if we
have that option for for public
access
there's nowhere in this bill Mr
speaker and gentleman that says
that that a private landowner we
have to open up their their
property you know there's a
conservation easement on a
parcel you that is that that is
party to the you know to the the
land trust or this you know or
the state or whatever entity
whatever third party entity
holds that easement and the
private landowner there's no
requirement
for for public access and I
think that's important to know
this is voluntary is for for
willing landowners only.
I appreciate that Mr speaker and
gentle lady I was just.
I see I see that cattle growers
in the pharmacological bureau of
bills of saying.
And I was wondering if there was
had there been any conversations
at all but twenty.
you and and the state try to
resolve these issues.
Mr speaker and gentleman we we
have not had a conversation.
But I am open to having
conversations always.
Well Mr speaker and gentle lady
I'm sure there you'll have many
more questions to.
Address and this proposal lock
continue to less that
Typically when I see.
groups like caliber origin time
farm last our rural housing and
they haven't been.
met with us and they are.
For all practical purposes the.
There's there's the men and
women of New Mexico who.
Really take care of our wildlife
and.
And of course our livestock
feeds us but
I would
I would hope that you would try
to address those with some where
this bill must partner thank
you.
Mr speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman Bernalillo
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Thank you madam speaker.
Well the gentle lady from I'll
see you.
Mr speaker I gladly yield to the
gentleman from Bernalillo we.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you generating.
I'm just not speaker
When I first read this piece of
legislation and actually there
are some red flags are.
That right away kind of wind up
in terms of being able to
In summary in terms of what the
legislation does is kind of
expand on an open space and
wildlife habitats.
And
and actually these are issues
that are kind of near and dear
to our our traditional line
grant immunities in terms of.
Of our our land with the muny
still kind of
having this trouble claims.
That they haven't relinquished.
In terms of rights to some of
these properties that are state
owned.
That at one time or comments.
And
What also kind of came to mind
as as I was gonna having that
flashback that.
You know that maybe this
legislation was kind of
Think of many.
wilderness.
Designation that we're.
There's been a ten cent is the
must be good to law impose on
and some are forced.
In
your New Mexico northern part of
saying that at one time or
comments.
And that are still access in
terms of firewood and.
And the.
Herbs things of that nature to
this day by the airs at one
time.
At ownership of that force this
must be
So in all of these things is not
going to fast to my mind and I
definitely took this position
that I no I could not support
the legislation.
As as is.
And
You know and I think what really
kind of a this must be growth
kind of really.
me that maybe this piece of
legislation sponsored footsteps.
As.
An undertaking that happened
the.
In the far south about the
goodies.
The borders traditional this
final language communities that
of which that force was once
common as to these communities
Santa Barbara which is a an
S. Korea Santa Barbara land
grants from bus.
Thank grant
And to some degree already
created the agency side you
Senator I won't then grant.
Coming known as the blue just
press.
Yes.
In its most bigger on actually
on leased land grants on that I
wrote down.
Fortune there is an effort.
And and again I kind of.
Kind of start up that this
legislation and maybe you that
same on the same footsteps.
There is an effort on the part
of a Representative influential.
mainly white men.
Environmental group.
The east coast.
That was pushing.
For declaring wilderness.
Areas in the in the forest.
That borders these traditional
as is I don't that communities.
In that force that was once
comments.
to these than recommended is.
And they were really aggressive
estimates speaker.
You know they they wanted a real
resolution from the task county
commission.
Supporting the effort to
declare.
Portions of that force
wilderness.
And
They didn't stop there.
You know.
They brought in their deer jet
setting one and done the
commission and
and took him in their their
checks to see.
You know the area that they
wanted to kind of awfully become
a wilderness area.
So you can see some of speaker
the degree that some outside
groups go.
The kind of determine.
Policy.
On our historical ancestral land
holdings.
And and even though the Santa
Barbara Trump us.
don't have ownership of those
comments.
They have not relinquished the
right.
The one day regain.
Ownership or create some kind of
traditional use rights on that
point.
And
What kind of a.
Conferred is the most Baker with
the.
With the sponsor you know I
realize that that the there
might be elements in this bill
that were worthy of pursuing.
But that still is the most
bigger maybe.
Needed some tweaking.
And it's much bigger up that
effort by that outside
environmental group.
Went down went down the tubes.
You know I just it just wasn't
gonna happen.
and and that that's the real bad
taste.
Amounts of some of these Regis
on spinal communities.
in that area and in other areas
where we've had similar battles.
In terms of.
Trying to turn a turn.
The tighter rounds must be
current in in in terms of
diminishing.
The efforts of.
Traditional native people.
to rightful claim to their
ancestral land holding system a
speaker.
And
And you know and and and and.
And these this funnel airs.
You know we've we've had good
good role models in terms of
what paired perseverance the US.
Pursuing.
Ancestral land holdings.
We've got that the examples of
the speaker of.
Of the valiant effort on the
part Taos Pueblo.
To regain control of their most
sacred site.
Late.
A century to win.
Some of the speaker.
Senator is on the part of a
Cochiti elders.
Almost at the same time.
To regain some of the most
sacred sites sacred land
holdings on which the Pueblo
that they had lost.
Speaker and the so you can see
that.
That perseverance matters.
And to disqualify.
The native people from.
Continue to pursue.
These claims yes I'm just.
and
And not in the spirit of what.
New Mexico is all about is the
most bigger.
In terms of that the good guys
can win and will win with the
proper resources property
ownership focus.
The termination of perseverance.
Some of the speaker and
This must be Kirk
You know I am.
I I appreciate the the young
lady.
The house.
Agreeing to some amendments.
we were able to kind of
just kind of
Be able to to do one.
But the the the the Sanchez I
mean Abbas must be good to kind
of pursuing the other
The amendments on the Senate
side because they need more.
Thorough
Research in terms of what we
want to accomplish.
And
and actually is the most bigger
I'll bring that amendment for
awhile.
But it's also important to stand
that.
You know that the state holds.
In ownership.
Properties that I once or
comments.
That these communities I'm not
relinquished their right to.
And let me give you an example
as to my speaker thank you.
Yes thank you Land Grant.
You know and just some of us
know especially in the Land
Grant Committee.
I think you is established by.
Good uncle OP renegades.
The Spanish.
A colony basically.
moved.
These will be warriors from
their own that.
And resettlement.
In a land grant called of the
queue.
You know and to this day.
At the end of the state.
Yeah thank you.
At residence dance both to
dissolve the that's.
Small speaker in commemoration
of other uses started and and
the lineage.
Representative is to start it.
Speaker M. and fish at thirty
two acres.
well I've had along the.
I'm a river.
Just skip and a jump from
bowties.
You know
and as you cross the river there
there's this beautiful flatland.
You know that was under the
hands of game and fish.
It used to be on this must be
good to the transportation
department.
And before that.
In the land grant doesn't really
know how.
But there was a big game the.
That was granted reporter.
And basically the state
purchased that parcel.
From that individual.
The land grant never
relinquished I don't.
All right to that land.
They call that rental that about
it.
The pres land.
As a land grant granted that
parcel to the pastor of the
Catholic Church.
Four is on site force orchard
orders are.
You know and for some reason it
fell out ownership.
And this must be guarded one the
Land Grant Committee was
established.
that was one of our battles.
Was to regain title of that
credential that body.
Back to the thank.
And it happened.
But it didn't happen easiest
most bigger.
We actually has to have to force
the issue with the game and fish
that what they were all the was
basically land that was acquired
unlawfully.
And we have the research to
prove that.
By doing through junior money's
certified title abstracts of
that property and it showed the
breaking title.
We're doing all the way to the
Land Grant.
So then is when the game and
fish that okay.
Transplanted and they did the
right thing speaker.
We have similar scenarios like
that.
Mr speaker on the general idea
that grant.
Three came have a tax totaling
close to fifty thousand acres.
You know and
the same thing.
Those these lands that are game
and fish.
Basically.
Thank you.
Comes back from the secretary.
They are not fully.
And in the most hideous ways.
Wired.
Those comments from the general
idea.
That was the first experiment
Thomas Patrick.
Wire this five million dollar
stockpile of Kamenets making him
the richest land owner in the
world.
For these comments that he
still.
mercifully.
Speaker.
And that Land Grant.
Once the utilize.
Those Daymon fish properties in
the traditional you sense.
And.
This must be and and and
continue with the Farmington.
And hunting and fishing and
would gathering and the guy
making pasta making that comes
from those comments that many
thing those communities
assisting of all some freelance
communities.
It was when these comments were
taken through unlawful means.
That our communities lost that
selfsufficiency.
That self reliance.
We people the land grants
basically have to depend on the
state just to put food on the
take.
Most people are.
And and that's of concern that I
have in terms of the legislation
before us.
Is will these.
Lands.
You know that maybe at one time
well that were at one time to
come in and system of speaker.
And.
That are not private property.
That we used to kind of set up
and open space or open wildlife
habitat.
Well they again be restricted.
restrict.
See more speaker the native
language communities from.
Developing traditional use.
Rights to these lands.
And that's what we're working
out on the second amendment.
Which I think we can kind of.
Of finish income to a
meaningful.
conclusion estimates speaker
over on the Senate side.
And
This must be
You know it's it's always been
about the.
About doing things the land
grants that that.
That involve them.
And
And the the land went into
committee is a good example of
how we've done it three
interceded return this must be
current terms of the state.
Being understanding.
You know
the roll the name rents playing
in terms of any type of decision
making policy making.
That.
Stems from the state.
That in some way or another
affects land grants.
Is that they have to be at the
table.
Just that simplest most beaker.
And that's what this
legislation.
Fail to do.
And I think with the amendment
that I want to propose system a
speaker we can get there on this
first amendment.
So so must be Gara.
I would like to move.
amendment floor amendment number
one.
To House Energy Environment
natural resources committee
substitute for House Bill to
sixty five.
Gentleman is the two oh two
number two two zero six one five
point one.
here to to correct is the most
Baker.
The gentleman.
I.
It's not.
Is an actress playing and then
if you get me there.
Explain the amendment.
Speaker a.
It was an oversight on the part
of the sponsor.
you know and she realizes.
In terms of the natural gas
production committee what we're
doing with the amendment is
basically just adding one
Representative.
The land grant council and one
representative of the S. second
commission.
And and I and this the most
beaker on that language actually
goes in online twenty three H.
three.
Very good and what are the
sponsor generating talents is
this a friendly amendment.
Mr speaker I am relieved and
grateful to say that this is a
friendly amendment.
Okay is there debate on the
amendment.
Is there objection to it.
Hearing on house floor amendment
number one.
To Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for House Bill.
Two sixty five is adopted.
Gentleman from Bernalillo you
still haven't for.
Thank you so must be current
thank you gentle lady.
Or that
And this must be
You know
that essentially under wraps up
my.
My debate the my questions my
statements on this piece of
legislation and
And and I think that we can kind
of still think it is that
further if we're able to kind of
do it in the amount of time that
we have left over on the Senate
side.
To kind of really address.
The
Incorporation into this
legislation in terms of
consideration
Of these traditional use rights.
On on these open spaces.
And.
Well Act habitats.
That are created.
That are going up what was once
comments the Spanish land grants
small speaker.
And
I thank you as the most beaker
and gentle lady House.
And
and will continue the dialogue.
on on its way to this to the
Senate thank you Mr speaker.
There is for the gentleman from
Colfax three hundred grams of
Senegal and you.
Interject you.
Thank you Mr speaker does delay
some tests yield thank you Mr
speaker I yield to the gentleman
from Colfax curry all those
counties.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I just had a few questions are
we talking about two acts in one
form or two acts with two funds.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
from all those counties it said
to access and one funded that
will merge.
Mr speaker and gentle lady how
much is in the.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
all those counties there is zero
in that fund.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
how will this fund be funded.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
those counties well we hope that
in the future we will have
funding for that program for all
the programs that can be funded
through that fund we hope that
there will be philanthropic
dollars that that slow in and at
some point of potentially
appropriations.
But there's no money in the fund
right now Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady I appreciate that
clarification so on page two
line nine it says stated that
But it would be for acquisition
protection of meat and
ecological ecologically
significant lands in New Mexico.
Now I'm a personal love New
Mexico a lot in our I just to me
what land would be not.
What are there is not unique in
ecologically significant.
Mr speaker and gentleman
nineteen I I agree with you
there many most of our lands are
unique and ecologically
significant.
Basically we're collider most
are in place in New Mexico
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
that is existing language and
that is not changing this bill I
just want to be clear about
that.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I
understand that but I'm trying
to understand the entire law so
that I can understand the
changes are too late.
So.
Mr speaker gentle lady something
that does change on page four.
One thirteen.
It has a strike through all
appropriated for such purposes
by the legislature.
And then it says the
availability of loans in the
natural lands and heritage
conservation farm the secretary
of energy minerals and natural
resources may pay.
So
Mr speaker gentle lady.
What is the purpose of taking
out the legislature.
Mr speaker and gentleman at that
that is a very good question any
practice over the last.
Whole.
Twenty one twenty twenty one
minus nineteen eighty eight
that's what thirty thirty thirty
plus years or so that the and
PA's been you know in in
practice in the N. H. CA for
you know for for eleven years or
so you know the that that those
funds when they had been
available it would have been
appropriated you know by the
legislature the for the
legislature appropriates the
fund but it doesn't make
decisions about the about the
projects that's always been done
by the committee over the last
thirty you know thirty some odd
years.
Mr speaker gentle lady just
looking at the the bill
instructs the language which
takes the oversight away from
the legislature I'm I'm familiar
with several other agencies that
are funded by private funds are
trees that are assessed for
certain areas saying that they
do.
And they still appear before the
legislature before the of the.
Appropriations committee when
they ask for their budget and
they tell us what they're going
to spend that money for so it
looks to me like this take so
this fund out of that process is
that true.
Mr speaker and gentleman
I want to I want to repeat again
be and be very clear on the
legislature appropriates the
money to M. nner date they do
that now and they will continue
to under this act and EMNRD
makes the decisions the
legislature has never been
involved in the decisions for
the projects funded so it
legislature will still continue
to to make that appropriation to
EMNRD if there ever is an
appropriation which we hope will
happen soon gentleman and Mister
speaker.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'll
take your word for that.
Line twenty three.
Thank.
The degree to which the lands in
question are able to sequester
carbon induced impacts of
climate change is one of the
criteria for lands that are that
would be chosen can you tell me
what types of land sea quest
through the most carbon.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I am
not a scientist but I have
learned a lot in the natural
resources energy and
environment natural resources
committee and and I know that
our grasslands do sequester some
carbon but I you know I think
that this is that you know will
what we're awaiting a better
science.
Mr speaker gentle lady
grasslands to sequester carbon
in quite a bit of it.
But the most carbon is
sequestered by structurally
complex forest.
Which also burn.
The easiest and then they
replace all of that party carbon
is taking up most quickly but
that's a grow fast and it is
Vigil longest five minutes it
real slow so
there's always a give and take
to all of those things.
What would be the tax rate on
this property if it were
purchased.
Would fall under.
What tax rate would be followed.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm not
sure what what you what you mean
by that is it are you referring
to can you just let me know what
you're referring to specifically
what what property.
Ever cultural land has a has a
tax rate.
private dwelling severance tax
rate.
landed is used for utilities
have the pack right I just
wonder.
This probably started as as our
cultural and what it maintain
its I mean how would how would
be taxed what.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
think it depends on the type of
project you know it's it's a
private land that is being
conserved or restore it would
likely fall under the existing
tax rate for for whatever it is
it's ranchland or or you know at
the cultural land but if it's a
state or a local park you do
that that is that that's a
different story in the tax rate
is.
Is is zero at that point as far
as I understand Sir but you know
I think that what's important
here is that if you do.
What what exists currently under
the NACA for conservation
easements that protect
agricultural land and and ranch
land that that isn't changing at
all with with the amendment that
we're making a ticket to that
act you know and that'll that'll
continue you know that those
lands will be taxed the way
they're taxed in various
communities.
Mr speaker gentle lady if that
were acquired fully acquired by
the state would not be tax
exempt that we would lose a
taxes previously paid on the
property.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
would be tax exempt and I would
argue that there would be other
funds that come into that
community and into the state
because we have protected that
land acquired for for public
use.
Thirty four dollars.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
who would manage this land.
Mr speaker and gentleman it that
is a question that also depends
on what kind of land it is if
it's private land.
That's being concert it is it
will continue to be managed by
the private private landowners
is it is land that becomes of
wildlife management area you do
that managed by game and fish
the act allows for inner to work
with you know the appropriate
agency on on management of those
lands.
Mr speaker gentle lady who would
hold the conservation easement
if they just bought a
conservation easement all that
the that would be the state
would be a some of them wanted
to be with us all that
conservation easement.
Mr speaker and gentleman it also
depends on where that land is
but it is likely that that if
there's a conservation easement
which you can do right now is
not changing because of these
but this ammendment they would
be held by a local land trust
another political the another
political subdivisions like a
soil and water district you know
or or other third party entity
that is qualified to build for a
conservation easement.
Mr speaker gentle lady do we
currently have conservation
easements that have been
purchased by the state.
Mr speaker and gentleman we do.
Mr speaker gentle lady who also
leads the.
It depends Mr speaker and
gentleman is there under the the
natural heritage conservation
act in twenty ten there is a one
time appropriation
of our listing for four point
eight million dollars of that is
supported restoration projects
and and conservation easements
all around the state it in this
case the easements are held at
the that the restoration efforts
were done by James this state
forestry state parks division in
the case of the conservation
easements
and NRCS House soil and water
conservation district along with
passengers that was the first
project I ever did at two
thousand and trust it was really
hard and and very exciting the
because your coalition and other
stand once on water conservation
district it really does depend
on on the on the type of the
project.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
the solemn water conservation
district actually hold our ship
of that easement.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
they have.
Mr.
I thank you for your time and
the all enjoy what's in this
bill as we go along.
You'll want to.
As for the baby generation
Katrin Sapporo and once here
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from task you at the
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
so I'm one of the coverage the
questions I have the gentle lady
is.
This there's already a way to do
conservation easements and this
is not changing that is that
correct Mr speaker gentle lady
you are correct.
Okay thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady and so the other question I
have is this is creating away
from what I'm reading and tell
me if I miss understanding away
for the state to purchase
private property is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is correct as long as there is a
willing seller.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
and so in the past that has not
been.
The case is that correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I do
not know.
Okay thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady the other question I have
is if you just say I wanted to
go into business with the state
the only way I can do that is if
I hold a nonprofit non taxable
is that correct.
You Mr speaker gentle lady I I'm
not sure exactly what you mean
by go into business.
Purchase Mr speaker gentle lady
to purchase land if I come to
the state nice and I'd bring to
their attention that there's
farm for sale that holds
endangered species the sobering
mental and it's up for sale and
all point my it's a it's my farm
that has that and I want to
So madam reading you can if you
want to own property.
Mexico insist and own property
with the state you have to be a
nonprofit.
Let me see where I'm reading
that.
Mr speaker kind lady I printed
the amended version so I don't
have line.
Numbers on my pages here
generally we need to.
Okay it's in.
Section.
Section four.
Better ET.
The availability of funds and
natural lands and heritage
conservation fund the secretary
Energy minerals and natural
resources May Day.
From money in the natural lands
and heritage conservation fund
title to acquire lands that
shall be held in the name of the
state if required solely by the
state so is if I brought if
there was something that that I
brought to your attention if the
state put in three million and I
put in a dollar.
The state right hold.
With the state all the title.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
if you wanted to sell your land
to the state this amendment
allows the state to purchase
that land out right if you are a
corporation you could continue
as the act does right now own
that in partnership with the
state if you want to keep your
land your land and protected
through conservation easement
board take advantage of us
restoration funds that may
hopefully at some point exist in
this fund a you can do that
through a conservation easement
or or through the restoration.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and the corporation has to
be a nonprofit.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
believe it could be a political
subdivisions as well if you just
give me a minute I can I can
double check thank you.
Mr speaker and gentle lady at
the existing law requires a
nonprofit corporation to be
legislative partner and this
bill amends it say that the
state can.
Purchase inquire lands out right
and keep that ownership have
state ownership and or
have a nonprofit corporation a
partner in the in the ownership
of this land.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady and.
so just to reiterate if I own a
ranch with a conservation
easement on it.
And so and with that the people
that put it in a conservation
easement I actually got a tax
deduction so is that still the
case in the conservation
easements.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
that is absolutely still still
in effect of that tax deduction
is at the federal level and that
has been expanded to go over
twenty years for the value of
the donation of the easement
that is that there's no change
there at the federal level if
you did the conservation
easement under the NH CA added
at I think after two thousand
seven you may have been eligible
for a tax credit which is a
transferable and that that is
that that there's no change to
that program as well.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and so is this are creating
the natural lands protection
committee.
Or is that already in existence
or you just adding to it.
Mr speaker and gentle lady we
are adding to that for.
In order to to more diverse.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
and I sat on that committee once
so thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady also.
One Mr speaker gentle lady do
you have an expert witness with
you.
I I do have Mister speaker
gentle lady I have an expert
witness his name is Jeremy that
spoke.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
and weird is good as Jeremy yes
I work for.
Mr speaker and he works for the
western resource advocates.
Okay thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady that's all my questions.
The debate the gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker doesn't
gentlelady from south county
middle.
Mr speaker at thank you I yield
to the gentleman from.
From Chavis.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady
I too would like to read as a
summary
Issues that were brought up by
the gentleman from the northeast
corner of the state of New
Mexico.
Talk about the.
We.
Language over on page four
paragraph of the bill.
You and one of the answers to
our to a question you states
your stated that and are.
Allocated the money for these
projects and I'm not the
legislature but when I read the
original language it says
subject to appropriation for
such purpose by the legislature
that indicated to me that the
process was that the legislature
had to be apprised of what the.
Right what land was going to be
acquired by number and it would
have been specific not just a
general line item in their
budget for acquisition purposes
and so I'm a bit confused by
your response through our
gentleman from from north
eastern New Mexico.
Mr speaker and and and and
gentleman
as far as I understand the the
money was appropriated directly
to and for some of those
projects back in in twenty ten
and that an overall the natural.
Irritates conservation act has
has never been funded.
Mr speaker and gentle lady are I
understand it would have flowed
through the agency but our I
believe that the one instance
that I'm aware of which would be
the early check in area your
moment Sam.
I am under the impression that
that was a specific acquisition
that was the subject of a very.
Here in this body armor the
wrong but I think that those
specific acquisitions were more
than just simply thank you
general one item in the agency
budget I think that the
legislature or at least the
Appropriations Committee.
We got a request for ex number
of dollars for the acquisition
of this land eight pound rabbit
students are and work through
that process.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
process that you're recommending
now on this legislation is to do
bill.
The other.
Just give and our at
appropriations of dollars it
says you have that money
available would go by land so
there's really no.
check or balance in the
legislature as to which lands
would be acquired it's only
going to rely upon the agency
now to determine whether to
enter into contracts to buy that
we were or not and so I to raise
the the this year and and
objection that I really think
when the state a choirs these
types of properties of the
legislature ought to be more
engaged you have.
That decision when there are to
be robust debate on whether we
should be acquiring those
properties because.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
It does take property out of the
taxes.
Those properties are taken out
of the taxes because they're
going to be now home by the
state of New Mexico either in
part or in whole and so it does
have an impact it's things that
we ought to be debating in this
body so I have a concern once
we're programs now.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
We talked a little bit about
this when I can be for one of
the committees I sat on about
the our corporations already
lands aren't where your gate
aptly point out that one of the
properties of was acquired was.
Property that was acquired
through the manager Conservancy
in the state of New Mexico
looking to purchase comparing
such I just want people to
recognize that when we see the
term corporation in this bill
it's the fine.
And that a way that is not
generally understood when you
say the word corporations so I
just point out to the body that
corporations in this bill is not
the as broad as our general
understanding of the word
corporation your budget is
limited to.
Nonprofit.
Appropriations not to
what I'd consider regular
corporations owns for profit or
and and otherwise would one of
liability.
Mr speaker and gentle lady of.
I've been dealing with this
primarily.
Federal lands for for most of my
professional career and one
thing that I've noted over.
Those years is that when the
federal government wants to come
into an area and you know start
acquiring lands.
But.
They're really concerned or they
really have started in my
district requiring right there
in your area is that the.
Have water resources available
to home for variety of reasons
number one
species members who are trying
to protect the the right
coronary of members right.
Really
It it gives the the federal
government the bureau of land
management in this instance
more control over the Watership.
And so I I I am a little
concerned about some of these
efforts because.
What happens when that occurs.
The economic activity along that
area.
Becomes less and less because
there's less
There will be there are.
Waasland that is your date and
say that word and so we do see
an effect locally what happens
when governmental entities start
acquiring taking land out of
private hands and put them into
the hands of of governmental
agencies and yeah well I don't
object to the government why are
in significant lands that we
have return your value
particularly for preservation of
the species and things like that
I am concerned about the breadth
of this legislation.
Allows the acquisition of lands.
For a variety purposes and it's
simply going to be the only
break is going to be the general
appropriations law and maybe the
person sitting on the secretary
of state of the particular
agency Representative trusted
workers and so I therefore have
have some concerns those with no
protection no
Real important from the county
commission will be directly
impacted by the.
The land off the tax rolls and
no real local
Remember decision nineteen we
did pass the member after allow
Land Grant council and thank you
madam to be involved with the
there is there is in my mind
gap that still remains Mr
speaker gentle lady of thank you
but I I do not support this bill
in its current form.
Thank you Mr speaker by the
dollar.
These are the debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Santa Fe our New Orleans yes
Representative McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
gentle lady will the gentle lady
you Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from all those
counties.
Mr speaker gentle lady I want to
ask you a couple different
questions about the program's
contemplated by these two acts
and merging them together first
thought I think it's been said
but I also think it bears
repeating we're talking about
voluntary transactions is that
correct Mr speaker tallied Mr
speaker and gentleman yes we
are.
So Mister speaker gentle lady if
you own land.
And are interested in selling it
to a state entity.
Maybe you'll get that
opportunity depending on funding
but if you own land and are not
interested in selling it to the
state.
Entity for one of these purposes
you're free to keep that is that
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
you are correct on both counts
you Mr speaker tell me the on on
the conservation easement so in
the conservation easement
transaction.
You're essentially you're
selling development rights
sometimes people try it that way
but you're not required to open
a lead that that doesn't make a
land public does it it's still
private property you just
limiting what happens on the
line
Mr speaker and gentleman that
that is correct the the way the
conservation easement is managed
by the private landowners and
monitored by the entity that
looking at that you know it's
it's it's really up to those
entities if you want to have
private access to she's a public
access you can if you don't you
don't have to.
Thank you for that Mr jolly and
just certain different line of
questioning Mr speaker gentle
lady have you ever look at that
the surfaced Management map of
New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
love to be enlightened on that
at the answer key now.
So Mr speaker telling the
unfortunately I'm not in the
roundhouse but I have a big the
map in New Mexico on my offices
around the US and its service
management so it's you know the
service management sometimes
different than the mineral State
this is service management and
what I've always said Mr speaker
gentle lady when I look at the
service management map of New
Mexico is it looks like a
disease it looks like a pox
right so there's there's
different colored boxes all over
the map.
Mr speaker generally you know I
understand that.
We're a big western state and we
have a lot of federal land we a
lot of public lands is but Mr
speaker generally I have always
believed it's poorly organized
and poorly sorted you know that
checkerboard nature of land
ownership makes no sense at all
Mr speaker gentle lady like I go
back to.
Yeah John Wesley Powell who
famously advised Congress to
divide the western states along
watersheds and that would be a
good start and then not doing
the checker boarding with could
start and you know protect
protecting
logical Ste pieces of land
functioning ecosystems
functioning branches functioning
are you know rather than simply
dividing dividing fighting which
is sort of the history of
the western Development of the
works so we will look at the the
map the surface mission map I
see all the work that that we
have to do.
Because Mr speaker gentle lady
we have the need to consolidate
persons.
We have the need to maybe
eliminate landholdings within
census questions we have the
need to establish wildlife
quarters we we are awaking to
the need to establish
practitioners for example Mr
speaker gentle lady a couple
years ago we passed the Rio
Grande trail.
In the status seeing a trail
along the Rio Grande would be
great economic boon to the state
of New Mexico that's a
complicated task and it crosses
many different jurisdictions
across many different.
Private land holdings in in
trouble including holdings of
public land holding so Mister
speaker July I.
The amount of work left to be
done in sort of getting our land
use land ownership patterns to
back to something that makes
sense you know is professional I
mean we're just never going to
get there but we should work it
Mr speaker telling she took away
that you know we should be
opportunistic Mr speaker gentle
lady one of the things I love
about this bill is that if we
funded make appropriate for the
state we will bring in all sorts
of federal money.
Yeah and I always think that's a
good thing for the state in the
private property owners of the
state.
Want to participate in a program
like this let's open that door
so Mister speaker gentle lady
thank you for your work on this
bill I I totally agree that we
have to access at yeah they do
they have similar purposes but
they don't mesh very well and I
view your bill as as taking
those two acts and making them
work together for the betterment
of our state so thank you Mr
speaker thank you tell it.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative stop.
Okay he's on chamber the
chairman from the.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative Rod Montoya are
you.
Really available able to debate.
Generated from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the lady from yes yield
thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the gentle lady from Travis.
Mr speaker gentle lady I was
reading your bill and I noticed
Harvard's first paid your bill
distance making an
appropriation.
Tell me about this appropriation
please.
Mr speaker and gentle lady there
was no appropriation.
Mr speaker I'm looking at the
committee substitute for House
Bill to sixty five in on page
one one twenty three since
making an appropriation.
Mr speaker and gentle lady there
there's no appropriation in this
bill we are because we're
bringing the funds together in
creating one fund.
We were told by our doctor that
we had to have that language in
there it combines the funds so
we need to have language about
the appropriation there is none
in it.
Okay that.
The state director said it need
to be and there will like issue
all of the.
Drafters suggestions Mr speaker
gentle lady on page three of
your bill.
I'm really bothered by that
because what you are talking
about taking.
And making part of the state.
Are those lands that are.
Personal property of farmers or
ranchers are people that do
tracts of land usually in rural
areas.
And the I see that on line
twenty three it starts out right
after Representative the
amendment that was put on there
is just three public members
appointed by the governor one as
in show Representative farming
or ranching.
Can you tell me for that like
which is put in their place.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is from the original bill that
is that we haven't changed that
language at all at his house
been.
Mr speaker gentle lady seems to
me like you've changed
everything else why did you
leave that language sign.
Mr speaker gentle lady because
it's important to have a
representative from the farming
and ranching community when it
comes to talking about working
lands and protecting you know
our our precious landscapes.
Mr speaker gentle lady on the
entrance of my wrench I have the
signed up this is and to protect
and care for all of his
creations god created farmers
and ranchers and your bill says
one and you have the opportunity
to change their and who better
is there to take care of Landen
protect all the assets that he
put out there.
Then a farmer and rancher and
would leave it at that one I'm
really really bothered by that
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker.
He said that the title to
acquired land shall be healed in
the name of the state.
Mr speaker.
We have already had I've heard
the discussion there that those
lands.
Will be taken off the tax rolls
at those particular counties.
And that can be a detriment to
some of these counties around
here Mr speaker.
This
is your bill's allows for
corporation to acquire at least
ten percent of the undivided
interest of the project.
And the.
The corporation does have to
pay.
Taxes to the state but the state
doesn't.
That will that County be able to
benefit from those ten percent
taxes that that corporation will
plot Hey I don't think so Mister
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker.
Hold on to dismantle possible
place.
Mr speaker on page six of your
bill.
I'm not I'm not too sure are
your pages numbered I don't know
which copy you are looking up
the but I'm looking at the one
that's in our books and it's on
page six.
And it seems to me like the way
I'm reading it this is under
management part of it is seems
to me like it is this finding
the responsibility to the Energy
minerals and natural resources
department Mr speaker gentle
lady is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady for
those lands that are that are
required by the state.
I'm sorry I didn't hear you Mr
speaker Mr speaker and and
gentle lady at the energy
minerals natural resources
department can can manage those
lands or can transfer them to us
to other agencies where may be
more appropriate.
Or the corporation madam CZ Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Mr speaker is it seems to me
like.
I can I can see potential
problems Mr speaker gentle lady
her gusting I can't remember how
long ago was stand it's been
well over ten years now.
The Interstate Stream Commission
or department.
Started buying up land between
for some or all the way down to
the state line on the taken
stripper in the taken stripper
area this is land that was
purchased by the Interstate
Stream Commission.
In the DPSCD District and the C.
I. D. district Mr speaker.
The Interstate Stream
Commission.
Is in the business of.
Complying with what we're
supposed to deliver to let's say
Texas sense for use of the bike
is representative.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Whenever they acquire these
lands because they bought the
water lot water water rights and
land as one package.
That was not their job.
To manage the land their job was
to ensure that the state of New
Mexico was sent compliance with
water delivery to texts because
of their ineptness in managing
these lands it impacted every
farmer around those particular
plants that the state now owns
due to the process that the
Interstate Stream Commission to
we had weeds that rover ten feet
high and I documented all those
the photographs of it was
nothing but.
K. also around there whenever
the wind blew and tumbleweeds
were actually piling up against
schools for the students
couldn't get out.
So the ineptness of that
department gives me great
concern about how inept that the
energy minerals natural
resources department is going to
be as far as carrying out the
responsibilities that are stated
in your bill do you understand
my concern there Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
understand your concern but I
believe that it is unfounded.
That's a different situation the
management of those I see and I
just see lands.
Okay so Mister speaker and
gentle lady on some of these
lands that will be acquired by
the state now through what your
bill is proposing to do.
By any chance would any of those
lands have any chances on them.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
you know I think it I I think it
depends.
Mr speaker gentle lady more
often than not they will have to
insist on Mr speaker gentle lady
will any of these lands acquired
by the state through this bill
that you're proposing grant here
will there be structures on
their will there be possibly
small dams to help defer water
Mr speaker gentle lady will
there be roads to be maintained
of these particular lands that
are now going to be owned by the
state that's been acquired by
the through the E. N. M. R. D.
of Mister speaker the list goes
on and on so whenever you say
well you're not sure maybe you
need to leave the house area and
get out there and look at the
science that have been acquired
in the past because Mr.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
You need to actually see what's
taking place out there in the
rest of the state other than one
particular area you Mr speaker.
I.
The thing that really bothers me
about this bill because these
lands will be able to be used by
the public who's going to force
any law enforcement on these
particular lands Madam speaker.
And lady from tasks.
Mr speaker and in gentle lady it
depends on the management of the
lands that that are state owned
and that have public access
there are park Rangers and our
state parks if it's a state park
that we're talking about then
there will be Rangers there.
Mr speaker I'm not talking about
state parks I'm talking about
these other lands that might be
it kids through what your bill
is proposing to date so if you
have hunters out there are they
really.
License to be hunting or third
punctures out there are there
really fishermen that have a
license or other people out
there that are just like note
down the river if that's what
the case may be
is it your bill will allow
public access to these acquired
lands and I see it being a big
problem especially.
Whenever you're talking about
very historic plans that do have
some significant historical
significance about the
degradation and destruction of
some of these very important
artifacts that may be there the
resolution is a big thing due to
wind or flooding
damage because people will take
their pets we've seen that on
private land that people do like
to trespass on so you need to
get out of the bubble and think
about the whole picture of that
because there will be people
that will try to do dig up
artifacts of the list goes on
and on so that to me is a huge
problem and if you don't see it
as a problem.
I think that the energy minerals
natural resources department
we'll see it as a problem
because now they're going to be
charged with trying to do
something about it to think that
negative that is going on those
lands.
Mr speaker gentle lady of.
Whenever we're talking about the
forestry division.
And again they're not a they're
not a land management agencies
are.
But we're talking about huge
vast amounts of land that is
that they have to take care of
they're not a land managed
Management Agency at all we have
seen well I don't want to go
down that I'm getting off base
right there.
Mr speaker.
Of.
Full on over here to get my next
win.
Can you tell me what.
Does your bill contained
anything in their in here that
defines recreational use a
multiple use or traditional use.
Mr speaker and gentle lady on
me.
This is this bill you know we we
define recreational use as
You access for hunting fishing
hiking.
Mr speaker there was three parts
to I question.
Mr speaker gentle lady would you
please repeat them.
Definition of recreational use.
What about multiple use what
about traditional use.
Madam speaker.
You Mr speaker and and
gentlelady it it depends on the
parcel and the tract of land
there
it it's allowed for for parcels
to be acquired that have
recreational use you and you
know and conservation use their
there is nothing in this bill
right now about traditional uses
Mr speaker and gentle lady but
that is something that we're
working on the Senate side.
So Mister Madam speaker and
gentle lady for you're saying is
your bill needs additional work
is that what you're saying if
you all are still working on
that because I think those
issues do need to be addressed
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
I think that the impact.
That it will have on the
adjoining private landowners
could be huge as well especially
through their recreational abuse
aspect of that Mr speaker gentle
lady I think maybe that's why
our forefathers thought to
checker board some of our landed
that was brought up by a
previous Representative that was
debating the bill.
Because they need to take better
take care of their land in a
governmental agency that has no.
Management capabilities or
expertise in taking care of our
lands especially these lands
that have now come all that
counties tax rules Mr speaker.
Madam speaker I keep I'm sorry.
These things are a little bit
sets from the right now and it's
hard to say so I do apologize
madam speaker of.
This is.
I understand why there is
opposition to this bill.
And it is those industries that
do take care of the lands out
there and take care of the
lilacs and take care to feed.
The rest of the world.
Madam speaker thank you very
much.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Lee County
Representative Scott.
Madam speaker will the gentle
lady.
From homes you.
Thank you madam speaker I yield
to the gentleman from Lee.
For the body.
The process for which land you
moved into.
A conservation easement
currently.
Mr speaker and and gentlemen I
am happy to do that hi I know
something about it at as it
stands up private landowners
will get into contact with a
third party entity system like a
land trust or so in water
conservation district and will
look at what the purposes of
protecting their land is for and
together they will develop a
document called a conservation
easement deed and that outlines
the the restrictions the removal
of some development rights the
possibility if that landowners
interested in in public access
so that is not required and this
bill would not require that on
and then together they you know
you you you do all kinds of
other of transactions working
with surveyors and you know and
geologists to you to understand
what's going on with that
property and if you are lucky
enough and interesting enough
that you can work with that that
entity to as a private landowner
to submit an application to to
energy minerals natural
resources for the land
conservation incentives that.
And you go through a whole long
process and it's determined it
may or may not be determined
that that land has conservation
value and and then it will
potentially be a vote for a an
available for at a tax credit
and there's another process that
happens at the federal level for
agricultural easements.
Mr speaker John.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady that is my understanding
also.
In the critical component of
conservation the sport is waves
the process is an issue.
At the request of a private
landowner is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman you are
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady how does
your religion Slusher.
Chair.
New program working the
Russians.
Mr speaker and gentleman it does
not change it at all.
That process remains the same.
There's just it opens up the
possibility to to support the
transaction cost of the purchase
of a conservation easement
potentially if we find it.
Madam speaker of the gentle
lady.
Yes Mr Kuhn.
Your legislation allows the
acquisition.
Of additional property.
From your.
land grants private owner sure
in other property owners in the
state.
Recommended.
The committee is that correct.
You Mr speaker and gentleman the
legislation allows for the
acquisition of land from a
willing seller
and it opens up the possibility
for grants to be given to
political subdivisions.
Mr speaker generating.
Can a corporation participate
with the state.
Acquisition of these properties.
Mr speaker and gentleman a
corporation can participate with
the state as it does right now
that does not change.
Mr speaker madam speaker was a
gentle lady.
Corporation participates with
straight in the acquisition of
these properties would also.
For the management of the
required property to fall under
the purview.
Service corporation.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
happening right now and that
does not change there are
several properties that are
managed by the corporation that
were that were required along
with the state in the
partnership back in you know in
the late eighties.
Generally you correct.
Thanks.
One major change is the story is
normal position.
To acquire these properties out
right.
In competition.
With.
When donors that may be
interested in the same property
is your.
Mr speaker this legislation does
not tell a private landowner who
it needs to sell to.
Highlander can do what they want
with their lands they can sell
to the state under this under
this amendment this act or sell
to a neighbor.
Madam speaker gentle lady that's
right this.
However on one side of the
transactions a willing seller on
the other side of the
transaction was a rancher wants
to.
To his holdings to to run
cattle.
The third party in that
transaction was the full faith
and credit.
Of the state of New Mexico.
Possibly in partnership with.
Our mental corporation.
Who would have.
Ops.
Thanks for your resources.
To compete
with.
Spread your purchases will.
For our.
Madam speaker gentle lady to the
state.
An issue with her.
Mr speaker and gentleman as the
director of a nonprofit that
does.
Land acquisitions as well
I can tell you that there are
very limited resources I believe
that a private landowner has the
ability to sell his or her lan
to whomever here she wants.
Miss madam speaker keep doing
that I apologize.
Speaker gentle lady.
If this were to were to
appropriate fifty million
dollars into this project.
That dollars would be available
to complete.
Perspective private purchase
numbers for this land does this
legislation and I will clap
in that circumstance.
Mr speaker and gentleman if this
let if this fund ever got fifty
million dollars would be dealing
with a whole different kettle of
fish but what I'm what I'm going
to repeat is that a private
landowner can purchase can sell
their land to whoever and the
state might be willing and able
buyer a corporation maybe a
willing and able buyer a
rancher.
Doing all of god's work maybe
eighty willing and able buyer.
Mr speaker or madam speaker
gentle lady at could have
politically understandable
that's not the problem the
problem is.
Taxpayer resources perhaps
significant taxpayer resources
to acquire land.
The.
Have some interest at some
significantly less value for
property purchase.
X..
Problems with this legislation
we're putting taxpayer money.
We're putting taxpayer money in
the hands of environmental
conservation groups to require
and manage.
Gentlelady.
Almost sounds like you're going
to be unconstitutional but I'm
not enough to the
Constitutional scrollwork
tomorrow.
Will Google search thank you
madam speaker finally got it
right and thank you lord for the
ranch.
There is further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
I don't see the representatives.
Let's go to the gentle lady from
Rio Arriba Santa Fe Intel's
Representative Herrera.
Thank you madam speaker and with
the kind lady from task you.
Madam speaker I applied to my
deeper the gentle lady from
River The Santa Fe and taps.
Thank you.
Maybe I I just wanna make sure
what sees a once these lancer in
conservation they can never go
private again right.
Mr speaker madam speaker excuse
me inch and gentle lady it.
I'm unclear what you mean by by
conservation.
What if they madam speaker and
I'm kind of moving you setting
up the some.
When you're setting up these the
with into it conservation
district.
I just wanted to know.
If you have.
The public one.
They just revert to the private
sector say if somebody wanted to
come in and do a development or
building industry or something
like that they would just be off
limits right.
Madam speaker and gentle lady is
a private landowner has put a
conservation easement on that
property it is in perpetuity and
and those lands I want to be
clear our our private lands and
they're kept private there's no
public
there's no public access and
less that private landowner has
to put that in the conservation
easement deed you can amend the
conservation date conservation
easement deed which I shouldn't
because at that point eating you
have received
you know us you've received some
benefits through the through the
federal tax deduction or through
you know potentially the the tax
credit if you went through the
the state conservation isn't tax
credit program so you know it's
it's really hard to it to and an
easement and and you and you
really shouldn't and typically
public lands usually but not
always state public.
I thank you madam speaker and
and and thank you kind lady at.
I'm just asking that question
because
You know one of one of the
problems in Rio Arriba is that
we don't really have very much
private life it's really a
problem it is beautiful and we
love it but I was looking at the
Rio Arriba land and resource use
plan for Rio Arriba county and
because I didn't know what the
stats were and and during this
debate since it's gone on I've
had time to read that the the
private land is only sixteen
point six percent that's to
about two hundred thirteen
thousand acres of federal land
seventy seven percent which is
the one million over million
acres State Land is about what
is it read two point three
percent thirty one thousand
acres of tribal lands is about
four point two or about fifty
six thousand acres so you know.
It's always a question of you
know I think conservation
development hi you mix those two
so I I guess I just wanted to
ask those questions if you had a
Netflix come in in ten years and
they wanted to build a five
hundred acre you know complex
for both housing and.
And employment and most here
land was tied up.
Of a conservation
District I I am I know I'm not
using the right word wrong right
right I apologize
comes to a station easement are
they could not.
They could not put that land
back in a private said that
setting so that you could do
that kind of development in
earlier is that correct.
Madam speaker and and gentle
lady again the conservation
easement if you have that as a
private landowners is is very
very hard to break it could
happen but that letter would
have to rate of funds to the
federal government would have to
find some other lands with the
conservation easement deed in in
the amendment that that is that
is a challenge you and I want to
I want to make an important
point here that conservation
easements R. for voluntary and
the landowner wants to do this
you know you are you use the
words tying up land you know we
use words like
you know protecting you know
protecting the land you know as
per the landowners wishes and it
you know it it ties it in that
land if it's if it's in a
conservation easement deed you
know it is protected forever and
if that landowner dies or or
sell the land that conservation
easement
you know at the end continues to
exist now we have a pool in the
conservation easement world you
know where we can build out
building envelopes and so you
know if if somebody had enough
acreage and wanted to build a
building envelope to ensure that
something someone like Netflix
could come in and purchase that
I guess they could but there are
we're talking about lancer
special we're talking that lands
that are for agricultural
purposes for ranching you know
for for important habitat for
you know for water resources you
know this is this is probably
not a place where you would want
to put you know a lot of
concrete and again this is this
is a voluntary situation.
Speaker and I kindly I I I
understand I understand that
it's volunteer but you know
different people at different
times make different decisions
and and so I just wanted to now
there there could be some
flexibility it would be very
different they would probably
have to have to pay a lot of
back taxes to do that
I just I'm just I'm just curious
about that knowing knowing that
we have really been a very small
area of really.
In Rio Arriba it's it's really
pretty small and it's it's one
of our problems when we start
doing economic development so I
I respect we're this bill is
coming from I was just I was
just reading just and wondering
how that could affect the future
and you know and how you plan
for seven generations ahead in
many would say yeah keeping
conservation I get that and
other people would say are you
allowing for a mixed use policy
so thank you madam thank you
gentle lady thank you madam
speaker I yield my time.
There's further debate the
gentleman from done anna grant
and Sierra.
Senator crosses.
Thank you madam speaker.
The gentle lady with the gentle
lady please R. yield.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from the onion that
grant is here.
Yes yes thank you very much I
just had a few questions.
Was just do you happen to know
Madam speaker gentle lady how
many acres in New Mexico our
federal of medicine federal
lands are managed in New Mexico.
Eight members in New Mexico.
Mr speaker and and gentleman I
believe it's a about nine
million but I I may be wrong I
can just check in on that I
Madam speaker gentle lady and
I'm not trying to get on a on a
on a question in jeopardy but I
was just looking to see what
we're we're at I know that we're
one of the states that has the
most public land public lands in
I believe were recognized I read
here that we have a total of.
Twenty seven million acres of
seventy seven million total
acres in New Mexico of just
federal land understanding is is
that we have another two point
one million acres managed by BLM
as I I'm always one of these
people that love
conservation I love to take care
of our for us I I enjoy with my
children but I'm not I just
wanted to point that out that we
already have a tremendous amount
of public lands and and I'm I I
heard some of the other
representatives expressed their
concern of some of those places
that.
Possibly don't are are.
Lacking of private lands as the
previous
Representative.
expressed and so I'm just trying
to see what and what or I'm
gonna ask you these questions so
I heard you guys talking about
Madam speaker
gentle lady I I I am.
Heard that
There was penalties I'm sure
there's penalties if you turn
around and you amended this
easement could you tell me what
those penalties which could be
or would be.
Mr speaker.
Madam speaker for me
you know I I don't know what
those those penalties would be
it depends on how long the land
was an easement it depends on
how much the land is is valued
at this bill has has nothing to
do with our with our how we
support the conservation
easement program in New Mexico
that is that exist and to this
day it doesn't change at all.
You madam speaker
gentle lady I just sort I just
what was going on with that is
I'm sure to be very difficult to
get out of if you amended it it
probably very costly ensure you
Got some tax incentives to do
that or or some agreements and
you have to pay that back and
I'm sure that would be
substantial
so the likelihood of somebody
reverting back and and and
completely changing that back to
its previous state would be very
unlikely would you agree with
that.
Mr speaker and speaker and
gentleman it's just it's just
not recommended.
You easements are up property
interests vested in the holder
and that is the the private
landowners who has an easement
has has received some you know
some tax deductions and and tax
credits and you know we we work
we work in a lot of other
interests around the state work
very closely with the letter you
got to be sure.
You got to think about the
future that's why you know we we
don't do we don't do that
lightly you have to really be
you have to you have to feel
pretty strongly about and
they're you know they're there
are folks on on in in our in our
house that have conservation
easements Mister step madam
speaker and and and gentleman
you know I think it's important
to to recognize that you know if
this is something that that we
think of is in part in
perpetuity we don't it is should
be changed it can be.
Okay well I'm I'm sure
Madam speaker gentle lady I'm
sure that it would be very
difficult to change almost or
use were impossible but it would
be very painful to the person
make those agreements I'm sure
of it nineteen ninety
so.
Madam speaker gentle lady
I was thinking about this you
know so you get your you've got
this property let's just say
that that may be.
The state were someone
Is interested in I'm sorry my
phone's going off and everything
but anyway you see that let's
just say a nonprofit and stated
interested in a piece of
property this is a rash like one
of the other gentleman mentioned
any kind of took some of my
questions which which is which
and you answer some of them but
my question is would the state
be able to out bid this is a the
purchase price was I don't
normally use of million dollars.
Would the state be able to out
bid and I and let's just have
want to buy myself a million
dollars for that ranch.
The state come in and pay over
its value to take that property
from you know a you know in in
what competing I I guess we can
be that lets the state paid a
purchase I won't purchase prices
a million and the state comes
and says all pay a million one
is that possible.
Mr step madam speaker and
gentleman the state is not
allowed to pay more than the
fair market value that yellow
book value.
Here it.
Madam speaker gentle lady that's
good to hear because that's
that's what I thought it's it's
that's what I thought they
couldn't do I just wanted to
make sure that that can happen
so and I and I did hear you say
that there eminent domain I
believe is not something that
could
that could happen in this in
this legislation is that
correct.
Madam speaker gentleman that is
not part of this bill.
So one of my last question will
be
Madam speaker gentle lady
So what protections do we have
if I don't know one of the
people in the committee has a
now that selling a piece of
property.
It is good now you know the and
brother in law is you all beat
whatever it has this piece of
property seized level what
protections do we have to say
that.
They're not gonna buy this
property from from a
friend or a now or whatever and
and and the bill take advantage
of that situation or can you can
you give me insurance.
It Madam speaker and gentleman
thank you really truly thank you
for for that question
you know there there's a
committee that is made up of you
know of folks from from the
ranching community now from the
Land Grant community the a
second community in the outdoor
recreation division EMNRD it's a
robust group of people who are
making these decisions truly.
And and I you know I think they
will make that decision.
Based on the factors that exist
in this in this language.
Madam speaker gentle lady I just
you know.
Sometimes people take advantage
of of these types of situations
of and so
I just I just worry about that I
mean maybe the committee does
that but no I don't know how
many members are on there I
didn't read that but it does
worry me a little
Madam speaker gentle lady that
you know I I I I do worry a
little bit about this because it
as as one of the representatives
stated earlier it up let's
stated in in a in a position to
compete very easily all in a in
a.
In an advantage to to your
private personal also purchased
some things Madam speaker gentle
lady I guess that you know I I I
do know that there's other
avenues to.
Get conservation easements on
I'm sure you're aware of those
can you explain to me some of
those that are available
already.
Yet Mr spend minutes speaker and
gentleman the one I know the
best is the is the state program
there's also the at a C. program
in the all the able program at
the federal level where is the
you know federal government
purchases an easement pace for
some transaction cost for a
private lender put that land
into into the conservation
easement I am not as familiar
with those programs because I I
don't work very much with them
we don't we don't do that up
here so much but there are other
programs that exist.
I think I will one last question
madam speaker put some new and
I'm still learning and there's a
lot to learn about this Madam
speaker speaker gentle lady and
one of them is and I'm just
wondering because I I saw a
friend of mine who long time ago
sold his some of those
properties are is rights to to
His ranch near river a beautiful
river running through there and
they came back in the.
bills offense and fenced off and
basically left him a little a
little way for the callous to
you Mrs cattle.
To be able to water and so is it
possible that is that possible
to happen I I think let me let
me ask you that is that
something that.
Can be done is done.
Madam speaker and gentleman it
fencing is one of those issues
that needs to be
really sort of really sorted out
by the private landowner and you
know and the entity that is
holding the easement so you
sometimes that there there's
fencing allowed and and
sometimes there isn't really
depends on on you know what's
happening.
And with the landowner wants and
needs.
Speaker gentle lady I guess I
guess is that maybe one of the
reasons that
Tell growers are against this
legislation you think.
And speaker and gentleman I I
don't understand why the cattle
growers are against this
legislation.
Well Madam speaker gentle lady I
I
you know I just a I'm sorry I'm
not gonna be able to to support
your bill and but you know I
everyone hazard reasons why they
can let your try to
that our state and I appreciate
yours but
being that there's already
avenues of doing that and
there's some oppositions worries
and some things that some so to
me like we would need to work on
I I hope that you're able to
make those those adjustments
if it doesn't pass and and maybe
you can bring it back to us okay
and maybe I'll fast maybe can
pixels on the other side thank
you very much madam speaker
gentle lady for where you're for
being so kind and answering god
bless you.
This is a debate the gentleman
curry Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from yes please
don't.
Thank you Mr speaker I'll gladly
thank you madam curry thank you
John I I just have a couple
comments in a couple of quick
questions
my first time it is a after
listening to all the discussions
that are you reading through the
bill
your eyes kind of settle down
different things and want to
comments we heard was the title
of the bill does say making
appropriation.
In on page two.
It also says money in the fund
is appropriated.
On line twenty five sorry
encouraging you gentle lady
when.
This moves on over to the Senate
to
consider voluntarily amending
that out I think it more
appropriate.
But that your choices your bill
but I just want to make that
recommendation because there is
no dollar amount there.
But I don't think having making
appropriation the title is
appropriate so I want to suggest
that.
The second thing was after
listening to the debate is yes
the first time I've seen
Corporation defined.
As in New Mexico not for profit
corporation.
So when it uses any time use the
word corporation your bill by
definition it's a not for profit
corporations that credibility.
Mr speaker and gentleman on that
is correct.
Thank god I just found that to
be.
When usual I guess it would
speaker gentle manner and the
third thing you know I I know
you gave us the name of your
expert and I believe you said
your expert works for the
nature Conservancy is that
correct already Mister speaker.
you Mr speaker and and gentleman
that is not correct he is from
western resource advocates.
Thank you for that are are
misunderstood that but I do
wonder gentle lady it is that.
Gentleman in a position to
benefit if this bill passes or
is this something that would
benefit his nonprofit.
Mr speaker and gentleman at that
is a no but I will add here that
if this bill passes we all
benefit.
I'm sorry I missed your last few
words gentle lady Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman at that
is a no to your question but I
will add that if this bill
passes we all benefit by having
land water protections and
access to trails and hunting and
fishing.
Thank you John I appreciate that
very much thank you Mr speaker I
was all my questions I just
wanted to encourage the sponsor
to consider amending a bill and
she goes over the Senate thank
you Mr speaker senior further
debate generators.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
House Energy Environment surgery
programs and.
Johnson when you take yourself
off the board.
Gentleman.
All right Jones one more.
Okay Jones San Juan
Representative Strickler.
Folks just just to reiterate
we're I'm using the board and so
when you take yourself off your.
So it was property go to the
gentle lady to close but you
know we'll make an exception
that gentleman from San Juan
you're recognized thank you Mr
speaker and I apologize Mister
speaker I thought
I was on the board the gentle
lady from a child's point here
Mr speaker I gladly yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you generally I I just
wanted to kind of clear I do
think she's been a long debate
and forty percent forty seven
percent of New Mexico was on by
either the federal government.
Or the state or the are the
Indian nations and so we're
heavily on by governmental
entities thirty six percent are
is by the by the federal
government in in San Juan County
it's even
you know even though more
six percent of the of the lands
in San Juan County or private.
And ninety three percent belongs
to primarily the federal and
then and and and I guess the
state would have four sections
per.
For a township that's were
checked more comes in and of
those are to generate money for
for Land Grant Park Fund in
there's a reason for that the
eastern states are pretty much
our.
Ninety to ninety five percent
privately owned and Texas is a
good example but from the of the
brass you all the way to Texas
Easter I I think the average
federal ownership in those
states would be less and then a
five percent so
in New Mexico we we just there's
a lot of federal lands law state
lands nine million acres that's
where you got that nine million
acres of services out of state
in Mexico and thirteen million
million acres of mineralized our
our our
Managed by the the the land
office and that's where we get
most of our
inflow to the land grant
permanent fund show
this in in San Juan carry at
least you know all the private
lands along the rivers and ask
for this for the homesteaders
you know develop their farms and
and those are mostly private
lands and we have three rivers
one screwed San Juan County San
Juan the animus Center and they
apply to revert and those are
those are private lands so.
I get a little nervous when the
state has has opportunity to buy
additional lance when they have
nine million acres yeah I know
there's some unique
circumstances that might you
know might require the state to
to pick up some of these lands
maybe at the fifteen acre parcel
or maybe as much as a hundred
acres and
and and that might be it
certainly appropriate and I know
there's no appropriation and
your bill Mr speaker gentle lady
so I just want to body though
that that
The western states
that yeah there's a lot of
federal lands and
and then you know we're we're
luckier than most it is only
thirty six percent.
and of and excuse me can you
tell me were you taught seventy
six percent so they they really
have a lot of federal lands
there that they would like to to
manage themselves and I think
state New Mexico would do a good
job managing our federal lands
at a much are proficiency than
what's currently being managed
so anyway there's that system
some transaction on the on the
land ownership and
this additional measure showing
makes really good sense and
private station H. what I you
know they have to
acquire private lands with that
eminent domain you know
voluntarily to add to a park or
something
in in the state of Texas for
example I think it's ninety
eight percent private land so
anyway I just wanted to clarify
that and appreciate
you present this bill and thank
you Mr speaker again I apologize
for not being on the board.
Senior for the debate gentle
lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker members of
the body I move that House
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for House Bill two sixty five as
amended do now pass on final
passage of Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
substitute for House Bill to
sixty five as amended to focus
now.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call member without
a recorded vote Representative
Baldonado.
The road is closed level forty
informative twenty five negative
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee sets to
prosper to six two thousand and
has passed the house.
Next read IT and gentle lady
from our.
Leo Representative Hochman Vigil
are you ready are are.
Thank you Mr speaker we take you
to that point but the record
reflect all action necessary
placing House with two sixty
eight is amended with an
emergency clause on final
passage has been taken generate
to explain it all.
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
two Sixtyeight creates on the
satisfaction of express
conditions a rebuttable
presumption that a COVID
nineteen infection contracted by
certain essential employees is a
work related accident triggering
entitlement to certain workers
compensation benefits with that
I stand for questions raised
right gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane.
Mr speaker will the general
anytime you don't.
Hi you Mr speaker to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Mr speaker I noticed.
General it looks like you have
some new friends this evening
elective like glasses last look.
my question I guess I have a
couple John jumps on Sir just
one second generation very you
had and then you want to address
that before we go to debate so
we can be debating a bill that
made it amended.
Speaker actually does look like
I got a copy of the amendment up
my desk so if I could get one
the two oh two number that be
great.
And for the members there you go
generally it's just here right.
The two oh two numbers two two
zero five four one point one is
that correct that's correct Mr
speaker and gentle lady to in
general San Juan thank you.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo to
the amendment thank you Mr
speaker I move
amendment one to house bill two
sixty eight discussion
gentlelady to explain New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker others does
three things the first thing it
does is that districts the
sunset date date for this
Bill from January thirty first
twenty twenty three to be a
cancellation of the current
virus public health emergency
orders.
It also strict subsection DA on
page three line seven to
thirteen and what it does is it
big it basically utilizes a
different definition personal
point Mr speaker it uses one
from a leader executive order
issued by the governor's office
that gives us a more exact
information of what we expect in
central employee to be.
Okay that is our debate on the
amendment.
Is there objection to it.
Hearing none House more member
number one to house bill two
Sixtyeight as amended is
adopted.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative Eli thank you Mr
Gramm also appreciate your are
interrupting because that help
satisfy we're questions.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady
I want to ask question about
standard proves.
So we're talking about in the
context of.
The employee who has a positive
COVID test.
And trying to establish the
presumption of that is the work
place related injury.
And so as I understand the
standard approaches in strict
compliance on the part of the
employer.
That the employer did not
strictly comply with the the
COVID nineteen health orders
that correct.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan it's it
is a bit more nuance that I I
call it a rebuttable rebuttable
presumption and what this does
is upon the satisfaction certain
requirements that the employee
has to prove meeting the
employer was not substantially
complying with the public health
order up in.
At the time of twenty days
before the claims made infection
was diagnosed that then creates
a rebuttable presumption that
the COVID nineteen infection
what is a work related injury
thousand titling that essential
employed workers comp
compensation.
Mr speaker gentle lady to and I
I don't practice in their
workers comp so it are we
talking about of the bonds of
the evidence what what is the
standard that I as an employee
would have to show that money
for did not stick with black
thank you very much Mr speaker
gentleman from San Juan so I
think at this time I'm gonna
take the opportunity to explain
to workers compensation
A little bit more so what
happens is let's say we have
essential employee to contract
COVID nineteen based cemex
notice to their employer what
the time then files a claim but
say they have a third party
insurer for workers compensation
benefits that ensure then
processes the claim the claim
will either be paid accepted and
paid what will be denied.
The workers comp are process
back to the workers compensation
administration where a mediation
is usually conducted for on
tribal third party evidentiary
hearings are held where both
parties have an opportunity to
proffer evidence need to meet
the standard or not or to to
present their case to the third
party mediator and usually that
mediator issues are guidance or
some sort of border from which
either party can appeal to a
full trial from there so what
would happen is the both parties
would have the opportunity to
proffer evidence if they took it
to that mediation process and it
would be at that point the
process where they would offer
the information on whether or
not the four was essentially a
compliant restricted buying
public health order and the need
for more at the same time we get
an opportunity to rebut evidence
by you know third Floyd was not
complying with public health
order to get food better they
were outside of the scope of
employment putting themselves at
risk the employer would have the
opportunity to present that
information as well.
Mr speaker and thank you for
that generally so the the
explanation.
But so I just the standard is is
strict compliance on behalf of
the employer.
but then when we look at things
Louise
Occident let me let me put it
this way.
For the employer to now re
bought the presumption of
rebuttable rebuttable
presumption I think this is the
first the gentle lady use in
order to establish that as I
read this bill.
The employer then has to show
that the employees
substantially.
Violated.
The health order outside of
their employment is that
correct.
Thank you Mr speaker John and so
yes the going to the workers
comp process the employee has
the opportunity to proffer
evidence of the employees are
was not strictly confined the
public health order at which
time if they do so successfully
the employer can and proffer
evidence to rebut that
presumption that the employee
was also not substantially
complying with the public health
order therefore negating the
attachment of the presumption.
Mr speaker gentle lady I noticed
that substantially violated
isn't defined here
you know in the legal context I
understand sort of what strict
compliance means because I think
it's maybe solar concert for
strict liability.
I'm not as familiar with
substantially violated and I
don't see defined in the bill so
what does that for a
substantially binding was that
means.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
speaker gentlemen so that is
probably legal term of art that
would need to be interpreted by
whatever third party mediator
administrator would be brought
to the case.
Mr speaker generally to do also
shed some light for me on why
are we have just two different
standards one for employee one
for the employees so strict
compliance with the health
orders on behalf of the employer
but substantially violated on
behalf of the employee it seems
like a little it seems like a
lower standard so can help me
understand why there's a
difference between the two
standards thank you very much Mr
speaker John from San Juan so
really that touches upon the our
public policy aspect of this
bill this bill is drafted to
incentivize good behavior I
incentivize those in central
employers to do what they need
to do to to protect the health
and safety of their employees
and strict compliance with
public health orders is one way
to prove that they are doing at.
Mr speaker John thank you for
that in.
As I understand bill also there
there's a fourteen day
attachments for both employers
and employees so if I as an
employer maybe maybe in December
I wasn't following the strict
protocols of.
Of the public health orders but
I got maybe you know no court
then or or new understanding on
how the health order operates.
What I didn't summer can be used
against me correct it's just
within the last fourteen days or
when the worker tests positive
for COVID is that correct Mr
speaker gentleman that is
correct.
And as I understand the the new
sunset in in the house for the
number one.
Is it best the end date of this.
Workers comp.
Claims system it is with regard
to comment is tied specifically
to when the governor's order
expires so for example you know
how we as we get vaccinated
things started we started turn
the tide seems like we we are
currently.
September state rolls around and
and that public health order is
now expired doesn't get renewed.
The next day I get COVID at my
work.
I filed a claim under this
policy Mr speaker gentlemen at
which the new amendments of the
sunset clause for this bill
would be in fact the date in
which the public health
emergency order expires so the
bill would no longer be codified
in law at that time.
Thank you Mr speaker I don't
have any further debate the
gentleman.
Thanks for the great Johnson
lead Representative with.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo you.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from the town.
Thank you very much
Mr speaker are you aware that
In March of two thousand twenty.
The
That has made a ruling that.
COVID nineteen would be a
recordable case.
Miss Mister speaker John Finley
I am aware of that.
So and then.
With respect to that they came
very specific language with
respect our recordkeeping would
be taken care of were you aware
of those recordkeeping
guidelines as well Mr speaker
and gentleman from the I am.
Thank you for Mr speaker so.
Through this document the.
They revise some on may the
twenty six two thousand twenty
gives a new list of how things
would be reported and housing
Sir track and so the majority of
the companies out there that the
are
are required to do OSHA
recordable switches just about
everybody
Now I'll have to come up with
the way Mr speaker gentle lady
to track.
The
The recordable dance with
respect to comment and to have a
way to determine whether or not.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
whether or not those that's
actually did happen in in the
workplace are you aware of that
Mr speaker diligently I am.
So as we go through that Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Help me understand if you can.
Why.
An item.
On page two under on a and the
definition A. one B. we is
does mention that differs from
ocean language.
Thank you Mr speaker John and
I'm looking at page two years
starting line six subsection B.
the contraction growth of our
species
yeah I'm looking at Mr speaker
Lori I'm looking at the year.
Revisions in contact so didn't
have line numbers would be a
one.
B..
Starting with the contraction
of.
Mr speaker John firstly this is
one of the sections that was
amended by the floor amendment
so it now has the are the
different date for the sun
setting costs.
And this language is designed to
track with the specific
presumptive language that we
have in other workers
compensation cases and so we're
working with state law right now
gentleman from the not federal
law.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so
The lead off on a little bit
more of what
The gentleman from San San Juan
was talking about under item.
Be on the bottom of the page to
replace the word strictly
complied with us Mr speaker and
gentle lady and of.
If you can please explain.
More and and on how you Cruz the
employer has not strictly
complied.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
from eight so going back to our
earlier conversation about you
know the requirement for logging
and co chair actually would one
be one way in which you could
about employee could look as
part of an evidentiary Inc right
to whether or not the there has
been substantial compliance of
people were social distancing if
they were wearing masks that the
inquire res and hearing to the
specific occupancy limitations
those would be specific manners
which they could prove
compliance the public health
order you know there's ways to
gather evidence you know what
your pictures or on that
utilization average up money yes
money from others.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and I
still find it hard to the
we could use and and strictly
actually works and so Mister
speaker and gentle lady with
that hi I have
We're limited to.
Yes for amendment to.
Two percent of the body.
Gentleman and but we cannot
accept this amendment.
It is referring to not build is
referring to the amendments and
context version of the bill
which is printed on the website
says is not to be used for this
purpose if you're gonna do an
amendment gentleman we need to
go to the bill not even just a
contact me page line.
That we can use this because as
things are amended the medicine
context page numbers change
that's why there's no money
numbers on the events and
politics.
So this this this man is out of
order I can accept it.
Gentleman from the the the on
the first page of the amendment
in context it says quote this
document is a tool to shore NMSA
context and we're not be used
for that purpose adding that
needs to legislation.
Mr speaker I will withdraw that
amendment.
And the other two that you have
Mr.
So this debate another two hours
The person you want to debate
the bill for two hours because
you're amendments out of order
I'm sorry the saying you wish to
to pay for two hours because
you're amendments out of order.
That we have these are.
No
No not at all.
Mr speaker Sir.
Mr speaker I'd like to.
Present house for such to one.
Our house for substitute for
House Bill to sixty eight.
The gentleman that will need to
get it passed out stand sectors
so I stand please.
The gentleman that has been
passed out it has been scanned
the generals of the floor
amendment of the gentleman to
explain.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm trying
to reorganize my notes.
Mr speaker house bill the the
the house floor substitutes for
hospital to Sixtyeight.
Does our.
Three three things for
substituting there also
definitions essential employee
to include only public safety.
Employees health care
professionals first responders
and school personnel.
With an added requirements of
these employees must be exposed
to Noam COVID nineteen K. at the
work once.
The second piece of this.
Source.
XLR is a sunset date to an
earlier date yes and when the
state's economy is open one
hundred percent back up.
For business.
Thirteen change almost four
substitute as an additional
rebuttal opportunity for
employer in regards to the
employees playing.
To include them we're.
Can show that the employee has
no comment exposure outside of
the workplace.
Current this current bill and
it's important.
Only allows the employer to
rebut the claim by the employee
by showing the employee violated
the pubblico health work.
So those are the three main
changes Representative and
stamps professionals.
The generally from Bernalillo is
in a.
Friendly substitutes thank you
Mr speaker this is on from like
substitute now a would you like
do you care to saying why thank
you Mr speaker and well I
appreciate definitely the
intention from the gentleman
from Lee County I think that
are this committee substitute is
problematic and kind couple
different reasons firstly I
don't think it takes into
account the amendments that we
are in need as part of the sport
amendment I think that it would
further complicate the sun
setting because of this bill if
we were to try it when we one
hundred percent open I think
that it would be better for the
people the state of New Mexico
to know exactly when this bill
would sunset and that would be
upon the termination of the
public health order
Mr speaker German I also think
that it's problematic and that
our work not problematic in
March so unnecessary and not the
rebuttable presumption as
already stated in this bill
allows an opportunity for an
employer to rebut the evidence
put forth by the employee that
it was not so strict compliance
and public health order by
putting forth proffering
evidence that the employee was
you don't not substantially
primed cells which could then be
presented by a known COVID
nineteen affection taken or
contracted outside of the
workplace
And also Mr speaker gentle man
are we further refined the
definition of the central
employer I'm sorry employee as
part of four in the affirmative
their confidence bill and that
was taken from exact language
and from the governor's of the
last executive order that
Definitions so we want to keep
it tracking closely with that
definition and I believe that
the gentleman from these
amendment does not include all
the essential employees that
have already been
identified as part of that
order.
Okay Is there debate on the
amendment.
And since the generation.
Mr speaker this is
Representative Anderson.
I don't chat is the end result.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
I won't take much time but I did
want to ask a question about
this committee substitute of
before the vote of the gentleman
I don't have you're you're
committee set up in front of me
so just bear with me if you
would could you go one more time
through that strict definition
of essential workers please
general.
Thank you
Mr speaker and gentleman from up
from all those counties
St the.
The definition of strict is not
placed anywhere in the document.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that was my work not
yeah sure I was simply trying to
of respond to what I heard in
the introduction of the
committee substitute Mr speaker
and that is sort of a redefining
or a or a or sharper
description.
I guess my question is gentleman
what is your definition of
essential workers in the
committee substitute question.
Thank you of those apologize I
I.
two different things and
so my definition.
Mr speaker would be school
personnel.
Public safety employee health
care professionals professional
or first responder.
Gentleman
Did you consider any other forms
of essential workers or how did
you come to this building the
definition of essential workers
question.
Mr speaker and gentleman we we
utilize the majority of the
language that was an existing
bill one of the reasons why Mr
speaker and gentleman that I did
not add the remaining
definitions because in my mind
everybody's in such form ploidy
essential workers every
companies and central but
specific to this bill.
Ensuring that from.
No in all cases.
The
The critical frontline people
and I just think I consider
school personnel is critical
frontline people
are are covered well in this the
majority of the rest of the work
force out there Mr speaker and
gentleman it's covered under
ocean in this again.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
and gentleman of then if.
A teacher.
Is an essential workers and the
teacher is ordered to work from
home therefore their home
becomes their workplace and they
contract.
heaven for bid gentleman COVID
nineteen at their workplace then
this wall would apply to them
under that circumstance
question.
Mr speaker and gentleman in my
eyes the answer would be no in
the in the eyes of the port I am
sure Mr speaker and gentleman of
the state of the that answer
will be yes there are two parts
of that Mr speaker and gentleman
one is was and this is where the
burden of proof she's is is very
thanks for me.
When we talk about strict we use
words like substantial.
Mr speaker and gentleman
It occurred during the working
hours of that person working
from home.
And so how do you determine that
when you're your family members
that may be part of that
domicile Mr speaker and
gentleman
When you know when they get it
they get it back to the gate and
the day when they're talking
they're ours Mr speaker and
gentleman that is one of the
reasons why.
The language in the state in
this bill is so concerning me.
Thank you gentlemen of the
gentleman of the shortened to
the point I'm equally concerned
about the language in your
committee substitute quite
frankly gentleman I'm not very
keen on either one and will
listen to the remaining debate
but
I think both proposals the
committee the floor substitute
as well as the bill have of
major deficiencies and the
shortcomings which give me great
concern Mr speaker gentleman
thank you my time is up.
Thank you gentlemen and there
are several moments following
this one that will clarify that
language later thank you is
are for the debate on the
substitute.
Generated from early.
Mr speaker I move to table.
The house.
Substitute.
The house floor substitute
number one to house bill two
sixty eight generally solution
is to table the floor
substitutes.
Yes it will be tabled no we will
be back on the date of this the
vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
Right.
The clerk to call members
without a recorded vote
Representative Cadena.
Yep to table.
Representative David a vote yes
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative top of.
Representative close we're no no
sorry Mr speaker walked away no.
Representative says both no.
I don't know.
It only counts once
Right forty four in the
affirmative twenty four negative
Z. score substitute is table
gentleman from right thank you
Mr speaker and gentle lady so
as as we just have part of the
debate with respect to
the employer having strictly
complied with
The public health orders.
Mr speaker and gentle lady can
you please help me understand if
we have somebody in a remote
environment.
How we can improve for
compliance within their home
brought strict laws for stripper
and July.
Thank you Mr speaker to your
attention to the format that we
just ask regards new definition
of in such a central employee
which means first responders
medical personnel teachers
construction trade workers other
employees to work at care
centers for the purposes you
three nineteen.
There's whose work brings them
into repeated and direct
personal contact with those
diagnostic from virus disease
twenty nineteen provided that
the employee was required to
work at the physical location of
employment at any time up to
fourteen days prior to the
diagnosis of coronaviruses east
one nineteen therefore Mr
speaker gentleman F. R. that the
employee was working in an
environment which is not coming
to repeat it
exposure they would not meet the
definition of the central
employee and the issue would be
met.
Required is is.
Is a phrase that words
specifically and and your and
your amendment gentle lady and
Mr speaker.
Normal but let's take an example
where the normal condition is
the person working from home but
does from time to time come in
J. the restock supplies or or
gather information from
classroom or from the office and
so.
I still were Mr speaker going
towards strictly places of rest
when try and the employer
respond trying to define.
What whatever everything that
happens in that fourteen acres.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady up
continue one of them may.
on page three.
Mr speaker and gentle lady when
we use the word substantially
when we talk about the
employment and the employee has
violated something.
And again substantial of the
word that.
May be very hard to improve the
court.
bows that word stride are
strictly and a substantial none
of those exists within the
phraseology and terminology with
respect to how ocean looks at
things.
Mr Chairman is our question yes
Representative Mr speaker and
gentle lady how do we define
substantially and and that you
know and I just I'd heard
earlier explanation on Facebook
and looking at social media and
stuff like that but once again.
It.
Doesn't define the key points
within that and so therefore it
needs up in both cases Mr
speaker and gentle lady I by
definition for the fact finder
to be the one that determines
that and then also has to be
approved greater than fifty
percent from.
Level proves how we prove that
was with greater than fifty
percent.
level of confidence Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Mr speaker gentleman from Lee so
throughout the law we actually
commonly have situations in
which the our staff writer
actually we are and then the
judge weighing issues of law
will be asked whether or not a
legal standard is that
preponderance of the evidence
you know.
Strict scrutiny rational basis
these are all terms of art that
need to be based on an
evidentiary inquiry which is
usually performed during the
discovery phase of state I
mediation or trial.
Okay thank you for that response
Mr speaker
As as you alluded to earlier Mr
speaker and gentle lady we we
did have a conversation on this
bill and my concerns with the
bill and we just have a
conversation that we would.
As this thing continues on to
the some of the more we work
together to try to.
To call some of those concerns
and.
One of those Mr speaker
knowingly the most critical to
me is the the concept of
equalization Mr speaker and
gentle lady with respect to
Insurance rates and experienced
modifiers in the current
language in the bill does does
Google doesn't and actually
doesn't kind of locks that
experience modifier in and so if
you have a company that's that's
a good actor out there that's
doing everything that they can
work on the COVID protocols
which sometimes Mr speaker
gentle lady are hard to follow
we've had forty two public
health orders with related in
relationships and COVID
nineteen.
Within the last twelve months.
And the the phraseology of the
phrase the works in the bill use
words like fourteen days but can
time and twenty days back in
time which make crossover Mr
speaker and gentle lady the
twenty one public health order
and another and potentially in
some cases three public health
orders there is language in one
part of the bill Mr speaker No
lady in the the talks about the
current public health order but
if you contracted under.
Just say the current public
health orders been effective
seven days in and you can
actually attracted to to being
contracted ten days ago.
And the change in the public
health order.
the current one actually makes
the community more the previous
public health order wasn't you
know they were in complete
compliance at that time the next
one and the change in public
health for is different make
some noncompliant those those
terminologies concerning Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
And so.
We look at that we have a
potential case of of programs
within the workplace and
somebody as as
So one company out there is not
following all guidelines.
And there there's no benefit to
them to follow the guidelines
because the way the bill
languages we're in right now is
there.
Lack of good action is actually
gonna be tentative to companies
that have
follow the rules all the way
through and so that's one of the
things Mr speaker and and and
gentle lady that I need to be
sure that we continue to debate
and discuss and hopefully move
forward on.
As as this bill moves towards.
towards incentives for and
I I have other points but at
this point in time like I said
we we made an agreement that
in the current condition like
that supporters of Bill but I do
look forward to working with you
on a bill Mr speaker and gentle
lady that I can.
Trying garner support for.
Was in the Senate side because I
do think it is critical that
there is a gap from the ocean
guidelines to workmen's comp are
closed and we're able to make
sure that this is something that
everybody every employee in the
state of New Mexico has access
so with that Mr speaker and
gentle lady I you'll that.
This is a debate the gentleman
curry Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker or
gentlelady please you.
This is the time zone a great
job Jody it's it's like look at
the clock I think I can see you
over there but I'm not sure.
It is pretty dark to see
anything in here looking
sideways look at gentlelady
religious three professionals
are three years that I want to
chat about a little bit.
In FY are page for.
Right at the top of the page
dollars Mr speaker this is the
work copper ministration Reports
current statistics indicate
insurers are paying COVID
nineteen claims.
An introduction of presumption
of this type is likely to create
new issues and new litigation.
So Mister speaker gentle lady.
If the insurers are already
paying COVID nineteen claims.
Why are you bringing forth this
legislation.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentlemen and thank you very
much for that question actually
so that is correct Mr speaker
dominated majority of these
workers compensation claims are
being paid at I'm.
That's a wonderful thing for New
Mexicans however there are
percentage of claims that are
being unjustly design.
Senator constituents of mine
reach out to me Senator
attorneys are working on this
issue and I've gotten word of
several specific bad actors
brought it back to employers
throughout the state who are
unjustly fighting these claims
and putting their essential
employees who are proverbially
keeping our trains running on
time.
The position in which they're
having to fight for the budget
to which they're already
entitled in a situation which
there already terribly
compromised.
We're not talking about the type
of people that have a mild case
of COVID Mr speaker John then
for four days get up off their
couch here fine filing a workers
compensation claim is part are
dressed it takes a bit of time
there's a lot of paperwork to
fill out and so we're talking
about subset of occupation that
is greatly and gravely affected
by COVID nineteen and so if
they're put in a position where
they submit a claim and it is
unjustly denied because their
employer
it has been about actor and has
not been keeping essential
employees health and safety in
mind then we need a specific
mechanism and instructions you
may to put those bad actors
lawyers on notice that if they
are to be R. nine and just like
I'm just a denying this small
subset of claims for benefits
they will be held accountable
and what this bill does is it
puts them on notice and also
gives an express turns to which
they can expect to be held
accountable for and that is
reasonable.
Thank you Mr speaker god I just
have to ask follow up who is
denying who is unjustly denying
the claims Mr speaker Mr.
Mr speaker and gentleman I am
not at liberty to call out
specific people in the public
forms such as this however there
are have been several private
employers and also public
employers as well.
Okay so Mister speaker July it
will chat about that a little
bit more in a minute.
First I would I would like to.
Kind of look back just a little
bit before you brought this bill
the state of New Mexico thirty
five years ago created a
complete work comp system
actually have a special session
appear for dates locked
themselves in the bill and
created a whole work comp
systems one of the best in the
whole nation.
And now as part of that system
they created a work comp
Advisory Council.
To handle all work comp matter
stood by the legislature.
But I noticed that your bill did
not go through the work comp
Advisory Council so gentle lady
Mr speaker why didn't they raise
your your bill so they could
advise us.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I I do believe you're
correct up to a certain time
frame in which I think the
Advisory Council did do a review
of the bill and they were split
three to three on.
Mr speaker gentle lady who did
they
Here Representative reported
that I prefer to different store
at if you've got someone like to
see a doctor I believe you did
but I would like to see it
because I had different madam
some and I can't find anything
anywhere that that said that
there wasn't Advisory Council
meeting to endorse or to advise
I know that I've never been
approached by any of the members
on the Advisory Council saying
that we endorsed this bill we
believe in this bill and and so
apparently it if it's three
three split they probably didn't
generate any paperwork but I was
just curious I had not heard
from any to Advisory Council.
Gentlelady much like certain
line of questioning is.
When the state of New Mexico
created the work comp system all
those many years ago.
Part of that system was that the
work comp administration have
all of its own judges.
The judge because work property
issues are so complicated.
And when you mentioned that
there claims have been unjustly
denied I didn't hear you say
that it was denied by workers
compensation administration
judge and I'm curious why they
didn't make it to the court of
the work comp administration to
the judges.
Mr speaker and gentlemen so I'm
sorry I should have given more
information they have been
denied on the pre litigation our
pre evaluation from workers
compensation phase
the way these claims are handled
there's notice of the claim and
that it submitted to let's say a
third party insurer insurer has
the opportunity to pay the claim
outside of the system and then
and only then if they decide not
to pay the claims advancing of
the workers compensation
administration process.
The state Mr jelly I think I
heard you say that it didn't
even make it into the work comp
administration system is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman usually
those claims that are denied
then go to the workers
compensation costs.
Okay thank you for that
gentlelady and and my final
question.
Kind of goes to a page three I
don't see at the top.
And it talks about the
presumption created and
subsection B. of this section
may be rebutted by a
preponderance of evidence in a
court of competent jurisdiction.
And I find myself wondering is
that referring to a court of
competent jurisdiction with and
the workers property
ministration.
Or you following this.
Section away from the workshop
and we're going to District
Court what is your attempt when
it says that generally.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
for that question that was
actually something that was
addressed in the amendments and
the house labor veterans
Committee and which I there was
a question as to whether or not
that language the language is
there before would pull that
these claims are the workers
compensation process that is not
at all our intent but this bill
so the court of competent
jurisdiction is designed to to
specifically refer to workers
compensation or any appeals
process available there after.
This is generally I I think I
hear you say that.
do you believe that you fully
believe that this is going to
happen through the work comp
point through the work comp
judges and yes there is not
satisfaction after going through
the judges then it could go to a
court of law the district
court's or somewhere like that
is that correct you lady Mr
speaker thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that is correct that
is the process for all workers
compensation claims we do not
need to started anyway.
I appreciate that very much I I
had thoughts of asking you when
you get over toward the senator
when you're headed that way if
you would be a clarify that a
little bit it would certainly be
more comfortable I think you
received last questions and get
on the side.
To to clearly state that this
would be.
A court of competent
jurisdiction after being
processed through the work comp
administration court system or
something of that nature medica
group you can word it like that
and I can.
I I would really encourage you
to do that it would settle a lot
of nurses from all of the people
to do that you Mr speaker.
I thank you for the the time
allow me to discuss this a
little bit our.
Hopefully you will accept the
recommendation and tweak that
one just a little bit on
whatever the Senate thank you Mr
speaker on the.
Now this for the debate the
gentleman generation Bernalillo
Representative Dixon.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county yield.
Thank you Mr speaker so the kind
lady from Bernalillo county.
Thank you
Mr speaker and gentle lady hope
one of the.
issues that I have sort of
always struggled with is.
having different standards or
uncertainties
and making sure that.
Our businesses no matter what
part of the state they're in is
everybody knows sort of what the
rules are and sort of operates
on the same playing field.
And so I was hoping that you
could talk to me a little bit
about and explain to to folks.
Hello this bill.
Puts everyone on level playing
field and if we could first look
at how it does that Mr speaker
and gentle lady for essential
workers I would appreciate that
thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo served on a
couple different ways firstly
looking to the new revised
amended definition of the
central boys and that
essential employees know that
they are essential and I agree
of the gentleman together sent
out I think every employees is
essential but within the party
of this law they're put on
notice is demand and essential
for you may be subject to these
benefits if they need specific
conditions and that's the other
thing that this bill does is it
puts both employers and
employees on notice as to when a
COVID nineteen infection that is
contracted at a workplace could
allow an essential employee to
claim workers compensation
benefits this is very important
because we find ourselves in
environment right now Mr speaker
gentle lady and what we have all
been affected by this pandemic
and some people chronically and
critically affected so to know
that if you meet these very
specific conditions that you can
file a workers compensation
claim which is a lifeline to a
lot of these folks that's a
certain degree of
certainty and confidence that
there is help out there that you
don't have to go it alone
without being able to provide
some sort of the least and and
know that you're I'm employers
going to cover you if those
specific conditions are met.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady could you then talk about
this certainty that this bill
provides for employers and how
they can navigate and then this
is been a very uncertain here
and there are a lot of stresses
and demands placed on business
owners you know in in some ways
this may seem like another
demands that we're putting on
business owners but I also see
that there's a benefit to
providing some certainty and
level playing field and so if
you could talk a little bit
about that thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I'm yeah so I mean I think
this bill encompasses good
public policy and that we're
incentivizing employers to do
the right thing
and previously the the gentleman
from we County was talking about
how they're different public
orders are in effect to
different times well yeah you're
put on notice that you may be
subject to you know.
Paying a workers compensation
claim if you're unaware of
what's public health emergency
orders in effect at the time
every single player throughout
the state of New Mexico should
know where we are in this public
health emergency and when you
order comes out it is incumbent
upon them to know exactly what
is within your order so they're
put on notice and also given the
opportunity to do the right
thing.
What.
This bill if importers are doing
the right thing if they are
following the public health
order if they are keeping their
essential employees health and
safety in mind.
Not going to be held liable for
claims that is been unjustly
defined and so therefore Mr
speaker gentle lady it's a good
public policy that incentivizes
employers to do the right thing
directing you're not gonna see
in just five teams your rates
are Nachtigal.
Members is a request for folks
to remove their jackets
unanimous consent suspend the
rule.
Your introduction books can
remove their jackets.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady another question for you as
we're thinking about employers
and claims that may be brought
forward do we need to be
concerned about frivolous
complaints and are there
protections in this bill
For employers to be protected
against frivolous complaints.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
are yes there are in this
protections that are baked into
the worker's compensation claim
process that's why I to claim
has to be noticed and then
submitted and then evaluated so
the pre litigation process the
our workers comp insurer or
sculptured parties going to
arrive at that point see that
substantiated and making about
and and either payout are making
decisions right so there's
the diesel to that process and
also did a rebuttable
presumption and establish that
this bill after listening claim
is going to be
Sorted out pretty quickly
because of the preponderance of
the evidence and the evidence to
standards that have to be met if
you cannot substantiate those
claims that's going to be made
very clear very early in the
process and are now the
mediators or party will charge
for the employer in that case.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I am pleased to support
this bill I think that it'll
help both workers and businesses
moving forward and thank you for
bringing this forward thank you.
State University made gentle
lady to close.
But those that are recorded on.
Representative Cadena.
Yes.
Representative yes
Representative looks yes
Representative Cook.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lord.
Representative Lord votes no.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Ortez both yes.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Serrato both yes.
Representative get off the.
No.
Representative cut off of both
no.
Speaker.
Representative.
Can I don't know please.
No you may not thank you.
Representative both now.
The representative was minus
thirty eight in the affirmative
twenty seven and negative house
the two sixty eight as amended
has duly passed the house out
divergences costs.
An expedited eighteen gentlelady
from Santa Fe are you ready on
that item.
Yes Mr speaker and gives that
point let the record reflect
election necessary for placing
state government Alexion's and
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute prostitute fifty on
final passage has been taken
gentlelady to explain it all
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
house state government elections
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill to
fifty on the long term care
dementia training I spent over
each.
Arguments Act has been developed
to ensure that we have a
dementia competent workforce hi
in our long term care facilities
this will ensure that all direct
service staff employed by
contractors a contract with long
term care facilities are would
have at least four hours of
dementia training for work and
working with our clients with
dementia this is a protection.
This is a protection for our
clients that may be facing early
stages of dementia their
families who are concerned when
they're just making a decision
to have their family wants for
their loved ones are going to
long term care and the staff
members I want to give the best
care possible to our clients on
and with that Mister speaker I
do an amendment to report.
Okay has been passed out.
John I want to congratulate you
on completion are the marathon
that ended at the age drag your
students ask for your address
and your you will to do both
things.
the the amendment number I
believe is two two zero six two
one point one is that correct.
I believe so.
Would you like me to explain in
New Mexico gentlelady to the
amendment thank you this
amendment is just a
clarification on came to with
the US secretary of LCSC on the
aging and long term care at long
term Services departments are
the Alzheimer's association as
well as the at the sorry
the New Mexico health care
association and the New Mexico
Center for assisted living what
it does is it just makes it
clear that telehealth
contractors that work for less
than ten hours are exempt from
the straight.
The amendment okay is there any
debate or discussion on the
amendment.
Is there objection to our.
Hearing house one of one to
house the governor elections in
universities such you prostitute
if you started seeing a great
gentle lady to close I stand for
questions.
Seeing no further debate
generated close.
That
number.
Okay well we have a generation
Santa again members please
please please use your request
to speak button I'm using that
not that and racism sites hard I
can see that so please use your
request to speak button
generation etcetera all
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
to have the public health work
with aging and long term
services the department termed
Services Department odd to
develop the standards and work
with our long term care
facilities as well.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Some examples of what you may
what the training.
Our offices.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady yes so early stage
dementia as is and including
Alzheimer's can be hard to
detect there is not only
forgetfulness which I think many
people do associate with on
madam want and Alzheimer's but
there's also includes things in
and elements like that
translucent
direct share on providers are
dark stop on to be able to
identify these early and to
understand and help navigate
currently in New Mexico we have
less than twenty percent of our
long term care facilities we
call memory care units and those
are for those with us more
severe cases of Alzheimers or
dementia for those that we don't
maybe living in an assisted
living home you know there's a
significant percentage of
majority of those maybe have
earlier stages of dementia and
so this helps those folks
this helps those folks I'll be
able to identify those earlier
and help with services for that.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
but before someone could go
into.
One of those facilities.
Families already know that they
have dementia and they put him
in the facility the calls of
what that particular facility
provides someone with dementia.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so it's both it's
those that may not be already
showing signs of that but that
may need assisted living in
general and then there are those
that on the already have it but
there the earlier stages of and
because only twenty less than
twenty percent of our long term
care facilities have training
often times of things go
undetected even when you know
staff members that work directly
with these individuals on you
don't have the training they are
working with the people in the
the best of intentions we're
doing the best they can but
these individuals on the still
rings the situation work they
have been properly trained to
interact with the.
Okay.
Can you tell me how many all
orders will be required the
training for these are these
individuals thank you Mr speaker
thank you generally that's an
excellent question with thorough
conversations between LTSE how
the Alzheimer's association as
well as the New Mexico
healthcare association of New
Mexico service center for
assisted living so the long term
care operators as well we have
come to that a minimum of four
hours of training.
Okay.
Would this be part of the sea
and I tried.
Mr speaker gentle lady just
because they are contracted and
so how that would work just to
be clear is that D. O. H. in
consultation with Gail TST would
provide a list and and are
approved trainings that can be
accessed online or in person so
that individuals have that run
for care facilities in our rural
areas don't have to come to
Santa Fe or Albuquerque to take
them and they would be then that
our long term care facilities
within the required to provide
access to that training and to
their direct staff contractors
that work with these long term
care facilities would then be
required to show proof that they
had taken that training when
they get hired by the long term
care facilities.
Mr speaker and gentle lady many
of the CNA's are are going to
school and also volunteer are
working already at the long term
care facilities.
And so would this be compensated
training that they would have to
go through.
Mr speaker gentle lady they
would have to work that out with
the organization that they were
contracting with however it
would be required that if they
are in in direct care on that
they would have to find that
certificate to the facility.
So Mister speaker generated
would be part of their general
requirement in order to be
employed.
Mr speaker gentle lady with but
they plan to be employed or long
term care facilities and yes it
would be.
Slow down I didn't understand
what you said Mr speaker
generating thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady if they plan to be
on employed by a long term care
facility than they would be then
that would be part of their
general requirements training.
Okay thank you generate in and
Mr speaker I'm asking these
questions because I've been
working with long term care
facilities now for about
seventeen years.
And I know the seven that I've
worked with seem to have you
know certified employees that
are
Providing.
Great care to the dementia and
Alzheimer's patients.
Would also be required.
The small facilities.
Where there are.
For the Mexican have is seven.
I guess it's called a group
home.
But I know they're smaller
than this assisted living
facilities thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady yes it would and
again we've gone through these
we actually had extensive robust
conversations with the long term
care facilities to ensure that
we're not being overly onerous
with them but that we're
providing access for their staff
members that work directly with
these individuals and on all of
their clients that's makes are
ready but yes they would as well
okay thank you Mr speaker
generating senior for the debate
gentle lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
at H. B. two fifty are of the
the house state government
act like and then and Indian
Affairs Committee subsidy for
two fifty as amended your past.
We are on final passage the
house state government Alexion's
in Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill to the
dust and it the vote is now
open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The recording.
Representative Baldonado.
Yes Representative Baldonado
votes yes Representative
Kannada.
Yes Representative then of of
yes Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
both yes Representative close
able to seventy in the
affirmative zero and negative
house state government elections
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute Russell to give yes
let it has duly passed house.
Okay now we're gonna go to item
nineteen house bill two seventy
two gentlelady from Bernalillo
are you ready.
I am madam speaker can you get
me to that point.
Representative record reflect
that all action necessary for
placing House Bill to seventy
two on final passage has been
taking that is now subject
debate amendment or something.
Gentlelady to explain the.
Thank you madam speaker so the
house health and Human Services
Committee substitute for House
Bill to seventy two it's called
the easy enrollment act and what
it what it it tends to do is to
provide some of those people who
are uninsured particularly those
who are eligible for either
Medicaid or low cost or no cost
our insurance on the exchange so
what this bill does Madam
speaker in it it will create a
place when you when you file
your state taxes where you can
check that that someone in this
household does not have health
insurance it could be the whole
household it could be a young
adult who is no longer on their
pair it could be anybody and
what will happen Madam speaker
is that the tax information will
then be transmitted to our
health insurance exchange and
they will determine whether this
tax payer will qualify for
Medicaid or for something on the
exchange and that that's what
they do and that's that's what
they do all day every day so
we're not creating anything new
except the box to check and
there has been as we heard
this earlier today a stubborn
percentage and I don't mean
governing the people but we just
can't get them somehow we can
get them to get health insurance
and that was a lot of talk
earlier about how how having
uninsured
that causes increase in
uncompensated care there is a
study out recently that
nationally roughly one out of
every three COVID nineteen
deaths are linked to health
insurance gaps and more than
forty percent of all COVID
nineteen infections are
associated with health insurance
gaps so we're trying to get as
many people as we can to have
insurance and this is been done
in Maryland and one of the
really interesting and helpful
things that they found in
Maryland is that the people who
signed up tend to be young.
and healthier and that kind of
spreads out the risk and brings
down the cost for everyone
because it for every person
that's uninsured in the state we
all pay higher health insurance
costs and with that miss madam
speaker I will stand for
questions.
There is debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Santa Santa Fe
Representative work.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county please yield.
Madam speaker I will yield to
the gentle lady.
Thank you so much thank you
madam chair US my question is so
where did HSD get their
information on New Mexicans are
eligible for Medicaid what's
statistics that they use or
where did they get that
information Senator said this
fifty seven thousand where did
that come from.
you madam speaker and gentle
lady let me talk with my and my
my expert is Gabrielle Rivera
with Health Action New Mexico
let me ask for that real quick.
Okay thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady it came from an
urban institute study.
Thank you madam speaker and
Representative add gentle
Madam speaker can I ask Miss
How many of those people of the
fifty seven thousand would you
say are estimated to possibly
not pay taxes.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady let me check with my
expert.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
that same study we have we
really we think that about sixty
percent of Medicaid eligible
people to file taxes.
Thank you manis Baker and
gentleman so madam speaker my
next question how do we intend
to pick up those other forty
percent of the people that don't
pay taxes.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
this has been a problem that has
been going on for years and
years this we have tried a lot
of different tactics this is
just one more tactic there I I
know they have had health fairs
where you could find out there
has been a lot of outreach
there's been advertisement we're
we're kind of piece Mealing this
together because obviously no
one strategy is going to catch
everybody so this is just one
more strategy that we're going
to use to try and get more
people insurance.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady so can I ask you how
many new employees do you think
that will need to understand
we're checking out the box will
be an issue but to comply with
all the rest of the paperwork
and plugging the people in the
programs how many new employees
to think that we're going to
need for this bill.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
don't believe there will be any
as I said that's what the health
insurance exchange already does
they get
financial information and
determine where where a person
can get insurance.
Thank you madam speaker I think
I would disagree with that
because there's going to be
sixty percent of fifty seven
thousand worst my mask people in
here that's going to be quite a
big influx of people that are
going to be now eligible not
eligible but now applying for
this purpose I think there's
going to be a need for more
employees and that Madam speaker
Is there going to be explicit
consent and that check box it's
going to tell them exactly what
it is that they are signing up
for signing off for.
Madam speaker gentle lady it
will be very clear that if you
checked this box your provide
your tax information will be
sent to the health insurance
exchange to help you find
insurance.
Thank you madam chair gentle
lady madam chair I noticed
something that was in here one
of the problems with the
analysis was at the office or
office of superintendent of
insurance reports as a conflict
between the bill which requires
exchange of personal identifying
information to state agencies
and that there is going to be
sensitive information flowing
between their this is based on
H. B. one twenty four SB seventy
five of the state agencies
closure sensitive information
how do we plan on getting around
that sharing of sensitive
information between agencies
gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentle lady that I
believe that
that analysis was from the old
bill where we have the
information going to Human
Services Department and we we
realize that that may have been
an issue with the private
sensitive information so that's
why we are sending it to the
health insurance exchange and
they they are HIPAA compliant by
definition.
Thank you generating thank you
madam speaker madam speaker my
last question This Is Your
appropriation for this is our
how we need for all this
increased send others
substantial FIR is and I know
that's always not accurate but
how we're going to need for the
extra boys are going to need to
process paperwork or how we're
gonna pay for any excess needs
with this Center procreation for
this madam speaker gentle lady
there is not an appropriation
and and as I said the the people
who will be doing it are they
health insurance exchange and
they do have locals in there
that the the vote period is I
think a couple months and the
rest of the year they are not as
busy I have spoken with the
Medicaid director of HSD and
this is something that no well I
I won't say that they are in
support of it they they think
that it is something that they
like the idea of they are they
have tried for years to try and
get more people to sign up for
Medicaid and they I mean if
that's that's how Medicaid goes
to it as and especially with the
pandemic with people losing
their jobs X. that are out the
rules go up the rules go down.
The HSD and their Medicaid
enrollment department are used
to
peaks and valleys shall I say so
this that this will be nothing
unusual for them.
Thank you Janet thank you madam
speaker us so I guess my biggest
concern here is that we have
Fifty seven thousand I'd
estimate pay taxes and then we
came up with that percentage of
those files and they get money
back maybe Pino taxes into that
so but what I'm concerned the
most servers that it's going to
reach some but not all at a
tremendous cost which I know we
had gone over the FY are before
in this number some concern over
the discrepancies in FY are but
I worry about this information
that is going to be shared still
between parties and whether
people explicitly now what
they're checking off onto it
almost reminds me of that people
get automatically register to
vote at the DMV it's like almost
the same thing so madam chair I
think that's all the questions
that I have thank you and I
yield my time.
Thank you very further debate
the gentleman from right.
Thank you madam chair does the
generating from Burnley or you.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
yield.
And madam madam chair.
My understanding of the are
the cares that.
In the.
The federal law with respect to.
Requiring insurance is that
there's a shipment at age for
not having insurance how does.
How does your bill address that
when you have people selling out
of state documents saying
analogy that they don't have
insurance.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
I'm not exactly sure what you're
asking.
So.
We
are lacking knowing the exact
terminology for when obamacare
came out there was a piece of of
of that act that actually made
it she ended up for a person not
to have madam chair and gentle
lady.
Not to have a medical insurance
and so now.
We're we're putting on a state
document that
asking people to acknowledge
that they don't have.
medical insurances are going to
be an issue with us Madam chair
gentle lady miss madam speaker
and gentle lady gentleman I'm
sorry
the representative portion of
the affordable Care Act.
Been taken out and when you file
your when you file your taxes
your federal taxes there is a.
To want to check whether you
have insurance or not so I think
if you're asking if this is
going if they are going to be
afraid to check that because of
something punitive the answer is
no.
Okay so the the pain of the
Senator point four if I
understand your answer exact the
punitive portion of the
affordable Care Act does not
exist anymore and so people do
not
get in trouble for not having
insurance anymore is that
correct madam chair gentle lady
Madam speaker and gentleman
correct.
Thanks for okay and
Madam chair gentle lady at the
end you converse with the the
this bill sponsored from earlier
tonight with respect to the to
the increase of one percent to
three point seven five percent
on how much additional funds
that is these people the use
that have been recognized in
your bill actually decide on how
much more revenue comes to the
states for the Medicare part
Medicaid process.
Mr speaker Madam speaker and
gentleman can you rephrase that
I kind of got lost there.
So we review the the bill and
passed bills nine madam chair
and speakers I am madam chair
gentle lady house bill one
twenty two and and which
increased our health insurance
premiums surtax.
And it estimated to bring in
next for hundred ten million
dollars and to the state.
Of the funds and it's it's madam
chair and gentle lady this is
the numbers on years let's.
A percentage of the sixty seven
thousand people that don't have
insurance how much revenue to
that after two and three quarter
percent bring to the state
coffers do you know.
Mr Madam speaker and gentleman
gentleman I'm not I don't think
that has anything to do with
this bill this is that this is a
different way to get more people
health insurance but it hasn't
essentially nothing to do with
the.
With the question that you're
asking.
So none of the people that have
madam chair and gentle lady that
potentially we could find they
get insurance would would be
part of the Medicaid process is
that what you're saying gentle
lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman no
that's not what I'm saying.
I guess I misunderstood your
question can you please try
again.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
I'm just curious of the sixty
seven thousand people that don't
just discussed a minute ago that
will come on to this that would
be that the insurance companies
would be paying the two point
seven five percent higher
premium on how much more money
if this bill is passed brought
into law would that be
regenerating for the pool for
the fund that
then then goes to
bring more people in the
insurance programs.
Madam speaker and gentleman
gentleman we I don't think we
know exactly how many people
will be eligible for Medicaid
versus eligible for plan on the
exchange so it would be hard to
come up with those number it
would be total at pretty much a
gas.
Thank you gentle lady thank you
madam speaker I yield back.
Thank you there's further
further debate the gentleman
from very.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo please
your.
Mr Madam speaker and gentleman I
yield thank you John I don't
have any questions on the record
comments for the benefit of the
body
the lady
In order to be here mentioned
about the fiscal impact report
of the actual cost of this
program and I think I heard you
say well it of ups and downs
over there and and they have the
money they'll just kind of
absorb it what the body to know
that this FIR showing in in FY
twenty one European million two
hundred thousand dollar impact
the budget that's the budget
we're in right now the wall in
the June.
In FY twenty two million two
hundred and fifteen thousand.
And then in FY twenty three
seven million and are seven
million about six million over
these general fund money.
This bill did not go to House
Appropriations finance
committee.
This is kind of things that.
I have two thoughts one world
didn't go to House
Appropriations finance.
And then number two if they've
got six million dollars what
around.
We're not in a very good job of
chairman their budget back I
don't know how we're just going
to absorb that within their
budget so don't you just based
on a on a financial impact of
your bill to the state's budget
FY twenty one FY twenty two.
A district will not be able to
support your.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you John.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close.
Thank you madam speaker and body
I move that house health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill two
seventy to do now pass.
We are final passage of house
bill two seventy two the vote is
now open.
Thirty seconds left about.
The vote is now closed click to
call those out with right
remained without a recorded the.
Representative black.
Representative Cadena.
Yes Representative then a vote
yes Representative Ezzell.
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Representative Zamora.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of forty eight in the
affirmative eighteen in the
regular.
House bill two seventy two has
duly passed the house.
Members we're moving on to the
supplemental calendar item
number one H. P. two zero nine
gentlelady from Bernalillo are
you ready on that item.
Thank you madam speaker I'm
ready when you get me to that
point place.
The record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill to all nine on final
passage has been taken that is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution gentlelady to
explain the bill.
Thank you madam speaker and I
appreciate everyone's time
tonight this is the state Indian
child welfare act and this is an
updated version from the federal
Indian child welfare act to
include those amendments that
were actually included in the
federal version but also to
include the best practices that
CYFD is currently doing to
communicate with tribes and this
has been a huge huge effort by
so many people involved and with
that I stand for questions.
Single based on the bill the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you madam speaker of a
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you madam chairman.
Madam speaker I'd like
to before I asked some questions
I'd like to preface my comments
with but maybe some procedural
issues.
This bill is quite widespread
practice thank you for version I
read was a hundred forty seven
pages
last night and.
It.
The version I read was not the
version that that serve the
force right now but but the
version that you might find on
the website is not the version
that's in front of us you have
to go to share file pulled up
reside.
And we heard this this morning
and the.
State government elections of
Indian Affairs Committee.
And
that's a lot to to digest and
you have the.
I only have one issue the the
gentle lady and I have discussed
this issue at some length and
we've texted and and sent me
mails back and forth.
What is your it's an issue that
I think the body needs to be
aware of the people New Mexico
need to be aware of because of
it it could affect some
children.
And actually affects the little
girl that is being raised here
in Santa Fe but I was.
Come to know the last couple
years.
At.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
As I read this bill.
There's only one place in the
bill that really.
Settles the issue of whether.
Foster parent of an Indian child
has the ability to interject
themselves in the.
Ross says the the legal process
regarding the disposition of
that child.
And that's on page seven B. and
section thirty seven sorry.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
yes that's our understanding as
well.
Misters Madam speaker and gentle
lady would you just repeat your
question.
Apart from the other.
Information that you provided.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
the the question as the only
place that I find where foster
parent who has established a
relationship with with an Indian
child has the right to interject
themselves into the proceeding
is all paid seventy of section
thirty seven C. of this very
long bill what I be correct in
that the
Observation.
Speaker and gentleman
That is correct to the extent
that when an Indian child is
going through.
The process of the Indian child
welfare act.
And and there is a hearing
involved than a foster parent.
Must be given notice and must
have an opportunity to be heard.
And madam speaker and gentle
lady and that would be in the
final dispositional raise up
that.
that the event would not.
Madam speaker and gentleman I am
going to consult with my expert
and that would be Cynthia
chapters with the
State CYFD department.
I'm speaker and gentlemen so the
reference that you were
referring to on page seventy.
Is actually at the initial
hearing which must occur within
sixty days and in addition to
that CYFD has a role and it's
rule eight point two six point
two point eleven that says Bosc
parents are allowed to be
involved throughout all
proceedings so it's not just the
disposition and so any
subsequent hearings including
any permanency hearings and
judicial review.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
are I wish that this bill would
have included that because I see
over on page ninety two and and
I misspoke earlier the the
version by Representative last
night was a hundred forty seven
pages but the one before us is a
hundred fifty six budgets are
Robert.
When I look at the section
thirty two aids asked fortis
twenty seven which begins on
line eighteen twelve nine
through.
Following.
Those are the provisions of the
deal with the rate of
intervention.
And.
All of this talk about when
foster parents been intervening
among other parties.
And in every instance it does
not apply to.
In the in short.
And then you get over to.
Page ninety serves.
Winds fourteen through rates
and.
Yes.
It basically says.
That the.
These aggravated circumstances.
Do not apply to a child custody
proceeding involving the memory
of the silo I think later on in
your all of the exceptions
except Indian children with
respect to the right to
intervene.
Madam chair and gentle lady here
I discussed.
I can understand this moving
forward because this sets up the
procedures moving forward that
would prove that the the
specific situation that I'm
concerned with.
And.
If you go through these
procedures properly moving
forward.
Then.
The parents the the relatives of
the child the tribe itself have
the right to.
bring that child back
that have or have it raised with
but with the family or whether
the I went to the.
But there are children that have
currently been placed in foster
care.
The.
Some of these at least the one
that but I personally know of.
The family that is the foster
family for this child.
Has a sensually racist child
since the child was was hours
old from our.
And yet.
There's provisions in this bill.
And and and that young ladies
but what this family for about
two years now.
And.
The.
The ability of.
The foster family to be heard.
And the ability of that Bossert
family to.
be involved in the process is
really not guaranteed in the
terms of this bill and yeah it's
possible by the terms of this
bill.
That that maybe maybe the
federal law that that child
could be extracted from that
family.
for variety of reasons.
And it just seems to me that
when you have a situation where.
An ongoing long term loving
relationship.
I can to parent child.
Has existed for for a
substantial length of time.
But the foster family elect to
have the right.
To be engaged in the process.
M..
We're really looking out for the
best interest of the child.
To be able to advocate for that
child and and show that the
relationship was there at and.
I'm I'm really concerned if this
bill is retroactive enough that
if it's just prospector.
Then I don't have a problem with
it but if it if it is
retroactive and an upset.
Existing relationships.
And then I I do have a concern
and and that initiates a concern
that I think we're great
everyone's part so madam madam
speaker and gentle lady good
your to tell me yes this is a
bill that is prospect of only or
does it have any retroactive
tax.
Madam speaker and gentlemen
first I just want to discuss the
reference you talked about in
page ninety three so that
article was specifically dealing
with termination of parental
rights when you're talking about
aggravated circumstances and so
that's at one extreme in
addition to that.
Even if you have a child that
stolen.
And that.
The person that stole the child
could create a bond with that
child that doesn't mean that it
makes it right you still have
parental rights involved in that
and this is exactly why this
piece of legislation was first
enacted on by federal law and
SEC can to have a state law now
because you had children that
were taken from their families
this is something that has long
affected tribes and native
American communities and so as
far as the state ECWA it is
being enacted
to hold CYFD accountable
pursuant to federal law and
pursuant to state law if this is
an act at
Because this should have been
followed all along and as I
mentioned in committee in a
couple of committees because
this is actually the third
committee that we've been back
and forth to that.
There's a hierarchy of care
where native Americans don't
belong in the CYFD foster system
they belong with their parents
with their immediate family
members with their extended
family members which includes
tribal community members so to
the extent that it.
curse retroactively yes the
federal law should have been
followed and it will it will it
will apply retroactively to the
extent.
That there has been
relationships established and a
tribe has to be notified and.
Court hearings court
proceedings.
Madam speaker gentle lady the
the tribe has to be notified the
foster parents you're not
yeah and that's
what maybe by rule but but
certainly not in this
legislation and that's what my
my whole concern is that the.
If we're truly looking out
And and taking everything as a
whole.
I just see that as a a.
Procedural misstep that we don't
allow.
The the the people who have
assumed a role that we come the
parents of a child and now are.
I'm not going to debate whether
you know regarding stolen
children or this and that that
that that's not what we're
dealing with here and probably
and and most cases but I do
think that the
The foster parents.
And this is that I want to
become the adoptive parents
should be able to have a place
at the table and then
Present.
Have a spam present their side
of the story Representative what
they believe is in the best
interest of that child as well
everybody else is given that
opportunity but they are
somehow or maybe from that
except and your maps the.
one instance that we we see on
our part of the page number now
but which had seventy
so madam speaker and madam chair
the
This bill are really
you know support ninety nine
point nine percent of it but I
just have a problem with that
one little piece and I hope that
the.
That you're right because all
children doesn't matter whether
there Indian children four
nominated children every child
in my opinion reserves the
rights to be raised by loving
parents and and have a steady
and safety.
Household and and we're not
sure.
We as a society are not seen
that happen in a lot of
instances and it breaks my heart
but the yeah I I I wrestle with
that one issue as you know Madam
speaker and.
Gentle lady and I just wanted to
bring that again to your
attention try to listen to me I
know on this subject but it is
one that that is heavy on my
heart thank you madam speaker
thank you general and.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative right.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from
Bernalillo county.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Bernalillo
county.
Madam speaker and chairman of
the along the same lines of what
Representative Nibert speaking
about I have not spoken to a
single member of the house who
does not we that placing the
child with the family with its
relatives and back to the native
American tribes that the child's
from is not in the that is
should be done yes that is in
the best interest of the child.
But in some cases we end up with
children who are awesome with
foster parents and as.
The gentleman had pointed out so
there's a hearing within six
months of first receiving the
child.
Then there's a hearing later on
where and that at that first
hearing the tribal entity can be
there and adopt that that trial.
But later there could be another
hearing we're talking about
years later when a bond does it
for or is occurring at the
point.
And what I said in committee is
of the essence the tribe could
come in and throw the trump
card.
And I'm not sure that that's in
the best interest of the child
that is the point that several
of us had an issue with.
Madam speaker and gentle
chairman the other issue this is
I'm I'm wondering if this is
gonna have a chilling effect.
On foster parents who would be
willing to accept native
American children knowing that.
they can be removed from the
home
by the tribe but anyway those
are several issues that I've
thrown out I'm not sure if you
want to respond to any of them.
But madam chair gentleman.
Act sleep right now I'm not
gonna start with the question
I'd like to explain a few things
to the gentleman from Chavis and
the gentleman from Bernalillo
and that is that this law does
not replace the entire
children's code.
We have a federal law right now
which is the Indian child
welfare act that was passed in
nineteen seventy eight that law
is in effect.
Throughout the country and New
Mexico has to follow the law.
So in every single case that
involves an Indian child.
In New Mexico the judges to help
to make increase every parent
grandparent who appears before
the judge.
To see if there's any chance
that there's a native
connection for the child.
Well tell you the courts are
really really careful about now.
Because if there is an Indian
child the evidentiary standards
change and the efforts required
by the department of.
These changes.
If there is an Indian child.
Throughout the case the first of
all the tribe has to be
notified.
Tribal representatives are at
every hearing.
And in every single case in New
Mexico faster.
This receive a notice of a
hearing they're invited they're
entitled to be heard so there
that doesn't change because it's
in it quite case it was the
Indian child welfare act act.
So.
Throughout the case the tribe is
present the foster parents are
present at every hearing.
The at every single hearing the
tribe has to weigh in and say
whether or not it.
of the placement the Indian
child welfare act has preferred
placement standards.
They want the child placed first
of all with family.
And if not family they want what
is called it will preferred
placement so they do have some
families I know and Sandoval
County there are a few
families where there are native
ma'am
And
So course you know they they
can't take every Indian
childhood comes into custody but
this is a partnership between
CYFD and the native tribe or
pueblo or
Nation.
To try to find a family member
in which to place with hope to
place the child.
as I was saying in our here
today that we had a.
K. right now right
Representative a little girl
whose mother is from a healer
river tribe in Arizona and that
particular tribe appeared at the
very first hearing they have an
it was social worker and import
turning who waited in and some
of the
What one of my colleagues who is
an attorney was a professor at
the law school actually when I
was there.
Representative the problem with
when he appears at our hearings
Representative a member of that
community and so he appears at
our hearings are.
For her children and her so
there's a lot of close
connection between the tribe and
statewide do appearance and I'll
tell you the the Charlie
Representative whose mother is
what he'll revert.
That try.
It is president on the meetings
for the child with her
therapists and support so
there's a lot of involvement
that's the ideal situation
I don't know what has occurred
with the a friend the gentleman
from Chavis is family.
But the tribes should have been
where you all of on whether they
approved that space.
And if they weren't.
That's a problem.
But what the the
To see the our students to be
requirement for the tribe to
weigh in is based on what
happened for just a century ago
this time hundred years ago we
were taking native children away
from their families and.
Putting schools in trying to
take away their.
sure we were actually taking
away the future of the native
people in the in the up in the
country.
And that is really the genesis
of the Indian child welfare act
we're trying now to honor those
cultures and not to break the
Indian family up anymore so it's
a very high standard for over
close.
And to keep the Indian family
together
I I imagine that.
Well I I don't I don't know
about that particular case but I
do know that in these cases the
tribe never stops working to try
to find.
A family placement now.
What is an acceptable placement
for under it well let's say the
data is made and and the mother
is not great.
The children could be placed
with the mother.
With the brothers mothers so the
maternal grandmother who's not
native is considered an eco a
friendly placement because it's
family.
And our decades and decades of
research show the children are
less traumatized and have better
long term outcomes when they are
with their biological family.
So that's why it one.
Refers those kinds of placements
so you were on.
Talking about beyond aggravated
circumstances activated
circumstances is a finding that
the court makes usually CYFD
will ask the court for
aggravating circumstances.
What they can do is that.
Somebody.
Absolutely no that number does
updating the parents.
Never order treatment never show
support doesn't this is child.
Disappears and see why you can't
find the person I'm looking and
looking and looking.
After a long time and really
CYFD just will do this very
often but now ask for
aggravating circumstances.
Another way there that they ask
for aggravated circumstances is.
If the.
The mobile and the it has to be
both parents.
Have had their parental rights
terminated before and.
That means that when the court
finds that they're active in
circumstances in CYFD can move
sooner for termination of
parental rights.
The reason.
I believe it's being disallowed
in the this particular act is
because under the Indian chief
Both Act.
The department is required to
make active efforts not just
reasonable efforts they have to
prove constantly.
That they are going beyond.
What would ordinarily be with.
Required to help prevent the
break up of the Indian family.
I have a case where I won the
appeal after my client's rights
have been terminated.
She was a bear with me and our
young father.
He lives very remotely on the
Navajo reservation and the
He had gotten his case plant his
court case plan done because the
worker really didn't help him he
didn't live very close to Crown
Point and she told them is like
nineteen years old and she said
you have to you have to go to
have to go to Crown Point sign
up for some classes and hear the
want to sign up for what was
kind of.
Just letting date and.
He also agreed that there were
there was a lack of active
efforts in that case.
Since that time courts have
gotten a lot stricter about the
act efforts.
And the reason you that because
you don't want to take the child
off from his or her culture now
this particular child really
needed to go back with his
family he didn't have another
adopted place.
But that's another matter.
So.
Taking aggravated circumstance
finding out of the law is really
not significant because the
facts are already out there the
judge can already look at the
facts is just not it's just that
the judges that making finding
I'm aggravated.
Circumstances excuse me so
With regard to the case
the gentleman from checked that
the gentleman.
Chavis mention.
You the gentleman wanted to know
if this logs prospective or
retroactive.
I don't think it even matters
because right now the federal
Indian child welfare act is in
effect.
So.
This is already under.
The federal
standard.
Case will be decided that way
this.
Law are here.
That the lady from Bernalillo is
carrying will not affect that
case but the standard is going
to be sent they're still going
to have to
Really.
Make an extraordinary finding to
not place that child with Indian
family.
And I will say
finished addressing what I think
the gentleman's concerns for and
it.
You may not like the answer but
this law doesn't change what
you're worried about.
What this law does is haunted by
the federal Indian child welfare
act for the state of New Mexico
so that we are clear and I I
think the lady could probably
explain if it changes anything.
I'm not entirely sure but as far
as the foster parents.
And
they are heard now at every
single hearing unless they
choose not to speak they're
invited and and the judge just
listen to them.
So but I'll tell you who the
judges listen to is that if
we're worker from from the tribe
and the pueblos and I'll tell
you if we have an
Worker on a hearing an echo and
the echo workers says I don't
think those efforts are active.
The department says what do we
do to make sure that they are
and they start they start
changing things the I have a
claim recently where
The department the and this was
at the urging of the tribe it
was a problem actually.
Actually allowed.
The mother.
Okay got it.
And.
The grandmother who was caring
for the children and the
children have come to the end.
Allowed all four of them to be
together in quarantine not
because it is the mother who
separated from the kids but they
were allowed to be together
under fourteen because they all
had COVID and had my client have
that place to grow she would
have been homeless.
Art and stepped up its efforts
because of
active efforts and and that was
the the problem it got them to
do that so that is the claim to.
Extra.
Quite frankly they were very
certain the children were not in
danger I have to say if the
children if if if if the mother
had been a threat to the
children that would have been.
But nobody was asking for
anything.
That wasn't safe for the
children but it was not the
usual procedure I CYFD but
they're trying.
Advocated for and that's the
right that was the right thing
to do so.
So
With
Madam speaker and Representative
Liz let me ask you a question
you're not replacing the entire
children's code here not be
writing for that Indian child
welfare act for New Mexico Madam
speaker.
Okay thank you very much I I
think this is.
A fine piece of legislation and
I hope I have committed.
The gentleman that there.
Their concerns are not with this
new legislation but perhaps with
the federal Indian child welfare
act which those are existing
Demands and assessed existing
law.
That's not what's being changed
here thank you very much Madam
speaker and lady from
Bernalillo.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from grant to build
on Sierra Representative Dow.
Thank you thank you madam
speaker will the gentle lady
from Bernalillo please feel.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentle lady the lady from grant
Dogo and Sierra thank you madam
speaker and thank you to the
lady I have I have two adopted
nephews they are Cherokee and
they were adopted by non
relative tribal members that is
my brother and sister in law and
both of the adoptions were open.
And both of the children were
adopted at first and.
I have to tell you this is a
hundred and fifty six page sub
and I have not had the
opportunity to get into it very
much it was just hurting rules
today so I don't know exactly
what all is contained but right
away on page three I see this
new CYFD definition effective
can that they put into rules
earlier this year that
regardless of the contents of
the bill and I understand that
that this is dealing with
tribal.
Issues however this definition
effective can is something that
concerns me in general and I
will just read it thank
defection means a person who is
not a relative or extended
family of an Indian child or who
has a significant family like
relationship with the child or
the child's family which
relationship existed prior to
the child's entry into foster
care.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
when children when an Indian
child enters into foster care
first.
And there is not a tribal member
of the tribes do not take
jurisdiction at the very
beginning.
And this incident stays with
this family for multiple years.
Would your bill allow them to be
defined as the division.
Madam speaker and lady I
believe.
That would change it but I'm
going to confer with my expert I
think it's going to be a case by
case basis so just give me a few
minutes thank you.
You madam speaker and gentle
lady so
so going back to my it depends
statement so the definition does
not explicitly name foster
parents but a try can still name
foster parents but in their own
law so
That could occur there in
addition in the case of older
you over fourteen.
Young people can choose their
victims can as long as it's in
their best interest so here a a
young person could name a former
foster parent as victims can in
addition this definition does
not prohibit a foster parent to
achieve a guardianship or
adoption.
Thank you miss madam speaker and
thank you and gentle lady
I.
We have spent a lot of money and
a lot of time and a lot of
training and a lot of focus on
teaching people the importance
of adverse childhood
experiences.
And one of those adverse
childhood experiences are
transitions that children
experiencing trauma that they
experienced through transitions
and this new language which has
nothing to do with it the the
Indian child welfare act that is
new language that CYFD is
inserting anywhere and
everywhere they can when these
rules are promulgated earlier
this year there was much much
objection and very little
support for this new definition
effective can't and so I see
that CYFD is inserting it here
and it does not answer specific
to Indian child welfare act that
I that I have concern over this
new definition but more so over
what we're seeing students yes
you care Advisory Council
reports and what Kevin just
showing us about how many
changes in care young children
are experiencing when they are
in but in CYFD so particularly
when they are not taking into
jurisdiction by the tribe from
the very beginning but let's
suppose it's not burst let's
suppose it's the age of two or
three and the tribe is not able
to take jurisdiction and even in
ideal circumstances they found
at what they found a foster home
that was a tribal home and do it
by this definition if they spent
multiple years with them.
And they were not a relative
they're not extended family of a
tribe in in in child and but
they could create a family like
relationship with that child or
child's family and yes that up
faster here.
Even even if it was a teacher of
cultural advisor a parent a
child a friend any other person
that had a relationship with
that child but only once they
were in foster care according to
this act can definition they
would not be able to be defined
as victims can unless the child
was over fourteen you're saying
the child could could choose
them because the child is old
enough to name that but why are
why are we excluding if they end
up going for adoption why are we
excluding those teachers those
cultural visors the parents of
the child's friends the foster
parents and others that could
have a family like relationship
just because it didn't form
before they entered foster care.
Speaker and lady we are not
excluding them the foster
parents have a right to
participate in the hearings
throughout and see why at D.
actually has some real time data
for comparison from the New
Mexico corporate so kinship
placements lead to better
outcomes in almost every aspect
including.
Returning home to
Two parents faster so with it
will compliance which is what
this bill is trying to ensure.
By having the department abide
by federal law by having the
department held accountable by
it quote compliance there's an
eighty eight percent relative
placement in April court cases
so again this is about ensuring
compliance and making relative
placement early and immediately
so we avoid situations like the
one you're suggesting and the
one the gentleman from Lynn can
I talked about earlier thank
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady and and I want
nothing more than CYFD to comply
with the law and I think I've
been pretty strong though it
voice of that at chairman Chasey
stated that this is that CYFD is
following the federal law so if
that is the case and see I do
it's following the current
federal law then why is this
still needed it what is not
redundant about this bill is
CYFD is following federal law
and this is just compliance with
federal law.
So I'm.
Speaker I believe I am not in
the in the timber but I know
lady said Mr speaker so excuse
me if I'm incorrect.
Okay great.
Madam speaker and lady so there
isn't always compliance and so
that's why this bill is
important and it's actually been
over a year long in the making
part of it is to actually update
provisions that were added after
the initial in nineteen seventy
eight and accent so it's
bringing this the state FY is
bring it and bringing it up to
par with that in addition over
the last couple of years CYFD
has been communicating with
tribes to figure out how to do
this to the best practice that
they can and that incorporate
some of those practices
this bill again has been in the
making for many years it's
involved
social workers for CYFD from
tribal it quote departments the
tribes as well and it's just
been such a long shot effort
again.
Bring the federal law adopted
compliance issues me to bring
the state law to compliance with
the federal but also to include
those best practices so we can
avoid situations where
communications don't occur with
the tribe's.
Thank you thank you madam
speaker and thank you gentle
lady and I I fully support that
if the federal law has not been
followed by CYFD what is the
additional oversight is there
any independent oversight is our
initial process for the tribe's
that is that will require CYFD
to held accountable if they
continue to be non compliant
with federal law after the
passage of this bill.
Madam speaker and lady.
I I think what you're asking is
I I think where the courts would
be involved and to ensure that
they have CYFD at the table
which is incorrect which is
occurring more and more so
but in terms of.
Holding CYFD accountable if we
have it in state statute.
There is.
No only that someone can say
they are not familiar with the
law.
Thank you thank you madam
speaker and thank you gentle
lady I think CYFD is fully aware
of the law and I think the fact
that they've asked and house
bill two for additional lawyers
so they can deal with the
whistleblower cases the lawsuits
that people are reading against
them The lawsuits they're filing
its people of I think you're a
little more optimistic about
CYFD than I am at this point and
madam speaker and gentle lady I
was just hoping that your bill
included some sort of
independent appeal process or
some sort of budget manner
something that would help to ID
accountable I think right now my
clause is just that this hundred
fifty page bill that went
through rules less than you know
just this morning is now a
hundred and fifty six page
substitute that I just need to
digest has nothing to do with
your intense and your heart for
children in the state but more
of my at hesitation to trust
that is CYFD is on board that
has enough accountability really
fits into even help us hold them
accountable and and further
actions moving forward thank you
madam speaker thank you all
generate thing no further debate
the gentle lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker.
This is.
Gentlelady yes I was on the
board by don't apply the last
four but I was on board.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative one thing.
Thank you Madam speaker gentle
lady you.
I yield to the gentleman from
San Juan.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady
At.
I have similar comments as of
those from the general from
Chavis down from Bernalillo
concerning
The aggravating circumstances
not applying in the case of
child custody procedures
involving Indian child.
One of the organizations that
I'm.
Peter and gentle lady that I was
involved with for.
A number of years part time was
is Navajo missions incorporated
in San Juan County and that'll
missions a corporation has what
is called the four corners home
for children and Madam speaker
and and gentle lady G.
The.
Program that they have their
homes for children is
Kind of small group homes that
are located on the property and
they have both short term and
long term care four nine Navajo
children.
And Madam speaker and gentle
lady at at then involved with
that I wasn't involved with that
side of the of the mission are
they have a radio station for
years that I worked at but the
person who was over that and
over the group homes are and I
was we're good friends and Madam
speaker and and gentlelady the.
The aggravating circumstances
I've seen first hand.
The the abuse and neglect.
and
Madam speaker and gentle lady
the the the number of children
that come through that program.
Where the children are are
suffering from fetal alcohol
syndrome or
drug related adverse effects.
And
so so madam speaker and gentle
lady.
I am concerned with that
language I'm very concerned of
the languages says that
activated circumstances do not
apply to a child to child
custody procedures involving an
Indian child.
I think I can the entire bill I
I understand.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
that's the one section that I
just don't understand because
I've seen it so often.
current.
pastor there in town that once
again what's church was for
forty for twenty four years.
His wife.
Ran that program that Navajo
missions for for four years and
two of the children they have
adopted.
Very very hard procedure to
adopt a native American child is
easier to adopt a child out of
the country it it appears.
But the two children that they
adopted have.
birth defects boasts related to
one two fetal alcohol syndrome
the other one too severe
Of drug abuse and and the child
has had to have several
surgeries.
along the way and and just
watching the family go through
that.
And that any point.
That the family of the child
having more rights than the
family it's raise the child has
been very very hard to to watch.
And I understand what this is
meant to do and I agree with the
overall bill itself.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
The the not holding the
aggravated circumstances.
Two of in in in in the case of a
family where the child was had
extreme abuse and neglect.
That's what I have problem with
this bill minus page ninety six.
Page ninety six lines fourteen
through eighteen.
I can support the spill.
But because I have seen that
neglect and abuse first hand.
And and.
Seeing what the the the love
that has been ported to those
children from these foster
parents foster families
perspective adoptive parents.
Just watching them.
Go through the constant fear of
the child can be removed at any
time.
As very heartbreaking not only
for the parable to the child.
I I really I guess we'll have a
question here is just I'm happy
that one section here.
I have a hard time with the
tried.
Or the nation or the pueblo.
Having.
More input in this case.
Then the family that has poured
love in time and attention into
that child.
And so
When I went home this weekend I
was able to go home this weekend
madam chair and and and
the gentle lady are.
My son very girl had a four year
old daughter and I went home
this weekend to a surprise which
was.
The my granddaughter who.
Has been with us since she was
four years old and is now.
thirteen years old.
Her name changed and she was all
excited got to.
That was not my.
Grandchild's force first four
years of her life.
But the moment she became part
of our family.
She became ours.
And we poured our we for a
license to her and for all she
knows we are we are the
grandparents she's known that is
the family but she's now.
And so in these instances
concerning these native American
children.
And faster programs that are
there.
Just treating that relationship.
As subservient.
To the tribe relationship or the
nation order pueblos
relationship with that child
which is been.
In most cases nonexistent.
I just can't support that.
And anybody who has.
Raise the child.
That has come into that step
into that life of that family.
That this is not something to
ignore the lot of that that
parent those grandparents so I I
do appreciate your legislation I
understand overall what it
means.
But that that one section.
Seeing the neglect and the abuse
that can happen in our child's
life and see them build that
bond with the family and then it
can just be removed.
I just I just can't accept that.
So I appreciate legislation and
I know your heart and I.
Appreciate everything that you
do
but I I just can't support this.
Thank you madam chair yes.
Thank you for the debate the
gentle lady to close.
Thank you madam speaker and
Thank you madam speaker.
This is been an effort and that
has been on going it's a
priority of the tribe's one of
the reasons why we take it back
to state government was cause
more tribes went to get involved
and I think we have most if not
all tribes on board working
through long hours talking
through several definitions
working with Indian Affairs and
CYFD really to ensure that
compliance is achieved early.
So we can
Bypass all of these issues that
folks are bringing about if
we're able to do that
immediately then we're not gonna
have these concerns about taking
kids away from foster parents in
native American communities it's
really a family it's it's not an
individual it's community it's
clans that hold one another
together so when folks have the
opportunity to take care of
children and to be notified when
children might be going into a
system that doesn't know their
language that doesn't know their
culture it's imperative that the
tribes are notified immediately
and that's what this legislation
does and and just to hopefully
ease some of the the issues
about the aggregate aggravated
circumstances this is language
given in the federal bureau of
Indian affairs.
Twenty sixteen regulations so
again this is just important for
active efforts remained active
that the department will work
with both the Indian child's
tribe and the extended family so
even if a biological parent will
never be considered for re
unification.
Again it's just imperative that
there are active efforts to
maintain connections out I we
heard from former governor tell
Aceh from the Pueblo of Pojoaque
in and he said he was one of
those children and his siblings
that were taken and he was
fortunate to be able to find his
way back to the tribe but he's
we've never been reunified with
the siblings.
And even after everything that
he experienced he was able to
run for governor of the Pueblo
and help his tribal members in
so many ways so it's always
important that these kids have
an opportunity to reunite with
family which is the tribe
because again it's community
it's clans it's everything that
we've been taught by culture and
by tradition.
So with that madam speaker I now
move that.
How state government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House health and
Human Services Committee
Committee substitute for House
Bill two oh nine do now pass.
We're on final passage of how of
how state government elections
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for House Bill to on
line the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds ago.
The electronic vote is now
closed clerk to call the numbers
without reported that
Representative Anderson.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative you have both
yes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of fifty one and the
Representative Anderson votes
yes.
Representative Anderson who are
both yes.
Representative Lujan both yes.
The vote is now.
By a vote of fifty three in the
affirmative fifteen in the
negative.
How the state government and
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
health and Human Services
Committee Cesky for House looked
online has duly passed the
house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo madam
speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Other announcements.
Madam speaker.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
well you're good Madam speaker
I'm not that concerned when
public affairs committee will
meet at eleven thirty tomorrow.
Members take more gentle lady
from Diana Representative Rubio.
Thank you madam speaker house
transportation will be meeting
tomorrow morning at eight
thirty.
Members take note.
You care gentleman from on the
ball and McKinley thank you Mr
speaker house labor and other
affairs on me tomorrow roughly
at eleven o'clock.
Members take note gentleman from
going on Representative small
thank you madam speaker madam
speaker of house appropriation
of finance committee meeting
tomorrow at eleven thirty AM.
Members.
Are there further announcements.
Members house bill one thirty.
Representative Trujillo house
the one thirty is on the
calendar I am referring it's.
Back.
To the house appropriations and
finance committee.
As the one thirty is referred to
the house appropriations and
finance committee.
we have house state government
lections and the Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill three hundred.
We have conferred with the floor
leaders and we have also been
forget the chairman of the
appropriations and finance
committee to remove that house
appropriations and finance
committee referral for state
government which is an in
universe the steps you possibly
hundreds that committee referral
is removed.
We have house agriculture water
resources committee substitute
for house bill one.
Seven eight seven.
Representative.
Is house agriculture water
resources committee steps to
cross the one seven seven
Representative clock.
This homemade food bill.
We are removing the Judiciary
Committee referral adding to
their Health Service.
House adding water resources
committee substitute Ross one
seventy seven remove the
judiciary referral ad in its
place the referrals and health
services committee transaction
is so ordered.
How state government relations
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill two
three four.
Mrs Representative Matthews.
House state government elections
in university substitute rascal
to thirty four we refer to the
floor leaders and the chairman
of the Appropriations finance
committee to.
drops the referral to the
appropriations and finance
committee Bill two thirty for
the appropriations and finance
committee referral is from the.
