Sir.
Representative Barreras.
Representative Dixon.
Here.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Herndon.
Here.
Representative Montoya.
Your last piece up he's on the
road if you would Augustine he's
he's not a panelists worries
that.
Yes Sir.
Representative Ortez.
Here.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler here.
Representative Townsend.
Representative mom plans needs
to be added on the panelists my
correct.
No I don't see him in the
attendee list.
These trying to get on chairman
ace ace driving.
Asian Farmington and these.
Is that a failed right now so we
he just called may deceive you
can it can help and get on as a
panelist this state.
Yes Sir can you text over his
number or out of form of contact
for him.
Yes what is what is your number
Sir.
Five zero five.
One sec.
Okay.
Six two zero.
Four five three nine.
Okay thank you.
And then to complete
Representative Townsend.
I sure Sarinana.
Vice chair Sarinana.
She.
Representative Sarinana is still
in HSD.
Is she excuse Mr chair she is
excuse for now yes and then Mr
chairman the queen.
Here.
So I'm good morning everyone
welcome to the.
Second meeting of
House Energy Environment natural
resources we're a little
Well scattered this morning.
I've been trying to reach
Representative Ferrary US to
built up rivers certainly are
good as one bill up is still
stuck in other Canadian.
Representative send your co
sponsor on the house energy bill
is that the bill you present or
do we need to wait for
representative Sarinana.
I thank you Mr chair I would
send her a text and just make
sure that she's okay with me are
present and I have not presented
it before but I did co sponsor
last year
So and if it's okay for me just
to check in with her that's fine
thank you.
So what we're trying to track
down our presenters.
One thing I want to make too
much difference go over in our
organizational meeting is it is
the practice of this committee
to do amendments on the fly.
When they're minor you know.
If there's a stationary right
there's a new provision it's
there's a committee set up
something like that yeah we
would want to get four hours a
day and so
the at the committee Alice can
take a look at it.
you know wording changes here
and there is something we
strictly at the you know.
What the cut off point between
minor and not some minor is yeah
we determine on a case by case
basis.
Is a member of the committee had
the questions or doubts Spence.
Before we.
Try to proceed.
Mr chair representative.
Representative Sari√±ana said
that it was okay to proceed and
we do have an expert witness who
is an attendee
and that is Abbas Akhil so we
would need him moved over as
well okay.
He is on his way.
So
We think the role the.
With us right now since we don't
have any we have a presenter
anything else before we begin.
Okay Representative since our
years.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee this
morning we would like to at
present house bill eleven which
was endorsed by the science
technology and
telecommunications Committee and
this is a bill that you've heard
before it passed through this
committee last
Session and it is to find a
income tax credit for the assist
installation of an energy
storage system
with that I would like to.
Ask if it's okay for our expert
witness to save just a few brief
words about the bill and then
take questions.
Certainly Representative thank
you Mr chair thank you so much I
know that today's but the
absence of UPS Representative
Cadena these other to jumbled up
but she was going to offer a
couple of amendments to the bill
since she's not here if you
allow me I tried to code those
as best as I can.
Can we move the amendment for
discussions of the amendment has
been passed out to sit does
anyone not have the amendment.
The amendment is in the Here
file and it was you mail out yes
Sir it was the made out I think
yesterday in time.
Okay so I think the amendment
has been distributed.
Can we move it for discussion
with some like to make a motion.
So moved anyone.
Okay also in it okay so so we
we've not yet adopted the
amendment
but it is
a suitable for discussion so.
The representative Akhil if you
could if you have comments on
the bill and or the amendment
at your discretion okay Mister
chair so let me start with the
amendment so that we get this
right
if you look at the amendment H.
that was submitted on page two
line fourteen again starting
after that is certified by the
Energy Adventist natural
resources department.
The reason we're doing this is
the bill wasn't ready to here as
to the rules of the TRD voices
the energy minister Department
Soviet clarifying that the
certification of the system and
start would be done by that in
two minutes resources department
and later on during my talk I'll
explain of course that the tax
credit would be processed and
paid out by the attacks and
Revenue Department the item
number two on the amendment H.
is up on page two of the bill
line fifteen yes striking is and
insert in you there'll be.
And the same thing on page two
line seventeen strike is
considered to be and then on
page two line nineteen strike
paragraph three units and di di
the numbers of succeeding better
drugs.
And then I think the more
significant amendment is on page
two line twenty.
We had described the system as
for Kendall walks and two hours
of storage that creates a little
bit of a big would be because
energy storage systems as
specified both the ticket walks
and get a lot hours so what
we're trying to do here is as a
regional for kilo walks and what
was missing there was an eight
kilowatt hours are greater.
So that makes it clear that the
minimum size of the system SB
four kilowatts the two hours of
capacity which beads it is a
eight kilowatt hour system so
all the systems installed have
to be creative in that then
online on beach to line twenty
one yes try to capacity and on
beach to line twenty two strike
is indeed Sir B. thank you
they're off.
And then.
On.
On page two.
Line twenty five.
Yes striking in its entirety the
on page three strikes line
wanted to and inserting.
Be a clarifying it that number I
would say is being stored as a
standalone entity system or if
the energy storage system is
great tied the energy storage
system has the capability to
provide great services if and
when such control and
communication infrastructure
exists with the service
provider.
And then I worked and that big
big page it's on page three line
twenty two after include it is a
certification proposal did
subsection C. of this section
and accepting those words and
then on page four after tax
strike credits and and so do you
and so did you they're all
credit claims.
So that basically completes all
the excess adjusting to the bill
at this time.
It thank you I think that's fine
I think we can wait
for further discussion for
without the amendment we can we
can the
when we vote on the bill
he'll do you have any comments
on the bill itself or.
Yes Mr Heston you know under the
members of the committee
discussed this before basically
the storage system eight that
allows the excess energy that's
produced by the rooftop solar
systems to be store can be used
in the whole our by the service
provider to later time and by
deploying energy storage in this
manner be with you know
basically increase the
penetration of water into with
energy so I just keep it for
discussion by the other members.
Do you have anything that Mr
chair thank you I think will
stand for questions.
Okay before we get to the
committee for questions we'll go
to the public we do have forty
eight.
And these members of the public
who are on soon if you raise
your hand.
A will recognize you
And we have a bunch of people so
we're we're gonna allow two
minutes per attendee
hopefully the
The timer should is there in the
middle of the screen you should
be able to see that.
To make comments that has
always.
Our comments are on the bill we
do not engage in personal
attacks on members of the
legislature or anyone else so
our first member of the public
who would like to speak is soo
small.
And I think you can.
Yes thank you and my unmuted yes
we can hear you thank you
chairman and members of the
committee and thanks to the
committee for hearing this so
very important bill I'm speaking
in support of house bill eleven
with the suggested amendments
for the energy storage system
tax credit it'll be a boon to
individual home owners like
myself to the the communities
and to the state as a whole so
my comment is that I'm in
extreme support of this house
bill eleven thank you and thank
the committee for this
opportunity to endorse such a
progressive idea by.
So thank you for that in
addition to.
Was so focused on not forgetting
that all COVID because the story
plate looking first committee I
was cut straight to committee
not to the public so focused on
getting to the public and I have
to do the whole.
Augustine can you can you do the
poll before we go back to the
rest of the members of the
public where does that screw
things up.
It's gonna be a little bit
difficult okay so what we let's
go through the the public
comment and then at the end of
public comment period then we'll
do the all before we go back to
the committee so I I apologize
for.
For that
Next member of the public is
Charles good marker.
Meet yourself.
Thank you members of the
committee Mr Chairman I'm
Charles good marker with the
natural resources defense
council this bill and we urge
strong yes vote for this bill
When it comes to truly
transformative energy
technologies energy storage
should be on the short list say
the leaders of the natural
resources defense council who
are representing here today.
International energy association
is also Center portable and
flexible energy electrical
storage technologies are set to
catalyze transitions to clean
energy around the world
and we really need this are.
Bill passed so that more homes
and other buildings in New
Mexico okay and have the energy
storage it helps make all of the
transition possible.
It will help us reach our state
goals for them hi minimization
and it
Really hope that you will
support the school.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you for that our next
member of the public is
Jim they heard and.
Are you with us yes I'm here can
you Mr Chairman can you hear me
yes we can hear okay great thank
you very much good morning
everyone good more thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee my name is Jim day
shut down and I'm the executive
director of the renewable energy
industry association of New
Mexico we're known as re up
we've been around since two
thousand and four we have about
forty five diverse members
including solar installation
companies installers
Major credit union we
distributors and basically the
reason why we're very strongly
in favor of this bill is the
ability to store information
is very important as we all know
because we have in our our
drives in our computers but the
ability to store energy is also
very important and we're in the
early stages of understanding
that value and that value base
includes utility to dispatch
information I'm sorry to disturb
that energy the resiliency that
are provides the grid stability
functions that it provides and I
might add as we all know about a
year ago there was extreme great
outage in taxes and
unfortunately two hundred people
passed away so resiliency is
extremely important and we
believe that this is going to be
a very important business sector
in New Mexico is very well
positioned to take advantage of
this we have two national labs
we have some great universities
here that specialize in this.
But we are behind.
Right now in California eight
percent of the solar systems
that are sold for homes and
businesses have storage read
about one percent in New Mexico
so there's a lot that we need to
do and this bill is meant to
jumpstart that industry so we
hope that the committee will
support this I thank you very
much for your time especially on
a Saturday morning thank you.
Thank you for that we have Tom
sold.
Thank you Mr chairman.
My name is Tom Solomon I am the
co coordinator of a three fifty
New Mexico and up on behalf of
our nearly eighty thousand
members I want to speak in
strong support of passage of
this bill energy storage on the
grid will be an important part
of the hundred percent renewable
energy solution for the grade
that we are not committed to the
state soaring energy to use
after sunset and also to use the
supply the daytime peak loads
where the most expensive and
dirty gas peaker plants or
otherwise fired up in needed
this will replace that need
and Natalie
With the transition but help
with the health of New Mexicans
so for those and many other
reasons I support this effort to
really get us started on
installing grid storage in a
distributed fashion in New
Mexico thank you very much.
Thank you for that next up we
have June persons.
Honorable representatives thank
you for this opportunity to
support H. B. eleven.
My name is June Parsons and in
order to make real progress on
reducing greenhouse gas
emissions huge contributions to
our human cost because climate
crisis we need to diversify our
economy and.
Create clean jobs to components
of accomplishing cleaner air and
reducing our clean water
shortages is government's role
in creating I feel two things a
business environment that
incentivizes clean energy
production jobs and empowers us
as New Mexicans to clean up our
energy consumption while helping
create these green jobs that
serve clean energy for us.
H. B. O. eleven energy storage
is critical to clean energy
transition therefore I'm
speaking in favor of H. B.
element and asking you to please
vote for H. B. eleven thank you.
Thank you for that we have
Walter Kersal.
Hi.
Mr chair respected
representatives my name is
Walter crystal I am co founder
of Albuquerque start of business
called C. sole power which is
developing an innovative thermal
energy storage product H. B.
eleven will benefit our business
by encouraging residences and
businesses to purchase our
energy storage technology our
energy storage technology
produces no greenhouse gases is
safe and democratizes the
electric grid.
Please vote yes for H. B. eleven
thank you.
Thank you for that except we
have Lori Z. from Albuquerque.
Can you hear me Mr chair yes we
can.
Thank you Mr chair and our
honorable members of the
committee I am Lorene zonder
from Albuquerque speaking in
favor of H. B. eleven because it
will create clean energy jobs.
Thanks in and makes the electric
grid more reliable and benefit
me personally my husband and I
installed solar panels last
year.
Our eight solar panels produce
more power than we consume even
in charging our new E. V. in the
winter so what would be to our
advantage to store that power.
Two years ago we were without
power for four days during a
storm with very high winds.
It was cloudy so solar panels
wouldn't have helped much.
Luckily we had a gas generator
to power our fridge and freezer
and charge our phones.
But with a solar storage system
we and thousands of other New
Mexican solar customers would be
better protected in the future.
Thank you.
Thank you for that we have been
Spartina this.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I'm Vince
Martinez with tri state
generation and transmission
association as you know try
state is committed to our
providing responsible
affordable.
And reliable energy to R. eleven
New Mexico members
we will be Burke will be
provided by twenty twenty five
fifty percent of their energy
from renewable sources and
seventy percent by twenty thirty
we stand in full support House
Bill Evans thank you.
Thank you for that we have
Deborah Condit.
Good morning Mr chair and
members of the committee it's
good to see you all again for
another year endeavor Condit
with western resource advocates
we stand in strong support of
this bill for all the reasons
stated at by the previous
members of the public and so we
ask for your the yes vote on
this bill thank you.
Thank you next up we have Louis
Carrera.
You guys hear me.
Yes okay perfect.
Hello everyone you just got and
I'm speaking for the Sierra Club
will manage out there and the
thirty five thousand members and
supporters all throughout the
state.
Today we're in support of this
bill and the amendments there
are over thirty five thousand
distributed energy resource
solar systems installed in New
Mexico and almost all of the
systems are without energy
storage as a result when the
solar system generates more
energy than it's being consumed
in a home or business the excess
energy is sent back to the great
adding storage would enable the
on site capture of the Energy so
that they can be used at a time
that is more beneficial the
ability to store energy offers
also tremendous potential we saw
the issues our neighbors next
door affects the struggle with
last year due to a lack of
functioning electricity when gas
infrastructure from the New
Mexico can be a leader and solar
energy and storage again we
strongly support this bill and
the amendments and we and urge
you to vote yes on this bill
thank you so much for your time.
Thank you for that except we did
carry comfort.
Good morning Mr chair and
committee members can you hear
me yes.
I'm very good on for with PPC
solar based out of Taos New
Mexico.
Since nineteen seventy nine we
have been providing battery
solutions to our customers in
the tiles area in particular we
fully recognize the importance
of battery solutions for
residents of New Mexico to
ensure energy independence both
for residents and for utility
serving them.
We endorse HB eleven and hope
that the committee will pass it.
On to the bigger body.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you for that we have Carol
Thompson.
Good morning chairman and
committee members can you hear
me yes.
My name's Carol Thompson and I
live in rural T. Harris New
Mexico my home is off grid and I
depend on solar energy for
absolutely everything including
pumping my water I have recently
upgraded my solar panels and
batteries the some of my
neighbors are not as fortunate
they scavenge old inefficient
batteries and use panels to meet
their needs.
Many middle and lower income New
Mexicans would benefit from tax
credits for adding and upgrading
solar equipment please support
house bill eleven and thank you
for allowing me to speak.
Thank you for that we have ward
McCartney.
Look there hi of this word
regarding Mr chairman committee
make members I'm in full support
of H. B. eleven.
We have to realize that last
month on the outskirts of
boulder Colorado over thousand
folds spurred the grout and two
lives were lost.
In the past two years Colorado's
extreme weather events cost more
than the twenty years
previously.
The climate catastrophe is here
we need to transition to
renewable energy the lady fossil
fuels in the ground as soon as
possible.
Well we have solar panels on a
rough.
We need battery storage back up
to continue to reduce our fossil
fuel consumption thank you.
Thank you for that we have
murder well.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is
Margaret bill I live in
Albuquerque and I'm speaking in
favor of HB eleven with the
amendments multiple studies
indicate that most solar and
storage will be the largest job
creators in the energy industry
in the near future in addition
as other speakers of indicated
energy storage will contribute
to a more balanced the
centralized and resilient
electrical grid helping to defer
grid infrastructure upgrades
that are ultimately paid by
utility customers and it will
incentivize private investment
and energy storage systems and
related technologies allowing
New Mexico to become a leader in
this rapidly developing
technology which is especially
important as our since our
national labs are already
leaders in the technology so it
is just sounds policy to
kickstart the energy storage
market in New Mexico by
providing this tax credit I
strongly support HB eleven and
asked that the members of the
committee passed this
legislation this is exactly the
type of forward thinking climate
legislation we need right now to
move New Mexico to a clean
energy economy thank you.
Thank you for that Carlos
Lucero.
Good morning chairman queen
members the committee Carlos we
start with the Public Service
Company New Mexico.
House Bill Levin gives
households especially so those
with rooftop solar system
systems an option during
emergency situations ability to
charge or energy storage systems
during normal conditions also
the energy storage system can be
utilized as a shared resource
with the electric utility in the
case of an emergency this could
help with electric outages do
happen which economic works hard
every day to prevent for these
reasons economic supports house
bill eleven thank you.
Thank you for that we re opens
all us.
Hi everyone hear me.
Yes thank you chairman queen and
and members good morning Rick
opens also del Paso electric
we're in support of this bill
we've got we've got several
things going on in our in our
service territory that all that
I'll go over today one is our
largest municipality has a gas.
Utility and that gas utility is
looking at essentially having
itself go out of business here
in in in a twenty thirty years
and so as as as that potential
happens going all electric in
homes is is something that we
see as as not future but right
now into that and we have a
developers in in our territory
which is essentially Dona Ana
County
we have probably more Tausen
customers in Luna County
we serve a little bit this year
County and in Otero county as
well
We have developers land
developers who are looking at
having all electric land
developments coming into our
territory
and then and then to that and
we've been working with land
developers in creating micro
grids in in new developments and
although all of those are are
still in the in the works I I
predict by the end of twenty
twenty two we'll see those
coming so as as we look at
microgrid.
Networks and and just having a
more robust ability for us to
have a relationship with our
customers some what to what
Carlos to settle stated these
these this battery power will
will become
essential and then to that end
as we look at transportation
moving to.
Electric we look at furnaces.
So sorry about that Rico we're
we're keeping people to two
minutes I appreciate your
comments I am.
Sounds to me like you're export
with killing ground wall.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee my
name's Kevin rolled on the CEO
The New Mexico role after Klopp
Association.
We stand in support of this
bill.
It's a very modest first step.
I'm in integrating energy
storage in our systems.
And
With the million dollar cap that
put a minimum of two hundred
systems around the state would
help integrate some of those
into our role actor call systems
because it will help us get some
operational experience in data
with respect to how these
integrate into our system so
like I said this is the modest
first step and we support this
bill and thank you for your
time.
Thank you for that we have
Evelyn been across the.
Good morning chairman the clean
and committee thank you for this
opportunity to speak my name is
Evelyn vinaigrette I represent
the PNM rural caucus statewide
and we speak in strong favor of
this bill thank you for your
support of HB eleven is amended.
Thank you for that except we
have semi Mexico or cap.
Representative thank you hello
thank thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee my name
is Danielle and I'm the crime
energy advocate with
conservation voters New Mexico
just you and we support this
bill because we believe in New
Mexico's transition away from
the oil and gas industry and
innovative but more importantly
equitable ways you've heard from
several members of the of the
public as well as
representatives of utility
companies on how providing this
tax credit will accomplish this
goal and for these reasons and
all the ones you've previously
heard we strongly urge this
committee to support this bill
as well thank you.
Thank you for that we have Jack
Miller.
Gentleman Jack Martin Mexico
home builders association we
also support this bill we
believe this is us.
Sensible step in the right
direction of where the public
policy would like us to go this
is a substantial tax credit but
it is balanced by the ideas of
these systems would make great
tied and available to the
utilities when I need them so
most of our most of our solar
rooftop or not are now over
producing what people need and
so we believe this is a great
step in the right direction
thank you.
Thank you for that are there any
other members of the public on
soon.
Who would like to speak okay so
next up and I honestly have no
idea how this is supposed to
work Augustine do we have people
in room three seventeen that won
the state as of right now I'm
not aware of any but I will go
in and double check.
So we have this is new this year
last year we were all virtual
that this year apparently we
have the committee room room
three seventeen
with a monitor and people are
allowed to come watch the
committee in the committee room
which.
I suppose it is if you don't
have other access that is that's
a good thing but we're just
gonna check for a minute and see
if there's anyone in there
who wants to speak.
As of right now there is nobody
in the committee room okay.
So we we we should check a bill
by bill however so.
We have one more member of the
public has reached their hand
yellow bird Services.
Yes Sir I'm very much in favor
of this bill and it will be a
big factor for specially
small homeowners and small
businesses and.
The eliminate demand and other
factors and and most of the
pollution that happens is
actually a peak when the gas
plants running and not the
nuclear plants so I want to
express strong support for this
thank you.
Thank you for that and we have
another each Miller.
Good morning Mr chair committee
members my name is Judy Miller
from the intergovernmental
coordinator for Santa Fe County.
And the Santa Fe county
commission has in place the.
Lucien in support of legislation
that is supporting environmental
sustainability and climate
action and this bill and it's
amendments of.
Does fall in line with this
resolution so the county is in
support thank you.
Thank you for that and no I
don't see it any other hands up
although I do see Jean walks in
her hand keeps going up and
going back down.
So the stock currently up so
we'll move on to that email
someone else's up okay we got
them so close the public hearing
portion the public testimony.
and now we're all so we're gonna
go to the committee you know we
want to do the whole apparently
we're having technical
difficulties with all services
your available today hopefully
that will be resolved by our
next committee meeting which is
on Tuesday also on the committee
first we have Representative
Ortez.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Dixon Mr Aqeel I
have a just a few questions many
of my questions were are
addressed in the amendment so
thank you for that
I just want to have I just have
a better understanding of how
much these energy storage
systems cost in general.
Mr chair and representative
artist thank you for the
question generally they are
running about ten to twelve
thousand dollars and the
available from a number of ready
to critical suppliers and these
are all you have sacrificed
systems of course the most
famous one is yes let.
Similarly energy the same people
make your TV set of a good
energy storage system by the
sonic and there's a lesson on
company and face but it's very
widely bill in the solar so
because they also have an energy
storage system so that just
gives you an idea that these are
not you know one of systems
these are commercially available
in Europe generally running
about a thousand or so.
Thank you Mr chair Mr akin
I.
I look at this bill I thought
that I I the question of the tax
credit amount one million
dollars it seems.
A little bit low is that per
year tax credit or is that you
know over the lifespan of this
three years that this order.
This bill covers Mr chair
representative I think this is a
program would run since it's
starting on January first twenty
twenty three into the like you
run about a year and a half two
years six point eight total cap
is one million so what we're
trying to do just you know one
of our public comment to say
this truly to jumpstart the idea
of energy storage systems we
expect about two hundred systems
to be deployed.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative Dixon.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative Ortez
next step we have Representative
Strickler.
Thank you thank you Mr Mr
chairman and and.
Representative kale.
Yeah we've heard this before and
and and explain to me the
minimum kill what our system
that is at the minimum sewer
system for this this tax credit
can Mr chair Representative
Strickler good to see you Sir
yes Sir and yes the billable yes
specifying is each kilowatt
hours which if you install a
four kilowatt system that's
about two hours of storage but
those are minimums for kilo
walks and eight kilowatt hours
okay so how much is an eight
kilowatt hour solar panel system
costs these days I know.
No thanks you know prices have
gone up in your material
materials of gone up and
whatnot.
All park figure of what an eight
kilowatt hour solar panel system
would cost.
Mr chair and representative give
me some clarity on that of the
addressing solar panels of the
banks yeah with yeah we're
trying to serve the soap solar
panels right in have some
storage so what is what is an
eight kilowatt hour solar panel
system costs these days.
Fifteen thousand dollars a I
mean how much if I was to hire
somebody to put
in a kilowatt system down
students talking about eight
kilowatts of solar panels on the
system Randy about twenty twenty
five thousand dollars okay
twenty twenty five thousand and
then the big system for a whole
okay walks is fairly large.
Well my panels on the right
right okay.
but this takes the and you have
to have a minimum of an eight
kilowatt hour system is that
right it's your choice what
appears.
John I'm gonna ask you to go
through the chair.
Mr sorry for all rusty.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Mr chair and representative yes
eight so I I think I lost to
questions but what you're asking
is it can what our system for
the energy storage system is
that your question Sir.
Mr chairman and Representative
kale I'm trying to understand
If I'm eligible to purchase a
ten to twelve thousand dollar
energy storage to my current
solar system I don't have one
but this December I do.
it what I qualify with a four
kilowatt hours.
Or do I have to have a larger
system for this credit to K.
can't.
Mr chair and representative I
think if you do install energy
storage along with your solar
panels generally it would be
sized for the state capacity our
state power rating that the
solar panels are because it
really doesn't make much
technical sense to install the
smaller storage system so you
want to go back to the table
walked right up the storage with
the can or creating on the sort
of bands.
That you're doing that that
makes sense in in your Mr
Chairman representative keel
with your technical background
building electrical engineer you
know you want to make sure that
this is economic and so if I
have an eight kilowatt hour
system all my rooftop then that
I need to spend that.
You know I need to spend about
twenty twenty five thousand
dollars for that system and if I
want to go further
Then unexpended actual
an additional ten to twelve
thousand dollars for this energy
storage is for how many hours
how many hours with this with
this
Handle.
Representative here specifying
to ours as a minimum that's
generally the rating of the
systems that are available but
for energy storage systems you
can always string them together
and get more storage time of
course it also acts to the cost
but the menu we are asking for
is it to our system.
Okay.
This is a two year pilot program
basically in just two million
dollars a year
Yeah I think it's it's million
per year are million cap I need
to get some clarity on that.
I think this I think this what
it says so we'll have that helps
a.
I'm just
Wish the store systems had a
greater capacity of two hours a
I know one of the the
participants so Mister chair and
and and gentleman said that they
had a wind storm where they were
they were added out of power for
for four days so this wouldn't
to wouldn't help much in that
regard Vienna catastrophic
tornado or you know what have
you so that that helps me and I
appreciate a good to see you Sir
and thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative ko Mr chair and
representative thank you for
your comments and let me clarify
its one billion per year so.
That's that's my understanding
thank you Mr.
Thank you Representative
Strickler except we have
Representative Barreras.
I thank you chairman are
Representative Dixon of
berberine the bill
and Mr kids thank you for for
the information
this is exactly why I was so
excited about that this
committee I think that this is
you know very consequential all
right now and I really like the
bill I it there's a couple of
things one thing is.
When it when it comes tax
credits or mailing rebates or
anything like that it just work
the same for low income people
it's different to put the money
out there and get it back and
it's just like you know one of
these bad boys on clearance or
something and maybe we can you
know get get get everybody on
board
I.
I like it I don't like that it's
a it's a tax credit and not just
taking some some dollars off but
my question is is that if the
taxpayer has to apply to the
department to show receipts and
cost and everything is not
something that we already have
in place or is that something
that we would need to create
again I'm just thinking about
like navigating and I want to
make sure that by you know the
it is it is easy for them to
actually get this this tax
credit that's my question thank
you Mr chairman
I just wanted to acknowledge
that Representative Sarinana is
now on the
in the meeting and so she'll be
able to answer questions with
Representative thank you thank
you okay thank you for that of
course if we were in person we
would have representative
Sarinana joining Representative
yell at the presenters table
and representative Sarinana is
of course a member of the
committee as well so in in this
capacity should be the we'll
show take over as the presenters
so thanks for finding that and
Representative Barreras was your
with your question.
The the do you have any
additional questions that
directed to Representative
Sarinana or or Representative if
you.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm not
entirely sure I just who whoever
might know the answer I just I
just want to know if we already
have a system in place for at
the the tax payer to apply for
this tech tax credit just for
transparency at I just wanna
make sure that it's easy for
them to apply for it.
Thank you Mr chairman I'll I'll
I'll start this in the past
finish I this one we I believe
we have to we're gonna create a
database I'm just going to take
care of that and then TRD will
do the tax part but I'm not sure
exactly if they have
specifically for this or it's
just an additional so could you
take that Abbas.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you I think this is replicate
exactly what we do for the store
assistance when they apply for a
tax credit to include with
record the size of the system
when it was installed the cost
and everything and get that
project a specific number that
will then be donated by the
whole order do I became the
credit so basically in a way and
that is so defined yes the
systems qualified and and that's
important because they would
also report to the LFC at the
end off I think in twenty twenty
four twenty twenty five June
thirtieth of each year how many
systems Red Star what those
capacity and what was the cost
it DRT within track the credits.
Does that answer the
Representative question Mr
chair.
Thank you Mr chairman and I
think you are Mr gill I I
appreciate the answer that
that's exactly what I was
looking for thank you.
Thank you Representative.
Thank you for that
Representative Bernstine sept we
have Representative stop.
Representative.
Representative can you we're
pleased to see you again Sir.
Questions.
Mostly of a technical nature.
For more more Representative
thank you.
Mr chairman
Mr Kiel.
We are looking at the
installation of two.
The system here what that.
When they approximately correct.
Mr chair representative Scott
good to see you again Sir and
yes that is approximately
correct.
So.
I presenters of public comment.
But we're going to.
Have a positive impact on
climate change.
As well as grid resilience.
To address those.
Individual if I could is there
is representation.
Mr chairman for appeal.
To.
Well this will have any
material.
Mr chair and representative
Scott.
Very good question and as you
know just PNM alone in the state
serves five hundred thousand
over five hundred thousand
customers so if we deployed two
hundred systems it's hardly
going to make a difference of
climbing so as noted before in
the public comment and indeed
the intent of this bill is to
jump start this technology
and also give operation
experience and experience with
aids dollars as to how the
systems and start and how
they're wired and how the work
so it is not really addressing
climate change just by the point
two hundred systems what we are
hoping bill is just cost comes
down and that not thank you
introduced the concept of full
energy storage that this will
take off on its own.
And then you see deployments
such as in California noted by
one of the public commenters if
the deployment goes into eight
and fifteen percent thank you
we'll see climate change effects
of reduction of carbon emitting
sources of that can make a
difference but I do not expect
that to happen with two hundred
systems statewide.
Chairman representative Akhil
lower sure the.
This.
Okay no.
Chair of the plan won't circle
back to jumpstart here in a
minute.
I don't want to move over.
Two of the grid resilience
market.
The same question.
Will be two hundred systems.
Yeah.
Material impact.
Mr chair and Mr Scott
Representative Scott indeed
they've of the cabbie Act The if
you take all these two hundred.
Let's see deployed them in
Picardy Pueblo all two hundred
yes they will have a tremendous
effect on the resiliency of that
community in case there's a
power outage obviously again
going back to our earlier
question two hundred systems
deployed throughout the state of
course the not increased it is
in the NC of the system but as
we deploy more and more of these
and US NGO in New Mexico
definitely understand this and
accept this argument that the
resiliency of our rural
communities within the
tremendously be enhanced because
non of the to be able to sustain
themselves during a major outage
or natural disaster and I hope
you agree on that.
Mr chairman Mr Kiel.
The demonstration of this
technology what the.
I several orders of magnitude
before.
Turrell impact could be felt
much.
The need.
To jump start the technology
heard.
One of the.
Public commenters.
Mr chairman Mr kill State.
Would you around since nineteen
seventy nine there or.
A number of.
Marshall appropriations.
These Representative well for
sure.
So
we're introducing anything new
and different.
Except lowering the cost of the
subsidy.
For.
Already been willing to spend
somewhere on the order of twenty
five thousand dollars for their
solar system how would you.
How would you address Mr
chairman Mr you know what those
are.
This is going to wealthy
individuals early adopters.
Would.
Representative.
One is still very.
Purchase stolen missiles.
Mr chair and representative
Scott indeed I buy that argument
but if you look at the
trajectory of any other
technology legislative the first
automobile.
It is not the lower income
personal bark that it is always
a more with the personal biases
so again goes back to the
jumpstarting not of the
technology Senate but the idea
of energy storage in a whole
that is what you're trying to
jump start here and yes the
first initial adopters would be
does who have a tax liability in
the state we can benefit from it
but just to Representative
Garratt asked point as we deploy
more and more then there's a up
aspect of social justice that
comes in where as the cost is
lowered their incentives
available then you'll see energy
storage deployed and across the
social structure.
That's my projection and indeed
you know we should get to that
point and just as you have seen
in solar initially solar panels
were installed by the by the
more with the people but today
we have subsidies and the cost
of come down to a point where
you can see that in low income
housing.
Just now solar systems on the
rooftop.
So let us take this leap of
faith that as more systems for
proliferate David cross the
investigation of the social
economic structure.
Chairman representative director
what I would like to see.
After.
Forty years well.
Want to see is this just Reese
able to compete.
With the economic incentive
incentives with the first stage.
The
process.
Require state subsidies to be
economically competitive sure we
have to get weight off of.
Right now give them this bill in
the next couple we're going to
see I just don't see the.
Mr Chairman.
Senator Stewart Mr yield of very
much appreciate the answers M..
Thank you Sir.
Thank you Representative Scott
except we have Representative
Townsend.
It's good to see a must
thanks for continuing to work on
issues.
Thank you Sir.
Mr chairman
And Mr Bosch.
Do you first see these units
being in.
In that daily power source role
or in an emergency rule back up
power source role I mean the
people that buy it if they are
the.
If they are the more.
wealthy act people that can
afford it you would.
I think we would assume that
most of those live.
In town or in developed areas.
So.
Normally how do you see these
things.
This device being used.
Mr chair and representative
Thompson indeed six really good
to see you Missy you face to
face but I think this would do
so yes I do see these being used
on a daily basis especially
during those months which is
pretty much throughout the year
in New Mexico but a sunshine is
pretty strong this solution is
very strong so this this this a
lady for the solar rooftop
system to be generated more than
what the whole want to use but
that from public comment as
well.
On the excess energy will be
stored and used almost on a
daily basis by the whole order
is.
And more Mr Boston
representatives what is the life
of one of these batteries.
Or
Mr chair and representative
Thompson that is indeed a very
good question the looking back
respect to using these days have
a tremendous cycle live.
And to give you an example we've
got electric way closer to be
running on the back K. well over
thirty years and yet we are able
to extract those use batteries
and use them in a stationary
energy storage applications even
after that so in the wake.
So yes the it's hard to quantify
and number but the cycle life is
much much higher than what the a
you still from that aspect
weeks.
So.
Do you think they could last.
Five years or ten years are
doing up Mr chair and
representative yes they would
last more than that Senator
nation rates which are well
within the operations margins
that up without back to back to
manufacturers four eight years.
Thank you for that I just didn't
know so Mr chair and and Abbas
thank you for that and I
I noticed.
and I was late in so there may
have been changes so I'm trying
to catch up but on page two.
Section one the.
On the the bill raids that
there.
Are allowed one of her property.
Is that correct.
Mr chair representative yes it
is so if I can rental properties
I could have one of these
credits for each one of my
rentals is that correct.
Mr chair and representative I
have to defer on that question
I'm
It applies to a homeowner that's
for sure but if you own an
enterprise and install them
right in different places I
think it's still goes against
your personal tax liability so
you would be able to claim only
one credit Sir.
That's my understanding but I
would defer to.
You know maybe Representative
side and I've she can offer a
better answer all Representative
Dixon says they have a better
understanding of this will work.
Mr Chairman thank you about us I
I agree with you I believe this
one
because of the tax credit.
I agree with you.
Thank you Representative Mr
chair.
Representative not to belabor it
but can you tell me where where
the language is in here that
supports that opinion.
We Mr chair representative
people up my bill.
I believe it is where it say's.
On page two if I'm not mistaken
and the department be allow and
this is line to on page two.
The department be allowed
created a case to taxpayers tax
liability imposed pursuant to
the income tax act.
That is subject to the
provisions of subjects section
C. and so on.
Mr chair and and Representative
Mr Abbas.
I read that and I tried.
I don't believe it.
As it's currently written.
On what the definition of one
per property that it would land
that.
Hey
A person that owned multiple
properties from claiming and
aggregating those
tax credits.
And I don't believe that your
intention I'm I'm I'm just on
the I believe the way it is
written that's what it says.
Mr chair and representative that
is my understanding that this of
course one of property but if
you think this clarifying
language.
I think we would be very glad to
make that clear if you can
propose some language on that I
think it would be very easy to
say and strike per property and.
Alright.
Her tax payer or protects.
Her individual I don't know how
you want to do that but.
You should look at that language
and see if there is something
you want to do there.
Mr Chairman representative we do
we have a if there is any
clarification we've got started
with the TRD.
Make sure that the date can
propose on the need to make any
changes to this language we will
but thanks to this clearly
against the tax liability one
person.
Regardless of the number of
properties the order with the
start of the systems.
If you look on page three.
On
line eleven.
Which starts oh section F. F..
Those.
Those identifiers are plural.
A taxpayer may claim an energy
storage system income tax credit
for the taxable year in which
the taxpayer purchases and
installs and and energy storage
system provided that the New
York actor get amount.
The income stab rest of this
section has met at the time the
claim that so just I think you
just need to look through that
makes your.
That.
That the wording as follows your
intentions that's my when I read
it I thought well at.
You know guys got.
I rental houses he's got a
microwave like a bandit on this
deal pretty quick so
You might want to look at that
Mr chairman and representative
that's all my questions again
Abbas it's good to see you I
look for in your bank.
Thank you Representative
Townsend except we have
Representative per game.
Thank you Mr chair and Mister
chair Mr a kill and
Representative Sarinana I want
to thank you very much for
bringing this bill forward and I
do want to just take a moment to
address this one credit or
property and I think you were
brilliant to to define it in
that manner because one of the
things that happens is that we
want to make sure that every
single person has access to
whatever
Whether the rest you need are
light or anything else that they
may be if something goes off the
grid because if you think about
what happened in Texas and all
those people who died when they
didn't have access to some sort
of we are light or something to
protect them in the middle of
winter to give a businessman or
businesswoman the incentive to
put this that every single
property to make sure that every
single person is taking care of
is absolutely critical and
particularly we if we look at
big units where people are
living we want people protected
so I think thank you for that
and and I don't think people are
getting away with being a band
that are are being
Roger one of trying to take
advantage I think that what
they're doing is actually
protecting the people in the
state of New Mexico every single
time that they can so I just
want to say put that out and
thank you for that so one of the
other things that I that I want
to bring forth is I'm not quite
sure how people will know about
this credit and based upon what
I'm looking into it in this in
your legislation how will people
understand that this credit is
available.
Mr chair and representative
thank you so much for those
comments more one of the reasons
we have thinking that this will
happen is you will often get a
person office on your door
insist you know are going to
send a solar system so David
David educate you about the
possibility that yes you can
install an energy storage along
with the pandemic second by or
this will install is that have
already started systems that are
on the books in all these
approach those customers and
said now you can improve your
system by installing an energy
storage both of these would
qualify for the tax credit so it
is not just future systems but
existing rooftop systems if they
add energy storage now David
qualify for two and do that the
only at deploying two hundred
systems we don't have an
education component because we
don't want to create it large
expectation thank people flocked
and bid applications and they
find out whether or the two
hundred people can qualify so we
kind of keeping it low key and
depending on the Selena G.
dusty's Association Andrea put
the word out so that the systems
can be deployed that is the
initial intent of this bill.
Thank you and Mister chair
Mister gill and and
Representative starting out at
just one of the.
Clarifying question in order to
get this this credit.
It seems to be that that has to
be an application fee paid to
Imran.
In order to get it so to help me
to understand the purpose of
this application the we're
giving a credit but why a feed
the end to get the credit.
Mr chair and representative that
just is a small contribution to
be Frank that cost to do the
paperwork and hundred dollars
doesn't go very far but this is
very knowledgeable and other
programs as well so even for the
solar programs we have an
application fee so it just
opiates and the.
Of what should I say at a
tribute application so people
must see this would be the
application fee so that they can
get get the certification the
need for better that is the
subject.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
kill Representative Sarinana.
Thank you for her didn't accept
we have Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman and
Representative okay good to see
you back in in your committee
thank you Sir.
Hi I'm interesting position
Representative Jesse just feel
now and I've taken some jabs
from my progressive friends and
that is I'm I'm working for a
company now that we sell energy
efficient homes that are you
know that a high R. value
sustainable homes and the
company I work for is
I've gone through the process
will be installing Tesla.
A roof systems and the and the
battery packs and so I've had
some friends asked me so Montoya
you you you drink the Kool aid.
And I haven't but I'm willing to
sell locally.
So but anyhow it because of that
going through the process of
getting certified to test law.
One thing that I found and and
you you're talking about priming
the pump here and trying to get
this ball rolling but as far as
Tesla goes there's a waiting
list of well over it's almost
two years it's eighteen months.
I'm not sure why we would offer
an incentive for people are
lining up already.
To purchase and now and I'm not
sure if you're aware but with
yes lower risk panels you can't
by the yes the roof panel
without buying the batteries
have access to.
So.
The discussion that I've heard
until now is the need for this
so we can get this ball rolling
and so that.
people might consider doing as
we're doing this without the
subsidy.
so I'm not sure what the what
the what the need for the
subsidy is when you have a
people of people lined up to
purchase.
and maybe could you maybe
enlighten me as to why we still
need a subsidy.
Mr chair and representative.
Thank you so much for that I
think again the idea comes back
that you would with people
lining up we only have one
percent of the homes in New
Mexico.
Less than one percent but have
energy storage so why there is a
desire to install it and you're
talking of a fairly affluent
part of the community and yes
they will definitely benefit my
hope is that the system will go
into cooperatives and
it's not just Tesla which is
setting the systems as I
mentioned earlier this at least
three or four video but then not
companies that also sent
existence so the field Tesla has
already unique.
what customer base right but the
other companies don't deserve
any loyal customer base for
Tesla and they'll buy what it
would be long lost what's out
there but the other companies
that are that don't have that
situation and for them
disincentive would be ready
park.
This way they can also get a
right to do this mark.
Thank you for that Mr kill I'm.
I'm aware of those other systems
because the the company that
that I work for sells custom
homes.
And the people who are
purchasing the systems are very
affluent.
We're talking about homes that
are.
very much like in Santa Fe their
homes that are going for five
hundred dollars a square foot or
more.
And they're the ones purchasing.
I'm.
So because the effluent are
already paying for this.
I would.
If we're wanting that to to to
have this
the spread to people who are not
a fluent necessarily and extend
that market to them
would you be interested or
willing to put something in
there that puts a a limit on who
could purchase because I mean I
don't think the the idea because
that the that the taxes that are
paid into the state.
That them will support this
subsidy go all the way from
working people who don't feel
like they can afford this all
the way up and so.
Like I said if you're fluent are
already paying for this I I
don't understand why we be
giving them a subsidy so.
Just like I said up until just
recently company that I work for
they have installed other solar
systems.
Yes up until just recently is
doing all of their own
installing.
The need and the expansion is
just exponential is why they've
extended to some sort of their
own company so.
If you could answer that
question maybe we would would
you consider limiting at.
To you know at a price per
square foot house or something
like that.
Mr chair and representative your
comments of any mandate and the
origin intent when I was
thinking about this bill posted
limited more proof of rural
communities such as a dollars
for example where it is indeed a
great need an operation the haps
you know holding energy storage
systems like this but I cannot
carbon out of ready with that
kind of for the car about for a
specific group of people so this
has to be available to all and
you know if you take an example
of the federal government
subsidizes so many other
industries even those that are
mature and does that for the
state of subsidy so what we are
asking here is not unreasonable
this is happened before and I'm
sure that happened with other
technologies as we go forward so
it's you know the argument that
yes people already lined up and
waiting for it.
You really it doesn't really by
very much to somebody tells was
knocked just let customer and
has the desire and the need to
install it and the the cost of
Quebec's serving them can
benefit from it.
So I have to spread it out
across the board not just for
yes lowcost was to get a deed
afforded and will use it
regardless whether there's a
subsidy on are effective that so
when the they will be offering
us a great service by Dr David
the credit and pay for the
system themselves.
So thank you said that Mr kill
and Mr chairman.
Usually somebody in my position
would recuse himself from the
vote because it could benefit
them but I plan on voting
against this.
because like I said I I've I
know the industry because the
company I work for and it this
seems to be a necessary from
from the way it was presented at
the beginning which is to jump
start this industry this
industry is mature and
conversations we've had in the
past about having to go away
from the oil and gas industry I
heard those today.
and what that would last week
not be reminded for I'm sure I
mean Representative Scott will
probably bring this up to a
hundred times between now and
the end of this thirty day
session but.
The oil and gas.
Is responsible for for
subsidizing our state budget it
and if we're gonna replace oil
and gas with other industries
those other industries need to
pay their way and we don't we
shouldn't be subsidizing so in
this particular instance I am
very aware that the current
market is for the very wealthy
and the very wealthy are are are
lining up and I would say
there's a new customer base as
well and that is the the off
critters the I'm very
conservative off readers who can
afford to build in the middle of
nowhere and want to have all of
their energy supplied without
any concern but in each instance
of it's been my experience that
there is there is there are
people buying this and they're
very wealthy and if we're
wanting to expand it does not
make sense to extend this tax
credit for the very wealthy and
for that reason
Representative even though I
appreciate you very much Mr kill
Mr chairman I I just can't
support this
because I I.
At some point we have to go and
look at who is actually taking
advantage of these tax credits
and if it is the very wealthy
it's not doing.
It's not doing what we need to
do which is if we're we're
trying to get this to everyone
there's no reason incentive by
the people who already
incentivized and have the means
to pay for it so
once again thank you Mr chairman
and minister kill it's it's been
very good to see you thank you
Sir.
Thank you.
Are there any other questions
from the committee before I ask
my questions.
Okay.
Representative Sir you the.
Representative thank you I I do
have a number of questions my
first question.
You mentioned that this this
program begins in twenty twenty
three.
But I'm.
I'm struggling to understand a
of looked for was limited to
twenty twenty three.
And I wonder if that's on the
help of it in particular I'm
looking at the language on page
one like twenty three this is
for taxable years prior to
January first twenty twenty
five.
If I already had one of the
systems collide bend my tax
returns that I for attacks from.
Representative do you want ship
Mr chair Representative do you
want to take that question R.
okay Mister put us Mr Chairman.
Mr chair you will be able to
eligible to apply for the credit
if you install the system after
the first of January twenty
twenty three.
And the reason we have that kind
of a dying breed is and
rightfully pointed out that
they're all the bees lasted a
good solutions which fall right
before the deadline expires of
the deep the time process does
as well.
If they still money available
and the one million dollar cap
that we have.
So I appreciate that.
Representative kill where is
that language.
This one second.
The last flight leave section
one AA.
If you.
For taxable so Mr chair I'm
reading of the bill.
For taxable years prior to
January one twenty twenty five
a taxpayer who is doctor
depending and other do each of
which is on installs and energy
storage system on the tax bill
is a cultural businesses to
ensure property Matt life for
and the good part would be
allowed credit against taxes
liability bulls pursuant to the
tax act so.
Mr chairman I believe you can
also see them online page six
the very last line the provision
of this act applies to taxable
years beginning on or after
January first twenty twenty
three.
Okay that's what I was looking
for and I think that's clear
I think it's.
There's.
There's some tension between
that line item page one line
twenty three.
Three.
So I.
My understanding is the first
ever press for twenty twenty
three twenty twenty four so the
language on page one one twenty
three doesn't need to be prior
to twenty twenty five because it
doesn't include twenty twenty to
twenty twenty one twenty twenty.
so that.
I'm willing to do that I think
the section six answers my
question so satisfied.
At some point
You're still working on the bill
you might want to.
Leading up that language.
My next question the.
To revisit the issue that
Representative Townsend raised.
On the per property in
Representative heard and
addresses as well my reading of
this would be that if you did
ten properties that you're
building of a subdivision you
can detect systems.
I think I I agree with
Representative turns point of
you know this is
Do we want available to people
and you know ten different
people would buy that home with
that technology so that's a good
thing but also you know in.
Lined with percent chills
comment about jumpstarting
the industry I think we have an
interest in having as many
different people clap for this
tax credit as possible.
So my my reading of this
property is you could do it.
You do more than one.
Any the representative Sarinana
a representative if you need
any.
For the thoughts on that.
Mr chairman I believe what
Representative Townsend said
right it is we wanted to we won
a lot of people to try this is
it is a pilot and I believe Mr
chairman that
when Townsend said an energy
storage systems taxpayers shall
be eligible I think that's
that's right on that's what we
want but I'll defer to
Representative Akeel.
So Mr chair representative I
think that is a valid question
what do I a business owner who
has stand director properties.
Does that go against my business
tax liability or personal tax
liability so it's I've actually
set up a company
that leads and digital
properties under its umbrella so
that is a question perhaps that
that is being asked here and I'm
not sure we do need yes we would
like to deploy this is in as
many places as possible so that
is something we should look into
I am glad I acted the TRD.
With the Mr chair we take that
at this advisement it's it's a
good question because I could
easily create a couple I mean I
could easily have a company
which and rental properties and
I'd like to install an energy
storage system each one of
those.
So.
We get clarification of that
thank you for that I think it's
something else to to consider my
next question and this is
relates to all the bill
amendment.
so I'm certain MPs three section
G..
The permits to allow a maximum
annual averages of one million
dollars the energy storage
income tax.
And we men's language state
credit claims.
Yes.
He.
For.
All
last amendment so we're striking
credits and adding credit claims
claims yes.
Mr chair and representative the.
That was that do I do with
cracked the one million cap.
so they would actually go by the
credit claims that are I so that
is a clarifying language to say
that is how do you do the
arithmetic to make sure that we
are.
Reaching our bill the one
million dollar cap subject H.
eight is more important than
just tax credits because it is
not claim that you're not being
out from that one minute cat.
That inserting and then reserve
the kids.
With with the possibility that
and that the claims are coming
in more slowly that the credits
continue to be issued so could
the credits exceed the one
million dollars a year people
aren't claiming that because
they have a five year Kerry for
so for example I get that five
thousand dollar tax credit I
claim a thousand dollars in each
of five years is the cap is
based on those claims and not
the credit.
I think the credits could exceed
one million dollars and I think
your intent is that this pilot
program is we're gonna issue
million dollars credits.
We.
Mr chair representative I think
yes you could be right but that
language came from the TRD side
wondering why they put that but
they did this indeed to make
sure that the bills exceed that
one minute cat.
So.
Again that is something we will
have to look into to make sure
that we remain with that date
date of the bill.
I think the cap passed so slide
to the credits in part of the
problem with the claims is
You don't know when they're
gonna commission or they're all
coming at once and people file
their compacts should like the
idea that we're gonna put on the
website that we've already hit
the cap on claims.
Well we're gonna have you know
everyone files right if we do
have to cap it if we get there
and that number systems and
people are gonna really have
advance notice yeah.
So the FIR I think tries to
address that so if you look at
page three of the FIR under
administrative implications the
state is tracking of the tax
credits in updating the website
with the cap has been reached
will be done by TRD.
It if you go to F. def I our
goods and the bottom of page
three under the first paragraph
of administrative implications.
Yes the clarifying that the
tracking of the tax credits and
updating the website with the
cap has been reached would be
done by TRD.
Is that not seek questions.
The yes and no one of my
concerns is that EMNRD is
issuing these certifications so
you can be in a situation where
EMNRD continues issue
certifications and TRD does this
actually doesn't honor the
certifications because they took
the cap.
So that again TRD sees all right
we have eight it's the cap limit
that the certifications really
don't matter because it's on a
first come first serve.
So once you hit the cap that
it's a cut off.
So that my concern here is you
have a taxpayers invested got
the certification and gets the
line it's here do that's going
to be an unhappy taxpayer.
If you wanted to that Mr chair
yes the ability to that I.
problems I solar programs and it
is unfortunately just the way
the system has to work.
So the best thing for the whole
do is apply as quickly as
possible because this is a small
program it's not going to run
for many years so the.
Speed step lie is very poor.
Okay so I'm more concerned about
the claims versus credit issue
but I I think both of those
things are things you might look
at my I think my last question.
They really thought about this
until I read the bill on page
five lines six.
The reporting is the nine digit
zip code where the energy system
is installed.
How many properties are in a
given nine digit zip code.
That's interesting.
Mr chair and representative I
thought pretty much everybody
although we don't use that most
important one is not aware of
the extra four digits but that
is pretty much where it reserve
corps this so the post office
does have nine digit zip codes
yes one is generally have got
used to just using the five
digits.
Well
let me say my question different
way I have a post office box my
post office box is it seven five
oh four which is the federal
post office in Santa Fe plus my
PO box number.
So I am the only person that has
that nine digit zip code.
Now it's a little different
because it's the post office and
PO box and I'm not gonna install
solar panels on my PO box but
like I I'm sure I have and I I
can tell you what the nine digit
zip code is at my home in cal
state so my question is how many
of my neighbors share that same.
Nine digits or for example say I
had agricultural property that
was.
Five thousand acres.
Yes this is.
They would still have a nine
digit zip code but but by
listing the nine digit zip code
are we specifying a particular
property in other words are we
giving out too much information
by listing the nine digit zip
code.
You're you're muted.
Mr chair yes that you raise a
valid question I'm not sure how
specific the additional four
digit identifiers because I have
four four eight six for example
for my whole and I don't know if
that's unique to my whole are
covers a larger area I could
look into that but came from and
the I think that's how they've
tracked other programs as well.
And of course you know trying to
disclose any personally
identifiable information what
you're trying to get as much
data as to where the systems are
clustered which is why we went
to a nine digit so that to be
more specific but I don't know
if that extra four digits is
specific to your property are
actually addresses a cluster of
homes.
So I look into that but the idea
was thank you would you like to
find out where yes the second
flight with as much accuracy as
possible without being very
specific to a particular whole
actress.
Representative Sarinana yes
thank you Mr chairman on section
explains thirteen to eighteen to
your question
what pages that
page three.
Section FY thirteen to eighteen
answers your question
Provided that if the annual
aggregate amount of energy
storage system protects
established pursuant to section
G. of this section has been
mapped at the time the claim
that the pet Department shall
notify the taxpayer the taxpayer
may claim the credit in the
following year.
Okay the answer is your address
is one of my questions.
Okay so I was just to finish up
on the zip code you know the
five digits might be sufficient
I I know my five digit digit zip
code shows up in computers as
Laney
I don't live in we need a living
hell state of I mean there's a
there's several years ten miles
between the two but you know I I
I'm concerned about the nine
digit zip code because I believe
it is geographically based and
potentially there are
businesses are or ranches or
properties where they are the
only property within the nine
digits so that's that's
something else you might.
Might look into Mr chair W. I'll
make a note of that we look into
it and if there is any
possibility of being personally
identifiable we get rid of that
okay.
So that's that's
the end of my questions
we do have.
The amendments to move for
discussion
with someone like to use the
amendment for adoption and this
is just we'll do the amendment
first and then we'll come back.
to the the bill so this is just
amendment.
Mr chairman the amendment to HB
eleven for adoption.
Their second.
Also.
Chair generally will do roll
call for everything but this is
just the amendment is there any
objection to adopting the
amendment.
Okay seeing and the amendment is
adopted.
And now we will we will vote on
the bill as amended as have a
motion to have a motion
actually.
Mr stout Mr chair would do pass
on H. B. eleven as amended.
So
who is the second.
Mr Chairman representative okay.
Augustine could you take the
please.
Yes.
Representative about it on.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Herndon.
Yes.
Representative Montoya working.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative Townsend and.
Vice chair Sarinana yes.
And Mr chairman the queen.
Yes.
Would you care to announce that
the.
Yes Sir so we have seven votes
in the affirmative and or in the
negative.
So by the seven four we have a
two passed hasn't meant.
Thank you Mr chairman and we
will look at the changes that we
need to make thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative you'll
always a pleasure.
next on our agenda we have house
bill thirty for the solar market
development tax credit extension
let's see if we have.
Representative Ferrary.
Course center schools.
I'm looking in the attendees I'm
not seeing them I just promoted
Representative Ferrary to a
panelist okay great.
Representative Ferrary was
Senator was going to join you.
Yes Mr chair he could also be
raises of two panelist.
My apologies I'll get that done
immediately.
Thank you for.
He's still he's listed under
bill this scene.
Bill so.
He's been promoted okay great.
Okay.
Representative Ferrary the floor
is yours.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
committee members it's so nice
to see you as my former
colleague and on this committee
H. B. thirty four is a solar
market development tax credit
and it amends the is state
existing new solar market
development tax credit to do
three things make the tax credit
refundable.
Raise the annual cap from eight
million to sixteen million and
extend the sunset date from
twenty twenty eight to twenty
thirty two to log a line with
the expected
expiration date for the federal
tax incentives.
And New Mexico reinstated the
solar market development tax
credit twenty twenty but
unfortunately this has limited
the accessibility disincentive
to only those individuals who
have sufficient income to create
a tax liability to offset the
credit and my bill seeks to
address this inequity by making
the tax credit refundable and
thereby assessable to those New
Mexicans don't have sufficient
income to create a tax liability
and this is a matter of equity
and by making the new solar tax.
New solar market development tax
credit refundable this incentive
will open the doors to
significantly more New Mexicans
to install solar panels on their
property.
I like to have Senator souls
attic adding any comments she
also has a Senate bill that
mirrors this our house bill.
Thank you.
Mr chair and as senator Ferrary
and my comments is this bill is
already law all it does is it
extends the date it makes it
refundable and it makes it
expands the scope of it so that
it's more available the more we
can put in the better for the
state of New Mexico thank you
Mr.
And with that we will stand for
questions.
Thank you both before we go to
the committee we'll go to the
audience as many members of the
audience on zoom would like to
comment please raise your hand
electronically.
First up we have Tom Solomon.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee my name is Tom
Solomon the co coordinator with
the environmental group three
fifty New Mexico and the we
stand in strong support of
extending this very good solar
market development tax credit
it has served us well for the
short period of time that it's
been reinstated and I love the
addition that Representative
Ferrary added to make it more
equitable for lower income
households and fully agree with
the comment by Senator schools
that the more solar systems that
we install in New Mexico the
better for the state for so for
all those reasons we and our
eight thousand members strongly
support passage of this bill
thank you.
Thank you for that we have ten
hits.
Can you leave on your end.
Okay okay.
Mr Chairman.
Members can heroes representing
the coalition just collision of
sustainable communities in
Mexico which is comprised of Los
Alamos Los crucis Albuquerque
Santa Fe and Santa Fe County.
My neighbor Angelo put up solar
panels last year and they said
they were.
That's great.
You know you have a fixed income
you pension you work for many
years you so security issues you
have I want to do something
about climate change is what I
could do the state income tax up
you social at all but I don't
have much tax liability so
didn't really know much so many
more like Angela I think can
really help from this amended
version of solar tax credit to
Dona Ana tax liability just
fifty four percent of Mexicans
make under forty six thousand a
year so I think this would be
helpful Lotta folks who are in
fixed incomes think about and go
solar.
Thank you.
Thank you the next with Louise
Corero.
Yes hello again.
Mr chair and members of the
committee many mysteries
governmental again with the
Sierra Club Rio Grande chapter.
Coming in support with their
thirty five thousand members and
supporters throughout the state
of New Mexico is the second
setting a state in the country
we have more than three hundred
and ten days of sunshine
throughout the year we can
produce more than a thousand
times our current energy demand
with solar program such as
residential tax credits.
Solar energy growth in New
Mexico creating jobs and
lowering energy bills one of the
best things about this bill as
of the tax credit is refundable
which means that if your tax
bills lower than your tax credit
you get the cashback in the form
of a repeat a tax rebate will
help more families gets or other
groups this legislation is key
as well to protecting our uh
Clemente and we urge your
support and again as somebody
that that's a homeowner that
would like solar these kind of
bills really do incentivized all
to a unit to do something for
the environment and as well for
their homes so we're just urging
you in strong support of this
bill thank you.
Thank you for that next up we
have June persons.
Honorable Representative.
Thank you for this opportunity
to support house bill thirty
four
as I said my name is Jim Parsons
I just want to emphasize that
from my perspective two
components of accomplishing
cleaner air and reducing clean
water shortages in New Mexico is
government's role in creating a
business environment that
incentivizes clean energy and
empower citizens to clean up
their energy consumption.
A lot of folks as was just
mentioned in New Mexico don't
have enough income level we are
depending on the year the second
poorest or the poorest state in
the country.
With more than half of our
people if you don't have tax
liability the way the current
laws written.
You really can't take advantage
of putting solar on your roof
I'm retired this speaks to me
personally therefore I am
speaking out very strongly in
support of house bill thirty
four ask you to please vote for
it and
You know I feel really strongly
about it thank you.
Thank you for that next up we
have Paul Gibson.
Hosted recruited thank you good
okay yes my name is Paul Gibson
I'm the co founder retake Our
Democracy and for all the
reasons we've heard before
especially the information about
the
refundable tax rebates for low
income people we've advocated
for years for all kinds of tax
rebates like this and to have
been criticized by low income
people as being elitist this is
taking this opportunity and
sharing it with other community
communities low income
communities and we strongly
support this bill thank you very
much.
Thank you for that we have L.
their rival.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee on Eleanor Bravo I
am the chair of the board of
directors of new energy economy
we stand in strong support of
this bill will keep solar
accessible for all individuals
not only upper class and wealthy
and more solar means more clean
jobs and I personally am retired
so this will help the elderly
and people on fixed income so we
stand in strong support of
voting yes thank you.
Thank you for that we had in the
gym they have a chance.
A good afternoon thank you very
much Mr chairman members of the
committee Jim dates are down
with the renewable energy
industry association of New
Mexico known as we are.
And the current also development
tax credit that is been in place
in a couple different
iterations since two thousand
and six has been very powerful
to help The New Mexico solar
industry grow to what it is
today which is about two
thousand people in the industry
of seventy or eighty different
companies however one of the I
would just say.
Downsides of the current solar
market development tax credit is
that it is in fact a tax credit
because it's a tax credit lot of
people has been pointed out by
many people before me a lot of
people are not able to take
advantage of this tax credit a
lot of people who really want to
have still runnable NMSA
businesses and in fact at the
climate summit I think it was
last October speaker egolf
actually mention this issue
about making incentives more
available to more people so I
think it's really a good idea to
you know expand this to make it
refundable it would unable more
New Mexicans to power the homes
with clean energy and
participate in the clean energy
transition thank you very much
for your time we hope you
support.
Thank you for that we have
Charles good marker.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
members of the committee Charles
good marker registered lobbyist
you can stamp the half of the
natural resources defense
council we thank the sponsors
and urge your vote for H. B.
thirty four this bill by
doubling the cap on the
incentives and equally if not
more importantly making the
rebates refundable
is absolutely necessary to reach
our climate goals we need to get
everybody in New Mexico involved
in reducing our impact on the
climate.
without refundable credits any
tax credit bill grows economic
disparities at something I feel
very strongly about personally
but also also representing New
Mexico voices for children on on
many issues
you know I feel compelled to set
state that because tax equity is
very important for for New
Mexico the goal sufficiently
important grant individuals any
credits against your tax
obligations those credits should
have equal value for all users.
Refundable tax credits allow
that to happen so please vote
yes on HB thirty four thank you
very much.
Thank you for that we have
yellow bird Services.
Mr chairman thank you very much
a young member services service
primarily Southern New Mexico
almost nine thousand customers
seventy five employees almost
thirty vehicles.
And we serve as your county Dona
Ana County in other areas but
some of the counties have
incomes below forty thousand for
their meeting income and so I
just started I'm sure the
statistics that the.
Revenue department shows is that
in twenty twenty there were only
one thousand eight hundred
seventy five claims for the
credit and twenty twenty one one
thousand four hundred twenty
nine and there were a lot more
solar systems and that installed
for lot of people do install
even if they can't get the
credits because they have.
A strong desire to help the
environment and climate but
there's a whole lot more people
to just simply can't afford to
do it without an incentive
concert will greatly expand the
number of people that we know on
a one on one basis we deal with
our customers daily and have a
bank of.
Customer service representative
to talk to people and I can tell
you from our experiences
overwhelmingly this will not
just increase it it will take it
in order of magnitude Egolf and
so I support both the greater
dollar amount and because we've
not reached a dollar amounts in
the past two years but with the
refundable nature.
It will greatly increase it and
have a much bigger and much
better effect it is a great
equity enhancer and I want to
thank you for considering thank
you very much.
Thank you for that we have a
team that Christodoulou.
Good afternoon chairman
committee my name that the
increased to deliver and I am
representing the environmental
justice caucus an online request
this and we're thrilled with HB
thirty four the aspect of a tax
refund really does help these
systems pencil out kind of a
good friend who is a hundred
percent disabled veteran and she
will she just bought a house in
was promoting the fact that she
can't afford a solar system and
really wants one this will
descend are over the moon so I
also will help us double the
amount of solar we're putting in
last I heard it was five
megawatts here in the state of
New Mexico a month and and this
will double it we need to get up
to fifty megawatts of months so
this is going to set us up on
our way so let's let's most of
the clean energy industry and
get HB thirty four passed we
fully support it thank you.
Thank you for that we have
market will.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is
Margaret bell I live in
Albuquerque and I'm speaking in
favor of HB thirty four between
two thousand eight in two
thousand sixteen the solar tax
credit was successful in helping
New Mexico homeowners retailers
and farmers install nearly forty
eight megawatts of solar energy
and just in twenty twenty and
twenty twenty one residents use
the credit to at thirty point
three megawatts this is brought
economic benefits of a hundred
nineteen solar companies with
eighteen hundred ninety solar
jobs and total solar investment
of two point four billion in New
Mexico.
My extending and updating the
solar tax credit for four years
and importantly as everyone is
indicated making the tax credit
refundable increasing the total
amount available for credits to
two sixty million it enables
many more New Mexicans to
participate in the clean energy
economy and transition I am
asking the committee to pass HB
thirty four you should do to the
public health environmental and
economic benefits of this very
successful tax credit thank you.
Thank you for that we have send
me cap.
Hello again thank you Mr chair
members of the committee NMSC
and Calpine be crime energy
advocate receiving them and we
stand in strong support of this
bill in New Mexico is blessed
with year round sunshine and
with climate change creating
even more extreme weather
conditions it's very important
that we harness the sunshine as
we make the just and equitable
transition away from fossil
fuels and the extension the tax
credit is another encouraging
step in the right direction for
New Mexico and addressing
climate change and you've heard
comments of support from both
the environmental community as
well as utility companies and
collectively we urge support of
this bill thank you.
Thank you for that
I don't see any other members of
the public with their hands
raised Augustine could you check
the room three seventeen really
quick yes one moment please.
As of right now Mr chair there
is nobody in the room.
Okay so we're going to close our
public testimony.
and we'll go to the committee.
The members of the committee
with questions.
Representative Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you panel and
Want to get a little
clarification currently this tax
credit to the
goes for the twenty twenty eight
why you why you increasing it to
me
Representative Ferrary I can
help me to understand this
additional time.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Strickler of the
reason we're doing at is we
expect the federal
a tax incentives to extend to
twenty thirty two so we want to
be in line with that without
having to come back and change
that later on.
So the thank you Mr chairman
thank you Representative so the
for the federal folks haven't
done this yet but it's it's
pending.
Mr chair and Representative
Strickler yes it it's it
expected in the build back
better or if you know however
that gets done in in one if it
doesn't pass.
And we would offer this Mr chair
and Representative Strickler we
would then have the stability
for investment of solar
installers and in those jobs to
you know go beyond that and wait
for that to happen sometime.
So currently
thank you thank you
Representative.
Currently we have a cap of eight
million dollars so you'll double
that to sixty million dollars.
Is is is that the idea.
Mr chair and miss Representative
Strickler yes and then the the
way it's set up right structure
right now to tax credit not
refundable
we're using about three and a
half million dollars a year
Thank you twenty twenty three
and a half million and twenty
twenty one was about the same so
with this being refundable you
you want to you want to
accelerate this.
Mr chairman and Representative
Strickler yes we want as the
capacity grows we want to be
sure and be able to handle that.
And I know House Bill Levin that
we just heard your bill house
bill thirty for the next bill
house bill thirty five
the next this tax and I I serve
on tax committee I know no or
procedure there I'm sure you do
too that any any bill it has
additional.
A tax expenditure you know we we
table to see if we have the
capacity to pay for this and I
know we've got some major tax
cuts coming our way namely the
social security income tax
repeal last that's going to cost
the taxpayers around ninety
million dollars a year and you
think we'll have enough capacity
to to to add this to that to
to the to the capacity that we
might have or may not have.
Mr chair Representative
Strickler yes it will bring in
over two billion dollars as we
see the increases.
So you think this thing will
have a positive impact.
On the economies is that what
you're thinking Mr chair and
representative Strickler yes
okay all right thank you Mr
chairman and thank you
Representative.
J..
Thank you Representative
Strickler the next step we have
the Representative Townsend.
Thank you.
Mr chairman of Representative
just a couple of questions on
the
Well tax credit.
Are there any provisions in your
mail.
That if a person has.
A lien against
Now that not make child support
payments.
has a judgment against them will
they be intercepted.
And put forth to those.
prior obligations.
Mr chair and
minority leader counts and that
has nothing to do with our bill
we don't have any of that
Not in are pretty.
No I what if I understand you I
think it does have something to
do your with your bill.
If it is a tax rebate.
For a check and maybe someone on
tax can help me on this maybe
the chairman if you have a lien
against you or judgment against
you what will that money be re
directed to those.
Or do does the taxpayer get it
regardless.
Right you Mr chairman I'm not
sure if you're referring to me
yes I am you know it's a.
I I suspect you would be treated
as any other tax refund and I
honestly don't know the
provisions for state tax refunds
whether or not you know for if
there are liens or your back
child support whether those are
intercepted I mean I I think
would fall under the same.
sort of
You know package saying take
check I don't know if present
Herndon might know more about
this with her tax background.
Representative Herndon you know
the.
Mr chair of thank you
Representative Townsend I would
expect that the same would apply
as in every other tax situation
when there's a liability that is
so.
That there is not a requirement
is issue of.
Under the under those
circumstances.
And thank you for that
Representative heard and do you
believe that that would be the
case I mean for like child
supporter anything else I mean.
They would be covered.
Mr chair Representative Townsend
I do believe that to be true
okay thank you Representative
One think that.
I think the two and maybe
committee already knows there's
no FIR on this bill yet so we're
kinda run and blind
that's why ours I'm sorry zero
the fires relate we did you mail
about.
There is one out there is one so
how do you know if you want to
check your email okay.
Back to you Representative would
you like for me to forward that
over to representative council.
If you haven't already please to
the call center second copy
yeah right thank you I'll let
let me have a minute to look at
thank you it will come back to
you.
We're gonna shift now to
representative Sarinana.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative and senator
bring this bill I think it's a
great bill making it refundable
it's it's it's what we need but
I have one concern EMNRD are
they gonna be able to talk to
them and be able to see the
staff what you're asking because
They ask for a lot of if she's
in in the budget we can give it
to them so or at least we
haven't yet so I'm a little
concerned for them is there a
way to so what have you talked
to them about that.
Mr chair and representative
Sarinana
It was noted that they shifted
because this okay I'm sorry
They do need more FTEs for
overall but this shouldn't make
it anymore
Taxing to their department there
might be a little bit more work
but I think they were
you know and be able to take it
in stride and but by the time
that this gets to where it'll be
a lot lot more people a
qualifying and putting in the
solar I think we can raise their
budget.
In the coming years.
All right thank you madam thank
you and represented Mr chairman
thank you.
Thank you representative
Sarinana.
Where we're gonna go to
representative.
Chair representative.
You.
What questions.
Question what you.
Sixteen.
This is current.
Mr chair and Representative
strict at Scott yes we're
expanding we're doubling it from
eight to sixteen million just to
be able to have that in the
future of the have that
capacity.
Mr chair representative this
would be.
Your commitment sixty million
dollars for.
Your or call.
Of a hundred and sixty.
Dollars.
My mask working.
Mr chair and Mr at
Representative Scott yes.
But we aren't expecting that to
be you know reaching that
capacity for awhile.
Mr chair representative
failures.
Thanks for.
According.
Testimony about two thirds.
The cost of the installation of
one of the systems.
Twenty five thousand dollars the
suspect.
Still.
Your.
Mr chair and representative
Scott in that ballpark it
depends on how many solar panels
are installed.
Representative Scott on that
point yes the question.
Servers Representative Ferrary
my understanding is that it's
it's ten percent.
What the the existing.
Yeah it's ten percent not two
thirds.
Mr chair yes I couldn't
understand because ascent
Representative Scott.
Volume are.
So this just be clear it's
FC on page two the tax rate is
ten percent of the total the
purchase and installation costs.
Thank you.
Mr chair and representative
Scott not to exceed six thousand
dollars per taxpayer per taxable
year.
And can only be applied against
tax liability okay so the
clarification as well.
So.
There would still be.
A number of circumstances were
the system or.
Twenty five thousand dollars
purchased equipment cost it
would reduce the tax liability.
By the in that circumstance
twenty five dollars is that.
Mr chair and of Representative
Scott yes but if they don't have
a tax liability that it would be
refunded.
With no tax would blow billeted
all would write a check for
twenty five hundred dollars.
Mr chair and representative
Scott yes.
But not nearly as bad as our
word ritually thought we were
looking at for liabilities but.
The last four ritual for.
Six million dollars.
Sure school record for your yes.
Quite a large thank you Mr
chairman thank you
Representative.
Thank you.
Representative Townsend if you
not received the the fire is
that what when I understand your
message to me.
Yes I went back I have not
received FIR I did not receive I
went looked to my junk email
thank you and that's where the
announcement went from Augustine
and it wasn't there so if you
just directed to the email that
I gave you.
Maybe in thank you for your I
forwarded you an additional
email for percent chance and
could you resend FIR to that
email please.
Yes Sir and then just to clarify
Mr chair representative you are
are you using your legislative
mailers that separating out.
It's up I use but I don't I
didn't get into my Legisla-
mail.
Was me my apologies I'll get
that sent over a whole rundown a
hard copy thank you no problem.
Okay so you give him a
A chance to do that and I
I'll go ahead and make some
comments
I think I I really appreciate
the responsibility.
I think that's a good thing I I
work with the tax credit this is
actually transferable.
Because it can be quite large
and so you can actually sell the
tax credit to someone.
You can use it which is usually
a corporation the transfer deal
the is better probably that
carry forward
but the the problem was
transferred to the is
transaction costs so the person
the the buying the tax credit
you know they want to discount
and then there's usually a
broker involved and so we were
dealing with landowners and they
get a big tax for that they can
sell it which it makes it more
equitable they still end up
losing your fifteen twenty
percent value.
so I mean I would like to see
that program have a refundable
credit in order to get more
money back to the actual
taxpayer so I I I appreciate I
very much appreciate the funding
bill the aspect of this and it
it but there would I think apply
to someone.
That maybe has a fixed income.
It doesn't doesn't pay taxes.
But still has some savings and
wants to investments this was
the benefit from this program
even though they don't have the
income that they they need to so
I just want to.
Mentioned that in New thank you
Thank you for that.
Does anyone else on the
committee have a questions I
still wanted Representative
Townsend a chance to get the the
FIR.
It should have been showing up
in your email right now as it.
Yes yes
and I have no further questions
okay.
Yes I do apologize for I think
we're still working out the
communication and of course
because we we we jumped on the
agenda and we had a meeting on
Saturday I think all the the
analyses in FIR is our they're
still trying to catch up to us.
Okay so
seeing no further questions from
the committee I will entertain a
motion.
Mr chairman I move adoption.
The motion to adopt is their
second.
I thank you Mr chairman.
Motion and second Augustine
could you take the.
Yes Sir.
Representative Barreras.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Motion is sorry
yes please.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Herndon.
Yes.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Representative or pants yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Townsend no I I
believe the correct function
isn't passed but I don't know
that makes any difference.
Are all circle back to that was
just about.
Vice chair Sarinana yes.
Chairman the queen.
Yes in the for you that's about
so I was shuffling papers in you
know you're the motion was there
some concern over the form of
the motion.
It was a motion to adopt not in
the past if that makes any
difference.
I can be stated if you like and
we'll reset just be sure Mr
chairman I I move it to pass.
Yes we have the second from
Representative Herndon.
Yes.
So this is roll through the vote
on the proper motion.
So I seem to take the boat again
yes Sir.
Representative Barreras.
Yes for the past.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Garcia.
Yes.
Representative Herndon yes.
Representative Montoya.
No.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Townsend and.
No.
Vice chair Sarinana yes.
And chairman McQueen.
Yes I will explain my vote.
That's a total please.
The total yes please the total
is seven in the affirmative and
for in the negative okay you've
two passed and and taking the
opportunity to explain both
because I forgot to mention
something because I was dealing
with other things in the.
Else's from.
Are in the FIR it might be from
taxation revenue make a
suggestion on clarifying the on
the building they only apply to
tax rates for the apply for you
twenty twenty two and beyond in
the prior tax credits remain the
with the carry forward in I
think that's something you
should Representative Ferrary
and Center souls you should look
at that language suggested by
TRD this is someone's currently
caring for.
A tax credit I don't.
Like we might need additional
language if they're gonna
convert that we don't want to
cut off that carry forward I am
it is suggested language in FY
are I hope you take up which
opportunity to look at that
inconsiderate in your next
committee.
Thank you Mr chair we will do
that.
You have in the past.
Thank you thank you committee
members Mr chair this is the
next bill is also Representative
Ferrary house bill thirty five
geothermal ground coupled heat
pumps.
If furry and whenever you're
ready on house bill thirty five.
Thank you Mr chair committee
members
house bill thirty five is
reinstates the previous
geothermal ground coupled heat
pump tax credits with three
significant differences the
personal income tax credit would
be refundable the corporate
income tax would remain a credit
against tax liability and the
annual cap would be raised to
sixteen million and the sunset
date would be thirty I'm sorry
twenty thirty two to harmonize
with the expected expiration
date for the federal tax and
comes just as we were talking
about.
And
For the same reasons that the
solar tax credit needed to be
refundable this tax credit would
be refundable for those who pay
personal income taxes and
Notably the bill does not
propose that the corporate
income tax be refundable and
the geo thermal ground coupled
heat pumps use the ground or
watering circulating through
pipes.
Can we improve the efficiency of
an electric heat pump and the
estimates are there that there
is approximately forty percent
higher efficiency in cooling
mode and a whopping seventy
percent of higher efficiency and
heating mode and over the decade
thousands of New Mexican homes
and businesses will have to
replace inefficient or non
electric heating and cooling
systems in order to achieve New
Mexico's clean energy transition
objectives and the tax credit
will provide important
incentives to to facilitate this
transition and with the
refundable again
a tax credit.
So with that
with my co sponsored by
detaining Center souls.
Thank you Representative and
thank you Mr chairman the only
thing that I might at is this
bill was essentially law until
about a year to when it
collapsed it probably should
have been part of the renewal
process a year or two ago with
only the additions of expansion
to sixteen million and making it
refundable but this was also
prior law until a year or so ago
when it last so we're trying to
reinstate that that's the only
thing I would just thank you.
Thank you with that will stand
for questions.
Okay.
The this is the time we do a
poll we don't have that
available so we will go
straight.
The to the public members of the
public who wish to speak please
raise your hand electronically
in you will have two minutes to
make your comments the first up
have Luis Carrero.
Yes thank you again Mr chairman
members of the committee good to
speak you guys again blue
Guerrero with the Sierra Club
Rio Grande chapter representing
thirty five thousand members all
throughout New Mexico
many New Mexicans want to be
able to keep their homes during
the cold winter months in ways
that do not depend on gas
installation of a heat pump
would make sense for families
from an economic standpoint the
international ground source heat
pump association says he pumps
can offer between twenty five
and fifty percent savings on
heating and cooling costs
compared to conventional fossil
fuel systems and from an energy
savings standpoint.
As well installed ground source
heat pump is capable of
providing three to four point
five five times the amount of
electrical energy it consumes in
the form of heat energy from
your home so making this up of
the top technology affordable to
families is essential this bill
just like the solar tax credit
allows for rebate which is key
for moderate to low income
families by voting for this bill
today you're given the
opportunity to many in our state
to help achieve the goal of
shifting away from fossil fuels
and into renewable energy and
combat climate change while
saving money and installation
utility bills I am urging you
once again to vote yes on H. B.
thirty five thank you very much
for your time today.
Thank you for that next up we
have Allison Smith.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Allison Smith I'm the
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico groundwater Association
the New Mexico groundwater
Association does support this
bill however we do want to bring
up a possible amendment to this
the association does believe
that the definition of
geothermal ground coupled heat
pump be amended to state that
the system as Shelby one that
prevents the direct exchange of
refrigerant into the ground and
so with that are the association
does standard support and
appreciate the sponsor bringing
it forward thank you very much.
Thank you for that next we have
Walter personal.
Mr chair respective
representatives my name is
Walter Gerstel and I am co
founder of in Albuquerque start
up business called seasonal
power which is developing an
innovative thermal energy
storage product.
Which is very similar to.
A ground source heat pump except
that we are using thermal
engineered thermal energy
storage in the form of.
Grapple so we're storing heat
Energy in gravel rather than as
a ground source heat pump.
We encourage expansion of this
bill to allow for engineered
thermal energy sources as well.
energy storage technology
produces no greenhouse gases is
safe and Act democratizes the
electric grid.
We encourage a yes vote on H. B.
thirty five.
But hope that it can be amended
to include a broader variety of
energy storage thank you.
Thank you for that we can use.
Thank you Mr chairman members
committee can use with the
collection of sustainable
communities and if you haven't
experienced the building heated
and cooled with jet ground
source heat pumps please go to
the city halls you Miss Miller
or Los crucis the work right.
And one of the.
Going to cover the extra costs
that going into the ground
rather than having the pumps.
The house so this is important
to have in there and also the
rebate as with the solar tax
credit bills are important
symbols for those researcher
support for house bill thirty
five thank you.
Thank you for that next step we
have the Cole Walter Mayer.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee thank you for the
opportunity to speak I'm a call
Walter Mayer speaking in support
of H. T. thirty five from Los
crucis and I'd like to
particularly thank my
Representative Ferrary H. and
senator souls for sponsoring
this important bill my home runs
on solar power insured geo
thermal suits and are we would
be early adopters for storage
but not without the tax credit
previously debated my oldest
child sees a reading specialist
and unfortunately like so many
children our state has been
hospitalized for breathing
issues so it was important to my
family to power home using the
cleanest and greenest
technologies available my
husband and I are both teachers
so solar power and geothermal
heat became possible for our
family because of these tax
credits you today have the
opportunity to expand
affordability and accessibility
of these systems but our planet
so desperately needs to many
more New Mexican families to be
more geothermal excuse me heat
pumps do not use fossil fuels
they improve indoor air quality
and safety for our children they
deliver efficient resilient long
term performance for the health
of the plan and our children
please support HB thirty five.
Thank you for that we have June
persons.
Honorable representatives thank
you for this opportunity to
support H. B. thirty five my
comment will be pretty quick
I have first hand experience
with my brother in law having
installed engineer geo thermal
twenty five years ago and it
continues to provide all the
heating for their homes in
Colorado and.
The way he engineered it it
actually provides some I don't
know exactly how to do it I'm a
structural engineer not
electrical but he's actually
providing power back to the
grid.
So I'm in strong support with
first hand knowledge of how
clean and efficient geothermal
is particularly for heating
homes thank you.
Thank you for that next step we
have tonsil.
Thank you Mr chairman and
representatives by name is Tom
Solomon with three fifteen New
Mexico and
as the others have stated strong
support of passing HB thirty
five geothermal ground coupled
heat pumps and extending that
tax credit through twenty thirty
two
Geothermal energy is a under
utilized resource.
in New Mexico and in the United
States for home use you know you
can tap into the very constant
ground temperature just ten feet
underground it's a pretty
constant fear ranges between
fifty and sixty degrees that can
be used for heating or cooling
all year round with you pop and
that's what this bill would help
us to do and again it uses no
carbon emissions to do that and
for that reason with three fifty
New Mexico we support this bill
and so thank you for your time.
Thank you for that Charles good
marker.
You Mr chairman members of the
committee R. once again I'm
Charles good marker speaking on
behalf of the national resources
defense council are we urge your
support in favor of this bill
it is important in many ways
You know and.
Largely I would say also that it
it really does take advantage of
New Mexico's greatest natural
resource
and brings it to the benefit of
everyday New Mexicans no I'm not
talking about oil and gas is
natural restraint as natural
resource our state the sun is
the greatest natural resource in
our state and in this case it's
the solar heating that comes
from the sun warms the earth
helps keep the earth's
temperature
it you know for fairly stable
and that and it's that sheet
that the geothermal heat pumps
can then circulate into our
homes or cooler air in the
summers of course so that we are
aware that your thermal systems
can actually save up to seventy
percent on household heating
costs heating and cooling costs
and applaud the sponsors as well
for making the rebates your
refundable and thank you very
much please vote yes on this
bill HB thirty five.
Thank you for that except we had
delivered services.
Thank you this is rocky practice
with your bird Services we've
installed thousand plus to occur
most systems within New Mexico
and the life expectancy is much
longer than traditional air
conditioning which we also do is
an H. for contractor but it
provides the best comfort for
homeowners it's not just that it
heats whirlpools world uses less
energy but it creates a better
humidity indoors creates a
better comfort sensation and
last a lot longer so those are
all very positive things it is
more expensive and making it
refundable will make it
applicable to a whole lot more
of our people that are in the
southern part of the state have
a median income that in some
cases for some counties less
than forty thousand a year so I
would strongly support this bill
I also strongly support the
direct exchange I'm not sure why
the other speaker with us to
have director preacher and
removed but that's the most
efficient type of geothermal
system and there is no
ground water contamination or
issues or I don't understand why
they would oppose that because
it's a closed loop with the.
Copper tubing generally that
serve both cathartic protected
and otherwise protected will
tend to last for fifty years in
place.
So strong supporter of the bill
strong supporter of it as it is
appreciate your consideration
time thank you very much.
Thank you for that we have
coming grown all.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee came Kevin role
all the CEO of the New Mexico
where electric coop association
we stand in support of this bill
we had some experience with
geothermal ground source heat
pump installations.
It is the most efficient way to
cool home or business about five
or six years ago are
Caught down there T. just
central Bally building
headquarters their heating and
cooling that office complex with
hundred over hundred twenty geo
thermal wells that were
In the parking lot and buried
underneath asphalt.
Thanks up literally the very
little space.
We've done several home
installations is probably about
the best energy efficiency
measure you can do and this tax
credit will very much help
offset installation costs
because they're very much higher
installation cost the savings
over the years are for reduced
energy usage
is very sizeable so for those
reasons them we support this
bill thank you.
Thank you for that we have sent
out.
Hello and thank you again Mr
chair members of the committee
my name is Amy Capcom Energy
advocate with CNN we've
discussed tax credits twice
today already for non fossil
fuel energy and geothermal
ground couple are just another
way for New Mexicans to use in a
race highly efficient reliable
non fossil fuel energy.
This tax credit will this tax
credit extension will allow more
New Mexicans to play a role in
reducing the impacts of climate
change and for this reason all
the reasons you've already heard
today the card is just part of
this bill thank you.
We have Margaret bell.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee my name is
Margaret mail from Albuquerque
and I'm speaking in favor of
house bill thirty five this
effective tax credit should be
renewed and extended through
twenty thirty two updated to
make it refundable and the total
amount available for tax credits
increased to sixty million
enabling many more New Mexicans
to accept access this efficient
clean energy source for heating
and cooling increased use of
renewable energy sources such as
geothermal moves us closer to a
clean energy economy with this
public health environmental and
economic benefits thank you.
Thank you for that any other
members of the public we should
we raise your hands there's.
Classes of all time then goes
away Augustine could you check
from three seventeen first
place.
Yes Sir.
Mr chair at this time there's
nobody in for COVID.
Thank you Arsene so with that
we'll close the public comment.
Thank you to the committee
actually happened that this.
Representative Ferrary is there
anything you'd like to add
before I go to the committee I'd
like to go back to the sponsor
first we got to.
Thank you Mr chair and less
Senator cells has anything to
add it for we're getting okay.
First up we have Representative
Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative Ferrary and
senator cels or presenting this
bill I'm I have a couple of
questions that are mostly
technical questions because I am
am in support of the the bill in
general but I did have a couple
of flags from reading the agency
analyses from taxed revenue and
the and EMNRD.
I'm so Mr chair and
Representative Ferrary that's
where I'm gonna start with my
questions
and.
Racy.
They're from the agency analysis
the EMNRD one.
I'm so.
I'm wondering if you intend to
make modifications to the bill
based on some of the feedback
and recommendations the agencies
had.
So specifically Mr chair and
representative the definition of
the heat pump.
EMNRD says that most of the
system submitted historically
were only cooling systems which
are allowed under statute but
these systems do not meet the
strict definition of a heat pump
and so they recommended
Amending that definition.
Mr chair and representative Dick
and
We
Have the definition of as it's
Supported
By the past and of.
We can take that into
consideration.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative that's that's
great I just wanted to be sure
that that was something that you
look at on the other item that
they also fly Act that I just
want to raise is that they've
received challenges on the
number of heat pump systems that
can be installed for property
and or applicant so if you could
add that
Two things to consider I don't
know if it's already on your
radar.
Mr chair and Representative
Dixon
I think we have the definition
or the right it is already
inclusive of
The same it's the same as with
the solar credit.
Okay.
Thank you Mr chair and
Representative and then.
My final question actually is
From the recommendation from
taxed Rav that they said they
recommended that instead of
amending this credit that the
new credit be created of for
ease of tracking and processing
moving forward and so I just
wanted to ask if that was also
something that you would be open
to if you'd looked at thank you.
Mr chair and representative
thanks and again yes we will
consider that it was just
recently brought to our
attention but we do want to make
it so that you know more people
can be included.
Thank you Mr chair thank you a
representative and senator I
have no other questions.
Thank you Representative next
step will be Representative
Ortez thank you madam chair
representative for ari just in
our souls I have a couple
general questions how many how
many households in New Mexico
have geothermal heat pumps right
now.
Mr chair.
In on that a if that's okay as
we I think overheard that
particular.
Company has installed maybe a
thousand of these are within
their area I suspect there are
other ones we don't have an
exact number this is not been a
widely used.
Credit but it's one that.
That provides great efficiencies
and so this is to try and move
that forward that we get more of
those out there they are
relatively expensive and so
they've been more for the
influence but this one opens it
up for a whole lot more people
to use is very efficient and
long lasting system.
Thank you madam chair Senator
souls all on that point but how
about how much our state.
There and and Representative the
it varies on how big and how
biggest space you need to cover
this particular one would only
cover a maximum total cost of
somewhere of thirty thousand
dollars or last most of them are
less than that that's the
maximum that you could claim
this credit for which it would
then the maximum that a single
person could claim would be nine
thousand dollars.
Right Representative refund.
Thank you madam chair Senators
souls that's really helpful for
me to just under understand you
are how much they are health
folks all around New Mexico can
can take advantage of of this
credit so last year I I worked
on a bill that was passed this
is stable building tax credit
and I wanted to get a sense of
how and in heat pumps madam
chair are under that under that
credit so would somebody who is
applying for this credit apply
for two credits how how do we
deal with the to put that in
that slightly to look at nature
of that madam chair.
Thank you madam chair and
representative of our test they
would not be able to go under
both but under
the geothermal ground coupled
heat pumps it would make it
easier for individuals as
taxpayers to apply and not have
to go through the lead and all
of that
a little bit more difficult at.
Location.
Thank you madam chair
representative for me that
that's all thanks so much thank
you.
Thank you Representative Ortez
except we Representative
Strickler.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you Representative
Ferrary
I want to.
Can I get a little more
clarification from
Representative Lord yes is to a
COVID how much for example I
have a two thousand square foot
house hypothetically how much
would a this system cost to take
care of the of that that size of
a house I I I do understand it
is a thirty six three thousand
dollars is.
is the cap
not the cat with the nine
thousand dollars it is the cap.
but what is the average cost to
make
is it forty thousand.
you do would you have that
information out this is a pretty
this is a pre proficient system
I do know Mr chairman and and
Representative Ferrary
For the I have a family member
that is an engineer and he does
a lot of these large scale
geothermal project for big
commercial buildings and they
they really work again I don't
know the cost for residential.
Mr chair and representative of
Strickler
I had a geothermal installed a
few years ago and it was like an
average of twenty five thousand
dollars for.
Actually twenty three hundred
square feet so
that could be like an average so
thirty thousand pretty good
ballpark I mean it that covers.
maybe twenty five thousand
square foot house if you you
were able to do it for less so.
Three thousand is probably on
the high end.
You Mr chairman Mr Chairman
Representative Strickler I would
think that would be it a good
average.
Hello Mr chairman and and
Representative Ferrary
these are a long life systems
currently this closed loop
system we have won the gentleman
who does heating and air
conditioning I guess
conventional and and and solar
I'm and and also
Geothermal
the systems that will do the
last thirty years Sir.
this is like the last a lot
longer than than a than solar
it's about to get has about a
fifteen to twenty year life you
know the average life expectancy
for geothermal system.
Mr chair and representative
Strickler I I don't but I would
assume that with upkeep and
you know watching your system
that it would be around the
twenty twenty five year.
I'm.
If I might might jump in on
that.
I'd like to just report it I
think it was reported that the
last fifty years or more but we
haven't been doing that that law
so we don't know they are not
running out of the likely will
outlast the house.
That just that you.
Its segments of the houses
installed in okay hi Mr chairman
and and thank you Center souls
Now these days the state
property they have to do you
have to back them up.
I I know you know so runs twenty
seven percent of time on average
so you you know you have to back
him up do you have to back up
these the state Popp survey
totally how to percent
efficient.
Our our our operational.
Mr chair and representative
Strickler
I would think you would have
some type of back up but that's
really not dealing with what
we're talking about in our
bills.
Well I I understand and I just
want to know the these
the systems.
Sounds like they're they're more
efficient than what else is
available out there if you are
you need to back up I'm just
curious dean eight back up fifty
percent of time or twenty five
percent time and says like
you're you're not how does your
system work.
Mr chair.
Mr chair and representative
strict Strickler
There if
They are so efficient that of
date of.
The efficiency is that they
won't stand alone but yeah we
our system was doing pretty well
and
the AC has no back up and the
heating does on occasion.
Well that's a good report thank
you Mr chairman thank you
Representative Ferrary.
Thank you Representative
Strickler.
Any further questions from the
committee.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative
Representative I'm sorry Mr
Chairman representative Ferrari
I do I would like a
clarification question as I read
the copy of the the bill itself
and because this
This.
The credit issue are existed
prior to the time that you're
now creating it as a refundable
is a refundable item before
taxes the credit to be carried
forward for up to ten years but
I've noticed that in your in
your B. L. it looks like you're
repealing the aspect referring
to the credit and my question to
you is did was there a legal
opinion on how this was going to
fail.
The application of this bill
because this becomes very
important you're now going back
in to retroactively affects
something that was already in
place.
Mr chair and Representative her
again
it will not affect you know of
people who were doing it for in
this is
We'll start
Representative
I have a effective date
you like around may but it
starts of January first of
twenty twenty two.
For the five.
So people who are still moving
forward with the credit I want
to make sure that they can that
also apply for credit is that
what you're saying.
I'm sorry Mr Chairman
representative I'm not
understand Representative
permitted.
So let me see if I could just
make it a little bit clearer so
if I look on page two and line
sixteen through nineteen of the
bill if we look at that if we
look at that flying.
I just want to make sure Mr
chair representative Ferrary
that we don't create any legal
problems for taxation and
revenue if they refuse to allow
the credit going forward for the
ten year period that was allowed
under the previous deal as that
existed before the bill that is
being put in place now because
what I see is the line out items
that talks about the the credit
may be carried forward for a
maximum of ten consecutive years
it looks like that is being
repealed and taken out so that's
causing some concern I just want
to make sure that you have had a
legal opinion on how this is
being applied before it's
implemented so this is something
for you to consider and the
please look at.
Her name on that point if I may
please
Representative Ferrary I think
this is the same issue I flag at
the end of the last bill just a
week we continue the the carry
forward for the for the prior
credits when we established a
fund building for the new
credits so it's probably
comparable language to the one
suggested for suggested by TRD
for house bill thirty four so
just something for you look look
at moving forward thank you Mr.
And representative I think
that's exactly right I mean
there's been some to recommend
calling this the new geo thermal
ground that heat pump so that it
is two separate bills and so
they're not confused and
overlapping in their
implementation.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Senator cells and thank you
Representative Ferrary thank
you.
Any further questions from the
committee.
Mr chairman I move it to pass.
The past through the second.
Representative Ortez
I'm guessing take the book
please.
All yes Sir.
Representative Barreras.
Yes for the past.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Herndon yes.
Representative Montoya.
Representative or pants.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative.
So.
Representative our vice chair
Sarinana yes.
And chairman McQueen.
Yes.
In total we have seven in the
affirmative and or in the
negative.
Representative Ferrary center
schools here with the past.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
committee.
And all the people who gave a
public comment.
Thank you to the members of the
public I think that concludes
our our business for the date
for the committee's information
on Tuesday we will not hear
house bill six.
The Mike is scheduled for
Thursday I'm not sure yet but
hostile six was was on the
agenda for Tuesday and will
probably appear on the golden
rod.
but we will not hear house bill
six on Tuesday.
anything else or anyone on the
committee.
The Augustine you hear Henry's.
Yes I can make one request of
the committee and its members.
Good.
If there are any emails aside
from your Legisla- mail for
future use can you please send
them to my lettuce email just so
we can get that clearly sent
out.
So I think we had some issues
the.
People not getting everything
I also think there was a the.
And also just for the last bill
which wasn't in the shared file
to apologize about that bristles
are working at those technical
details and we will keep working
on that so if you do have a
preferred email please send it
to Augustine.
Representative
CS.
Chairman do we have other bills
on Tuesday morning.
Yes Representative Garcia the
plan is to hear house bill
fourteen funds into your to
deduction for electric storage
house bill one a one Mexico
reforestation Center act.
Thank you Mr chair.
Garcia
The.
Lee do you have something first.
Yes chairman I just need to make
a comment about share file and I
just wanted to let you know that
those were just updated to date
so everybody should be able to
access your file immediately.
Enter Representative funded.
Someone walked you through that
yet.
No they don't I don't know how
to access that.
Thank you reach out to
Representative Herndon and make
sure she gets set up on that.
Yes Sir I certainly well thank
you for that.
Anything else on the committee.
Thank you very much we are.
