The federal Culbert.
Representative Romero.
There.
Garcia.
Here.
Madam chair Rubio.
Here.
We've got seven folks.
I'm here my wife's work and.
I got you thanks welcome
Representative and
Representative Powdrell Culbert
she messaged me last night that
you wouldn't be making it this
morning so she will be excused
today so Senator will go ahead
and and start when you're ready
thank you very much Mr chairman
again I want to thank all of you
for gathering to date this one
built in Senate bill thirty four
and basically it's because of
the hope is to allow the
department of transportation to
have the authority to do design
built for state projects and so
at this point I think I'll just
turn it over to
Mr can Tana and let him tell you
a little bit more detail about
what they what they intend to do
thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
senator members of the committee
appreciate it simply what this
bill is doing or accomplishing
is we're already allowed to
design build for project
procurement the the copyright is
it needs to have some federal
participation some federal
dollars associated with the
project now that we've been
getting a little bit of money
over the last few sessions we
have one hundred percent state
funded projects that are of
eligible for the design build
procurement and we simply want
to be able to use that a design
build procurement for one
hundred percent state projects
so that that's what this bill
does is remove the cabbie out
that the project needs to be
partially or fully funded with
federal dollars.
Questions of sorry yes I think I
think we're ready for questions
thank you okay great thank you
senator is there anyone in the
audience that would like to
speak on in support or in
opposition of this legislation
we'll start with at.
Amy go ahead.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Amy Barrett and I am the
registered lobbyist for the New
Mexico oil and gas association
he remains the number one
priority for our industry and
we're grateful to the
legislature for your thoughtful
consideration of prior or taking
funding for roads are please can
travel to work and back home to
their families every day I
personally was born and raised
in I have raised my seven
Albuquerque as a mother of an
eighteen year old red safety is
a personal priority for me as
well thank you to Senator Kernan
for sponsoring this good
government bill that removes
arbitrary requirements from the
road construction process while
providing jobs for New Mexicans
and alleviating safety concerns
thank you also to secretary
Santa and Mr can Tana for their
teams tireless work to ensure
the safety of everyone of the
support Senate bill thirty four
and appreciate your
consideration.
Thank you any next we have
Jerry.
Yes.
Yes.
It appears are muted Mr fanning.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Gerry fanning on the public and
government affairs director for
Eddy County.
US Senate bill thirty four will
allow the deal to to procure
funding for the design build
projects outside of just federal
funds as we just mentioned this
will out apartment flexibility
in planning projects providing
the opportunity to move projects
forward and more economic manner
in return will see savings for
the state on these projects and
getting roads built and work
quickly and efficiently manner
for the citizens of New Mexico I
would like to thank the sponsor
for bringing this bill forward
we believe it will be very
beneficial to all citizens of
New Mexico who use these roads
and Eddy County stance in
support of Senate bill thirty
four for these reasons thank you
very much.
You Mr fanning next we have
Missy career.
This
Let's try this.
Madam chair I I'm deputy general
counsel with the NMED of tea and
I'm here to support David and
not here for public comment okay
great thank you.
Missy career.
Thank you madam chair I'm sorry
I couldn't get off mute.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is misty
Currier registered lobbyists for
strategies three sixty speaking
on behalf of our clients Apache
corporation plains all American
pipeline and Occidental
petroleum all three of these
companies are part of the
seventeen member Permian
strategic partnership
organization we ask you to
support Senate bill thirty four
as explained by Senator Kernan
in New Mexico DOT the bill will
expedite and streamline the
highway construction process
this will allow for improved
road conditions increase road
safety and enhance quality of
life for residents in southeast
New Mexico and across the state
of New Mexico thank you for the
opportunity to testify and thank
you to Senator Kernan and all of
you for considering this bill.
Thank you Mr.
That's it for public comment
so we'll move on to the E. R..
Will move on to the committee of
first we have Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair I just
like to do fast whenever you're
ready.
Okay thank you Representative
Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chairman thank
you senator I just have a couple
of questions how many New Mexico
companies have the capacity to
do the design and build project
delivery system.
Thank you thank you madam chair
and representative and I'm gonna
let Mr can Tana answer that.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Representative
Garrett thank you senator I can
get you an exact number but we
have several design firms and
construction companies that are
able to do to to join forces and
go after of design build
projects but I can get you an
exact number I don't off the top
of my head I I don't know what
if you if if you wish I can get
you a number on Monday
Chairman and and David so it
doesn't have to necessarily be
one company companies can come
together for the business is
that correct.
Madam chair representative yes
that's correct.
And then my last question madam
chair women and David is so you
get incentives because it's the
speeded up process is that
correct.
the Madam chair representative
that is correct that's part of
it this procurement method is a
allows us to be a little bit
more flexible with regard to
getting a project one hundred
percent designed for the full
length of the project we're able
to take components or pieces of
the project that are a hundred
percent allow the contractor to
begin those brought both of that
portion of the project well
we're still bringing the other
up pieces of the project up to
that level so yes you pointed it
allows us to speed up the
process the construction process
and allows for a lot more
flexibility.
My last question madam chair and
David is what when we talk about
incentives for getting things
done
in a timely fashion like the I.
forty I. twenty five the big guy
intersection other things what
the monetary amount that we're
talking about roughly.
Madam chair representative
that's a great question and and
really it's going to be
dependent on the overall cost of
the project of the big guy in
today's dollars would obviously
be just be significantly more
that particular case I believe
Q. what was offered an incentive
of prime real estate location
right there at the big guy in
when they met a certain
deadlines they were able to beat
that and and they looked and
they were able to acquire some
prime real estate so that's was
one of the one of the ways that
we can work out incentives with
the with this process.
Okay.
It can be it's not necessarily
cash it could be something else
like you sound like a land.
Madam chair representative that
is correct it would be cost
possibly real estate or
combination.
Okay thank you very much.
It Madam chairwoman.
Thank you Representative Garrett
next we have Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair good
morning that senator and Mr.
I'm just thankful you guys.
This bill is coming through and
and for for the Mexico Way the
governor's desk very soon this
is.
For two
for two page bill this problem
all the best things would be
done in the state right now and
I'm just really supports
additional and I'll follow
Representative Crowder's a
motion for do pass with the
second.
Thank you Mr chair
representative pentagram by your
Garcia.
Thank you madam chair David
you were talking about
incentives.
I'm projects.
Is that a fair assumption to ask
if a project thank C. in the
western part of the state is
smaller compared to of project
in the eastern part of the
state.
With their incentives be greater
so therefore you would go that
way instead of the other part of
the state.
Madam chair representative
Garcia that's a great question
thank you really we will be
prioritizing any particular part
of the state depending on the
size of a project we plan our
projects from the from the
district level on up and make
sure that we four the same
resources to all five projects
regardless of whether their
design build of low bit of low
bid or any other you know even
if it's a contracting this
project we we really don't
prioritize projects in that in
that manner per se as far as
incentives and things of that
nature so we really are.
Follow our planning process to
make sure that the projects are
coming through the stepper
planned and budgeted and stay on
on the schedule they were
originally intended for.
Madam chairman David the reason
I asked that the ability sure
part of the state is the we will
produce your and I know the a
lot of taxed into the state Fund
and so but the you know I just
don't want to you know leave all
other parts of the state out of
the loop because they're not
producing as well as money is
the issue part of the state is I
just returned thank you madam
chair thank you David.
Thank you Mr chair I do have
just a couple questions Senator
one David and and if you could
answer it in terms of have we
ever clearly this is the first
time this is being proposed
is that correct.
Madam chair of the members of
the committee we've we've used
design build up in the past and
the big guy was a design build
project of.
The state del the sale the
looked at the new interchange at
twenty five thousand is ideal
project the cabbie out with
those with those had federal
dollars associated with them
this is what we're really I. I.
ng is the D. B. that we have
identified for New Mexico thirty
one and one twenty eight are
currently that is a hundred
percent state funded and that's
simply what this bill does is
will it'll allow us to use the
B. on that project or any other
hundred percent state funded
projects that meet the
threshold.
And thank you
thank you David and can you can
you tell us those two road those
two highways which ones they
are.
Yes the New Mexico one twenty
three one that's right down the
middle of the Permian thirty one
goes it's a from a right but I
believe in in and out Senator
Kernan can can assist me here
but it's right outside of Hobbs
going towards the Texas line
through gel that's that's New
Mexico thirty one
and one twenty eight is
connecting thirty one down to US
twenty five and up north I may
be mistaken but but that that's
it's right down there but near
the Hobbs job area in in the
heart of the Permian there's a
lot of oil and and gas truck
traffic down there and and
intersection intersections need
to be read on the roadway needs
to be done in white and to
accommodate for this these the
special volume.
That that's great madam chair
and indicated it is of course
one twenty eight runs from jail
over toward Carlsbad and I don't
know if you the committee
recalls couple years ago in
house bill six and that was the
big tax package in in that bill
there was an increase in excise
tax in a portion of that was
going to be used for dedicated
to southeast New Mexico for two
years and the purpose of that
was because that will feel
traffic was so severe we were
saying multiple to technologies
that one twenty eight is a very
very narrow road and there is a
lot of traffic from the oil
field that comes on and off that
road constantly and you know we
took a break during the pandemic
portion but I will tell you now
traffic is already picking up
again and we're going to begin
to see the technologies in that
area once again so I think
that's the the purpose and and
certainly the design build
process will be good for cross
the state but it certainly is
going to help that project down
on one twenty eight specifically
because you can do a portion you
may not have the money down to
do the whole thing did you can
begin to break that project up
into parts and we can get some
work done down there in every.
twenty miles or so that it's
done that will help with the on
oncoming entering and exiting
traffic in that area so even a
portion of that that's completed
basically is going to sideline
so that's that's where it is and
that's one of the reasons that I
think it's so important to get
that get this thing going so
that we can can not begin to to
make that a safer area and so
that's that's what there's a
little bit more money and not
just from the house bill six
from a few years ago the state
is actually been.
Appropriating larger issue as
this committee knows more and
more money every year to the
department of transportation for
for construction of roads which
is I think absolutely so
critical and I'm I'm so grateful
that this legislature couple
years ago dedicated that
additional one percent of excise
tax to the department of
transportation and it'll stay
that way until I guess
legislature decides to put it in
the general fund again so really
grateful for that additional
money it's not just gonna help
southeast New Mexico it'll
certainly help every area across
the state New Mexico when
there's any.
Thank you senator and I know all
so is my understanding is that
this will be a two year project.
Mr chair madam chair and David
you're you're probably gonna
have to answer that because I
don't know that we're for
exactly you are on that.
Madam chair members the
committee center the up the
project right now we are
currently involved in the we are
what we put on our F. P. last
summer to bring on a consultant
to help us bring the entire
quarter to a what we call a
thirty percent design level and
at that point and and establish
some performance specifications
and standards and B. R. F. and
and the another request for
qualifications for the eventual
design builder so we're in that
process right now getting to the
thirty percent identifying these
performance specs and we will be
issuing another R. F. P. later
this year round and summer time
frame for the actual design
build up our plans are the this
this is a huge projects and
we're we're going to do it in
phases and right fifty million
dollar phases anymore so we are
looking at the first phase of
the first project to to go at
least two years and and it may
take a little bit longer to get
the entire quarter completed in
depending on the funding that we
receive we are gonna prioritize
again in phases that would
accommodate the design build of
fifty million dollar threshold
so we're we're looking at about
three to four phases to get it
done so it's going to take a
little longer maybe maybe about
three or four years I would say
by the time the entire quarter
result is done.
Thanks David and then I know
that I brought this up a couple
of hearings ago and Senator
Kernan we we were just
discussing
Those that like companies from
New Mexico versus companies from
out of state and who gets to
I guess when these bids or these
are peas and so that was gonna
be my other question is in terms
of the the project that you now
for C. is is maybe between three
to five years what your what are
your thoughts or your your
understanding in terms of what
that might look like for New
Mexico companies versus out of
state companies who are
participating in that sure madam
chair pre sheet that members the
committee the since this would
be one hundred percent state
funded project the local
incentive would apply to our
local contractors and
consultants to bid on this
project interestingly enough
there is some discussion on the
national level with the
association of a
state highway transportation
officials requesting
potentially removing and
allowing up local preference for
federally projects that I have
an that's just some some
scuttlebutt going around but
that maybe it's something that
comes up as well for sure for
this project any hundred percent
sent state funded project that
incentive will definitely apply.
Thank you David and the lastly
yes as as I was preparing for to
hear have this hearing is that I
know a few years ago and it was
my first session in the
legislature is that we the the
the legislature invested a lot
of money into the brand well in
Carlsbad and and I know I mean
as you know senator that's where
I was born and raised in that
area I grew up in lake Arthur
and so that area is very much
familiar to me I drive those
highways when I went before
COVID when I would go visit back
home but I was just curious in
terms of this this project
specifically and the brand well
like is there any relationship
there in terms of
I know that federally it's
always hard with the red tape
federally to administer some of
these funds if if if I mean god
forbid anything were to happen
but I was just wondering if
there was any intersection there
between this project and and and
and the brand well and and all
of that.
Thank you madam chair and David
I I don't think one twenty eight
comes into that particular area
the the brine well is situated
in Carlstadt New out thirty one
of his ex still outside of the
crosspad area and for those of
you that affirming with prime
well it's basically two eighty
five and that it may connect to
I don't know thirty one goes on
in that for David you may know
that certainly we're making
progress on that project and and
I cannot thank the legislature
enough for what they did several
years ago with regard to funding
that we're still short but I
think we've reached a resolution
over the last few days on how to
pull that thing to the to the
goal line and I'm very grateful
but without the legislature's
help on that we would not be
where we are with regard that
and I don't think this
particular Aaron I may be wrong
dated thirty one may eventually
find its way into Carl spent.
Madam chair Senator thirty one
the state on the east side of
Carlsbad and lose staffs out
towards a loving and okay
neither one of those roads
actually connecting the girls
that okay.
Madam chair is this is Senator
and and David we're talking with
the amount of traffic we have
down there there's two ways that
we we we just we judge how busy
the oil field is one of right so
we can cap and the other ones
but how long it takes thank you
make a left turn on some of the
roads and SO and at times during
the year you know there's it it
takes you fifteen to twenty
minutes of times to get through
a T. intersection.
Thank you Representative I mean
I I can tell just driving inner
Tisha and making a left toward
Tom's on First Street in Maine
how long traffic is at times
that I never experienced as a
young person so I totally
understand where
where we're at right where
you're coming from I'm David did
you want to follow up with that.
You madam chair members the
committee thirty one connect
intersects with twenty five
there may be a portion of that
that is affected by the by
Google we separated that
particular intersection away
from the design build because
it's it's critical that it gets
done expeditiously so that that
that one moving a little bit
faster than the design build but
there there might be some
affects their again it's not
going to affect the project
itself and we'll we'll we'll
deal with it.
Thank you David I'm my server
see on.
Thank you madam chair for the
second time and David.
you mentioned earlier.
A lot of the qualifying these
projects what do you mean by
that dude.
Thank you muted.
Thank you madam chair by the
vice chair Garcia appreciate the
question what we do is we we
want to issue what's the request
for qualifications and make sure
that any design builder you know
consultant and contractor that
come together for this design
build make sure that they have
the minimum qualifications that
we set forth with our
performance specifications
up to ensure that a they are
going to be able to do the job
and they have interest in it so
we are in the process of
developing exactly what those
qualifications are right as we
speak up but as we as we develop
those those minimum
qualifications will help guide
us into allowing which firms
which design build teams we are
going to allow to actually
submit a request for proposal
for the design build we just
want to make sure that we have
qualified bidders before we get
to that point that can actually
handle this type of project is
the size of project.
David madam chair maybe I missed
a did you on the question.
New projects how to ball of
other projects qualify.
For you to get into this the
scope of work.
Madam chairman of vice chair got
it so we are currently under the
legislation with the minimum
requirements or threshold for a
design build procurement is the
project a have to have federal
dollars on it and be has to be
over fifty million dollars and
those are the two criteria that
we have to meet in order to
advance to design build
procurement this legislation
obviously would remove the first
requirement of having federal
dollars associated with the but
the fifty million dollar
threshold still apply.
Chairman David numbers of the
project in my part of the
country the forty five million
dollar project will not qualify
more to read.
We would provide five million
dollars with the scope member
madam chair.
Mr speaker Mr vice chair with a
but technically yes you are
correct if it's not a meeting
that fifty million dollars
threshold it would not be
eligible for design build that
is why it's very crucial that we
eventually get our our other
bills C. NG C. construction
manager general contractor
through that procurement process
is kind of about the hybrid
design build that would allow us
to utilize that particular
procurement for smaller projects
but to your point if it doesn't
meet the fifty million dollar
threshold would not qualify list
we went back to the legislature
for special permission to do
that.
Madam chairman David you also
mentioned that the project
should double in southeastern
New Mexico are going to be done
in stages well.
A guy to get fifty million
dollars a stage how many stages
can you produce and socially to
Mexico and leave for a wish more
New Mexico a lot of it.
If we have the C. James James of
the New Mexico has a one project
will cost two hundred million
okay just for numbers Madam
chair of.
My part of the country we have a
project is worth fifty million.
How do you divide gets the
projects done.
A first come first serve basis
or need how do all.
Explain to me how that is how
that works.
Sure madam chair Mister lesser
appreciate that
all of our projects regardless
of location and within the state
that we're going to follow our
our NMDOT FHWA process we're
going to get projects identified
through either though if we're
in a rural area of the local RPO
or foreign metro area of the MPO
and then make sure that we
prioritize those plans as they
come into the fold you as as
projects are identified in in
whatever region of the state and
get and and they get programmed
into the tips first and to the
tipping stepped we're gonna
follow they're identified
schedule that they that they
were initially because started
with sos project and and you're
part of the of the state if it
was put into the step and
identified for funding this year
it's going to get funding this
year if it was identified for
next year's gonna get funding
next year the color of money
whether state or federal
will will you know that that is
neither here nor there as far as
our prioritizing the plans of
the anything within the step in
this given year is gonna it that
is a priority for the deal to we
we we work through our step in
we have a robust planning
process that we really do not
hear from.
Madam chair and David yes so the
problem I'm having is not
knowledgeable enough to what
we're going to do can we
reassure looked a little bit
closer and kind of blindsided me
well you want to be sure and I
analyst though you sure
southeast by New Mexico produces
a lot of range for the state the
new body appreciates that but in
the same time same program we
need to make sure that.
Other parts of the state don't
get live dial over what their
rate of taxes Byrd from other
parts of the committees and you
know that's a big girl all the
journal money.
This is Ivan Aldridge stated for
six year dial in all labor
hear is certain central corridor
State very often the good left
out and you know I don't want
that to happen of this
particular instance and I wish I
knew more about it maybe we can
have all offline conversation
between the two men with better
because right now I have I just
have a little bit harder to hold
wind and like I said low oil
intended anybody madam chair but
I just don't know enough about
it to be comfortable of the
forty seven that I just don't
know much about thank you know I
don't want to leave nobody out
the space you can try to get a.
Miss madam chair could I just
weigh in a little bit maybe
dated to clarify that when you
talk about the step this state
transportation improvement
program and how the funds in New
Mexico were distributed it's my
understanding and I may be wrong
there two pieces to that.
Don't appropriated by
transportation district and I
believe every district gets a
certain amount of money and then
within that district legislative
priorities I think what what may
be your concern representatives
is there there seems to be a lot
of money going to southeast New
Mexico this is a big project and
if you'll recall in house bill
six when we pass that we
dedicated for two years that
additional one percent excise
tax.
Two southeast New Mexico and we
that was part of the legislation
that's what this legislator
legislature determined that we
would send those dollars to
southeast New Mexico for two
years and I'm not sure David if
that's where the department is
getting those additional dollars
to be able to do this project
that overall over time this step
directs the dollars in every
district on a fairly equal basis
in my correct with with state
dollars and all the money that
that is distributed in my
director my role.
Madam chair members of the
committee Senator Kernan you're
you're absolutely correct
district to received of the
first a portion of the the first
year portion of the excited New
Mexico's tax increase at the
tune of about fifty five million
dollars each year so they have a
Hyundai had a hundred ten
million dollars already
identified for this particular
project so so that those are the
kind of lately the related
legislation there with regard to
federal the federal explanation
yes all federal dollars are
identified
Throughout the state based on
district priorities districts
are very
They take of the they really do
take on a lot of a lot of
effort to prioritize their plans
the district engineers have a
really really good handle on the
district priorities and we we
definitely defer to them and
make sure that the projects that
are identified in the state of
Brecht will and and and and and
are getting all of the
priorities so up with it so just
took to centered this point she
is absolutely correct with that.
So going forward after madam
chair after these two years.
That southeast New Mexico will
no longer get that additional
money but where it will go and I
think to the tune of about one
and a half percent will continue
to go to the department of
transportation to be spent all
across the state equally and
that's the good news about that
bill certainly we benefited for
the first two years that thank
goodness going forward finally
we're taking that excise tax and
we're spending it across the
state for the benefit of all and
so that that's how that bill
works and and we're grateful for
the ability to improve those
very dangerous roads and we know
that there are problems
everywhere that every district
up basically over time just kind
of receives the same amount of
funding I don't think going
forward at southeast New Mexico
after the two years we'll get
any more funding than any other
particular district it's
basically it's it's pretty fair
and that that's all I have on
that madam chair.
But I'm not sure I think that's
in red presheaf that but after I
think the secretary of
transportation might be on the
line could you comment on this
if you don't.
Sure.
Analysts.
Thank you madam chair and Mr
vice chair Mike Santa cabinet
secretary for DOT just here
listening to the conversation I
just wanted to reiterate a few
things number one this bill
doesn't have anything to do with
where money goes so by passing
this bill doesn't mean any
monies moving from one area to
the other or changing the
process that we currently have
and so I just wanted to to be
clear about that and David's
right we try and be as equitable
as possible we're we're fighting
two different processes the
first process is the legislative
process and I know with all the
extra money we received it's
been very important for
legislators to to be equitable
among districts a lot of cases
this last a hundred million or
so it's been divided up among
the six districts pretty evenly
but we also have a new federal
process and the federal process
is pushing us towards.
The need based projects so they
don't care where the project is
but they're taking a look at the
pavement condition at the
economic development
opportunities at the safety
metrics and they're saying you
should be prioritizing based on
that and not necessarily
dividing it equitably and so
we're we have two different
processes with the state money
with the federal process but
overall we always try and be
equitable we know that
constituents needs are great
across our state from one corner
to the other so we'll continue
to try and do that but just
understand that with our federal
dollars that's the direction
we're building question but
having said all that I just want
to reiterate this bill doesn't
have anything to do with
changing how money gets
distributed or the process that
we're using for that so just
wanted that to be clear madam
chair and and Mr vice chair
thank you madam chair secretary
and really appreciate that
additional clear my head a
little bit of what we're going
to do and by no means
Madam chair Senator and my
trying to take anything from
what we're really needed I just
want to make sure that it's
equitable and fair to everybody
in the state and you know.
Secretary Santa Fe really
appreciate you all coming for
the state in the and I'm sure
that's all the questions I have
thank you.
Thank you I share
Representative group for the
second time.
Thank you madam chair I
the senator David and then the
secretary and
explained everything
exceptionally well on that I did
want to reiterate something to
committee beauty is of this.
Our process.
Is that in some of the questions
madam chair that have been asked
to is you know do we have
contractors out there we have
companies out there capable of
doing projects with the science
the beauty of the design build
is that you can over madam chair
you can bring five different
engineering firms to the table
you can bring to different three
different contractors to the
table and they can consolidate
everything as one team and work
together to accomplish this so
this the this process allows
small engineering firms are
maybe it you technical firm that
only has three to five members
to become part of a bigger team
and and grow their business at
the same time good the expertise
of of of the bigger players and
and
Help that small business
continue to go that same process
works on the contract side as
well you may have a small
pipeline contractor covr
contractor don't work at that
that has a really small company
but you can become part of the
that that small company can
become part of of this.
This Egolf team and it grows
that company is an intrinsically
ropes that company and in eight
games experience it gets them
a larger amount of experience
and exposure to the DOT and the
bigger projects across the state
as well and so this.
I.
Work on design build projects
from the from the east coast to
west coast and the in throughout
different stages of my career
and these are.
One of the best things you can
do to to solidify and grow small
businesses throughout throughout
the state and and bring that in
so you may not you may have one
or two big contractors across
the state that are capable of
doing things and in our case we
have a multitude large
contractors that are more than
capable of doing this but I I I
just appreciate the fact that
then the design build process
that they can they can
incorporate smaller companies
and and I'm sure a madam chair
Senator and David secretary that
is that's probably gonna be for
your qualification process is
how will we how will we deal
with small businesses across the
state and there in this process
as well and so.
I just.
Again
this is this is one of the best
things would be doing for the
state with respect to making
beginning our projects.
From from concept through
completion all the way through
from now on and so thank you
again for allowing me to speak
master.
Thank you Representative so we
have a motion for a new pass
from Representative Crowder
second from Representative
Pettigrew
Are you can you go ahead and do
the role please.
Eighty two passed most.
Representative Crowder.
Yes.
Representative Garrett yes.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid yes.
Yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Six Hughes.
Santo Domingo.
Yes.
Mr Garcia.
Yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Your review.
Yes.
Eight two zero to pass who have
the second again I apologize.
It was Representative up in a
group thank you so much Madam
chair for make.
Go ahead Mr Madam chair of
David have a question of then to
us.
These companies that are large
companies like the one with the
Fisher industries for example
they they have all of those did
the dish station here but
they're from out of state of
considered in state companies.
Madam chair up Representative I
Strickler Sierra I.
I would I I believe they are I I
think the if they some some
companies did in fact establish
in state offices to qualify is
in state contractors and when
we've had previous design build
projects so that that I believe
it is is the case and and and in
some instances again to
you know I think.
These types of projects lend a
lot of these contractors come
together and and build a a B.
team with multiple contractors
and subcontractors similar on
the consulting side there's
going to be multiple consultants
pooling their resources together
to go out to this project and I
may have let's see if.
And so I had to the eggs in fact
I believe our this Travis can
answer that question.
The purpose.
Just for the purpose of this
legislation Senator Kernan you
do have a due pass eight zero
vice chair Garcia I just because
I know that the Senate is
probably gonna going to session
soon
is if this is a conversation
that that you all could have
offline
but I just didn't want to say
that Senator Kernan you do have
a due pass eight zero well thank
you very much again I want to
thank the committee for coming
in this morning to get this and
thank you so much thank you so
much Senator.
We're waiting for our breakfast
Senator.
From you.
I can arrange that.
What thank you thank you Senator
Kernan and thank you all
committee members I did have a
brief conversation last night
with Representative Crowder
regarding federal funding that
is through the the stimulus and
and the funds related to
transportation we I know I I let
Tom reach out to the Department
to see if maybe before the end
of the the session we can have a
briefing on how the federal
stimulus will
how we can apply that here in
New Mexico and so we'll we'll
see if we can try to get
something scheduled before the
end of the session so I just
wanted to give you all agree
feeding on that that
Representative Crowder made that
request last night and so will
will be working on that for the
for this coming week it's
unclear what other bills will be
hearing and so we will certainly
keep you all posted and so with
that I think that's it and we
will
We will see you all at noon
thank you all.
Thanks Madam.
Thank you.
At twelve thirty or one does
anybody know the final madam
chair one.
One o'clock.
