Roll call is closed we have a
quorum.
Members please rise for today's
indication offered to us by the
gentleman from Chavis Eddie into
Tero leader Townsend.
We pray with me.
Heavenly father we thank you for
the many blessings that we.
Enjoy and that you have bestowed
on us.
Many many more than we deserve.
We thank you.
For your son our savior.
That you think that we might
have eternal life.
Lord this week we celebrate.
That sacrifice.
That resurrection.
Because of that we have hope.
We have a love.
And we have the opportunity to
spend forever with you.
What is we make our way through
life today and every day.
Let us not forget to
contemplate.
On this.
What would you have us to do.
What prepares your children.
For their future.
What prepares us to become
better disciples of your word.
Lord what would you have us to
do.
Father god bless us with the
strength wisdom.
And insight to do what is right
in your eyes.
For give us where we fail you.
Bless all of those that are
present here today in listening
for to Christ's name I pray in.
Thank you John with the the
gentle lady from real reverse
Santa Fe inTaos please leave us
in the pledge of allegiance.
Chance to the fine at the United
States of America and to the
Republic for which it stands one
nation under god indivisible
with liberty and justice for
all.
The only Bernalillo
Representative Figueroa would
you please leave this in the
pledge of allegiance and
Spanish.
Discussion is an American he
person that will.
Yes in the late that you see
here bills.
And with the gentleman Chavis
and Lincoln representative
Nibert please leisure and
saluting New Mexico slide.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker good morning Mr
speaker members of the house Mr
speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objection it is so
ordered good morning everyone.
That members yesterday we had a
technical issue on the zoom we
for reasons that have not been
resolved in the chamber we could
not hear the members.
Participating remotely who
wished to vote on house bill
one.
Those representatives were
Representative Chatfield.
Garcia and Matthews they did
speak.
but we could not hear the
chamber there for their votes
for not recorded by the clerk I
have this morning discussed it
with the
with the Representative Townsend
the leader of the Republicans I
would like to ask unanimous
consent to allow those three
members to vote on that bill as
the they're at their lack of was
not their fault it was a
technical error is there
objection to allowing those
three members to vote on that
measure hearing none we'll
suspend the rules to allow those
three members in those through
our only to vote.
You put the vote on the board I
believe.
Actually can't do that with that
quite a lot of work so what
we'll do is we'll hear the clerk
called those three numbers and
then we'll update the vote sheet
and display the updated the
website.
Okay the clerk to call to the
three numbers.
Representative Chatfield.
Speaker I will no
Representative Chatfield votes
no Representative Harry Garcia
yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative
Matthews yes.
Representative Matthews votes
yes.
You think members what
Representative Chatfield we were
only gonna do that if you're
gonna go yes there
misunderstanding.
Just getting.
Okay so we've now.
And that's them saying this
Ezzell is that it's it's clear
on the webcast.
And for the eternal clerk.
This is the vote on house bill
one.
this is.
RCS number three
the record that will be updated
still bears the date of March
thirty twenty twenty one still
there is a time of eight
nineteen and four seconds PM
with an updated vote of forty
four the formative twenty five
in the negative house bill one
passed the house again unanimous
consent to expunge the original
roll call vote replace it with
the one I just described during
objection it is so ordered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
committee report.
no objections were there to
read.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too is been referred
house bill two as amended has
had it under consideration point
in with recommendation that I do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Gail Chasey chair.
We are honored option of a
favorable committee report on
house bill two as amended all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
Hello this.
Eight.
The committee report is adopted.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
messages no objections ordered
Cllr to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate bill one with
emergency clause and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
this is really inner.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed house bill one in return
same here with respectfully
submitted Lenore and Lara host
Senate chief clerk message of
inter.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation no
objections were clear to read.
Senate bill one introduced by
senator.
Senator Hemphill and graves and
representatives Chandler and
Harper in act relating to
economic development providing
that a portion of state and
local gross receipts and
compensation compensating tax
revenue impose on certain
economic development projects
maybe rural he provided us
public support for the projects
pursuant to the local Economic
Development Act providing
transfers and distributions of
the portion of state local gross
receipts and compensating tax
revenue declaring an emergency
Senate bill one.
Senate bill one having been read
twice by title is referred to
the taxation and revenue
committee.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business third
reading of legislation.
Hearing objection is so ordered.
Members I'll turn your attention
to supplemental calendar number
one.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Martinez are you
ready on house bill two.
Yes it is that point.
The record reflect all action
necessary for placing House Bill
two as amended on final passage
is been taken down to explain to
the.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of the house good morning for
everyone I hope you all gas good
rest house bill two is a
valuation of the work that we do
this past session house bill
twelve immediate continuation of
several years worth of work.
Mr speaker members of the body
I'm going to begin using the
bill and then I'm gonna have my
cool Sanchez also introduce
other parts of the bill thank
you senator remarks before we
open for debate
speaker of the body our house
bill two is known as the tanners
regulation Act twenty twenty one
Canada nation act regulates the
use production and sell cannabis
and cannabis products in the
state of New Mexico.
This act creates a responsible
and highly regulated system
approved licenses with a strict
set of rules and regulations
that are going to be developed
by a missile radiation licensing
department.
Mr speaker body
we know that New Mexicans are
with us on this issue.
A recent poll conducted over the
course of September in October
showed seventy four percent
support overall.
For a proposal to legalize has
vaguely cannabis.
For those fertile use twenty one
or older.
Only twenty five cents posted.
Why is important is because of
the body if you go back to two
thousand seven.
Only thirty four percent of
those schools supported the
legalization this is a you know
this is a more than forty forty
percent forty point shift in in
support for for legalization.
Mr speaker members of the body
I know that we all legislative
recent polls I I certainly don't
taking symbols that holiness is
just popular eligible set that
are not so popular I understand
that but I think the point here
citing the full is the fact that
there was that a shift over the
years and I think that that is a
reflection of what's happening
in other parts of the country as
more people become more
comfortable with the fact that
cat is is in fact this is gonna
be taxed right it is it is that
we all you know that public
perception will continue to
shift even needing I leave to a
federal system mobilization
aviation academies.
Mr speaker members of the body
the this is America is in the
midst of the sea change when it
comes to this issue
and we need to be aware of the
unintended consequences we had a
great debate last night it has
to be sure about the about the
size issues we must remain
vigilant but we also have the
reasons and thought for as we
develop a framework for
legalization.
In order for us to bring well
for six years has been an
underground in this market it's
gonna take a lot of the
liberation input from
stakeholders across the state.
That's why this is not the first
time that states be introduced
this bill was introduced at past
two house committees and the
house floor and to Senate
committees and ended up without
a hearing on the Senate floor in
the twenty twenty one regular
session prior to that another
version of that bill went to one
Senate committee and that a
second set Senate committee the
year before that twenty nineteen
house of the state so maybe just
wait until house committees
passed the house floor it ended
up passing the Senate committee
and it ran out of time on its
final Senate committee stop that
year.
Mr speaker members of the body
this bill has been rooted in the
region in a minute.
I always said this is very
publicly to the media there's a
hundred and twelve very smart
individuals is legislature and
all of us have great ideas
whether we propose or or or
support legalization we'll have
good ideas as to how to do it I
am well aware that.
This document it truly is a
living breathing documents that
has evolved over the course of
several years.
Keep in mind the first issues in
the house meetings issue with
twenty fifteen by David
resembling cattle at least the
person that I'm aware of I'm
sure there might be other things
before that since then the bill
has the improved upon the bill
has taken stakeholders
a previous account working
resent being treated at the
executive level some of us have
visited at length with
constituents.
This particular constituents of
of of of years communities.
this bill truly truly reflects I
believe the most not only the
most thoughtful legalization
framework but also doubles
equitable
Mr speaker members of the body
of the bill for you thanks for
the tech Children heard public
health or natural resources and
create a smart tax structure in
revenue distribution plan this
creates a local as in animal
industry in New Mexico it
protests for medical cannabis
patients we cannot forget about
medical cannabis patients and
that's something that this will
surely
you know has at its core and
this bill also helps begin to
repair the harms of prohibition
harms on the harms and so many
of our people over the course of
the last sixty plus years of
prohibition
Mr speaker of the body.
Why the allies had is fertile
use.
Maybe some of the reasoning
behind why we're doing this bill
first of all Mr speaker of the
body this is about reducing our.
Seeing Kandace use
disproportionately harms young
people people of color it is
sponsored by the Russian
and he's shown time and time
again that it fails to use
access we have very strict
conversation about this last
night and I kept repeating that
in fact you know if we want it
is not like we're reading it is
decided for the first time ever.
Yes unfortunately is it is it
Candace Candace that is harmful
Canada's regulated untested in
any case is laced with very
toxic chemicals are very harmful
to people who use it no
different for admission level
for selling motion out of their
garage and imposing people.
Members of the body
This bill
is about creating jobs as well
the less it is will we will
bring one of the nation's
largest cast cross under the
rule of money Mexico this will
create jobs and economic
opportunities in a formal
economy is that it is market and
I'm talking about the tools
producing manufacturing and
selling and it is all the other
support businesses that will
thrive under this framework
rather fulsome gonna be
developing listen and packaging
in in you know transportation
is you know systems and New York
renewable energy and whatever
else that will go into making
this industry vibrates.
Mr speaker members of the body
This is
a safety again up it is it can
it is right in the middle of it
through this bill we are
creating a framework which has
product we tested packaging we
come you know
proof of the movies Center
requirements of that that the
packing is trial creating that
packaging is in many cases
stable you know and and label
the appropriate ways that
consumers know what they're
Jesse you know when you drink a
beer with receive my group
whether it's C. biolite whatever
it might be you can look at the
back of the council is in there
it is a cat is again god knows
what's in there under this
proposal you'll get your Candace
we will get your beer wine and
you will is that the US it not
only that you know who produce
it you know how they produce it
and you'll you'll develop your
own because it's based on those
specific preferences.
Mr speaker members of the
committee.
This allows free person that
who's twenty one years of age or
older to assess road to
cultivate for adult use but also
purchase of two thousand cans
flower sixteen grams extracts in
eight hundred milligrams of
edibles speaker of the body the
bill allows bills.
To grow six mature cannabis
status plans Representative for
a maximum of twelve per
household is different than we
are we growing racially Basil
and tomatoes in my back are from
our consumption bus
maintenance and that agency can
is gonna be sold unless you are
a licensed producer under the
last the the licensing framework
that that the that that is in
place of this bill.
The body.
Of course continues to get out
for medical cannabis patients.
Mr speaker I might this bill
establishes a new division
within the.
Department recognition licensing
call kind of central division.
that is a division of the
problem the rules and
regulations to get this free
more often around.
It is still we allow local
decisions to have local control.
Local decisions can enact
reasonable zoning land use and
is licensing requirements.
They can also prohibit
supervised consumption areas
however
concerns raised by law
enforcement two years ago a
previous version of this bill
had a complete opt out mechanism
so counties could say nine my
County law enforcement told us
please under that is a terrible
idea California does that that
will be a problem enforcing you
know can't is lost in a state
where you have a patchwork of of
you know we're not as a counties
not so all of those concerns we
remove the full opt out but we
still allow local governments to
ensure that they can have some
control over how these business
operates a location hours of
operation Senator.
Mr speaker of the body the task
force through this bill is as
follows rules he says is a by we
used many other industries both
local and and and state portion
this.
Up the original version of this
bill had a four percent excise
tax
roughly four percent that would
be distributed distributed back
to the local community where the
cat is also introducing County
you can stack overflow
four percent goes to the state
however in the house tax
committee yesterday and it was
approved that actually elevate
said four percent excise tax to
eighteen percent over the course
of six years came in fiscal year
twenty twenty four.
Part of the reason behind that
amendment Mr speaker of the body
and and you know it's it's good
racing
as we embark on building a ready
made history and we get to set
the rules of the game for how
this issue will play out it was
selling many of our of our over
members particularly some holes
you know who were the
appropriators as an opportunity
to actually raise revenue and
we're gonna do this much will
get the most you can get without
overdoing it to the point where
we are maybe under cutting our
efforts to get rid of the is so
that's the number that we so
long eighteen percent excise
tax.
Distributions one hundred
percent we'll go to the general
fund this is the change that we
made over previous versions we
heard from members of both
parties we heard from members of
both chambers that you're
working dollars at this stage of
the game when the framework is
delighted when ready it was not
a good idea is we've conceded
that point removed all you know
specialty I was that we had
created under this legislation
that's not Santa fun looking
back I I made very committed to
ensure that those funds are
establishing that we running
legislation can come session to
set those up and if you're in a
a three year preview of those
will be I want to ensure that it
is rural equity fund I want to
make sure that those rural
communities in New Mexico want
to get in on these business are
able to access not only business
development supports but also
capital because that's one of
the things that these is really
tricky here isostatic capitals
legend business so the rule
equity fund is going to be a top
priority for me in the next
session and you know should this
bill pass and become law that
may be going a in that effort
Madam speaker members of the
body
Lasses instructor this bill
creates ten lies just to
participate in this industry
this bill creates a
a vertically integrated had
establishment license think of
that is like reading glasses
that had led to the masses that
will allow you to do everything
from growing and harvesting the
cat is always a manufacturing.
And the retail so
that lies's
is is fully very is this what we
call it but integrating you all
of the above.
But we also have licenses that
are targeted toward small
producers so there is a small of
my group for Business producer
license that will allow state
you know a family somewhere the
plot of land in excess water and
it got the know how they should
be able to jump into the
business as well they should not
just be a business for the big
guys with lots of capital income
may and and and and **** the
licenses in addition to that we
also have the micro Business
integrated license.
This way I describe the fool but
ISIS for the biggest.
The little guy can also get a
fully but very clear a great
losses they've got a plan that
you with the their limited water
plants this state that same
lasses will allow you to grow
and harvest manufacture retail
sale of cannabis this micro
businesses are a good entry
point into the industry again
wanted to make sure that we're
not creating industry just for
the wealthy people we wanted
industry that other people can
get into and be able to benefit
from as well along with the less
is we also have you can assess
the members were licenses this
is to ensure that all probably
sold are independently tested by
an independent testing that you
can just let us do that any of
these other licenses it's very
important
we are also creating a
it is research laboratory
license this came up it has to
be sure right that license will
allow you know we were who's got
the know how was that background
in research to utilize a license
to do to research on cannabis
and to really be at the
forefront of you know what
different strains exist you know
what a good for both in the
medical field but also.
In India though users are
traditional it's really you know
inform us more about what this
plan does and doesn't do the
fact of the matter is because
this plan has been illegal for
so many years the federal level
a research often times has
lagged behind and so we have to
rely on not only on our this is
really sort of will reserves
right you know maybe I don't
reprimand medical schools and
task story for her family using
cannabis for Emanuel's and yet
to be running your choices may
cause some pain.
So we got that body researching
background but you know over the
last fifteen years in medical
cannabis has been legalized for
more state happened at the
reserves and we're finding out
you know pretty pretty is about
this plan one of New Mexicans
engage that ask the business as
well if they so choose to madam
chair members of the committee.
of this bill if you think of it
this way it's got three
additional principles.
The first one I I've already
mentioned more regulatory taxes
this is a ready made history
when we get off the ground sure
it's exceeds one should we tax
we regulated accordingly so that
we don't have unintended
consequences whether you so that
we can this you need to
consequences
but it's got to be smart right
now we talk about regulation all
all the time here is chamber and
so I think a lot of those
lessons are being taken to heart
as we build is banning it is you
want a regulated enough that
over it you know not related to
death you to.
this is bull and I also missions
already is protecting and has
had its program one of the
things that we're doing this
bill that were exempting.
Because you see sacks from a
medical cannabis products is you
know you Mexico we don't tax Mrs
but we do tax medical cannabis
we want to medical exams you any
other medicine
you know there are a lot of
people who depend on this
program there's always a hundred
thousand it had is cardholder
sensitivity Mexico and these are
false we're dealing with
terminal illnesses good terrible
pain you know there is some back
from from from from our course
with with PTSD and the the head
on their medicine for for the
well being and their quality of
life when should we protect that
program so we are sending
metadata from your TV set for
that we're not it rationally if
you get a was senator you just a
little bit of medical and and
you know until use you can just
sell he's not some medical I'm
now if you want to see if you
could choose to always right you
just you know your niche market
could be made on stations and
and that's that's all right we
want to should that continues.
measures invite the last mission
was bill it is one of the for
more more about the about a this
is a solution taxes right what
is the social justice well then
then Mr speaker thank you so as
you speaker and members of the
body is that.
From what had.
Communities across the country
Hey rob the space.
the word rose has
disproportionately Harding
Garcia people of color
throughout this country New
Mexico session and in many cases
tools poll you know for a
mistake that was made twenty
thirty years ago the rest of
their life has changed
you know I I I I would I would
license here in Albuquerque for.
Back home early
and I would just went to a
school as reverse in every way
shape or form we had people from
from the base which was we had
he's for not not mistress and
then K. like we can
international this is
and I had friends that were just
you know making mistakes and the
the rest of the change in the
great people their loss that
much what their entire life
completely changed because of
the you know got busted in
Canada this many of us to either
using it or selling it it really
just change the rest of their
life so you know we we need to
make sure that as we build is an
industry we don't forget about
those folks so our bill will not
more you automatically if you've
got one of these conditions on
the record our bill of look is
asking us to look at the trial
users to make a decision as to
whether or not you should get a
license but having a prior
conviction should not be an
automatic bar
granted there are people who are
who should have a license
because of you know prior
records and because of of of of
of you know whatever
you know whatever intentional or
unintentional this is a life
what we want to make sure that
we capital school to it amended
state at some point in their
lives he doesn't he following
especially as we establish a
brand you will type in the
street here in the state
You know as we discuss social
justice issues separate social
decisions not you know what we
need to do is to pull all the
special mechanisms out of this
bill.
House Bill fluffy to borderline
if you go and on this floor had
a slight mechanism to expunge
cannabis related offenses.
after missing two members from
both parties after losing two
members from chambers Sanchez
and I am a medical schools and I
have said that if we different
bill a bill is running
separately to the Senate I
believe I heard it be read out
this morning on house bill is on
the other chamber we are dealing
with the city these issues
Senator understanding that a lot
of people have Harper or the
fact that we had a funding
mechanisms in what is the
regulatory
the issue Frank so that's been.
But also what is offered
you know we **** in order to
ensure that we have that is
regular that we want that is
right for New Mexico that's just
one piece of social justice.
Using this whole time.
Mr speaker members of all the
fact that our licensing
framework mace proposed ministry
itself is social justice.
This is for everyone you social
justice for people of color this
is for low income people on
social justice for rural New
Mexicans who may not have access
to the capital **** to resources
to enter the industry by golly
they've got the land it got
water they've got to know how
their amazing farmers let's make
sure they can get into the
industry as well so we social
is this bill and I'm very proud
of that because it is school
passes this legalization for the
movie one of the most equitable
one of the smartest the decision
frameworks in the entire
country.
If
will scale of other countries
legalize cannabis you know this
is the less hazardous like
twenty years ago I guarantee you
the Netherlands were not being.
So we emissions test is in rural
communities another legalization
framework.
If they haven't already and I.
You can also suggest is
racial justice rural communities
legalization framework I could
be wrong rather the proposal yet
but I I highly doubt it.
Yeah school little New Mexico a
little speck.
In the national map it is
smaller specs on the global
scale.
Perhaps potentially passing the
most.
Thought out well.
So to equitable the worst in the
world.
So Mr speaker members of the
body is still very proud of the
work that still needs this bill
both you know with members of
all of our sharing the other
chamber and conversations with
with with members of the other
side I know this is not easy to
do and and that there's a lot of
opposition to this but you know
I had wonderful conversations
members and others that are you
know where there's meeting of
the minds you know for one
reason or another you know not
all school is that there's
another standing that this is
coming we might as well be ahead
of the curve and not being from
behind we sadly has been the
story of New Mexico in many
situations I firmly believe the
federal government legalized
cannabis sooner and later and I
want more so if you're ready for
I want to be playing catch up to
this so with that Mr speaker
stop right there there's more to
go through initiatives with our
debate but I do want to our I
but Sanchez said it remained
Representative Armstrong to
chime in through the production
because they put in a lot of the
side and we're going to this
particular teacher when
Armstrong who has been leading
this fight for more than twenty
years and so she has a lot more
to say you know about this as
well so that I can do for Santo
exemptions thank you.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Romero thank you
Mr speaker thank you that
gentleman from Bernalillo io why
you are here today.
We are here today to look at a
piece of legislation that
regulates taxes and allows for
the consumption of legal adult
use cannabis that is what is it
says on the bill however the
reason that I'm here today and
want to re iterate society was
heard the stories from me before
that the reason this is so
important for New Mexico the
reason why we are we hoping to
receive the benefits of this is
because of what we're trying to
undo with the definition of the
war on drugs cost our
communities throughout New
Mexico since the inception of
the United States efforts to
criminalize the use of campus
New Mexico is very familiar with
the history of Canada's our
history in this state in
relationship to this substance
has been long and winding I told
this story a grandmother grew up
in a house in the nineteen
thirties and forties whose
grandfather my great great
grandfather who is still with
bone cancer and they had of
course rules house the whole lot
of access to of the you know I
hospitals and you know there's a
doctor there this time on the
Sobeys of her grandfather in
campus as a student is paying at
a group of state cultivated on
their home property is
assistance farmers and house
being that it was a criminal
enterprise to cultivate at that
moment is there any side out
that they had this substance and
they were so worried and we
started to the authorities that
they cut down across which is
helping their grandfather
survive to be able to walk again
and decided to take a.
And the other problem is that
this is ordered to insure that
they were need personalized
service accessing something that
was helping cedar and all.
This is a story Canada's
throughout our nation it is it
is a nation of substance use of
the substance that has been very
familiar to communities of color
is what unity throughout our
state what our government has
done is stigmatized the use of
this substance that every city
has since the nineteen thirties
and forties but it is safe when
idols use it safely if they're
educated about it they know what
they're getting into this is
just the for substance and
something that is legal even
alcohol.
It and
I'll hold that on and of course
because a lot of problems or in
addition that is the same thing
over here to fix and rectified
today and we're not the first
there are fourteen states
throughout this country who are
sorry fifteen just added to New
York this week for the last
forty eight hours we just add in
your to that list of those were
rectifying the wrongs the damage
of the war on drugs and let me
be clear to the war on drugs was
never about keeping people safe
what I was doing it wasn't out
regularly and it wasn't this
sure that those who was one of
the remaining to everybody so
that's what we're here to do
today we work we're what what
that was about was criminalizing
communities of color and is very
very clear as a history of the
war on drugs and who they're
targeted and what we're doing
today is rectifying the wrongs
that he's costs and access to
justice as soon as we actually
legalizes substance for use.
So what we're doing is looking
season prevents the problem that
we had and be able to get into
the future and he sees it as an
assistant in Hollywood through
about history of the war on
drugs but it is not a gateway
drug what is unfortunately not
going to criminalize this
process we targeted communities
of color it's been a gateway
sedition
but it was the first Asian to
arrest record that perhaps we
are ladies and criminalizing
addition and so unfortunately
what we've done in the process
is created more problems for
herself and this bill helps to
rectify all that not just that
we get to set up an entire
industry from scratch that is
rife with justice equity we
professions are requirement all
we need is it what we're doing
today to rectify those wrongs
and cost is he able to actually
prove ourselves in the process
of winning New Mexico could
really home or for self and
ownership over something that we
never have membership for
instance and actually made it
easier for so long New Mexico
has always been of the forefront
of innovation in this area in
nineteen seventy eight we were
the first state even authorized
experimental understanding of
medical use cannabis we have
always been at the forefront of
fighting injustices and cost
because of the criminalization
of this plant.
And when you'll see it is the
day before to delivery is how
you get it done how we act re
access to jobs education.
Was it has been such a stain on
our history on how we
criminalized this plan initial
consultation across the board
with not only our government
entities communities around the
state I'm so proud that this is
you know so many years in the
making but I portents of what
we're trying to do is leave it
with Jonathan Lee equity the
with the idea as to why we are
going to the lasses since I just
want everyone to understand that
why we're here why so important
in Mexico to this with an
intention with that Mr speaker
and I look forward to the debate
and since hoc about all the ins
and outs of the technicality
here we're truly is an
enterprising here just as
legislators and returning around
administrative monitor the right
New Mexico is absolutely ready
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman yield.
The gentle lady.
don't really have Representative
Martinez.
Lady from early was.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Armstrong thank
you Mr speaker and thank you the
members of the body my close
officers who have and carry the
torch on this I I so appreciated
you said a lot of what I want to
say that I'm gonna and as well
as all really important points
and and that is that when we and
I have and engaged in this for
twenty years
it and getting started and
enacted our medical cannabis
program and for many of the body
you know just a Senate roses
might not wind conditions that
anyway so important it's a
little more compassionate use
act here is my daughter is named
for her because of her advocacy
in the early days of her cancer
Garcia was a patient advocate
insufficient rights and the
access to
to medical cannabis ironically
shouldn't use it at a time but
indicated for for others.
it didn't actually ever are hard
until this last about after on
her cancer just as much of
course with and as for as much
and you have heard that story
before but yes how long I've
been in involved and engaged in
a really important thing to know
is your speaker and members of
the body is it when we pass the
end of this program.
There are compassionate use act
in two thousand and seven.
After years of attempting to do
that New Mexico was the most
legislation was the most
important and created the most
structure and regulation around
the around the medical program.
In in the country so there were
other states that have medical
programs that New Mexico we only
order summary in the same way
we're doing this over the years
of enhancing that proposal was
quite a great deal of structure
around it and the ability to
regulate it and control it.
And the really important thing
about that when we look at the
US is that
Here's.
I have visited with other of
legislators across the country
who have
comprised a cannabis I visited
growers in Colorado.
And I've talked to legislators
there and one of the lessons
the base set of the mistakes of
what it was difficult maybe saw
some of the negative impacts is
that they didn't have a can of
Titley control medical to start
with and they didn't they didn't
want to in the same way because
most of those states passed it
through a referendum by the
voters not by the creation over
time as we are.
With a softphone constructed
structure and regulatory and
legal framework to it.
And so it was much more
difficult to control and and as
an example it and this was
really a powerful example for
me.
Is that Colorado didn't have
regulations I don't know that
there's still do around
packaging and marketing of
cannabis when when they
legalized.
And so a market developed that
was really aimed at kids it
and I've seen presentations I've
seen the products look like
candy bars are looks like
common
things that you might have is
current that you would no have
that you might if of a parent
wasn't parent teacher wasn't
paying close attention wouldn't
know that's what ones are
because it looks like something
a usual
and say they didn't have control
over that and and we're going to
control that we're going to
control the packaging and the
labeling and and the marketing
and we're going to
it cannot have protection of the
medical program and that we're
going to assume the
An adequate supply and for for
medical in an independent lab
testing and that's critically
important to have that testing
so you know what's what's in it
in knowing what contaminants M.
as a little bit like you know
what's in your particular
product and it may be a little
bit like buying organic is going
to
officers are buying something
organic verses going that
Albertsons or smis and you're
not sure what
finalize our was user or pass
control methods were used for
the
you know other
Ingredients that might be and
that.
At and those things are
important and we don't know and
then be able to consumers will
now and you can target some of
those things are really really
important to someone who is sick
what what other additives or
contaminants might be in a it
may be just fine for someone
who's healthy but not for
someone who is say cancer
patient on on us specific
chemotherapy.
Or has some other issue so.
On having that testing and
knowing what's in it is really
important
it and so.
being.
The thing that we drives me and
my continued engagement of this
and then my support for
legalization.
News for public health is so
that we can can regulate it ten
million what's in what's in the
product that we're using we can
control how in successful or not
for young people and get it off
the street we have no idea
what's what's in that when you
bite off the street there's more
and more
hearing of a lacing it with
frontier mall.
or other contaminants you don't
know what kind of has controlled
fertilizers whatever
is used I don't know the
strengths of what you're buying
how much THC Zenit all of those
things are
those are the harmful
components of it and I think
that the only way we have Mr
speaker members of the body the
ability to really impact on the
health and well being of
individuals who are using about
ready to access it already is to
control it tested what we have
get it off the street all right
how much you can have and those
I think are contribute to better
outcomes then what are the
States might have seen in their
initial launching of
was Asian.
The other thing that we have
addressed and addressed new in
this bill that I don't think was
and twelve is
the smoking and and public
the public consumption so we
have in their consumption areas
you have to have a license
consumption area but what we've
added is a consistent source
does smoking and not all
consumption of smoking that for
smoking that is consistent with
the dean Johnson clean air act
that there there is permitted
smoking but it's it's regulated
and has to be separate buildings
can't be
the more the the air from the us
right validated so that thing I
am from smoking doesn't
infiltrate work spaces or other
spaces that
That may be
not allowed for a public smoking
so that we can also be
consistent with with tobacco
usage for smoking and so that's
an important component of this
as well and we've included a
public health advisory committee
to monitor the impacts so that
we can closely monitored of
their areas facets of.
as we of public health as we go
forward and and can modify where
needed in response or increase
education or whatever that is
and we can research it
there's not a lot of research in
the in states because of it
being illegal federally fund so
a lot of the research comes from
international
but then then a liberalization
we have in the more access we
have here and we have put in
reserves in our
in this bill to allow reserves
the then and now and no offense
that will help us as we go
consented to tailor the program
if we need to but
some of those are some of the I
think really innovative in order
for things that we have
incorporated in the spelling of
that I don't think you'll see
and in many other states and it
is a tradition as I said that
began with how we did our
medical in that we have
it is really thoughtful
structure and ability to
regulate around that and now
expanding to to recreational use
and so I'm really proud to have
my name on this I strongly
supported and one last thing Mr
speaker members of the body I
just want to deliver to you a
message from my mother who's in
her mid nineties and remembers
prohibition and the effects
sessions but also would have
remembered effects from stories
and and family in her messages
probably.
Some didn't work.
Legalize it regulate it taxes
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you
for professions during the
nice to be generated from
Senator Representative Lord.
The list of the speaking order
and I was down for them that
list.
I yield to the gentle lady.
So.
This Representative carefully
approach from both sides of my
constituents.
District is not the statistics
rested.
Fifteen fifteen and some cases
in some districts attention
sixty percent oppose so we don't
have the same.
Reputation reflecting as far as.
So I just want to attention
districts.
It is not necessary to send
quoted earlier.
We have a four.
Up.
To make a decision.
Decision I'm not.
Not in the state of New Mexico
federal level.
Yes.
One.
And our state registered
senators for which is negligent
use of a deadly weapon.
Not in this state.
Done.
And.
I want to it is illegal.
I understand that.
The end of the day after the
decision am I going to smoke
pot.
My second amendment rights
something that.
Think it's not top.
It's a Mr this what that's a
possible six thousand dollars in
fines.
Once that Mr.
Yes guess what.
Economic in the state of New
Mexico you just lost your rights
that's right.
Yes website it is right there.
So.
Kerry in the state.
Yes Representative.
This is a controlled substance
can not.
Hey.
Caring licensed master gun
rights as.
This state.
The federal laws which I was
looking up.
Federal level.
Can look this up real quick.
Other thing I wanted to add a
this content yes.
And and.
House someone
kicks
you.
I guess what happens.
Rested on dash seven dash four
which is.
Would have been because.
So think about that.
Is this what happens after that
I called my insurance insurance.
What happens guess what.
Good to.
I am going to say.
In the first place.
Attention to family.
This
is not.
Right the gun on you and protect
yourself when you smoke pot.
It's a choice I'm going to smoke
pot.
Your second right.
Jan on top of that we have.
This.
Title eighteen section to
change.
Subs not possess a.
It is a class.
About ten years in prison.
On the federal.
The state level.
What.
On the federal.
I.
Twenty two funds cannot smoke
pot and buy a gun.
So.
I just want to make sure that
they understand this at the end
of the day absolutely not
possess a gun.
Our second amendment right it is
gone out the window so.
Choice.
By.
I know you said right.
What do you want to get high.
That's your choice.
The way around it it is still
controlled substance on the
federal.
It is still.
Mexico and the there's a
carry measure right to carry.
If you defend yourself.
The
other one is going to be in
trouble for that because not
supposed to have it done.
Hi at the same time.
I just mentioned and did that in
rates Winchester one of thank
you.
Gentleman from Chavis terror
rise Janis recognize.
I I rise on a point of personal
privilege if I may when we're.
Yes.
The process of the bank should
start debate starts not
introduction starts.
This particular mail.
Well as for about forty five
minutes.
I really believe.
Proponent of Bill.
And
as controversy over the session
have every opportunity to
introduce the.
Right thank Sen.
fit.
I believe that the clock on the.
Should start once debate starts
and so I would request.
That that to allow the minority
fair and.
In order to debate a bill thank
you Sir.
Thank you very
I think the job of going back
and forth between both parties
and I expect the Mr leader that
will have a good debate on the
floor this bill was debated also
in the sixty day session we have
a long debate yesterday in tax
Indian judiciary the text of the
rule states that with any
matters under consideration for
three hours that begins when the
bills presented in my
interpretation the rule we may
go beyond three hours to make
sure that ever has a chance to
speak
also noted Mr leader that
frequently during the sixty day
session members of your party.
would offer for substitutes and
equipment and control well in
excess of half of the time on
debate on virtually every
contentious measure before the
house we did that
you know I I did not raise
concern objections the time I I
feel like I've done a pretty
good job of making sure when I'm
in chair that both parties.
Have an opportunity to make the
points into presenter amendments
from the F. actually work Mr
leader with you so that we can
make sure that your members had
an opportunity to present
amendments if they wanted to
Representative will continue to
do so I don't want to create a
new interpretation of that
would.
we have potentially present
challenges in the future I don't
think we would be in the same
place in terms of the time if
the gentleman from Bernalillo.
And since that I stand for
debate and then head back in and
we recognized representatives
Armstrong and Romero and if you
know they could have given a
long the remaining at the same
time is that they did so and
this may be an issue of
elevating form over substance in
terms of when the the presenting
members simply says the words I
stand for debate.
but I'll make sure that we have
a good conversation on the floor
and
in that we have a chance and
others to amendments and the
impose will we will have an
opportunity to consider both of
those and our mission we go back
and forth between both parties
that everyone can have their
say.
I appreciate that I just believe
it is the responsibility of the
chair to make sure that the
minority.
Regardless of who's in charge
has an ample time to debate and
I think the rules are clear on
that and so I would just the
clock starts accordingly thank
you Sir thank you gentlemen
there's further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative small.
He's.
Not there the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
Garcia.
Thank you is the most Baker
Thank you members of the body
will be
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you
This Madam then a.
Is my husband current.
You know I've I've voted for
this measure.
Never ever since it's been
introduced.
And the and I did so again in
the regular session.
And
but you know as the most Baker.
Some things kind of.
Look at me taking a different
perspective.
In terms of
The legislation before us.
And that is the most been
growing I'm also kind of.
Perspective.
because.
Some past opponents of this
bill.
never got back to me this year.
One secretary of for our
teachers.
and some of these teachers of.
Are no slouches.
Federal constitution does a
around them excellent educators
IBM certified.
Finally you know Blue Ribbon.
Thank educators in my district
and.
And
and then that constituent base
you know I'm a retired Spanish
language arts teacher.
And so I made a lot of contacts
statewide in terms of
Spanish immersion programs.
And I I didn't hear from them
this year as well as speaker of.
I did hear from my doctor's.
And my primary care documents
lounge.
Similar speaker introduce twenty
reserves southbound.
Kind of a it is residents in the
missing of Allen.
when when after graduation.
thank you NM.
R. E. and is creeping down he
carried in his hands you can put
it on.
This is my primary care doc.
So when it went up to get his.
His MD degree.
You know he he gave a is camping
out.
To the president.
We told them not.
I feel this Paypen down.
With another Chicano another
Chicana and give them the same
opportunities that you gave me
in terms of becoming a medical
doctor.
You know I did hear from a
religious leaders.
This year.
And
Maybe I don't hear from them
because they've taken for
granted that done.
That I basically.
Over again for this ask for this
legislation.
Mr speaker
So I guess to them is.
I probably abandon them.
In terms of their opposition.
And I'm not listening to them in
terms of the way I won't.
Speaker one thing that I did
hear from this session work on a
lot of elders.
And it's the most bitter upturn.
A lot of these elders
They had really a.
Really sorrowful stories.
To tell about this function or
family.
And some of it had to do with
the the usage of marijuana.
And and that's what keeps.
Them from visiting their son
their daughter.
Requests are children.
Is this constant use.
Of the family members.
And
In terms of of
that element.
And you know and that's that's
that's the starting.
You can hear those kinds of
stories.
When you know it's not speaker.
This legislation does fall short
of some initiatives.
I
I really applaud the criminal is
that the criminalization aspect.
I think that's that's.
The banner you know
this legislation that basically
unifies all all of us that that
kind of understand.
You know the
the criminalization of.
This element you know in our
community.
But you know just much bigger
this this legislation does fall
short.
And some equity issues.
The line I'd like to address
this the most the current.
And you know it does fall short
in terms some of the concerns
that the educators at.
You know just how do we keep.
You recreational cannabis from
the hands of our school kids.
And you know and how do we keep
recreational cannabis
away from our parents.
In terms of their leaving and
taking up our kids from school.
And
I mean we're just not a common
occurrence like drinking water.
And
and these are the concerns
teachers had you know because.
A lot of parents take their kids
to school in their vehicles.
And they don't meet the criteria
in terms of the bus pick up
foundries.
And most important is that
legislation has no real
initiative.
In terms of how we keep.
Medical I mean recreational
cannabis from the hands of of
our school gets.
And
and there should be initiatives
and I can that a yes the one
initiative passed the most
people are that the.
And maybe learn to buckle up.
It was the buckle up program in
elementary schools.
You know department of
transportation along with that
probably Department of Health
back then.
Implement these educational
programs they basically had
see questions the size of of of
of vehicle question of vehicle
seat front seat with seat belts.
And you know it it it showed
kids an opening those doors
Kind of a portrayal of public
order will be at home with the
the dashboard and and then the
two seats.
And.
You know and and even before mom
or dad click on that ignition
key you know the kids buckled up
that was the slogan buckle up
stay safe.
And
but you know what the dentist
must be guarded educated us
elders.
Our kids are actually.
the model for us elders learning
to buckle up.
And
and I think that's a type of
initiative we need to have any
kind of enabling legislation
that deals with.
The the criminalization of.
Of recreational cannabis.
And also with the public sale of
recreational cannabis there's no
consequences this must be very
not a.
Of my kind introspection in
terms of.
Why am coming for the session
and not in prior sessions
because.
You know this piece of
legislation has a good chance of
making it through.
The thing is that a false or on
some elements.
I mentioned one.
But I feel that any enabling
legislation dealing with this
type of significant issue.
Should really be all
encompassing.
And where it's not all
encompassing is not speaker is
in the revenue sharing.
You know this is the person that
doesn't have any type of revenue
sharing.
And
and the revenue sharing because
of the dynamics of our state
being sixty five percent rural.
To really focused on rural
economic development.
And you know I I.
What about as Legislative
Council to draft an amendment.
I'm not putting that amendment
for I am addressing what that
amendment recover similar
speaker in terms of making this
legislation a better piece of
legislation.
And it is the kind of that
increase rural economic
development use a portion of the
excise tax into specific
programming.
That will go to pass any.
Infrastructure capacity in our
rural communities and also you
cap.
And one element in that
amendment that I have proposed.
Four introduction was to do a
one percent distribution the
campus excise tax into the S. A.
P. R. and community ditch of
restructure fant Fund a one
percent distribution into the
drinking water state revolving
loan fund.
In a one percent distribution
from the excise tax into the
land Representative systems I.
These are all initiatives that
impact rural community.
And build infrastructure.
And
And also the most bigger provide
operational money's in terms of
of
of handing
Leaders in these rural
communities be able to kind of
conceptualize the needs desires
plants.
It's a drug for economic growth
in their communities.
Mr speaker there is no mention
of revenue sharing.
In this piece of legislation
that should be.
In regards to
mental and behavioral health.
rebuilt.
Rebuild.
In our rural communities and why
is must be good I mentioned
rebuilt.
As we know.
That there was basically a
dissemination at eight a and
I'll ation.
Almost to the root.
Of our mental and behavioral
health programs.
In the prior administration.
These rural communities and not
come back to our.
They have not come back to that
same level of delivery.
And
Excuse me.
And safety net.
approaches that were in place.
Before that the yes.
Tab on our behavioral and mental
health systems in our rural
communities.
Mr speaker you know at.
There's definitely a need for
revenue sharing in regards to a
substance.
Use in terms of treatment
prevention.
Thank you Mr.
In a rural communities and
throughout our state is the most
eager.
And
You know in terms of this must
be what's happened in other
states that have.
Implemented in.
The recreational cannabis
program.
Is that there's a ship.
In terms of the illicit drugs.
That are coming in basically
from the cartels.
And as we all know the cartels
basically have a stronghold on
the investment of money one.
distribution in our communities
and our state.
What we seen in states that
we'll go to all.
Recreational cannabis program.
We see the introduction of law
but not.
Speaker federal is an opioid.
Along with their on.
oxycontin.
Mexico don't.
Other.
Opioids but it's not a speaker
no there's no.
No baby.
That was a hundred times more
powerful than heroin.
And imagine.
Getting a quarter teaspoon of
sugar.
In terms of what that under
times more potent.
And here on this imagine getting
a quarter of a quarter teaspoon.
sugar.
And taking.
For requests from that quarter
to school.
That's the ratio of dangers
panelists your nation should.
And you can see why people every
day in our state.
In our country are dying from
overdoses.
With federal.
If it's great federal you're
listening manufactured in that
reports by the part.
Or if it's fentanyl that's
wasted money wanna everyone
okay.
The math.
But it's a killer.
And and we need to have some
kind of revenue sharing to
address that cause us the most
bigger the opioid crisis in our
state hasn't dwindled it's been
consistent.
For the past four five years
actually we were at the top
three in overdoses deaths
overdoses before the the
national crisis opioids with the
use of oxycontin.
When it became prevalent.
You know and but we're averaging
this must be Kirk one over to
one overdose death every
eighteen hours in our state
today.
And revenue sharing.
As the more speaker for.
K. twelve programs this is an
attempt that Everton Colorado
model number one in.
But you know it's not speaker K.
twelve programs we can focus.
In terms of what that
distribution.
Of the excise tax will be.
You know in terms of coming in
compliance with the Yazzie
Martinez.
And then that we could initiate
teacher training programs.
more native American Spanish
teachers and delivering.
Heritage language development
programs.
That are so crucial to
sustaining cultural liabilities
within our native cultures.
Also you know teacher training
in terms of producing all
qualified.
trained.
Educators can reach are mainly
in development disable children
estimates speaker.
In one item Mr speaker will fall
short with legislation.
Is in terms of the equity.
The equity factor.
And
In the name of the legislation
dealing with recreational.
Cannabis.
Should definitely have an equity
component.
Especially as the most weaker.
In the distribution.
Of recreational cannabis
licensing.
Recreational cannabis licenses.
It would be ideal.
That we what we saw that in this
legislation we haven't.
But it would be ideal.
Graphics are states that for
every.
Major.
Canada's recreational cannabis
license.
That goes into an urban area.
One major license goes into
overall and.
Inequity another equity
measurement would be that.
For every major.
Recreational cannabis license
issued.
To a medical.
Cannabis producer.
And I think there's fifteen tops
in our state.
That one recreational cannabis
license issued.
In our rural community is the
speaker.
And.
Yeah.
You know this legislation does
give the most favored treatment.
To establish multi million
dollar.
Medical cannabis operators.
That's what the equity element
is so significant.
The kind of.
Equalize the playing field.
Mr speaker probably the.
The criticism on me making that
statement terms of equalizing
licensing between urban and
rural.
Between medical.
Operators in rural.
Existing medical.
Operate medical cannabis and
rural.
Is that.
Basically you major licensees
going into rural areas.
Probably don't have the
capitalization.
Probably don't have the
resources probably don't have a
finance and probably don't have
the political money that some of
these major operators.
Have developed throughout the
years.
That's why.
They need time.
They need to kind of sink those
rooms they need to grow into a
position.
Financial resource for me.
In terms of being able to be
competitive with the major
operators.
So it's not that they come we'll
be prepared we have to Grumman
still not speaker that's the
whole issue of equity.
Is that you don't become
equitable overnight because
there's certain elements certain
levels.
Of education of resourcefulness
of finances that just don't come
with certain people
entrepreneurs that want to make
a goal that is the speaker and
we should be at the forefront.
Of some of these licenses in the
rural communities.
Is the most bigger producers.
Should be.
They should be a top qualifier.
Four major cannabis licenses.
In the rural community.
Why do I say that is not speaker
because I've seen.
Mr speaker I've seen incredible.
You gonna happen years well into
the help and industry.
Make a go of it.
When impact particularly is in
the northeast section of our
state.
Former executive with North
Korea Northrop corporation.
In terms of.
Montoya missile.
Construction.
And.
I know that our rocket scientist
in the house.
Representative.
Harper would probably be related
to have a conversation with this
gentleman.
Small speaker.
He left this.
I paint job with one or more
for.
When there's no community or is
born and raised.
So dilapidated SNES system.
Use this technical knowledge is
modernize that a second system.
But fallow land that had been
abandoned by the elders
generations and generations that
will to the city's.
But that federal land to use in
terms of planning it without
them.
And that same operation provide
West Texas.
Ranchers with feed my West Texas
went to the worst drought in
their history.
Cattle were Ballin up ninety
because there was no grass
growing for them.
Yes that was the care.
Tractors.
Thank you half off of grown in
this little community.
You know and providing some
edging.
That beef of course West Texas
farmers I was being experiencing
the worst drought ever.
This gentleman went into
production estimates speaker
that is a possibility regional
facility you know what the with
the best.
Cannabis operators in the
medical arena you're in the
moment and the F. metro areas.
And what happens most weaker.
The gentleman was going J. D. I.
J. monies from the state.
Showing how advanced he was in
terms of its commitment to and.
I want to.
COVID happened Mr speaker.
One kilo the the the the the I
see my speaker the bottom just
dropped out of the hand market.
Ten thousand dollars
Representative you look at
a few of him.
Went down to three thousand
dollars for people.
What does that do coupled with
care and loss of value of the
product you lay off people.
The gentleman they are people
halfway through their state dept
training.
The thing that there's no club
Act in terms of the operator.
Lawyer thing that.
Amount that.
Thank you madam speaker there's
a man that.
Millions of dollars hundreds of
thousands of dollars right.
Into an operation.
Extractors.
Oils
all your reserves act and the
start off.
It's funny Market.
Some Senator producers that only
group.
Didn't have the extractors make
oil.
At the heart.
You know and the.
But they invested heavily.
Next record you can find percent
five thousand dollars.
Speaker.
Not to mention the facilities.
With the implants.
Humidifiers.
Everything that you need to keep
the that hemp plant healthy.
Speaker and
Another to come up in your rate
in my community schools.
Engineer.
Senator graduate.
Star in our.
The.
Six.
People being.
You know I I think that is not
on you know you should contact
this guy went on northeast part.
To help you with the extractor
semi.
I'm an engineer.
I can put this up in a day in
this manner but affect the next
day.
I don't need a meeting or
training.
It
is not speaker.
But there's people out there.
You know that should be
entitled.
A major.
Medical I mean the major
recreational cannabis.
This must be and
We don't have it in the bill.
So this.
You know the Sanchez wrote.
Sincere in their efforts to
maybe addresses down the road.
And
we must bigger for next year of
this magnitude.
It's part of the.
This is part of our plan.
It's it's it's not a
contingency.
You know it's it's not with
bills that then we run it no.
It's gonna be we build on the
run together.
This.
And
You know I really applaud the.
The station for elements of the
legislation.
Well we really fall short.
Some of these real crucial key
elements.
And.
I don't think.
We can wait.
They got to be a component part.
Making.
This new industry.
The press that we can.
And given it our best shot from
the very get go.
Thank you our general really on.
Thank you.
Mr speaker thank you.
Gentleman of the house.
Thank you general.
The gentleman now there's
further debate the gentleman
from Chavis and Lincoln
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo county
yield.
I yield to the gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln.
Thank you gentlemen
I guess today's a day of
speeches.
So I'll be no different at least
at the beginning.
You know I was wondering we we
we come up here.
Generally you like to just jump
from Bernalillo to yield.
Mr speaker I believe I did okay
I'm sorry I missed it thank you.
The Mr speaker gentleman that
I'm not.
Speaker John when you did.
Okay my mistake my mistake thank
you Mr speaker
You know I was pondering
and the question was was asked
earlier by one of your co
sponsors.
Why are we here today.
In general
We we kind of know why we're
here
We think that we're doing things
for the citizens of the state.
We have budgets to pass we have
Important measures to consider.
But really I think it's a
pointed question why are we here
today.
Why why are we here.
Once a year.
What is it about legislative
bodies in the United States that
bring us together.
What is it that we do.
In this body.
And this issue that the
gentleman from Bernalillo is
bringing forward to us today.
Has caused me to think about.
What do we really do.
Because this is an issue.
That.
According to the polls
your representations Mr speaker
and gentleman were that seventy
percent of New Mexicans one and
support.
And yes.
Why are we here today debating
something that seventy percent
of the people New Mexico what.
And I would suspect that there's
a lot of issues.
Around the state.
But people want.
And yet we come to this body and
we debate those issues.
And so why is it that we
assemble in this room why is it
that we ask each other questions
what is it that we go through
these procedures.
And the answer is.
When it comes down to it.
We.
Representatives from throughout
the state we assemble.
For purposes of crafting public
policy.
We set the stage for society to
engage in.
There are various pursuits.
We provide mechanisms by which
those pursuits can be.
Achieved.
Without the maybe this harmony
without the
people going down the street and
settling their differences.
Other issues but basically we
craft public policy.
We provide expectations for the
citizens of the state.
Back we spend billions of
dollars.
Educating the young people the
state.
For what purpose.
Is it just for education or or
is there a bigger goal of mine.
I was thinking back on.
My.
Time of the university that the
New Mexico citizens provided me
with an education.
Thank you doctor are startled
Plato in some of the great
thinkers of of.
All mankind.
Total declared that a virtuous
person is someone who has ideal
character traits.
These traits are derived from
natural internal tendencies but
need to be nurtured.
And I would suspect the
gentleman that you would agree
with me that the that's true we
we have these tendencies are
natural for us and and we want
to instill in our children
ideals principles character if
you will.
So that their generation might.
Achieving greater things and
then our generation and the
generations before us.
What it does is the.
Then he recognize the role of
Madam then trying to map out of
society.
The importance of time to think
carefully and logically is
critical.
I got to think a little bit
about that.
You know this this issue that
we're debating today.
Is apparently of extreme
importance because the governor
put it on a call for us to come
back to Santa Fe after we spent
two months here about a week and
a half ago just returned general
can foster saying someone has a
cell phone can can members
please silence your cell phones.
Thank you just stop it this is a
matter to court if we have a
ringers turned off please thank
you general please proceed thank
you Mr speaker.
And so.
This this is apparently an issue
of critical importance to the
citizens of New Mexico brought
bringing us again together to
deal with.
Basically one piece of
legislation you can throw the
leader of bill lamb said to two
pieces of legislation but the
call I think was primarily for.
The the gentleman from
Bernalillo county's a bill that
we're discussing now.
So prevalence of of high
importance and.
You know I I got to thinking
about the what Plato set and and
ultimately Plato said that.
Man must bring order and clarity
the life.
And so I got to thinking about
this bill.
And trying to.
Make some some sense out of it
because.
I arrived here yesterday
received a copy of the bill try
to get through the the best I
could and then we met for I
don't know probably way too long
for everyone last night into the
very we hours of the morning
talking about it.
And I'm.
I think I just a question Mr
speaker and gentleman last night
we have a hundred and seventy
nine page bill and this.
This issue.
And the legalization of
marijuana is so critical.
Why does it take a hundred and
seventy nine pages to simply
remove marijuana from the list
of forbidden substances that one
can possess.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
the answer that was provided
last night.
And correct me if I'm wrong but
it was to basically legislative
mechanism.
For.
The regulation and taxation of
the product am I understanding
that correctly Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
And so we have a hundred seventy
on pages of the bill that.
Yes your co sponsor says we're
starting a new business or a new
industry.
We're starting of brand new
industry.
And the state's during that and
it's providing the framework for
that.
And so we need to do more than
just simply eliminate marijuana
from the list of prohibited
substances.
We need to.
Put in terms of so that we can
regulate it.
We need to put in terms so we
not only tax it like we would
other substances but with that
we have additional taxes and
additional things that that go
along with it.
And so that's why we have a
fairly complicated bills at all
and then I'm not gone all the
way through it yet
even even though that.
but I have gone through I think
the the bulk of it.
And so gentleman.
I think ultimately.
Our role here this body is to
figure out how do we live the
condition.
Of human existence in our state.
How do we is as elected
representatives left the
condition of man so to speak
In the vernacular.
how do we make life better for
citizens how do we achieve our
goals.
And so
my my my question Mr speaker and
gentleman is.
Do you honestly believe.
That this action.
Thanks in the direction of
making the recommendation of
citizens of New Mexico in a
better place
for for all of us.
Mr speaker gentleman from Chavis
and Lincoln the answer is yes
the answer is yes because over
the last sixty years that we
waged a war on drugs conditions
have not improved because of the
war on drugs conditions have
worsened and so now we have an
opportunity as the rest of the
country continues to move in
this direction to establish a
framework for legalization
taxation and regulation this
substance that I deeply believe
to my core will be legalized at
the federal level and we can
either do it now into it right
you know hundred and seventy
nine very complicated pages or
we can wait until the federal
government decides to legalize
it and then we have to play
catch up so the answer is yes a
resounding yes Mr speaker and
gentleman.
And so Mister speaker and
gentleman that's why we engage
in this debate.
Because you come to the table
with honest intentions.
Wholeheartedly convinced that
this is the direction that we
need to take our state's Mr
speaker and gentleman I would I
would submit to you that I to
come to the table with those
same intentions.
I don't deal with the same I
don't reach the same conclusion
that you have reached but I come
to the table with the same.
The concern that we that our
goal is to.
Do what's best for the people
New Mexico to list the condition
of the citizens of New Mexico so
that they can achieve higher and
better goals and my concern and
we touched on it last night the
Mr speaker and gentleman is my
real concern.
What with the the whole
legislation.
Is.
Studies have shown.
That.
Usage of marijuana.
Particularly in young people.
Does not allow the brain to
develop in a regular fashion and
then secondly marijuana usage
has been linked to
a higher incidence of
schizophrenia.
And so my.
First concern is how do we as a
state if this is overall good.
How do we as a state deal with
these parents and apparently
much studied.
Side effects of this
Component if it's utilized by
number one the use but but I
don't think the schizophrenic
part with has any age
limitations of how can we as a
state grapple with those issues
and a lot of the effort to now
make recreational marijuana
legal.
Madam Mr speaker and gentleman
from Chavis and Lincoln you know
I will I will submit to you in
the body that in fact cannabis
is already here it's been here
for a long time the difference
is that the cannabis that is
currently here unless you are
one of the one hundred thousand
medical cannabis patient
cardholders unless you're one of
those you are up to current
you're getting your cannabis
from illicit sources
and so the fact that we are here
today with house bill two to
legalize regulate and tax adult
use cannabis does not make it
so that young people can use it
it it's it doesn't legalize for
young people to use it remains
remains illegal for young people
to use and so you know the the
notion that by legalizing today.
We are creating more of you know
what we are we are is some way
providing our young people with
cannabis you know it's it's
happening now it's happening now
now what I would like to do what
I would like to see if this bill
passes and if this bill becomes
the law of the land is that we
can ensure that we develop the
mechanisms to prevent access to
cannabis because you are right
you know I'm as you many of you
know I'm the father of two young
children I don't want my
children to to consume any type
of substance that would be
harmful to them the eight
cannabis get liquor here be it
tobacco products be you know be
it smokes this bill so called
smokeless tobacco I don't want
to use in any of that because
you are completely right you
know brain development we were
we were talking about this last
night I believe for young men
the brain I think develops
you know a little further down
the line into the twenties and I
was even joking with you you
know if you ask my wife I think
she probably believes that my
brain still developing even
though I'm almost forty years
old so you know there's no
argument to your point Mr
speaker and and and gentleman as
to whether or not young people
should be using cannabis issued
not however cannabis is already
here and people are using it in
many cases seventy young people
are using it this is an
opportunity I think to create a
market that would be that that
regulates this substance tightly
and that ultimately I believe
will under cut do listen market
of cannabis you know I'm sure
right after prohibition I'm sure
I wasn't around obviously but
I'm sure even though prohibition
ended I'm sure people maybe
still have their dealer of one
trying down the street and
probably still got that product
instead of going to the store
but fast forward you know sixty
years later I mean I couldn't
tell you where to go get a
liquor bottle of anything I mean
if I make it to.
This by ten PM good for me and
if I don't I don't have to wait
till the next day but cannabis I
can assure you walk out of these
buildings for kind of these
walls and I'm sure you'll find a
dealer somewhere willing to deal
to you or me or anyone so far I
agree with your statement I
agree with your position that
young people should not be using
one hundred percent I agree with
you
but you know it's already here
let's let's let's let's you know
we can make you know we we can't
do that now to the second point.
You know we talked about this
last night as well when you look
at the the research on cannabis
it's it's it's it's limited and
that's because the federal
government has consider this
substance illegal still
considers it illegal so research
it is not as as robust as it
should be now lucky for us a lot
of states that have the last of
the last fifteen twenty years be
it medical or now a bill used I
have had in fact provided
opportunities to conduct
research including our bill our
bill as as as as I stated at the
beginning of provides free
research license so researchers
when we universities are yes you
know be it for profit ventures
can go out there and and you
know grow their own cannabis and
conduct research for the public
good for us to better understand
what the plan does and doesn't
do
you know we we we've heard from
from one Michael Sanchez earlier
Representative Armstrong about
you know the the benefits of
cannabis to medical patients
that's why there's a pretty
robust medical cannabis system I
think in the country now you
know more than a hundred
thousand patients in New Mexico
alone I believe Oklahoma has
medical cannabis I'm not sure
that Texas does but I'm sure
it's it's not far behind you
know fact of the matter is the
more states that legalize a more
research we will have the better
the body reserves will be but
let's make no mistake about it
cannabis is here whether it's
legal or not and people are
using it people have been using
it for generations so you know
to me I'd rather regulate tax
legalize today.
And then build that body of
knowledge to better understand
what these impacts are
I don't believe we'll ever get
to the point where we can say
that you know use use of
cannabis is is is beneficial
unless it's strictly for medical
purposes I don't think that I
don't think the research letter
show that for the reasons you
stated during your brain
development primarily but you
know I the end of the day I
think.
Not legalizing to me is just
turning a blind eye to something
that's already happening so we
might as well do it do it right
and ensure that we protect young
people young people from it make
sure that we protect our
communities to public safety
measures and make sure that we
taxed regulated thank again the
revenue instead of the revenue
you know getting siphoned off by
courts else here and abroad.
Mr speaker and gentleman you can
make the same argument with
respect to virtually every
prohibited substance that the.
used to
get their kicks and and so we
are focused on one out of maybe
many but that same argument
could be use for for cocaine
hello on everything else and we
as policy makers need to the
side what message gets sent.
To the citizens of New Mexico
and I'm concerned about the
message it's getting sent by
legalizing you are correct.
We have an automatic aided.
Marijuana or any drugs from.
Illegal use.
We we can't.
Legislative.
Morality we can't legislate
Many thanks.
But we can set the tone for.
Hopefully those that wish to
be engaged.
In society and try to make sure
that they have all the tools
they can be to to meet whatever
goals and I have
Just a couple points and I'm not
going to the labor of the issues
very long because there's a
number of people on the board
but
gentleman a couple things we
talked about last night the that
I do think need fixed of the
bill.
We have just
A care giver is a person
eighteen years of age or older
but if it's a care giver who is
eighteen to twenty one years of
age that you cannot.
Get this product for their.
Patient or the the person
they're caring for
so there's some internal
inconsistency there and so if we
have care givers who are
eighteen to twenty one.
They ought to be able to provide
the care to the the the person
regardless of some of the
language in the bill and the
Jerry about their their duties
there's a number of other things
I've given a list two of the
speakers internet maybe she'll
share those with you but there's
a number of technical things
that I think need to be changed
the most important thing from my
Districts that I would ask.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
really ask and implore you.
To put in.
A provision that allows
communities stopped out on I'm
not going to.
Bring the amendment I brought
last night that failed but I
really assets you think about
that I know you say law
enforcement doesn't like it but
I think I don't like the
enforcement aspects of whether
someone has possession of the
substance in a community all I
would ask is that you allow
communities to.
Opt out of this bill in terms
of.
Allowing the sale the creation
of recreational marijuana shops
within their jurisdiction and if
they opt out
that product will be sold in
that community I don't think
it's so law enforcement issue I
think it's just the issue
between the local government and
their services.
As an advocate for for some very
small communities in the state
They have expressed to me some
desire to have those types of
provisions in this bill and I
would ask you to seriously
consider whether that
should be something that you
would within certain end of this
bill to allow local communities
to decide whether or not to
allow recreational marijuana
sales yeah I'm in that in their
community my next and last
observation is.
I think people need to
understand a couple things about
this bill number one.
It would made recreational
marijuana legal but it sets up.
A very complicated regulatory
framework.
It's not an easy framework it's
a very complicated framework by
which this product can be sold
and actually the state of New
Mexico will be telling people
how to conduct their business so
this this is a at a step beyond
anything that I've seen with
respect to
New Mexico.
Getting involved with with of
Business and and actually thanks
for the proper us several
notches and I'm concerned about.
Going down that road very far Mr
speaker madam speaker and
gentleman I've heard the
arguments that you know this
legislation had to be carefully
crafted to deal with the the the
subject matter and I yes I can
see that on the one hand on the
other hand if it's if the pro
climbs all the virtues that have
been proclaimed about it I think
be a lot easier just to strike
marijuana from the list of
prohibited substances and let
the market figure it out of the
I'll leave it that Madam speaker
and gentleman I appreciate
your bearing with me for several
hours last night I appreciate
your bear with me for a few
minutes this morning and the
again I think we all have the
same.
desires but we certainly
disagree on whether this is
at a step that will up with the
condition of of citizens in New
Mexico.
Representative Madam speaker
All right thank you and thank
the gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you gentlemen I I
appreciate your thoughts uh and
and very much appreciate your
debates very thoughtful thank
you Sir.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Serrato.
Thank you madam speaker I will
the gentleman from Bernalillo
yield I yield to the gentle lady
from Santa Fe thank you so much
Mr speaker and thank you to the
sponsors for bringing this
forward I feel like this is a
testament for why we need a year
round legislature because not
only we've been discussing this
this past sixty days we service
every time and so you know a lot
of the conversation has been
debated but I do think it it
brings a strong debate for I do
a few questions and we will bear
with me on the FIR it has the
numbers I don't believe that
includes the amendment the came
from four from the tax committee
is that right Mr speaker sponsor
the Mr speaker madam speaker
delete from Santa Fe you know
the the FIR and from me is from
the tax committee before the
amendment was put on I'm not
sure if they've updated that at
this point so if madam speaker
gentle lady from Santa Fe is
this the one that has if I'm
looking at fiscal year twenty to
you put on that chart three
thirty nine point eight is that
the same when you're looking at
yep you got it just on that so
that's that's prior to the to
the to the amendment in tax
thank you Mr speaker thank you a
gentleman and so we would
anticipate the future revenue
would be increased because of
the amendment tax would you
agree on that Madam speaker
annually from Santa Fe and that
that is correct I I think that
that's that's a fair thing to
say the tax now goes to twelve
to eighteen percent the excise
tax and it's it's faced in over
the course of six years starting
in twenty twenty four so I you
know I I'm not sure what the
numbers will come back at but
that's that's definitely an
increase thank you Mr speaker
thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen I'm also curious
you know that eighteen percent
numbers that too high would that
come from and then it I guess
most most increases is there any
information on how that would
affect in the black market
reduction black market or
anything like that yeah that's a
great question and if you give
me a second I'm gonna pull up my
chart madam speaker and gentle.
A from Santa Fe
this group to give some context
as to the the tax so
the the by way of background the
way we achieved.
The tax rate under the original
bill which of your your bills
twelve percent excise with
roughly four percent going to
the local community whether it's
County municipality plus the
applicable G. R. T. so we on
Santa Fe obviously you'd be
higher than than than
Albuquerque for example
up we've had it presentations
from national experts folks that
do tax policy and and they've
begun to study the impact of tax
policy are with regard to
cannabis in states that have
legalized adult use cannabis and
they've looked at different
metrics including you know is is
this impacting the the illicit
market isn't generating enough
revenue to pay not only for the
program but to pay for the
unintended costs that that that
that are going to come from any
new industry and so we were we
were advised that the tax rate
really needs to holdover around
twenty percent give or take
that's how I came up with a
number of reasons.
Now we conversations over the
last few hours really including
yesterday in attacks Committee
you know that there there's a
feeling by some folks that in
fact because we are starting a
brand new industry we are and
and and you know the phrase I
use during the regular session
with regard to this debate was
you know how many times the
legislature have we have the
opportunity to start a brand new
multi million dollar industry I
mean certainly not since my time
here but I've only been here
seven years but even talking to
some of the folks have been
around long that it's it's been
a really really long time.
and so if we're gonna get to
start from scratch why not build
it up in the way that we feel is
the best so the idea to increase
the tax and not at one ninety
one shot but to gradually
increases after the third year
that the industry set up so the
industry gets twelve percent you
know for you know three years
and then it is after those three
years that that tax begins to
increase very very you know
slowly if you will one percent a
year and the eighty percent
quite frankly was just to keep
was within range of our
neighboring states right we hear
that a lot in tax policy which
is are we gonna be you know a
competitive if if if we tax
something too high whether it's
tobacco whether it's alcohol
whether it's hotel rooms
whatever so if you look at the
if you look at the and and this
these are numbers from from the
LFC someone's going to put in
here but you know if you look at
Colorado for example other
combined tax rate could be as
high as twenty six percent.
you know Arizona combined tax
rate could be as high as twenty
two percent so this keeps us
within range understanding that
you know we need to generate
enough revenue really to make
all of this worthwhile from a
financial perspective for the
state but at the same time not
make it so cost prohibitive that
you know people just travel
across state lines to get
cheaper cannabis
you know if if they live near
you one of these other states
and also you know just it's
gonna take a while I think to
break the licit market you know
I mean I'm sure there are people
out there in their fifties who
have had a dealer for you know
twenty years and I'm not sure
we're gonna be right those folks
off right away but eventually I
think we will develop a
different type of approach to
this the example I gave earlier
was you know I I I I
legitimately do not know how to
get a bullet Bob one from
anywhere I just don't I don't
even know if there's a market
for that that somebody would
want to provide.
But sorry I froze here
well but
my apologies I I've kind of
frozen here in the center but
you know
Cannabis I think it's going to
take it's going to take a a you
know a little while now as the
federal government the glasses I
think you know as a world number
one consumer cannabis I think
that we will be able to.
we will be able to to really put
a dent I think into into the the
blue orchid but that's that's
the tax rate and and that's how
it was achieved I can tell you
I'm not like the number one
point of increasing the tax but
I understand members concerns
and so that's why we took it.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen I I appreciate
that I'm I'm very much in favor
of of the the the amendment I
was glad to see it but to be
honest with you I I'm also glad
to work came from just that idea
that really was looked at from
you know.
We're not entering this market
so early that we have no
evidence we talk of this
endlessly we're not insured but
we're not going into too late so
I think you know utilizing that
pass information really helpful
I'd love to talk a little bit
about the different divisions
and that the committees that I
get thank you you know we're
getting set up in here and you
know tenant at.
Thank
spoiler alert and I very much
appreciate them I think they're
very thoughtful and they're very
with our flexible to really
manage to handle the changes in
it but that's my reading of it I
wanna make sure I understand it
correctly I'm not misreading you
know what what they're able to
do and so looking at the canvas
prints control division I
appreciated that here that talks
a lot about you know equalizing
efforts or or at least a
technology in understanding the
impacts on rural communities and
also communities of color under
under us serve the communities
I'm curious if how that set up
is that similar to what other
states do as well.
settlement of Madam speaker and
gentleman and gentle lady yeah I
I don't know that it's it's a as
what other states do but in in
our framework we wanted to make
sure that the cannabis control
division which which is going to
be staffed by folks at the
remission lesson departments
provides for the superintendent
of licensing and regulation that
this advisory committee exists
to provide feedback and and sort
of direction to to the
regulators and if you look at
the the composition of the
advisory
first of all it's got to be
created no later than September
one of twenty twenty one I
believe there are fourteen or
fifteen members and the advisory
and and we tried our best to
keep.
There's a tension with with who
can be on the cover of the
committee because you could
easily end up with a hundred
members of this committee I mean
right now we could probably just
a hundred folks who should be on
there also we limited to
fourteen or fifteen different
ones kind of looking at public
safety looking at public health
looking at you know communities
of interest for example rural
communities so
if you look on page eighteen it
give give a description you know
as a DA appointed by the New
Mexico VA Association and share
for pointed by the cessation
counties a member from each of
the following groups of
professional qualifications you
know we have a qualified patient
policy advocacy labor
state local agency with relevant
experience as director deems
appropriate Indian nation tribe
or pueblo Public Health
eccentric Center up there been
some discussions about adding
you know having others on here
you know I'm not sure that that
we will do that but I think
we'll definitely keep an open
mind on that but but to us it
was important to make sure that
there is a mechanism in place so
that the regulators can can have
adequate advise and I just I
find really expert and
professional advice as to these
many different areas that these
new this new industry gonna
touch right no one will deny
that this doesn't touch public
safety that this doesn't touch
public health as we as we as we
debated earlier with the
previous debater so you know I'm
I'm not sure that other states
are doing this perhaps you know
but but we felt strongly that
that needed to be in here.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen I I really and I
think that you know that that
speaks volumes because I do
think that you know New Mexico
has an incredibly diverse unique
population that isn't like you
know it was it's different than
so many other states are
implementing different policies
I think that you know right
again between the cannabis
control division and what they
were C. and you can just
regulatory advisory committee
what they oversee and even I
believe we had a short term
advisor community O. H. member
correctly in there that also you
know has these different
elements in there so I really
appreciate that it's kind of
covered and all that and I thank
you for walking a little bit
through the through the
different individuals that will
be included on the advisory
committee on because again in
there you also highlight that it
needs to be aware of the I. of
underserved communities how are
rural counties impacted
communities of color impact I
think you know again we we talk
about that a lot that we don't
we you know we have to all rise
together you know we're only as
strong as our so we see because
local economy and in some cases
so we want to make sure that
that everyone has access to that
the monetary benefits but also
the the concerns of many people
have expressed myself and and
many others in the body you know
with that being said I I'm kind
of also curious there is that
there is an aspect in the
advisory committee that you know
to encourage lose on page twenty
it's unlikely that it be
encouraging is
it as business in in in diverse
areas sorry.
Not great when I think
Here is a page that have we've
its it's items need it says the
canister gives for advisory
committee should be created by
the division of the rules
pursuant to the act including
best practices an approach of
economic and cultural diversity
and licensing and employment
opportunities protection public
health safety and so I'm curious
from your perspective what are
the tactics that they can
utilize to encourage that kind
of diversity.
you madam chair originally can
you can you put me to fix number
gives these ghastly sorry it's
it's just one in the creation of
the committee itself.
Seventeen and I'm working on
this I might provisions three so
maybe a little bit off but
probably too long twelve and
thirteen.
Got it got it so it cases
subsection G. including
And I'm just curious about your
a gentleman you know what
tactics do you think they can
utilize to got to got to yeah
thank you thank you for that
question appoint question
because as I mentioned earlier
there's been a lot of debate
about you know splitting social
justice out of the bill you know
as if it's if it's it's got it's
own little section social
justice section forty seven
point out when in reality you
know we've embedded a lot of
these best practices into the
bill you know the the the way
the way I would interpret this
and and I believe the way the
you know the drafters and and
our folks operation lasting
trip at this is that you know we
would look first of all and the
other states we know other
states have had this problem and
it was mentioned last night a
committee you know state like
Colorado that legalized the
ballot initiative and they have
something like two or three
months to get the industry off
the ground I mean they are
really working from behind and
now Colorado you know almost ten
years later has had to go back
in past affirmative law.
To to build these types of
of of opportunities into their
legalization framework right so
for us I think you would be a
great deal of research right
what other states doing to
ensure that there's diversity in
the industry you know some of
the points that one of our
debaters about earlier about you
know real participation ensuring
that rural communities get
access what are other states
doing right you know what what
is Colorado doing Colorado is
still pretty rural state I was
just up there you know over over
the past week and you know I was
driving the back country roads
it's it's I've been to different
times have never really been to
the rural parts of Colorado it
is pretty darn rural wrecked so
how are they ensuring that those
communities can access that type
of industry no these are all
things that I think the the the
advisory committee can help the
regulators frame right and as
they look at the data is a look
at who's getting license as a
look at where they're coming
from who they are I believe that
the advisory committee will be
able to continue to advise the
regulators to ensure that we are
to ensure that the rules and
regulations that are that are
enacted as a result of this
legislation are are responsive
to the needs of New Mexicans of
New Mexican families all rural
communities of communities of
color and of other communities
across the state I think that
that's one of the pieces that
that I think probably sets us
apart from other places because
we're not doing it from behind
we're not doing it after the
fact we're doing it on the front
and Madam speaker and gentle
lady thank you madam speaker
thank you John and I I really do
appreciate that especially his
you know as you know I represent
the legislation Santa Fe
including airport road and it's
it's I love my community it's a
remarkably at you know diverse
and and lovely and you know what
we do the things that set us
back and we do issues and
something that you and I kind of
had about before the session
began because they were the talk
of eight back then even as a
freshman you know you're for me
as myself actually talking about
the things.
Appreciate that but you know for
me my concern was that seeing
how cannabis is grown in other
industries it had become treated
essentially by corridors in in
communities like my own to be
quite Frank and they were very a
difficult for for communities to
kind of overcome that and and
again looking back on it you
know so like you're saying in
Colorado where I've never heard
so much in California where you
just it hasn't been applied
equally those that are
benefiting the most from it are
are the wealthiest those that
suffer the worst impacts of the
poorest and really my hope and
my expectation from this
regulatory advisory committee is
to really look at insuring at
that again like the D. O. H.
Committee that's being for form
as well is that we can avoid
that happening in our
communities of color so that
they're not overwhelmed by this
is that how you how you feel
that those will should operate
as well.
Yes yes a hundred percent and
and I remember our conversation
because I think about ups and
some very good points about our
communities and you know our
hometown spread you know I know
that in my in my city you know
we have a we have historically
had a complicated relationship
with with with zoning for
example right it's been improved
over the years right it's it's
not as bad as it used to be but
it's still a battle right you
know a lot of those policies
ordinances you know regulations
and zoning guidelines that were
set forth you know fifty six
years ago you know are are still
with us and so these are the
kinds of things that I think it
is this advisory certainly will
help the regular soup and then
don't forget we we are still the
legislature you know and
anything that we see regardless
of what the division does
regardless of what the advisory
committee advises we I I mean I
can tell you should this past
I'm gonna be watching this like
a hawk you know this needs to be
done right in the spirit of what
we intend to do understanding
that also you know none of us is
perfect you know and I'll be the
first one to admit no bill that
I've passed in my six years in
the legislature is perfect and I
always welcome folks coming back
and saying you know what this
month in is you miss that spot
right do you think about that
you think about this I welcome
that debate I welcome that work
in fact I've been texting back
and forth with members of both
parties over the last twelve
hours trying to figure out maybe
there's an amendment I can be me
here maybe there's an amendment
I can be me there right that's
the process and I love the
process because it's
collaborative in New I see that
process extending into this
legislation should it become law
over the course of the next
twenty twenty five years.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you don't you don't I agree and
I I did appreciate that the the
discussion earlier even you know
hearing from members not of my
same party that I that I
oftentimes and agree with I
think you know in insuring that
this is a healthy dialogue and
ensuring that these voices get
heard on the budget committee
get heard from these different
elements I think will ensure
that we're we're what we're
protecting our communities and
and and doing the best that we
can well you know bring well
understanding that this market
exists and so what can we do to
protect our communities and make
sure that it's that New Mexico
is growing the best it can on
what you know lasting I'm kind
of curious about and second last
really on is that these I
appreciate it so that measures
you had in here that protect the
medical cannabis industry and
I'll be honest with you I
thought they were little they
were aggressive in a good way
you know to make sure that if we
see it and it decreases the
decreases in the supply of
medical cannabis to require a
producers I believe J. to ensure
that a certain percentage is for
medical cannabis and things like
that protections for that that
element I'm just curious if
there's you're great anymore
back on that or or you know if
you feel that there is need need
to be flexibility and how that
works as well.
Yeah madam chair and and
Representative and and gentle
lady for from Santa Fe you know
just that protecting and finding
ways to has a medical cannabis
program it is one of our top
priorities with this bill you
know medical cannabis you know
regardless of the you know I I
remember California first did it
and they're all cancers jokes
going around that you could get
yourself a medical card for you
know a little bit of back pain
you know people depend on it for
quality of life I I know several
people who suffer from either
terminal illness the ability to
paint or or you know folks with
PTSD very very deep deep PTSD
veterans I'm particularly who
who whose lives have been turned
around by medical cannabis and
what we saw in other states
early on I'm gonna think Oregon
it's pry the most obvious
example because it's come up
quite a bit over the last
several months of discussion is
that if you don't if you don't
have an adequate process to
regulate the market at least at
the beginning you can end up in
a situation where you know
there's more money to be made in
the the ability use market that
you abandon the medical market
complete.
and so we've created not only
incentives for patients to
remain on the program for
example exempting medical
cannabis from from gross
receipts and and the excise tax
so that'll make that product.
Less expensive
but but also by allowing
licensees you know if you apply
for a license.
You can you have a choice you
can be adult use.
you know full adult use what you
have to also sell medical.
Four you can go in and only do
medical at a discounted fee
right and in your niche your
market could be only patients
and I believe that that you know
those measures are are are going
to make sure we're going to
ensure that the program is
protected now there there are
other things in the bill you
know should special especially
during the first three years of
some plant management system in
place to ensure market Calabria
to ensure that we have enough
supply and if if the school a
wire for some reason other
regulators will have the ability
to to to require that a
percentage of sales on a monthly
basis be to medical cannabis
patient card holders we believe
that those measures I think we
can we can really ensure that we
stabilize the market
especially once we open up the
doors to table use are so that
we don't see what we've seen in
other states again other states
are particularly those that
legalized through ballot
initiative didn't have a great
deal of time to implement their
programs and so they saw they
saw a lot of problems early on a
lot of those lessons I think
have been have been learned and
as more states legalize now
through the through the
legislative process more more
states are adopting some of the
same mechanisms case in point is
New York state which are I found
out yesterday we were in the
running you know for for who's
gonna legalize next New York
state or New Mexico New York
state beat us to it by by a
little bit hopefully and the
legalize yesterday and you know
I don't know when the governor's
gonna send their bills but a lot
of the same provisions exist in
that framework as well also if
we protect medical cannabis
program is is imperative I give
a great deal of credit to the
medical cannabis program here
and in other states for getting
us to this point I believe that
because the medical cannabis
program.
exist here and it's existed
elsewhere California like
assistance in late nineties I
believe
it helped change the discussion
around cannabis but to that
point cannabis was as bad as all
the other hard drugs.
Once medical came online I think
people really started realizing
that Hey this isn't so bad in
fact it's good for me you know
it's good for me to treat my
illness it improves my quality
of life etcetera etcetera and so
as we worked on this
legalization framework we did
not want to go down a road that
harmed the medical program and
so I'm I'm hopeful and my
expectation is that the these
provisions are enough but again
if we find that they're not the
next thirty day session we will
be back to make sure that we do
right by those patients thank
you madam speaker thank you
gentlemen you know I I really do
appreciate that especially
because I think so much of the
session and so much of the the
dialogue about around our state
is you know how New Mexico is
top of the worthless and brought
the best and you know I hate
that are that that narrative I
have organs because I don't
think it's healthy for states
hit ten turtle are some ways and
it's not true all the time to be
quite Frank you know I look at
our early childhood care and
education department any during
the pandemic was literally a
leader and other states would
come to it and ask our
department how are you reading
the best day care in the state
the state care system in the
country right now how are you
doing that and I look at you
know get a response to the two
you know our vaccination rollout
that's been happening and and
and and our and our citizens
have been given lining up to
make sure they get vaccinated
with top of the country we're
the number one state for getting
folks acting not just because of
our our governor in in in our
state legislature because our
citizenry our communities are
ready to do this engage so no I
think when our when our
communities are important we're
interacting like that it makes a
difference and I see that with
this bill because this bill
doesn't leave people out in so
many ways and creates these
mechanisms that whole flexible
in progress and and and I any
progressive and and like
thoughtful thoughtfully looking
forward and what to do next and
so I really appreciate those
things I I you know again you
mentioned when California first
legalized murder when I first to
California like after they had
legalized and it was just like
it was it was night and day
from.
More than before and it was it
wasn't a great experience and
and even seeing how it's
continued onwards you know I I
I'm not I don't I don't smoke
marijuana or anything like that
and I I that's not my voice of
choice but you know I think for
folks like I think really
putting these things protections
and maybe give me some of the
clarity and you know somebody
had asked about you know like
are you feel like you're setting
the younger generation up for
success I think so I think we
are primarily not because this
poses generates a lot of income
for the state we can utilize to
help build out our community
resources help our communities
grow make sure the growing
healthy but also for the
fairness aspect of and I'm sure
we'll get into that later today
but you know really ensuring
that you know when when people
are are are accessing these jobs
or this industry we're not
seeing it happen in California
be quite Frank we're only the
riches of the wealthiest and you
know some celebrity has our own
brand of of marijuana you know
that's the succeeding it is it
will everybody so I I do
appreciate that the bill and and
I also see you know I don't know
what the future is I don't think
either of us can know that I
appreciate that the flexibility
for it but I think of our micro
brewery industry that has grown
so incredibly and and really
become a national leader and an
award winner for for what our
national collectively reserve
able to produce and create and
and and you know of those
aspects to and so it you know I
don't know if this is gonna turn
into that I don't know if you
know how this industry will grow
but I think again understanding
our role in the legislature to
help keep that understanding you
know the the community's role
that I think makes a difference
as well with that that's all my
questions thank you Mr Madam
speaker thank you Jennifer thank
you madam speaker thank you
gentle lady.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative ring.
Madam speaker will my friend
from the south valley of
Albuquerque of yield.
Madam speaker I yield to my
friend but I'm from the north
valley and I'm still waiting for
my candy bars gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Mr speaker gentleman yes a.
Us in Albuquerque need to get
together will more often up I
appreciate the debate last night
and I don't have that many
questions today thank goodness
so
Madam speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo the I'd like to begin
with taking the thirty thousand
foot view and then we'll drill
into the bills that
when I speak about Colorado I'm
also speaking about Oregon and
Washington state and
of their similarities of what
they saw with their
legalization Madam speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo
Did they did Colorado not see an
increase in homeless males from
eighteen to thirty four years
old.
Madam speaker and and gentleman
I suspect your answer is going
to be that yes they did I'm not
sure what the contributing
factors to that are.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo it was that they
could come and have recreational
marijuana Madam speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo did
Colorado State drug drivers it
increase who had marijuana in
their system.
All Madam speaker and gentleman
I I I I'm looking at I'm looking
at a.
Looking at a chart here that
says that they did not
but you know I think that's
probably one source and I'm sure
you have another one that's
going to show that it did so I'm
curious to hear your study.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo they saw an increase
in fact it was over sixty
percent of their drivers who
were involved in fatal
collisions were testing positive
for marijuana and many times
alcohol or other substances
that's concerning to me because
currently New Mexico is number
two in the nation of foot
technologies per hundred
thousand residents
anyway on that issue I have a
bill up in rules today to deal
with the drug driving that we
will probably see as a result of
that Madam speaker and gentleman
from Bernalillo did call round
to see an increase in truancy.
Sorry I was muted who would have
been a floor debate without that
happening once Madam speaker Jim
lady truancy from school I guess
is what you're referring to.
Madam speaker gentleman from
Bernalillo yes and madam speaker
gentle lady
I'm gonna assume that you're
going to say yes again you know
correlation versus cost
causation I'm not sure that I do
adult use cannabis
contributes to truancy rates but
I'm I'm willing to hear you out
please.
Madam speaker and gentleman yes
it's a yes and that's troubling
currently New Mexico is the
fifth highest teen use right in
the US
in fact just over fourteen
percent of our use under the age
of thirteen and then to smoking
marijuana.
We know from the science that it
causes brain damage at any age
and so that's concerning Madam
speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo did Colorado see an
increase in the ER visits from
marijuana overdose.
Including overnight stays.
Madam speaker gentlemen I don't
know anyone who has ever
ingested cannabis and ended up
in the emergency room unless
they were doing other things
ingesting other substances or
drinking alcohol so I don't know
what the answer is but I don't
know of anyone and I don't think
the research supports that
cannabis alone will take you to
the ER.
Madam speaker and gentleman what
the Colorado actually saw is not
only from use but all the way up
through adults and the majority
contributing factor was eating
edibles because are not
receiving the Hari is fast they
end up consuming too many apples
but.
That's what they saw Madam
speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo did Colorado see the
black market in their state
increase.
Madam speaker and and gentleman
I believe Colorado has had a
love hate relationship with the
listing market I I I I believe
that in some years it's it's in
a decrease in other years it's
seen an increase I have this
debate last year with with our
former colleague rich every
Ruiloba who who by the way if
he's watching high reserve path
but he was very very
informational I think
educational for me and others
about what was happening
Colorado because of his
connections to law enforcement
there so I believe it's gone up
I believe it's gone down I
believe it's a problem that
we're going to have
regardless but we're gonna
definitely have it if we don't
legalize if we legalize we can
begin to wonder could eliminate
it but if we don't legalize you
listen market will continue to
do what it's been doing for
sixty years.
madam chair or Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo
actually saw an increase in if
you remember even
Nebraska's sued them because of
the marijuana quantity that was
being trafficked through their
state and throughout the U. S.
if we look at Oregon and the U.
S. Attorney General told Oregon
and that if you didn't get the
over production under control
and the trafficking that they
would step in and
of of stop there Oregon of
recreational marijuana.
But
The problem is the drug cartel
our business spent they're going
to undercut the legal market.
And
here in New Mexico we could look
just last fall at Shiprock.
We're there was D. A. sees two
hundred ninety thousand plants
and those were Californians who
can grow in California coming to
New Mexico so every state is
seeing an increase in a because
I can kind of appear to be
legal.
Madam speaker and gentleman
Colorado is taxing that a thirty
three percent right your
legislation is eighteen percent.
Our Colorado also.
Determined that they're spending
four dollars and fifty cents per
one dollar in tax collected on
many of the things that I just
discussed as well as others so
we're probably going to be in
the ten or twelve dollars areas
that will spend per dollar
Collett of collected.
Madam speaker R. Mr speaker and
gentleman.
I've heard a lot of folk
comparison marijuana versus
alcohol well they're not the
same.
The purposes smoking marijuana
it is to get high.
No like alcohol
Marijuana the more you smoke the
lower your tolerance so there's
a big difference and Mr speaker
and gentleman I would also note
that governor Hickenlooper
in the near the end of his term
stated publicly that if
legislation came across his desk
to repeal recreational marijuana
he would consider a.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo was go to page thirty
four.
Mr.
Speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo this is I'm gonna
propose an amendment this is the
amendment that I proposed last
night.
Mr speaker I would of our
proposed House floor amendment
number one to house bill two.
In the two oh two number is two
two one.
Zero seven two point one.
The Germans the amendment and he
has told us the two oh two
number gentleman Jim now explain
it.
Mr speaker and members of the
body
this amendment imposes a hundred
dollars per an ounce of cannabis
cannabis product.
where eight individual and it's
really aimed at the drug
cartels.
In the legal market.
Now Mr speaker members we have
to remember that the black
market is not licensed so
they're not paying a license fee
and they're not paying the
eighteen percent tax that the
state would receive.
And I want to explain where this
money will go this is a Senator
Ferrary.
And the money pursuant to
article twelve section four of
our constitution we'll go to the
current school fund of the
state.
Mr speaker I would call for a
roll call vote on this and all
other matters and with that I
would stand for questions okay
we'll go to the gym for Leo
Representative Martinez is this
a friendly amendment thank you
Mr speaker can I ask a couple
questions before I make the
determination the floor is yours
thank you Mr speaker and and
gentleman from Bernalillo
Do you think you have to you
back to where it.
The gentleman
Hey will you have the floor
about the okay got it got it got
thank you apologies Mr speaker
look from Bernalillo also in
reading your amendment
Person who possesses cannabis
products not obtaining
compliance with the cannabis
regulation Act or the Lynn and
Erin compassionate use act shall
be subject to civil penalty of
one hundred dollars per ounce of
cannabis products possessed so
my question is Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo if I
am a medical cannabis card
holder I'm a patient of a
qualified patient under any of
the conditions listed in the
minute and compassionate use act
I can prove that in fact the
cannabis on me was purchased or
obtained through that card right
and that's very easy to do my
concern is how do you prove that
if I'm not a patient cardholder
how do I prove that I obtain
whatever cannabis is in my
position through the cannabis
regulation Act how do I prove
that I got it from a dispensary
and not from the listen market.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo one is to send your
bill which I do like is that all
of the marijuana that I purchase
is in a package that is labeled
it's got the manufacturer in
several other things what this
is really and that is we come
across an individual who has a
hundred pounds of marijuana and
it's not labeled it's not gone
through any retailer or grower
that is licensed.
Yes Mr Mr speaker and gentleman
I I I understand that but you
know I could potentially take my
cannabis out of the container
and and you know have it in my
pocket
and if this amendment is adopted
that person is and would be
liable under under this penalty
the other so as I have a problem
with that I I think I I see
where you're going with it but I
think that there's a very real
unintended consequence here
you know in in in previous
versions of the bill in fact I
think it was the bill that we
pass out of the house in in
twenty nineteen which was a
Republican Democrat
compromise one of the column one
of the pieces of compromise in
there was a you have to have a
receipt to to prove that you
purchase your cannabis at a
licensed dispensary I remove
that that section because I I
just didn't like it I do think
that you know we need to be
forced to keep a receipt we
don't do that with their why do
it with this
but needless to say I think that
that's a concern that that I
have my second question Mr
speaker number from Bernalillo
our bill
From our bill allows I feel all
stop right there I I I think I
think that that's probably
enough for me to determine that
it's unfriendly again I like
where you going with that I'd
like your your your logic behind
it but I I don't think that this
is exactly what we want to go
down for so all call and
unfriendly Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you.
King there is debate the
gentleman San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
John from Bernalillo yield.
Mr speaker I yield to my
colleague from San Juan County
before we begin I would note
that under the current under
your bill
gentleman from Bernalillo that I
can have four ounces on my
person and that could be four
ounces that I grew at my home
and have in my own little baggy
so
it is it this is really aimed at
going after the larger dealers
out Mr speaker gentleman from
San Juan.
Go ahead thank you Mr gentleman
actually that is the direction I
was going to go with my line of
questioning is the bill already
has very specific parameters
around
what it says can be that a
person can have on their
property on the person without
it being labeled or being in any
sort of container like alcohol
would be
that this could be.
In a baggie or just in the
pocket or whatever so I I do
believe it's just that the
concern that was brought up by
the bill sponsor is not
necessarily the speaker is it a
concern here and this remains as
a civil penalty so
the idea that
because there are some other
penalties in here for possession
of above a certain amount
and maybe maybe this within a
little bit more clear is be on
whatever that amount was to to
do that Mr speaker and
gentleman.
I do see a need for this
amendment
currently Mr speaker and and
gentleman can you point to
anywhere in this legislation.
Where
There is a higher penalty than a
fourth degree.
felony it appears to me that a
cartel member under the bill as
it's written today.
I believe Representative
Stansbury uses the phrase the
words that are in front of us.
The words that are in front of
us in this bill today.
Anything above a misdemeanor the
highest penalty that I see in
this bill.
Representative from Bernalillo.
Is a fourth degree felony so I
can have a truckload of pot.
In my possession.
And it's a fourth degree felony
is that the way you read this
legislation the speaker and
gentleman Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan you are
correct and this is going after
the if you will the tax evader.
So thank you Mr speaker and and
gentleman
That.
Maybe in the end is the only way
that will be able to prosecute
these folks who are actually
selling on the black market and
I I once again I I don't see.
Anything if I were a black
market black marketer.
There's nothing here to keep me
from
us from having a hundred pounds
two hundred pounds of thousand
pounds in my position at any
time because the the worst
offense that I would be
committing would be worthy of a
a fourth degree felony and so I
do support this I wish a that
I wish that this body was full
today and as debate was going on
that we knew that the membership
was listening Mr speaker and
gentleman I I just kind of a
side note here is that's one
thing that's been lost during
COVID and during our debate on
the floor if you just walk over
the speaker and gentleman and
look at the other chamber and it
is full during debate
members of of all of that are
present.
Are listening to the debate and
I'd Mr speaker and gentleman I
think that if the membership
understands.
That there is nothing in this
legislation.
Two deterrent black marketer to
to turn the cartel from coming
in here we're removing every bit
of consequence I don't
understand why anyone Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Once again as as the words that
are in front of us today in this
bill at that are written in the
bill today as we see it.
There's nothing to deter the
cartel from coming in and
setting up shop.
in greater amounts and I would
do if I were them in ninety days
after the governor signs because
when this goes into effect there
are no penalties long before we
have recreational marijuana in
shops across the state Mr
speaker and gentleman
the cartels can set up shop in
ninety days.
And the worst thing that they
that that that they could be
charged with is maybe tax
evasion.
Because I I if I were them
And by the way all I have to do
is a send it with somebody who's
eighteen years or older younger.
Mr speaker and gentleman because
the toughest of the toughest
crime that they would be
committing of possession over
the legal now.
The that they would be charged
with
They would they would have to
attend for hours.
Of education of drug education
that's it.
Mr speaker and gentleman we just
created in this legislation in
the words as they are written
and we are reading them before
us today is I'm a cartel I'm
gonna go get a bunch of kids
that are eighteen under eighteen
years old and I'm gonna send
them out which is Bigelow as I
possibly can because the worst
thing the with the worst penalty
that will come out of that is
contributing to the delinquency
of a minor maybe.
And four hours of of a a drug
education so Mister speaker and
gentleman I I can't imagine why
this is not a friendly amendment
especially for the reason that
you stated earlier as the
amount that can legally be on a
person.
And all this is all this is Mr
speaker and gentleman is a
hundred dollar per ounce fine.
We don't even want to provide
the cartels.
This legislation is so bad.
The words that are written
before us today we don't want to
protect our kids are in school
and we are willing to protect
the drug cartels so Mister
speaker I would urge the body to
support this amendment we can
not be this reckless in our
desire to pass legislation Lee a
drug legalization thank you Mr
speaker.
Is there for the debate on the
amendment.
Gentlelady from Santa.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo you.
Mr speaker I yield to my
colleague from Bernalillo
county.
Mr speaker and gentleman I get
along the same lines.
With the
Previous
Minority leader.
The the eighteen year old.
We
your experience can you just go
on to that just a little bit
more so that the body really
understands the magnitude of not
prosecuting.
Of the the individual I mean
this is famous not prosecuting
that that individual under
eighteen is caught with
possession can you tell us what
happens with that individual no
matter how many times here she
is called under the age of
eighteen.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Santa.
By this current legislation
they're going to attend a four
hour training class.
They will not be sent to
juvenile probation so they do
not have a juvenile record.
Mr speaker and gentleman if they
do not.
Have a juvenile record what
incentive.
The state of.
Or I should say would the state
have on the future of that
individual.
And I guess I'm going into the
direction of your sheet not
having to even comply with the
licenses because they already
know how to utilize other young
people to Ezzell.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
you're you're correct the.
Of the you know there's no
repercussions.
Mr speaker and gentleman so for
this person is black market.
Would you.
Based on what we discuss what's
in the legislation the we're
just brought another generation
of young people who feel that
they can scare what's going on
you know with the system because
they've already been trying.
Just to how they can get away
with of bringing additional
marijuana into the state of New
Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Santa I think you and I both
watched juveniles go into the
juvenile system and then
suddenly when they turned
eighteen they had a reality
check were they were kept in
jail all of a sudden and they
were used to just cycling in and
out of the juvenile system of
but yes I agree with you thank
you Mr thank you to.
Is it for the debate on the
amendment.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo Mr
speaker I move to table the
amendment.
Generally this motion is table
the amendment vote of yes the
amendment will be tabled a vote
of no we will be back on to get
eight of the amendment.
The vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote
Representative Anderson.
No Representative Anderson is
no.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Chasey both
yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
is yes.
Representative at up.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Johnson votes
yes.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Lujan both yes.
Representative Matthews yet yes
Representative Matthews votes
yes Representative Roger
Montoya.
Representative Roger Montoya
both yes representative Sarinana
yes Representative Sarinana
votes yes.
The vote is now closed but go to
forty three in the affirmative
twenty six in the negative the
amendment has been tabled
Jennifer Lee are you still have
the floor.
Thank you Mr speaker and Mr
speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo what it actually can
occur or happens if
we found somebody who is in
possession let's say of a
hundred pounds of marijuana and
they didn't have a grower's
license and it was clear that
they didn't purchase that from
an authorized dealer.
Madam Mr speaker and gentleman
well first of all there would be
probably the entire weight of
the federal system on that
person.
For trafficking.
Full for trafficking.
number one number two I believe
you know I I believe under
current law might be a decent
for three felony I would assume.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Under.
the federal system what they do
is they have minimum guidelines
and they want several hundred
pounds to go ahead and prosecute
but I think that's problematic
there's no penalty Mr speaker
and gentleman from Bernalillo
let's move to page forty and
page forty five and I just want
to point out to the body.
Inconsistencies so if a
individual
Is a server at a cannabis job
and he R. M. what the law says
on forty five is makes a good
faith effort to try to identify
that the individuals twenty one
or older and ID is not required
like it is for alcohol so we
takes a good gas in that
individual is
under the age the first offense
is suspending his server's
license for one year and I I
just want to point out our
inconsistency in and how we're
handling that
Mr speaker and gentleman was go
to page one seventeen and in
particular we're looking at
winds nine and ten and Mr
speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo back in the bill that
we've already passed over we
allow an individual to go ahead
and grow of six plants and if
there are multiple adults in the
home they can have up to a total
of twelve plants so
last night I was speaking about
the pungent odor of marijuana
and you start taking
particularly town homes but I've
got twelve plants growing in the
backyard of my town home that
pungent odor is going to.
Emanate with into my neighbor's
yard into their house and I
think that that is
very problematic we should not
be allowing individuals to go
ahead and grow out there Mr or
you know so that that odor goes
into their our neighbors.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Let's go to page one sixty
three.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo I would move house
floor amendment number one to
house bill two and this is a
The two oh two numbers two two
one zero seven three point one.
And Mr speaker and gentleman
from Bernalillo this is the
The penalty assessment
amend that that I had last night
and I want to discuss a little
further.
Today.
Mr speaker and gentleman from.
Bernalillo I do more research on
this.
And if we go to page fifty seven
we see that smoking in public is
a civil penalty of fifty
dollars.
If we go to page fifty eight
line for there's a of penalty
for possessing more than six
plants by someone twenty one
year years older and it's a
penalty assessment of fifty
dollars.
If we go to page fifty eight
line fourteen
a penalty for possessing of
plants by someone eighteen to
twenty one years old and that's
a penalty assessment of fifty
dollars.
We go to page sixty two one
twenty three are we're talking
about reporting of penalty
assessments I share simple
lease.
The problem is when we go to
page one seventy line I we
strike current language that
allows for a penalty assessment
and that's where the problem
lies there's also a problem in
that.
The.
R. the penalty assessment is not
a form accepted by the courts
for starting a civil complaint.
We also we will go to thirty
nine dash nineteen eighty dash
one which is the penalty
assessment.
Statute and I want to read
paragraph eight payments of
fines pursuant to a penalty
assessment citation shall not be
considered a criminal conviction
okay when we go to paragraph E.
the magistrate court or the
metropolitan court in the county
where the alleged violation
occurred has jurisdiction for
any case arising from a penalty
assessment under the criminal
code.
And that's really important
because as I just read most of
those are civil fines.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo this ammendment
approach into your bill the
penalty assessment so that the
court can hear those M. Mr
speaker with that'll stand for
questions.
The gentleman the amended by the
way is up on the website it had
been passed out we'll go to the
gentleman from Bernalillo to ask
whether or not this is a.
Friendly amendment thank you
speaker and thank you gentleman
from Bernalillo I'm gonna say
this is not friendly offer many
of the reasons that we discussed
last night
so I'll leave it at that but
it's it's not friendly.
There's debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker this
gentleman from Bernalillo yield
again Mr speaker I yield to my
colleague from San Juan.
So Mr speaker and and gentleman
we briefly had this conversation
on black market sales.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
appears to me.
Again if you look through all of
the penalties that are listed
in this bill.
the majority of the penalties
that are so that specifically in
this bill are the penalties that
are removed from the criminal
code at the end of this bill
there's an entire section Mr
speaker and gentleman about the
bills that are removed are the
of the penalties the criminal
penalties that are removed so
Mister speaker and gentleman
we've been hearing.
The over and over at the
beginning of this debate about
how popular.
Pod recreational pot is in New
Mexico.
we heard a a poll which I have I
really have a hard time
believing of seventy four
percent I believe is what was
stated as people in New Mexico
who want pot legalization but I
believe that it's very specifics
for adult consumption is that
correct Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan that is correct and I
have a problem with the poll as
well
I have received very few
comments supporting that of and
in particular out of my district
is been overwhelming
opposition to this legislation
yeah I agree with that Mr
speaker and gentleman that's X.
my experience and virtually
everyone I've talked to in the
legislature.
Or not beating down our doors
for this legislation get passed
I believe Mr speaker and
gentleman it's because people
who want
pot for recreational purposes
can really already get that for
recreational purposes through
the medical program going to a
doctor and.
Getting a.
Quote unquote prescription which
really is just the right process
so Mr speaker and gentleman
we've already decriminalized.
Pod possession
To some degree in New Mexico
through just by having a medical
card so Mister speaker and
gentleman.
That being said.
I don't know of a single poll.
That says New Mexicans
overwhelmingly want recreational
marijuana for our school
children are you aware Mr
speaker or gentleman of that
poll.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan the I do not know of a
poll where they want to of
marijuana recreational marijuana
for our students.
Mr speaker and gentleman is
there a whole that says that we
want.
recreational marijuana to be
distributed free Lee at our day
cares Mr speaker John.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan I'm unaware of any pull
the sports that.
Mr speaker and gentleman would
you would you be surprised us to
find that after we removed all
of those penalties
in from the criminal section of
Los since we're making this no
longer a controlled substance.
Are you aware that the
possession that the
that the penalty for possession
and the intent to distribute on
school grounds and day cares is
a misdemeanor are you aware of
that Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan I read that the bill
and that is extremely troubling.
Mr speaker and gentleman we are
understood of the understanding
the way it's been presented a
almost a forty five minute
minutes a presentation at the
beginning of this really
limiting debate here but.
That presentation is that New
Mexicans want this.
And as you stated earlier you
haven't been receiving emails or
phone calls I have not either
maybe twenty of from all the way
in the sixty day session up to
today maybe twenty emails I got
twenty emails every fifteen
minutes we're talking about the
trapping Bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman we are
to believe.
That New Mexicans not only want.
Recreational marijuana.
We wanted to be distributed free
Li to our school children and
even our day cares and the other
portion of the bill is going to
be coming over from the Senate
is that we want to expunge of
the criminal records of the
anyone who's ever been convicted
of of trafficking marijuana
previously so Mister speaker and
gentleman we're using a number
of seventy four percent and I
think if this bill would have
been released to the public
instead of given to us literally
hours before the session began
two days ago or yesterday.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
believe it be anywhere near
seventy four percent I don't I I
can't imagine that there is a
single parent in New Mexico much
less people who are not parents.
Who wants.
This
now uncontrolled substance being
distributed to our school
children.
So I'm just the seventy four
number the seventy four percent
number is already hard to
believe even for adult use but
Mr speaker it is a flat out lie
if that's what we're trying to
say is people want that is for
this to be so one controlled
that the crime for distributing
to our children is a misdemeanor
even in our day cares gentleman
from San Juan can we please
watch the decorum of the debate
and when we're talking about
a license of things just want to
make sure that we are.
The debate on track and and
maintain the decorum of the body
thank you Mr speaker let me
rephrase.
There is no way.
That the people of New Mexico R.
and bored with this legislation
as written.
And I hope Mr speaker and
gentleman they hold us all to
account if we pass it out in
this fashion thank you Mr
speaker.
There is for the debate Johnson
San Juan Representative
Strickler thank you make thank
you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo police
yield Mister speaker I yield to
my colleague from San Juan thank
you thank you gentlemen and
I appreciate you bringing this
for because it's the young
people that I'm worried about in
our area you know teenage
teenage abuse of drugs and
alcohol our problem and this is
just another component of that
and gentleman I think this this
really puts a little taste
and a little incentive you know
not to underrate Straker under
age.
The use of marijuana is that is
that the idea here gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan yes and I think that
once an attorney challenges the
use of a penalty assessments
citation for the issuance of a
civil fine that the
that this will stop.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen well I've
got some you know some
interesting
Facts on on the
the situation Colorado they're
they're kind of the Guinea pig
if you will of legalizing
marijuana they don't they do a
lot of.
The they've had a lot of issues
and and and San Juan county
gentleman we see that flowing
down our our county from from
the plight of candy in Archuleta
county Montezuma county and
since legalization of marijuana
in Colorado the percentage of
Hispanic teens arrested under
age users increased twenty nine
percent and that's a that's a
pretty pretty large number also
You know the use of marijuana
doubles the risk for developing
opioid use and in our in our
area we have a lot of drug and
alcohol problem should San Juan
County mainly alcohol
lot of data the us in this sort
of thing but we also have a lot
of heavy drug.
Problem some you know Matt Matt
this is really a problem in our
area you're being in law
enforcement I know you you deal
with this on a daily basis so
this is going to compound those
issues especially for our you
know for under age kids is it is
that your understanding
gentleman Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan absolutely
is of a marijuana is easily
concealed
where is you know if you have a
bottle of liquor it's of little
bit larger.
But the the potency of marijuana
today is quite high speaking
with the DEA agent and marijuana
they're seizing the New Mexico
is testing as high as sixty
percent THC which is just
unheard of and that will really
fry yourself what I mean that
announced to the users Mr
speaker and gentleman those high
those behind a T. was a T. H.
right.
Is the potency of the of the
marijuana issues is is quite
high.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
correct in in New Mexico of the
gentleman we already face a
major major challenges related
to homelessness you know crime
drug use poverty and mental
health in this will kind of
compounded those issues is that
is that your understanding
understanding gentleman and Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan that is correct and I
would encourage the body and the
listeners to go to you to and
Google Seattle is dying it's a
documentary done by the news
channel there in Seattle about
the homeless problem and the
homeless the in particular using
drugs and the support that there
are
theft is the biggest way they
support their drug habits.
So so gentleman so crime
increases and we already have a
high crime rate in New Mexico so
that's gonna that's going to
escalate the of the crime the
crime problems in in our
counties.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan exactly and that's
what's documented in that
Seattle behind you to one of the
issue the homelessness I know
Colorado ranks you know they're
in the top four force home which
homeless folks Washington Oregon
and now California I think
they're the top four so that's
that's we're going to we're
going to have a issues in that
regard to try to take care that
the home assist
of homeless people in our state.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan that's correct one of
the data points I saw out of
Colorado
that one third of the new prison
inmates stated they came to
Colorado so that because of
recreational marijuana.
And there's there's some
detailed studies from the rocky
mountain high intensity drug
trafficking report that sets all
this out and and the statistics
are pretty a pretty overwhelming
that there's there's a lot a lot
of negatives to this and then my
last question we are aware that
Colorado leads the nation in
first time marijuana use among
among the eighth and that that
the of marijuana related
emergency room visits by
Colorado is also on the rise so
we're medical services are going
to be strained of the S. and as
well as law enforcement that our
medical services going to be
strong with this with it with
these under age problems.
Mr speaker and gentleman you're
exactly right in fact I remember
Carly our colleague
Representative Rouch.
He's superintendent of his
school district borders Colorado
and superintendents in Colorado
noted to he that all
legalization did in Colorado was
bringing more truancy hi
teachers and very little money.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentleman and
currently we have similar for
funds and families for underage
drinking is that is that is that
right gentleman.
And this is kind of what you're
trying to do is kind of kind of
piggy back that same concept it
just is just a deterrent to stop
underage drinking this is the
term to stop under age
marijuana use.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan correct thank you
gentlemen thank you Mr speaker.
You for the debate on the
amendment.
The gentle lady from.
Senator a Bernalillo and
Torrance it should be a quiz
thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo county
please yield Mister speaker I
yield to my colleague in the
spans thank you
Mr speaker so I'm looking
through this amendment that you
brought forward.
It's I was looking.
It's illegal for someone to go
and get marijuana for somebody
on I mean no sorry alcohol under
the age of twenty one like if
somebody were to go and purchase
alcohol for someone under twenty
one that is illegal in the state
of New Mexico correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady you are
correct and that is one of the
inconsistencies that I'm
pointing out that's actually a
felony and in this current
legislation the maximum it could
be is a misdemeanor.
If the alcohol servers servers
under age under twenty one
individual.
The penalty is a thirty day
suspension of their license for
first offense.
Thank you for that explanation
and Mister speaker.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
county.
I can't wrap my head around this
where this would be a friendly
amendment because.
In this day and age.
Kids can get access to alcohol
so why wouldn't we want to stop
the excess of children being
able to get older brother or
cousin or uncle to go in and get
them marijuana and then have a
penalty the stiff penalty for
that to try to prevent young
children from getting hold of
marijuana.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
from Bernalillo you are correct
I could also see that
of the you know the teenage
grants the.
plants so plant at grandma's
house she doesn't she's not
aware what he's actually planted
in the backyard and you know
it's under this current are
under this proposed legislation.
She can have up to six plants
so.
Thank you Mr speaker and at that
it that is a very good point to
the one I didn't think about
that if somebody is growing in
their household how we gonna
make sure that children don't
get access to that because I.
I don't know how moonshine is
made but I would imagine that I
would hope that they're not
giving it out to their children
so you think what we would at
least try to do the same thing
to make sure the children not
having access to marijuana
because as we know from all the
studies.
People who smoke marijuana under
certain age is not good for the
brain and all its not good for
the development of brain so when
I read this ammendment to me it
seems like a very friendly
amendment it just seems like
something that you go all this
makes sense we want to penalize
people.
I mean what is the and the gun
world we call it a straw with a
strong man sales we go in and
somebody buys a gun for somebody
else we don't allow that that's
a felony correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes a
straw purchases the legal limit
is felony.
So to me I look at this and I'm
like why don't we just do the
same thing
to me it looks like a totally
friendly amendment somebody
purchases are allows somebody
who's under the age of eighteen
goes up by four we do with
alcohol we deal with guns we
deal with many other things so I
just thank you very much
Representative for bringing this
forward I cannot wrap my head
around why this is not a
friendly amendment other than.
It's okay for eighteen year olds
to get access to marijuana I
just I don't know what else to
say about this thank you Mr
speaker I yield my time.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move to table the
amendment.
The gentle lady's motion is to
table the amendment to yes the
amendment will be tabled no
annually back to debate on it
the vote is now open.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Anderson no
Representative Anderson is no.
Representative Harry Garcia yes
Representative Harry Garcia is a
yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
There is a close vote of forty
two in the affirmative twenty
six in the negative the
amendment has been tabled.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo I thank you for your
answers and unfortunately I
can't support the legislation
thank you Mr speaker okay we'll
go quickly and we have reached
the three hours that we're going
to go to the gentleman from
Santa
to offer an amendment Jennifer
Sandoval Representative and is
thank you Mr speaker
Mr speaker and representative
from Bernalillo.
Closer.
Does the representative from
Bernalillo yield thank you
speaker I yield to the gentle
from Sunderland.
Thank you so much Mr speaker and
representative
I have to amendments I know
we're short on time so I'm just
going to get into rural
amendment two two one zero five
seven point two.
It has been passed out.
As soon as the general news it
it will appear on the website.
I move house floor amendment I'm
not sure what number one number
one to house bill two is amended
generates explained the
amendment of this amendment will
add a municipal police chief
appointed by the New Mexico
association of chiefs of police
to the cannabis regulatory
advisory committee as described
on page starting on page
seventeen in section three
subsection she.
Is the we'll go to the general
for the Germans explaining
amendment gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
Martinez is this a friendly
amendment thank you Mr speaker
having had a conversation with
the gentleman from Santa a
little bit earlier about this
ammendment it looked a little
bit different before but we went
back and forth with such
language and I feel like this is
a friendly amendment.
Okay.
so we have a friendly amendment
does anyone wish to debate it
seeing no desire to debate is
there objection to it.
Hearing none house floor
amendment number one to house
bill two is amended is a doctor.
Okay the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Mr speaker.
Yes there's a second for the
amendment to orange and
gentleman we have made this
remark so what it is gentle lady
to we went to you to add your
friend the amendment and now
we're going to the gentle lady
we've had three hours and it's
in order for me to recognize her
to close debate.
Mr speaker.
This motion having been debated
for three I was I move that
debate sees.
Okay so we could let them the
whole that motion for a second I
may have had a misunderstanding
gentleman from Santa.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Martinez did you
wish to consider the second
amendment.
The temporal Division for study.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
some of our yes I think that
would be fine I think that
that's something that that would
be useful as we embark on this
framework for legalization okay
sorry my misunderstanding
gentleman from Santa Fe to move
house amendment number two.
I move the house floor amendment
number two to house bill two as
amended.
And I believe the two oh two
number is two two one zero four
five point three.
Yes okay that gentleman to
explain the amendment.
This amendments is to include
reporting and studies that and
shall include budgeting general
fund revenue and expenses
impacts on potential funds
created by the cannabis
regulation Act impacts on the
medical cannabis program of
local and state law enforcement
economic impact on the state
including job creation tourism
and other economic impacts
In that section of seventy one
from years twenty three to
twenty seven.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
said that this differently
amendment.
I surjection to it.
Hearing none house floor
amendment number two to house
bill two as amended is adopted
Republican amendments and so
nice we accepted them twice.
Okay now we will go to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker.
This motion having been debated
for three I was I need to that
debate sees.
Generators motion is to end
debate.
Is there objection.
Hearing none debate is ended.
The gentleman from Bernalillo to
close.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you members of the body for a
thoughtful debate today
thoughtful debate yesterday and
about five years of thoughtful
debates on this issue I will not
belabor the point of the hour is
is late if you count all the
work we put in yesterday all
together all of us
I just want same speaker that
I'm proud of this legislature
I'm proud of this legislature
tackles big issues some credit
this legislature chose to tackle
this issue this issue through
this particular venue the
legislative process
I'm glad we didn't go the route
of a constitutional amendment.
In my perspective that's the
lazy way out this is the people
to work and we're here doing it
regardless of how the votes
might fall today Mr speaker with
that I move that house bill two
as amended.
Do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill two as amended the vote is
now open.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Anderson no
Representative Anderson votes
no.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
bridge votes no but it's not
close by a vote of thirty eight
in the affirmative thirty two in
the negative house bill two as
amended has passed the house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
messages.
No objections order Cllr to
read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed the Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill two as amended and request
the concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
this is really entry.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation no
objections to order their to
read.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill to an
act relating to criminal records
providing for expungement of
arrest and conviction record
records for certain cannabis
offenses providing for dismissal
of sand sentences of
incarcerated persons revising
the list of criminal records
that cannot be considered an
application for public
employment licensure or other on
authority to practice a trade
business or profession amending
the criminal record expungement
Act Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill two.
Senate Judiciary Committee says
you percent bill to having been
read twice by title is referred
to the Judiciary Committee.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
committee reports no objections
ordered clear to read.
Mr speaker you're rolling in and
grossing Committee too it's been
referred house bill one has had
it under consideration report
saying that has duly been
enrolled in gross preparatory to
signing by the officers of the
house respectfully submitted
Brittney Barreras chair.
Zero zero committee report on
house bill one all those in
favor please signify by saying
hi.
Well this was Nate.
Really close but I'm gonna give
it to the eyes committee report
is adopted.
Let the record reflect the duly
rolled into gross copy of house
bill one has been signed by the
officers of the house in open
session.
Generally friendly of.
I move that we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business here
in objections order.
Members to announce.
No you can't go home yet.
Yes the gentleman from
Bernalillo and Sandoval Mr
speaker your rules committee is
going to have a short hopefully
short meeting on house bill four
question of Germanus thank you
Mr speaker will meet at two
o'clock.
The point of order is it
Germanus ridge amenity.
Amenities the state of Germanus
so it's both Mr speaker.
And I must have missed that we
can my philosophy class in
college.
Are there further announcements.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Martínez do you
have an innocent yes Mr speaker
thank you the house taxation
revenue committee will compete
today at two thirty to deal with
one Senate bill and Mister
speaker the always make it to
the final four I have been
following.
Sir chairman your your Mike is
cutting out I can't quite hear
you I I not not sure he said Mr
speaker I want to know if the
who won the basketball game and
who is.
Yeah I'm not I'm sorry you're
breaking up you're breaking up
the the gentle lady from
Bernalillo or the generator's
going into regarding Judiciary
Committee.
We're dealer you Mr speaker can
you hear me we can.
Mr speaker the Judiciary
Committee is going to be fifteen
minutes after the rules
committee is come has finished
its business members take note
also for members of the public
who are watching the proceedings
of your legislature you can go
to W. W. W. dot NM Legislature
and M. L. E. G. I. S. stock of
click on the link at the top
that says what's happening it is
not your favorite nineteen
eighties TV show with that link
rather it is link to where you
can click to participate in
offer public comment on the zoom
meetings that are now our
communities.
So we'll have rules fifteen
minutes after the floor
Judiciary when we fifteen
minutes after that to consider
the expansion bill and the tax
revenue committee will meet to
consider Senate bill.
We will return to the floor.
Thirty minutes after the end of
the Judiciary Committee meeting
or tax committee meeting
whichever and last.
And then we'll take up whatever
meeting legislation as before
said also we of course have
house bill two that is now in
the Senate.
We will have to watch their
proceedings to see if it is
amended if so we will need to be
we only to stay in session even
after we passed the Senate bills
if we do pass them I did
consider the sentiments on a
concurrence vote so when we're
able to depart and signee dying
will depend in large measure on
what the Senate does with House
Bill to simply be aware that.
Even if we dispose of the two
Senate bills this afternoon or
this evening we may not be able
to insurance seen ADA if the
Senate is not a service that
house bill two.
Okay gentlelady.
Ms I stand that the help I need
that the house that I'm gonna
recess subject to the call of
the chair.
We will do so I would imagine
that we will be back.
Sometime around six PM would be
my guess.
so and I also believe that we
are providing dinner for
everyone so we'll make that
known so that people can plan
to.
maybe save some room for some.
For some barbecue this coming in
this evening.
Unfortunately is not is not
Powdrell as you we have second
right barbecue for the personal
privilege Mr speaker.
Yeah a state your point.
What started this.
It is not pod draws barbecue.
It is not.
Barbecue thank you Mr speaker.
Your point is well taken the in
those of us who live in Santa Fe
have to suffer from the
knowledge that we don't have
ready access to New Mexico's
finest barbecue.
Right the house the recess
subject to the call of the
chair.
