Thank you madam chair this is
Randy Senator I am from Lee
County southeastern part of the
state and Representative.
Parts of Lovington point of
Hobbs and the rest of the
southern half of the county.
Thank you Representative Lord.
Representative Lara thank you
madam chair from the east
mountains district twenty two
thank you.
Thank you.
Representative Thomson thank you
madam chair I'm not Liz Thomson
house district twenty four which
is the north these types of
Albuquerque happy Thursday thank
you.
Vice chair thank you madam chair
I'm Representative Andrea Romero
excuse me
my popcorn in my truck I'm a.
Trying to eat some popcorn but I
also represent a northern Santa
Fe County from the City of Santa
Fe through the Baca valley into
the city of Espanola thank you
madam chair.
Thank you and I'm chair Joanne
J. Ferrary from house district
thirty seven in Los crucis
so our first bill out do we have
Representative Rehm available.
I was gonna say madam chair we
should call this green day with
all the bills you have just
today.
That's right.
Does that mean we're getting
removed Kerry I'm here.
That was terrible.
So.
Okay
Representative do you want to
introduced house bill twenty six
unlawful firearms small
trafficking.
Representative Rehm your muted.
Okay help.
Okay so my computer froze.
Yeah.
You madam chair in and committee
members
Hello one of my bills were sent
to rules and we've got a matter
rules and what I'm doing is
chasing the bills that you've
already passed we're what we
want to do is combine them and
that's with all of these that we
have here.
House Bill twenty six is
creating the crime of carrying a
firearm while trafficking a
controlled substance the first
year I introduce that was two
thousand and seven and
it's now part of house bill
sixty eight and that's happened
House Judiciary.
What the problem is that we've
seen across the state is
individuals bringing guns to
drug deals and of course once
one gun comes out there and the
gun battle started so we're
having a lot of individuals
killed.
In a drug transaction.
And madam chair with that I'll
go ahead and stand for
questions.
Okay let's go to the audience
and but the pullout please.
Those in the audience will
please signify their in favor or
opposed.
Hey.
Out of twenty seven people
seventeen are in favor and ten
are opposed.
Okay we'll start with those in
opposition first you have one
minute.
And the timer will be there
where you can see it.
Kim Chavez Cook.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Kim Chavez Cook
with the law offices of the
public defender as we have in
past years but we respectfully
oppose this legislation it does
create a new third deck degree
felony crime that would be by
definition added on to that
charge of trafficking that is a
companies are drug trafficking
itself already carries a nine
year sentence for the first
offense and a mandatory eighteen
years in prison for a second
offense so they were talking
about folks who are already
facing significant time we're
the evidence does not show that
increasing penalties has any
deterrent effect whatsoever on
the commission of crimes we also
already have enhancements to
penalties when a firearm is
brandished during the commission
of a crime so if that is the
case as well as the sponsor
describes there would be
additional penalties there and
if the person was already a
felon and was carrying a firearm
that is also already a crime and
all of this would be subject to
habitual offender enhancement we
simply don't need more penalties
and more sentences to address
this problem our sentencing
scheme is already quite
comprehensive thank you so much.
Thank you next.
I am Metcalfe.
Good afternoon committee thank
you I'm someone with a previous
felony conviction is already
subject to penalties for firearm
possession regardless of whether
or not they're trafficking
controlled substances substances
and I'll go out on a limb here
and deposit that someone who was
caught trafficking is likely
someone with a previous felony
conviction there are already
subject to penalty per firearm
possession additionally
trafficking told substances
already crime as it should be
with its own penalties in place
I see this is mostly redundant
another attempt to increase
prosecutors ability to attack to
staff charges leading to costly
additional prison time and
percent longer than about a year
longer sentences have an
increased likelihood of
recidivism and this is from the
Washington state institute for
public policy as legislation is
reactive rather than proactive
it's unlikely to benefit public
safety thank you so much.
I'm sorry your time is up next.
Campos.
Members of the committee my
name's Lucille that combustible
policy manager with old features
was the decision to HB twenty
six New Mexicans all over our
state are struggling with
substance use people with
personal amounts of substances
can be caught up in trafficking
charges this bill does not
address the use the fire are.
Really carrying a firearm we
need a comprehensive plans to
address substance use in our
communities instead of enhanced
penalties please vote no on H.
B. twenty six thank you.
Thank you I'm sorry your time is
up next.
Barron Jones.
Madam chairman of the committee
and my name's Barron's also they
still use of New Mexico the ACLU
of New Mexico stands strong
opposition to this bill of
creating excuse me longer prison
sentences on there's no evidence
that longer prison sentences
deter crime
this bill is is part of the
tough on crime bills and it
crackdown on the war on drugs a
lot of talk about just such as
this may play well during the
eight years it really is an
effective to our to soften our
public safety problems and acts
you all to vote no on this this
this this legislation.
Thank you next.
Public comment for opposition
madam chair okay thank you now
those who are in support
would you please raise your
hands.
Our house bill twenty six.
Kerry called.
Thank you Ron good afternoon
madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Terry Cole
I am the president and CEO of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce this legislation
addresses a very real problem on
Albuquerque streets drug deals
that are wrapped into shoot outs
usually among young more then or
where weapons are used to turn
drug deals interoperates we have
a gun violence problem in New
Mexico criminals carry firearms
cavalierly and their presence
during drug transactions
immediately increases the risk
danger and possibility of
tragedy we urge you to support
this bill thank you madam chair.
Thank you next.
Our contact.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee of
Carter was tied up this is Leri
Sonntag representing the New
Mexico business coalition we
represent hundreds of businesses
and thousands of New Mexicans
our focus is to make New Mexico
a better place to live and work
but we have an abundance of good
paying jobs to provide for our
families the crime problem that
we have in our state is
conquered totally contradiction
to a better environment for
individuals and certainly
businesses and providing jobs we
stand strong support of this
legislation to help address a
portion of that crime problem
thank you.
Thank you next.
Summer help.
Thank you very much as a gun
owner and taxpayer I support
this legislation because it
already targets people who are
committing crimes that turn into
tragedies.
There are I have to question the
the one statement that there are
no indications of longer
sentences deter crime.
In my opinion for what it's
worth if they are serving in a
longer sentence in prison they
will not be committing
additional crimes this will make
our streets safer thank you.
Thank you.
Linda M..
Hi there I'm just a member of
the public but I want to say
that to me
having guns at some sort of.
Drug situation.
Would likely lead to more
homicides.
That's my own personal opinion
and I am and very strong
favor of this bill.
And that's it.
Thank you next.
Just as.
I thank you for listening my
name is venture Randal Shorty
and I'm in favor my son
Zachariah Shorty is a victim of
homicide here in San Juan County
and again I stand in favor of
this bill thank you very much.
Thank you next.
Madam chair that was the final
public comment.
Okay thank you
Yes if you could let in
district attorney Diana Louise
she'll be my expert on all these
bills.
Sure Diana loose L. U. C. E.
thank you.
Okay my computer froze.
I can get this better.
Okay.
Would you like to stay in New
more remarks or have your expert
speak Representative.
Miss Lewis would like to see any
comments fine if not then we're
ready for questions.
Madam chair and members of the
committee Representative.
Good afternoon just briefly to
address a couple of the comments
we heard this bill is
specifically caring it is
different than the definition of
brandishing
under thirty one eighteen
sixteen brandishes to display
are right now and caring being
that they have it on their
person or have it with them in
the vehicle I had it with them
where they were well they were
trafficking also regarding that
this could be another crime that
can enhance the.
If there if someone
we are out limited if they prior
felony conviction is within the
last ten years since have
completed that sentence I and so
I'm we do have individuals that
their felonies or to all that
to our traffic directs thank
you.
Was that all.
Your muted miss Lewis.
Yes I'm madam chair that that
was all for now thank you.
Okay thank you Representative
bring or anything else.
There will.
No madam chair we're ready go to
questions.
Okay thank you Representative
Pettinger.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for.
bringing this bill back to this
again and the thank you my DH
are.
For a for her comments you know
I I appreciate the bill.
I appreciate the fact that
We need to have.
So for laws when it comes to a
multi crime of that.
And.
I appreciate the comments on
both sides in during the poll.
But the reality in my opinion is
that the longer we keep a drug
trafficker that's willing it to
use the gun.
Off the street the longer we
do that.
Individuals ability to traffic
drugs.
To continue to increase the flow
of drugs in the state of New
Mexico that's a win win in my
opinion.
I think this legislation truly
Sauls is is one.
Spoke in the wheel that provides
a solution to.
Some of the crimes that we have.
You know over the last couple of
years we're we're there's been a
huge attempt to do fun police
even in this state and.
Allowing people to get away with
certain things
I think it's important that that
R. DA.
Our police departments and our
judges.
All have the ability to ensure
that the the heinous people are
set aside they all and we've had
discussions during other bills
have the ability to reduce
crime.
During sentencing and during the
trial.
When when the situation fits.
But you can't increase the crime
yes you can enhance something
yes you can do that but we need
the ability to put a stop to
some of the things that are
happening in the state just like
our governor said when we
started the pandemic one life is
too many so the fact that we
lose lives.
In a drug trafficking and so
that because of of guns and
we're not able to enhance those
penalties and keep that person
off the street this enough to
sit here and say okay we've got
to step back and we've got to
figure out what we've got to do
I think Representative Rehm is
been trying to do this for years
I think it's great that that is
consistent with the governor's
call and can and consistent with
the final crime.
That she's turned around she
structured that out and
I support this legislation and I
hope to see it continue on past
thank you all.
Thank you is there any thing it
would you like to respond
anything or should we go to the
next person.
Madam chair no no response.
Okay thank you Representative
Lord.
Thank you sorry madam chair at
that I'm it myself.
As Representative Pettigrew is
was talking I was thinking a lot
about that how.
I'm sorry about the officer
that was down in the south the
state police officer that was
killed and he was killed with a
drug trafficker that had a
weapon.
And when we're doing all these
bills but I keep thinking about
is.
How we're trying to.
We always to the community I
guess is what I'm trying to grow
your to the community to keep
the community safe that's part
of our job we do the budgets we
we do sells passed laws but we
also have a duty to keep our
citizens safe.
So there are times I know that
there's people.
If you were are dealing drugs
and had a drug addiction.
I understand a lot of people's
point of view is we need to get
them to rehab get them help.
I guess if the first time they
did and they got help and
rehabilitate themselves but
we're looking at somebody who
like that person who did the
shooting down there.
Their intention was to take law
enforcement down at all costs.
And when you get somebody who is
in many of the were tweaked out
of their minds.
And they have a weapon and
they're trafficking drugs there
were far more likely to use that
weapon on a law enforcement
officer.
And this is not graduation this
is this Karen having using a
weapon so there's a difference
between those two so some is
rolling down the highway like
that last gentleman did and they
have a gun on them and they get
pulled over they are far more
likely to shoot and kill
somebody.
So I appreciate the intention of
this bill of trying to I mean we
have a drug problem in New
Mexico and we have a criminal
problem in New Mexico.
And the goal is yes some people
can be real be rehabilitated and
some people their intention is
to kill people.
And from what I've seen in the
history people have a weapon
when they're trafficking drugs
they're going to kill at all
costs I've never said I've never
seen a situation where it's
different where they just put
their hands up and surround
themselves are usually more
likely to have a should out law
enforcement so are
Representative re my appreciate
bills bring this bill back
forward again and I will support
your bill and I just want to
that's all I have to say about
that thank you I yield my time.
Thank you are there any other
questions for before I make a
few comments.
Okay Representative green can
you tell me that since use of a
firearm during commission of a
felony already mandates added
incarceration in a felony
conviction of why is this bill
necessary.
Madam chair of from
understanding or you meaning it
is a felon who has that done for
the this is dealing
specifically with an individual
bringing the gun to a drug deal.
I'm I don't think I quite
understand it maybe D. A. loose
understands the question better.
Madam chair and I'm
Representative I'm if your
question is I'm what is defined
thank you maybe a felony yes.
I'm sorry madam chair grant.
I'm just.
No I I was listening and you
dropped off.
Madam chair representative I'm.
The distinguishing factors
between this piece of
legislation and the laws we
already have our I'm the
enhancement that we could do if
they brandished a firearm used
or display is different than
caring that's what's in this
bill it's also different and
enhancing if they have a prior
felony conviction not everyone
that traffics drugs has a prior
felony conviction they may have
a prior felony arrest or their
family I may be too old to be
used and so this is when the
individual is curing the farms I
doesn't require that it be used
it doesn't require it be made
known and in so it really does
fit the situations when an
individual I is found to be
trafficking I and they had the
farm at on their person or with
them in their vehicle that that
is where there's not anything
that covers that currently
under New Mexico law since we
changed on that the use of farm
to the definition of
brandishing.
Okay I'm so how does this deter
drug trafficking
If the person is only
Carrying an unloaded gun fire
when trafficking.
This will use them to see the
criminals said sentencing when I
don't do you talk about that.
Madam chair representative I'm I
don't believe there's anything
here about it being an unloaded
firearm I don't think that's
distinguish the differences
brandishing means that you use
it meaning you maybe are at a
point in somebody's face
displaying it making it known to
the person that like I've got a
gun give me what you've got
that's brandishing this is
caring so the person has a farm
on them they are trafficking
Drax that that is the difference
right now all if a person is
trafficking I'm and they likely
have a farmer I mean that is the
reality and so right now there's
no extra charge for that they
simply are charter trafficking
and that's it the judge can
consider it when they had to
sentencing if you're asking what
is the deterrent to trafficking
and carrying a gun the reality
is I don't know if they're I'm
the individuals that are in the
drug trade really
see see that the losses not
having a lot of teeth in them
John a lot of mandatory time so
they are going to bring a gun
and they're going to get what
they came for and so the
deterrent is that this gives us
a way to add on time when they
do bring the guys and they are
trafficking tracks and right now
there's there's they can bring
the gun habit with have a in our
car trafficking Drax.
And that's not a crime unless
they are convicted felons.
So Representative I guess I'm
concerned that this doesn't
really someone could have a
concealed gun and not be you
know shooting it or anything and
this would still give them extra
penalties
of just four track you know
above and beyond trafficking
whether they were using a gun or
not.
You madam chair of the problem
is when you bring the firearm to
a drug deal you escalate the
violence and that's what we're
trying to pre vent is not bring
the the gun to the drug deal and
so we're seeing that this is
also part of the house bill
sixty eight which has been
passed out of the committee is
now in House Judiciary and so
I'm trying to move this up there
and get it combined with house
bill sixty eight.
Okay I have no further questions
what is the work of
Representative Pettigrew did you
have another question or just
your hand was not taken I do
have a question because I
think I heard one thing and I
want to hear I'd like to to
clarify one of the madam chair
one of the questions you talked
about what in in in your
discussion
was with respect to a concealed
weapon.
Just for clarification
standpoint.
Was there a chance that you're
talking about somebody that may
potentially have a concealed
carry.
License in the in the
What and then have a concealed
gun while.
Breaking the law with drug
trafficking.
Because that that would be a
whole different scents and
something that the is illegal as
well but would building would
need to be.
Very concerning to to our
console Terry losses well.
that's Representative that's my
point of this bill really isn't
necessary.
Well it is Representative range
it's.
And even if it's concealed.
There's there madam chair and
and I don't know if this is
proper in this discussion but
in in.
My understanding of law there's
a difference between having a
concealed weapon and having the
ability to carry it concealed
what.
By.
The very chart that I have in my
wallet that allows me to carry
one.
I I have the right the state
says I have the right to have a
concealed weapon.
But not everybody has the right
to have a concealed weapons and
in the this this doesn't this
legislation piece of legislation
in my opinion and and J. Luce
who are representative of bring
may want to disagree with.
But you know.
The people that carry these are
are are problems.
So I just wanted to to have that
moment of clarity to make sure
we're not trying to confuse the
difference between a conceal
carry.
Some are carrying a gun
concealed versus some I that is
legally allowed to carry
concealed which that license
would be revoked the minutes of
my chose to do that and traffic
drugs drugs at the same time.
Madam chair all at
agency will use go ahead and
comment on it but this is
dealing with bringing the guy on
to a drug deal.
Whether you use it or not that
is the big key with this we're
trying to discourage that
activity but all all have miss
Suazo comment also.
Madam chair representative I'm.
Sorry is that an individual is
bringing a gun to a drug
trafficking
situation that is what this is
penalizing because we do not
want individuals to have guns at
the a drug transaction that's
occurring they often do escalate
and so that is what this is
trying to
caramelized and the TIRS bring
that farm hi it is.
I'm.
Separate from an individual that
would have a concealed Kerry
license but I I would agree with
Representative have every
statement that individual that
had a concealed Kerry license if
they're trafficking drugs under
charged they're going to have
that sorry
Okay.
In order to stop talking I'm
sorry and madam chair.
Chair is experiencing a
technical problem with our
computer please bear with us for
just one moment I apologize.
I think she was unfortunately
unmuted will just
Can you can finish your
statement sorry
Ms.
Thank you madam vice chair I'm
it it is it is separate and and
what we are saying is in Holland
Chinese for gun I and that is
what this bill is focusing on
having the gun present bringing
the gun to that drug transaction
it is not currently something
that specifically there is an
enhancement for unless it falls
under brandishing
and we are trying to determine
that escalation of violence for
individuals are shot or killed
during a drug transaction thank
you.
Thank you loose I think is a
chairman for ari reconnects are
there any other comments from
the committee.
Seeing.
But yes.
Madam chair you are you back can
we can are you connected to us I
am back yes.
Your major yes we just got
through
comments and questions and
Representative Pettigrew just
motion to do pass.
And I would like to do a
substitute motion to table madam
chair.
Okay the motion to table.
Is there a second I will mention
to table.
I was second thank you.
Thank you okay we'll take a roll
call vote on motion to table.
Representative Lord.
No to table.
Representative Pettigrew.
No to table with COVID please.
Representative Thomson yes.
Vice chair Romero.
Yes.
Madam chair for our.
Yes.
Three to table motion succeeds.
Thank you
We have our.
Table on your bill H. P. twenty
six Representative with a three
to
Madam chair I requested a
comment okay I will go on with
house bill twenty.
I'm sorry yes of course I wasn't
sure I heard that go ahead
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank there thank you madam
chair I just want to say to the
representative I appreciate your
can to NASA the with continuing
to push this through I wish
people understood our laws will
better and understood the need
for this and I do appreciate the
fact that is stable it does set
a precedent on whether or not we
truly in New Mexico want to
fight crime or not and the it's
frustrating thank you.
Okay thank you let's go on to
house bill twenty seven
Representative breeding to
present.
Yes madam chair this is a
another one of my bills that are
you introduce since twenty
eighteen and has been
plagiarized stand but in house
bill five.
This is the bail bond.
It is allowing
are criminals in our revolving
door that we're seeing currently
and so
What this legislation says is if
you are you committed a violent
crime.
Or if you go ahead and you're
out on release.
From a felony and you commit
another felony or if you violate
court orders such as cutting off
your ankle monitor then you will
have to prove to the court that
you are not dangerous right now
the the DA has to prove that
there are no conditions of
release that would make the
community safer that you're that
dangerous and all let miss Lucy
go ahead make some comments now.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative ring
I'm.
The district attorney's
association I have in support of
on it legislation that presents
presumptions we are in a
position now where we have to
establish even first degree
murder and that a person has
committed first degree murder
may have committed acts that
killed multiple victims that
that person is a danger I and I
that no other means can
reasonably protect the community
we believe that this legislation
is needed we believe that the
rising crime right.
And individuals that are out on
conditions of release that have
committed crimes violent crimes
that this legislation is needed
we've heard a lot about
statistics hi and there what I
can say on behalf of victims and
victims families are that if
there's one person is injured or
murdered by someone who is out
in conditions of release that is
too many it is our job to
protect the public eye and to
act on behalf of our citizens to
make New Mexico a safe place for
people to let and our children
to grow up I'm would stand for
questions thank you.
Okay we will it is there
anything else you'd like to add
Representative bring.
No ma'am again this is a bill
that's been plagiarized and put
in house bill five and as passed
out of this committee.
Hey are there we'll go go to the
audience and take the call
please.
Those in favor signify and those
opposed.
All right of the twenty seven
people we have fourteen in favor
and thirteen opposed.
So we'll go to public comment
and those who are opposed
art let's go ahead those are in
favor will do first so if you'll
please raise your hand if you're
in favor of this bill.
Terry called.
Thank you rob and good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee my name is sherry Cole
I am the president CEO for the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce twice each day and
Bernalillo county someone who
was released from jail pre trial
is arrested for a new crime and
every other day a release
dependent is arrested for a new
violent crime in our community
the revolving door exemptions by
design in fact our system is now
a predominantly pre trial
release system and GPS
monitoring isn't working and
judges are simply refusing to
hold our most serious offenders
in jail pre trial so something
has to give and that's why we're
supporting HB five and that's
why we're support happy to
support this bill to we commend
the sponsor point hearing act
and we urge your support thank
you so very much.
Okay next.
Carlos impact.
Good afternoon madam chair
committee members it's Leri
Sonntag on behalf of the New
Mexico business coalition.
And for the reasons that were
laid out by the bill Sanchez
which we greatly appreciate
bringing this legislation
forward and of others that have
been set we stand in full
support of HB twenty seven thank
you.
K. next.
Your main summer help.
Thank you madam chair.
I support this bill because it
makes sense.
While also hopefully deter that
revolving door that this accused
of serious crimes keeping them
from being released into the
community pre trial.
Especially those who use weapons
such as guns in the commission
of those crimes I don't know
about anyone else but I sure am
tired of hearing reports of
people like Trey bells be cut
off his ankle monitor and then
fail to show after being
released on first degree murder
charges I'm also tired of
hearing people like Paul Raymond
Apodaca a convicted felon with a
long history of violence he was
also released in one on to kill
more people as a citizen and
taxpayer I support this bill
thank you.
Thank you next.
Alicia what are.
Thank you madam chair and
committee I am the least you
know Tero the co founder of the
New Mexico crusaders for justice
my son Nicholas was carjacked
and kidnapped my oldest son we
are so terrible skills in front
of his home trying to save his
brother was held at gunpoint.
I support this bill because
currently New Mexico stands
apart from other bail reform
jurisdictions that you're
capable presumption.
We need to keep violent
offenders out of the community
this bill would give guidance to
judges that alligned community
expectations you can.
Violent offenders New Mexicans
no longer feel safe and I feel
that this bill is definitely a
start thank you.
Thank you next.
We sell our our.
Yes good afternoon
my name is Li somewhat I listen
I stand with the New Mexico
crusaders for justice my Sen
Joseph Morales was killed on
November the thirteenth of two
thousand and twenty one by
someone that was released the
mansion should have not been out
on the street to commit another
crime I feel that New Mexico is
not a safe place my son was
attending the university of New
Mexico he went to Albuquerque to
better his life and it
absolutely cost him his life.
Thank you that's also.
Thank you next.
Only.
Thank you madam chairman members
of the committee for reasons
already stated in the interest
of the committee's time just a
note that the development in the
county chamber of commerce of
which I am the president CEO
stands firmly in support of this
bill and urges this committee to
take action in the affirmative
thank you so much.
Crystal match.
From.
Listen to today I am with the
New Mexico crusaders as well and
I support this bill
as it seems as if criminals
lately have overtaken our
community and we are on our way
to again breaking records in
homicide
not only in homicide but other
crimes as well for these repeat
offenders that are continuously
going in this revolving door I
feel that judges and lawmakers
should hold these criminals
accountable for
what they're doing the
disruption to our community and
keeping us safe my father was
killed in two thousand twenty
along with
By his neighbor and this person
had previous charges as well and
shouldn't have been in the
community please support this
bill thank you for your time.
I'm sorry your time is up next
person.
Yes.
Thank you.
Good afternoon madam chair I am
thank you Randal Shorty and I
stand in favor of this bill I
stand with the New Mexico
crusade for justice Senate and
the into my W..
As stated before my son
Zachariah Shorty was a victim of
homicide although an arrest has
been has not been made on his
behalf I would not want the
people responsible for his
murder to be released into the
community so again I stand for
this bill thank you very much.
Does that Otero.
Hello my name is does that Otero
and I'm also with the New Mexico
crusaders for justice my son
Kyle Martinez was only fifteen
years old when he was shot and
killed on April twenty second of
twenty twenty I stand in favor
of this page this bill HB twenty
seven the person who killed my
son is now being held with the
federal the federal people and I
will not get justice for my son
until after they're through with
him he was out and running
around three weeks prior
shooting at other people before
he killed my son you should have
been in jail and he should not
have been released I hope that
we can get these people to stay
in jail and stay off the streets
because it's not fair to any of
us families who have to go
through this and it's a
revolving door that needs to be
shut so I am very in favor of HB
twenty seven thank you for this
name have a great day.
Thank you next.
Galaxy a party to provide your.
Hi my name is Erica Walker and I
strongly believe support this
bill my son's name is Lorenzo
Romero and he lost his life due
to gun violence on October
thirty first twenty twenty one I
was just eighteen years old now
I don't know has been arrested a
man on his monitor but I do know
that there is a revolving door
in our our state and we do need
to do something I'm very afraid
for my younger children to grow
up in the state of New Mexico I
was born and raised here and it
worries me to have to raise my
children here I'm scared for
their state the I'm scared for
them to be out there
just at the grocery store in
general and something needs to
be done these criminals do not
care about the things that
they're doing and the people
that they are hurting and
they're just continuing to do it
I am strongly strongly in
support of this bill.
Madam chair that was the final
comment in support.
Okay thank you
Representative rain do you want
to
Make any other further comments
before we go to the committee.
No madam chair we're ready go.
I have directing we didn't do
our public comment for
opposition.
I'm sorry that was just those
who were in.
Abre.
Okay
There's a whole lot of people
now we'll go to those who would
like to make public comment for
those who are
opposed.
To be.
Twenty seven.
I and my tax.
Good afternoon thank you I
requiring because to be shown
that a person is a danger to the
community does not mean
releasing people
indiscriminately without the
requirement so that a person be
shown by evidence that hearing
to be a danger to the community
we rest we harm to individuals
who are charged but not
convicted as well as to our
families like the remaining in
detention until trial jobs will
be lost families may use lose a
wage earner and become
vulnerable to housing and food
insecurity among other harms
incarceration itself is damaging
to individuals on a number of
levels so I believe we owe it to
ourselves to require evidence
presented hearing to demonstrate
that someone who was accused but
not convicted of a violent crime
is a danger before subjecting
them to be detained indefinitely
pre trial thank you.
Rachel Feltman.
Hello.
Yes.
Okay my name is Rachel Feltman
I'm representing a group of
called indivisible sos of Santa
Fe we're group of ninety women
who work on law enforcement
issues in the state we oppose
this bill we think that based on
the data that has been collected
and presented in.
By the legislative finance
Council there's there will be a
huge increase in people who are
are detained under this bill and
may be innocent up to forty
percent of the innocent and
average that will cause lots of
destruction and harm to them we
don't think this is an effective
way to solve the problem and
therefore we oppose this.
Thank you next.
Campos.
And members of the committee my
name is assumed that Campos I'm
a policy manager pulled futures.
We strongly oppose H. B. twenty
seven.
The level we can not violate
people's constitutional rights
by denying them bail imprisoning
them guilty an investigation in
pre trial states this would
disproportionately affect
communities of color individuals
could be incarcerated for months
waiting to see if the DA will
decide to file charges or while
they await the trial.
The reason LFC report showed
that ninety five percent of
people on pre trial release did
not commit a crime on the other
hand in over eighty five percent
of felony cases the is are not
by a motion.
Go does not need to prohibit pre
trial release but instead is the
systems we already have in place
please vote no image B. twenty
seven thank you.
Thank you next.
Your account Salazar.
Good evening chair members of
the committee my name is Jack
cells are and I'm calling for us
no New Mexico I stand in
opposition of house bill twenty
second growing up in Rio Arriba
county has shown me what.
A huge amount of people.
Show me what a huge amount of
people we have in a result the
door to the car stereo system
majority of our home miss course
reader for months at a time
until they're given an
opportunity to see a judge
passing house bill twenty seven
will just keep couldn't we'll
just continue keeping people
incarcerated always do more tax
dollars and further harming.
Individuals and their families
please put please vote no on
house bill one forty.
When house bill twenty seven I'm
sorry thank you.
Thank you for listening.
Chavez Cook.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee from Travis cook
at the law offices of the public
defender we do oppose any
approach to rebuttable
presumptions for a many of the
reasons already mentioned
primarily though because any
such approach is in direct
conflict with the constitution
which The New Mexico
constitution places a burden of
proof on that state to actually
prove that a particular person
is dangerous not just that they
are charged with the particular
crime any approach that relieves
the state of that burden is in
direct violation of the
constitution this that is also
coming at a time when our jails
are extremely overpopulated
based on staffing shortages with
corrections officers and medical
staff and it is a terrible time
to be sending more people to
jail where they are in grave
danger as well many of those
people are present are innocent
they are all presumed innocent
and a lot of people and up being
either have their cases
dismissed or convicted of a much
lesser offense than the one that
makes them sounded dangerous
please oppose this bill.
Thank you next.
John.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name's Barron Jones
ACLU of New Mexico senior policy
strategist unfortunately I
understand all too much to pay
many of the speakers in support
of this bill Carrie having
witnessed my older brother's
murder.
While we appreciate the Sanchez
effort in the ten of the
proposed legislation with
respect please and this makes
the point seven with many
reasons stated passes a
basically twenty Senator
happened just after the impact
of communities reeling from
decades long on crime policies
he can be locked up for a couple
days ago long months waiting for
drought could have a negative
effect on one's ability to
provide those in themselves and
their family and I ask you to
oppose this legislation thank
you much.
Thank you next.
New Mexico presenters.
Hi my name is Danielle
Sepe trip my son was two kids he
was eighteen on April twenty
first twenty twenty one I feel I
am for this bill a hundred
percent I know one of the people
that killed my son had did
drugs.
K. with the undercover cop in
the he was not charged and you
have Senator.
Things going on with him and I
am for it because I think I
would probably have my sent to
date if the what a charge them
this was a week before he was
killed.
I am for this bill.
Thank you.
Thank you I think we are in
opposition of the bill right
now.
That was the final public
comment madam chair okay so she
hi this is the first part all
right we'll go to the committee
is there anything else you'd
like to add Representative rain
are your witness right expert.
Madam chair we can see if this
will.
Your muted.
We can see if miss Lou's has any
more comments
All right one of the comments
that I heard was that they were
held in jail and pled to a
lesser charge well that's the
reality of our criminal justice
system and you know if perhaps
we need a bill that says that
they won't.
There won't be any plea bargains
would be the way to remedy the
that that anyway we'll see if
Miss Suazo says some of.
Madam chair members of the
committee Representative as the
fifth district attorney I
personally draft pre trial
detention motions and have done
that numerous pre trial
detention hearings are and at
the Supreme Court in New Mexico
has stated that we're not
required to put on witnesses or
evidence to court can I'm make a
determination based on the
attached from will complain I'm
an affidavit which is a proper
evidence and so for those who
say that we have to put on
evidence the supreme court's
already determined the court can
take notice at that following
we're still required to file the
motion and attach that come
complaint affidavit I'm and when
it comes to people talking about
people sitting in jail for a
long time the Supreme Court has
mandated a schedule a priority
of individuals in pre trial
detention at their trials will
go first and hi they have
dictated that they will be done
within a year some of them are
set within six months and these
are homicide trials and we're
talking about trying to get back
lab reports on my report.
In a short amount of time so
some of those concerns are not
really what we see and day to
day practice I'm instead what we
do see our us having to I try to
keep a volunteer I. individual
with a past history of
convictions are farms are your
appears and other cases pending
I'm and I can talk specifically
about the case that made
national news on that is still
pending talk about the issue of
the pre trial detention only the
young woman that threw her baby
into the trash dumpster
at that case I probably makes
the point of what for
restricting to see the entire
event unfold on video and know
that the state is still required
to put on evidence and witnesses
told that hearing there there's
no there's no presumption for
that were the judge found that
the evidence was very strong so
I think that what we're talking
about is the discretion of the
district attorney's for not
following in every case I'm I
think it shows great discretion
on that that we're following
only in select cases and so
we're not going to be filling up
the jails and separate these pre
trial detention ten H. B. twenty
seven will allow us to hold the
worst of the worst I thank you
madam chair.
Thank you.
We'll go to the anything else
Representative bring.
No madam chair we're ready for
questions okay thank you
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
So.
You are a I'm sorry you are one
of the co sponsors on this bill
yes I was just about to say
that.
Okay thanks thank you.
As one of the co sponsors on
this bill.
So one of the reasons I became a
co sponsoring this bill is
because when I was activist and
as a legislator I'm costing out
talking to people and having
town halls and and hearing from
them and going out throughout
the state.
And one of the biggest
complaints I here's you've gotta
stop that revolving doors you
have got to help us with this
crime issue and that's number
one.
But before go on I want to say
something really quick the
people called into the moms and
friends that have lost loved
ones my heart breaks for you
it's very tragic in this
incredibly beautiful state of
New Mexico with the most amazing
people I've ever met in my life
that we have such a horrendous.
Not just crime issue but a
violent crime issue so when I
saw this
Bill I I signed onto it because.
I I guess what we need to do I
think we need to do is go
through the bill because I don't
know if people are understanding
that a when someone gets
arrested.
The law enforcement officer has
to have probable cause that has
to be shown.
And then the prosecutor has to
have probable cause and then the
insured to the bill and half
says it has to be proven by
clear and convincing evidence so
we're taking our certain people
and we're saying okay one
Forsman rest of this person that
base and our problem calls the
prosecutor felt there was enough
evidence to move forward and
that there was clear and
convincing evidence so.
Madam chair and representative
I'd like to go through this bill
can you define for me on page
two because we're gonna go
through clear and convincing
evidence and dangerous people
can you first defined
it is number one on line five
the defendant is charged with a
capital offense or serious
violent offence can you explain
to me what a capital offenses
and with a serious violent
offenses.
Madam chair and Representative
Lord I'm I have this loose
address those because she deals
with those every day and and can
give the best dancers.
Madam chair representative on
the board I'm in in New Mexico
I'm a capital offense was are
originally and the death penalty
that was repealed and so I'm
really truly at the we still
have first degree defined this
capital F. and spend our Supreme
Court has basically said it's
not really a capital offense to
really only maybe first degree
blocked out parole would be a
capital offense still in New
Mexico but a series following
offenses by statute so you just
legislators have decided the
specific crimes are eight series
following intense and they are
specific enumerated crimes in
only those I would would be what
is up and I at one.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative thank you miss
Lou so what about the current B.
like murder right
aggravated assaults with those
be examples of violent crimes.
Yes okay so thank you Madam what
I'm trying to establish is so
we've got very violent people.
To done very violent crimes such
as murder such as rape.
It is aggravated assault.
And these are the people that
were taken under consideration
of showing that there's clear
and convincing evidence.
At the most violent criminals
are the ones who fall under this
bill so I want to make sure that
that that's that everybody
understands that so.
Sh we go to outline to and this
person has brandish or discharge
a firearm so now in fact if I'm
understanding this correctly and
and please let me know feminine
chair representative as I
mentioned this correctly now
we're taking a.
Person has committed murder are
we found probable cause that
they they are more likely than
not have committed murder or
rape or aggravated assault and
now this also includes somebody
who used a weapon in that crime
is that correct is that with
section two says.
Madam chair yes miss Lewis
please.
Madam chair representative I if
I'm if I'm reading page two of
HB twenty seven correctly I'm I
believe that one two three four
five and six or or they're
independent of each other so
that the person could be charged
with a non series following the
fence or non capital offense and
if they brandished or discharged
a firearm they could do and I
that would be at one of the
factors that the judge is
considering at two as the
presumption I'm in the service
of violent offenses are on page
three of the bill
under and.
The.
Subsection to our and so I hope
I answered I hope I answered
your question if I'm in terms
the representative and your
legislation in correctly I I I
apologize no thank you madam
chair and representative yes I I
should have said or I was trying
to go through all the things
that could could be this could
be someone who did a murder rape
aggravated assault with with
anything even in their bare
hands to would be the
Braniff centre discharging a
weapon
and then I was going to I'm just
trying to make sure that
everybody understands that this
isn't just something that
somebody decide all I don't like
this person or this person did
this we're going to this is this
is serious and there's a series
of steps have to be gone through
sh so madam chair representative
I read and I'm just gonna read
because there's there's there's
some really no question so the
defendant committed and is
charged with a felony offense.
While pending trial or
sentencing that right there is
extremely important to
understand this person's ready
done something and then we let
about they did it due to
announce again.
the defendant has failed to
appear to court also really
important which shows that they
are a slight risk
Defense the finish demonstrated
a pattern of failure to follow
conditions of release release.
Super also important because it
shows that this person has been
released their stipulations are
not following through with any
of these so
madam chair and representative I
I thank you for Mrs thank you
for pointing out to page three
because when we do talk about a
serious violent offender I want
to make sure that stands we're
talking about somebody who's
done a murder or there's
manslaughter or there's third
degree aggravated battery or
there is third degree activated
battery against a household.
Well then member there is first
degree kidnapping there is
criminal sexual penetration
right.
There is and very very very
important second and third
degree criminal sexual contact
with a minor so are.
we just I don't want those
people on the street first and
second degree robbery and second
degree aggravated arson and
continues on a are read it but
Senator there's all kinds of
things in here.
So when I look at this I don't
look at somebody who's done like
a minor offense and we're saying
okay we're just going to lock
you up and not release you Madam
chair representative I I and I
think Representative let me know
if I understand this correctly
these are people who have raped
murdered.
Done aggravated assaults and and
and part G. R. sexual contact
with a minor they've done some
pretty heinous crimes one four
spent has seen there's probable
cause and the district attorney
has seen that there's probable
cause so these these are the
people right these are the
people that we are asking okay
we don't want them out so can
you tell me a little bit more
about what clear and convincing
evidence would look like for
there be anything more than just
we have a history of these
things they're very violent
people and is there anything
more that I need to understand
what the section I'm.
She set the bar.
She.
I'm not.
Sh hello chair representative to
be there.
I feel like I'm gonna say on you
like to follow.
I.
To
please.
You can't hear us.
Madam chair representative board
I'm so that everyone understands
the levels of proof I think that
that's why clear convincing is
supported I'm at.
Well because is I'm the lowest
standard for at the the criminal
system we didn't go to a
preponderance of the evidence
within go to clear and
convincing and then ultimately
beyond reasonable doubt which is
what we have to prove for a
conviction of an individual of a
crime so it is a high standard
that we have to establish clear
and convincing and so I'm.
I I think for the committee
members to understand
that a judge's are for persons
already been arrested that that
probable costs so it's not just
the next level up to a
preponderance it's an even
higher level to clear and
convincing I and so it is a high
level of proof that we have to
establish in the court can rely
on a proper can rely on the
attach from a complaint
affidavit the Camilla's sister
exhibits
and I to make a determination I
and so what this allows is
support to look at individuals
who have committed what we deem
as hi Sir respond offenses are
and I make the determination
based on that motion being filed
respect from a complainant catch
on it that we have hi Matt are
burdened I at that point I and
then the defense may or may not
wish to present anything to show
that that what we've established
our it is not accurate or not
complete.
Thank you thank you madam chair
representative from but I
thought I was only one on here
but thank you friends in that
I'm.
So I guess the point of this as
I read through it and what and
why I signed on to this bill is
we're taking people they've done
some very very heinous crimes
and I went and looked at some
stats and.
Most of the time the fast with.
During the time I had one I
first want to say about ninety
nine percent of time when there
is probable cause it's shown
somebody's done something in the
prosecutor has shown that
there's probable cause as far
more likely not that that person
is actually to get convicted of
this crime for something that
they have done and again we're
not talking about shoplifting
we're talking about people
they've done some very
horrendous things.
So I guess at the and what we
have to look at with this bill.
We've we've proven beyond a
shadow of a doubt that this
person falls into these
different categories we would
have sex offenders also just
noticed that we have aggravated
battery upon a law enforcement
officer.
So this persistence very bad
things and they get there then
there has to be clear and
convincing evidence to prove.
That there danger to our society
so something that I learned that
was speaking to law enforcement
officers state reminded me that
when we make laws it's not just
about the budget it's also about
Making our community safer.
So the other day what to think
what's going to call.
Cause more harm.
Is it more harmful to keep
somebody who has been shown this
probable cause for the rest
problem because be detained and
keeping them there when they
have done these heinous things
or is it gonna do more harm if
we release a criminal back into
the society and I say it because
as far more harm.
Unfortunately we're known as
I've had people say and this is
so sad if I was going to commit
a murder I would do it in New
Mexico because people literally
get away with murder and I don't
want to be known for that
anymore sh I want us to lock up
the dangerous people I want us
to keep them locked up and until
they they would go to the court
case and charged I don't want
them back out in the community
because how many times a return
on the news our lists are read
the newspaper what we state.
Person acts was arrested
released and went out and kill
somebody or did something else
so if this helps stable life
then I'm totally absolutely on
board with this I'm I can tell
you that there are some people
to do some incredibly horrible
things.
And I'm gonna tell you about a
story when I went to.
A court case I went with these
people that are read more cycles
in the protect children that
were attacked by anyone who
offended them.
And I had to sit through a court
case of eleven day old who had
their legs ripped off by
somebody.
Twisted didn't pull the legs off
but pretty darn close and they
releases then on is are that's
got to stop we can't have people
doing horrendous crimes and
murders and releasing them so
that they can go out and kill
people again.
We just we can't I mean if we
really want to bring business
and industry here this bill is
much more than this if we want
business and industry come here
we have to fix the crime issue.
And I just want to say this
lasting in the sand this.
I'm to all the mothers and
fathers who called in today or
anybody that has had a love the
one that was killed by someone
who should have been locked up.
This bill is for you.
Thank you some say you'll might.
I'm.
Thank you representative
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and
the representative of the wart
covered portion of everything
that I wanted to talk about so.
Thank you the.
Is the madam chair I would like
to get clarification from D. A.
loose on.
Capital tenants and and I feel
like I heard basically.
We don't really have anything
that we can charge capitol fence
with care New Mexico anymore did
I hear that in correctly we
sure.
Madam chair and Representative
Pettigrew I'm lost without
parole I'm in the death penalty
was repealed time the
legislature I put into place
that instead of the death
penalty I we would have the
possibility of seeking life
without parole if we could
establishment aggravating
factors and so that based on our
New Mexico Supreme Court
interpretation is the only
capital offense that we have.
Thank you very much for that
clarification that that's
concerned
So with that I.
Statements
You know I I find it interesting
that the also I exists right now
when.
House Bill.
Twenty seven has been introduced
since two thousand eighteen and
once again it is a election year
for the governor and and.
That's fine but.
Always.
Always.
I'm in.
Gun bills go through.
C. pack.
But.
Pre trial release hospital I
business house to remit
Alexion's in Indian Affairs.
I find that interesting the very
bill that we're debating today
version of.
His house government lections in
Indiana first.
I think it's pretty apropos it
goes that way because it is an
election year for governor.
For New Mexico's excuse me
Representative Pettigrew can you
keep your comments to the bill
and not other keep.
Sure be happy to thank you.
So I want to echo Representative
of course comments
This bill is designed to keep
people that have while it
murder.
But current rules from a murder
for right from aggravated
assault you guys can read that
on section one.
One in page two.
I'm gonna be interesting to
figure out how.
We look at whether or not that's
an issue hi from five corridor
thank you madam chair.
Representative right.
Madam chair and Representative
Pettigrew I think the big
problem is that what we're
seeing with this revolving door
and that's across the state
we're seeing individuals get out
and then commit other felonies
and in particular other violent
felonies now as we heard from
several of the moms who spoke in
favor of this their loved one
was killed by a person who is
out or should have been detained
and this bill would have
detained them
And prevented a burger how do
you how do you go to a family in
say well you didn't lose a TV
you lost yours son and that's
okay because we want to mount
tell trial and I think that
that's a very bad position for
us as policy makers to take I
think we need to make our
communities safer that that's
what my community is been
telling me and in response to
that I started since twenty
eighteen introducing legislation
to go ahead and do that this
committee and in fact all the
legislators who have ever seen
this legislation since twenty
eighteen good of amended this
bill to our say something else
if they didn't like it but here
we are again.
It's twenty twenty two and we'll
see if we can get this across
the finish line and make our
community safer.
Representative I appreciate your
response to that and and I think
you had a wrong target might
community also same thing you're
community what's I'm just going
to be interesting to see whether
or not my colleagues along I.
twenty five corridor agree with
you thank you.
Thank you representative
Thompson.
Thank you madam chair I've been
listening to the debate and it
people are saying we want
rapists and murders locked up of
course we all do.
But we're talking about people
who are cues not not I mean I
do.
Representative green have we
ever made mistakes and arrested
the wrong people or even
convicted the wrong people or
even the committee act committed
to the death penalty on the
wrong people.
The representative Thompson
absolutely we've seen examples
of that in that fortunately
those are rare.
Our system is very much weighted
towards the defendant.
And even with this bill it's
weighted towards the defendant
that's why DA Luz spoke about
the clear and convincing
evidence is the standard.
Thank you madam chair I'm.
Thank you I grew up I mean I
don't know when I first started
hearing this but as a young
child hearing innocent until
proven guilty so how does this
not we we are locking up people
who who as per my understanding
you have to be witnesses that
can be you know somebody heard
somebody say something how do we
how do you how do we get around
that old standard of American
justice innocent until proven
guilty.
Madam chair and representative
Thompson this does not in any
way nor should it implied that
we're getting around our
criminal justice system in fact
if you want to look at why are
they sending of persons accused
of crimes.
Yes probable cause clearer is
convincing evidence to federal
court.
Because of the revolving door in
state court that's exactly why
they're setting up the federal
court because they have tighter
rules and they don't have a
revolving door.
And madam chair and
representative Thompson all
lived do a loose way and if she
has any further comments on.
Madam chair representative
Thompson I'm.
We are not I'm in any way I'm
impinging on the constitutional
right to be presumed innocent
the state always carries the
burden of proof we have to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that
someone is guilty I am in this
we still have the burden of
clear and convincing I it is
simply what change from just a
stimulus brought forth.
The constitutional amendment I
did change the money bail
system.
Changing the money bail system
was because individuals charge
of low level property crimes are
were being held because they
didn't have the money to get out
following criminals for bonding
out a lot of times sh so trying
to to change that injustice and
that's what justice Daniels
worked for and so this bill is
simply saying that we've
established our burden on it we
have strong evidence that still
required that should the roll on
to prove our case I and that
depend is still pursing Guinness
I hope that that answers the
question thank you.
Thank you madam chair I'm it
kind of doesn't because locking
someone up tends to one send the
message that we're pretty sure
you get it whether it's been
proven or not and and I I'm I'm
I can hear the families I know
that it's it's difficult I'm I
think now Representative ring
you may or may not know this I
believe that LESC said that five
percent of people who were out
on release committed new
felonies is that is that the
correct number from the LFC
report.
Representative tops I remember
it's a low number it is also the
number that's disputed by do a
Taurus and he made a response to
it and he had a lot higher.
And our I actually question
there
reports for about forty five
minutes or an hour you know such
as one of the things that they
are reported in their report was
shoplifting is down but yet
they're unaware that APD by the.
D. O. J. eight agreement cannot
arrest a misdemeanor shoplifting
so I yeah I I guess it did go
down at least the reports but I
think everyone of us have seen
somebody shoplifting and they're
just walking out of the stores
now so there's a lot of errors
in that report and in lot of
contradictory information that
DA Torres brought out in his
presentation and I'm not sure of
miss Lewis wants to comment
further on that LFC report.
Madam chair representative
Thompson I actually appeared
along with DH forest before
Senate Judiciary on that very
issue that Ellis report I'm we
did we do dispute the numbers
I'm not sure how they came to
some of their numbers we tried
to recreate their numbers
actually and we couldn't do the
math that they did I'm they
claim to be using our data it
it's definitely concerns me as a
person of the dust association
if I'd another agencies using
our data in we can't replicate
the mac
and the numbers and so certainly
you have to also consider that
that report was to burn a Leo
crime data report and not the
entire state of New Mexico and
so was not considering what's
going on around the rest of the
other judicial districts around
the state thank you.
Your representative Thompson I
would add that there are data
showed that crime and violent
crime.
Was up in twenty of New Mexico
city's.
And madam chair I wasn't asking
about violent crime building up
I was asking about people who
who were I'm under under I'm
have a monitor or something
alarming that that so I don't
district attorney loose do you
said you can't make the numbers
match up you know you can what
are your numbers say.
And
chair representative Thompson
I'm it we are we're trying to
look at the issue of but I think
the case is dismissed the number
of individuals that violated
while out on conditions I'm and
we could not come up what we
provided was the raw data we
have performance measures that
we have to get and then they
took that and they calculated it
and put out the report and our
concern was that they look at if
they're convicted of one charge
what we dismissed another they
said that was a dismissal but it
wasn't because we often that
person doesn't play to all the
charges I if we dismiss one case
because that can lead to another
one and then at yes it shows a
dismissal but they were
convicted but they're not
reporting it that way I in so
whether or not an individual I
was released on conditions of
release and violated I am
committed a new crime I I
believe that was made in the
area you're asking specifically
about I don't have the specific
stat in front of me I have those
women's IDA Taurus but I I I
don't have those with me now I
could certainly provide this to
you but certainly I believe that
one of the things that we found
I'm very striking was that they
said that there were there were
seven individuals and and and
two of them committed
additional I believe homicides
while they were out in so Hey I
think that kind of makes our
point is that if they are at the
tool that's being used on a tool
that stabbing you started
have been testified yesterday
before Senate judiciary that
that are not tool is being used
in the six district the second
district San Juan County in
Santa Fe County it will be
coming to Dona Ana County soon
that that tool on this that the
prediction as I is a line judges
to release people and they're
going out and committing the
crimes.
they were asked by members of
the Senate Judiciary why are we
using this tool more judges
relying on it if it's not being
an accurate predictor I think we
can look to California I think
that's what we where we need to
look like they have available
presumption I'm they use are the
Arnold was well on and look at
their primary when we say is
district attorneys and I set it
in the past have been quoted at
Senate to media when New Mexico
is more left and in California
and we're more volunteer than
California we have a problem I
and that's we're talking about
you can skew data on in our
concern was individuals using
our data our district attorney
data didn't understand it I and
when when we are individuals
that work for the administrative
offices of the district attorney
tried to explain to them that
they were in accurately
calculating and putting in their
report it's still got published
that concerns me as a citizen in
the state of New Mexico not only
an elected district attorney
thank you.
Thank you for that thank you
madam chair that's all I have.
Okay thank you
I just wanted to
Clarify that we did not see
House Bill five in this
committee.
And my understanding is that
it's not exactly the same
And I just wanted to also
make a comment that you know HB
twenty seven allows a prosecutor
to prove that a defendant is
dangerous without any
requirement to show anything at
all specific about the defendant
personally and as significant
number of defendants held in pre
trial detention in Albuquerque
this past year were ultimately
acquitted had charges dismissed
or were convicted of lesser
crimes including misdemeanors
after spending months in jail
So I I think that
this is
not a good deal
and without all take
What is the pleasure of the
committee.
Turkey to table the cost I will.
Okay we have a motion to table
and a second.
we take roll call please.
Representative Lord no to table.
Representative Pettigrew.
Well COVID.
Representative Thomson yes and
I'd like to explain my vote.
Vice chair Romero.
Yes to table.
Madam chair R..
Yes you table.
The motion passes.
Okay we'll go to Representative
Pettigrew to explain as to the.
Madam chair I at.
Appreciate the opportunity to
comment I just.
Your very strongly that this
shows that.
There is an extreme focus on on
the governor's reelection
campaign and there's a huge
desire to not release
a comments to the bill
Representative you have to keep
your comments to the bill
Leisure uses are not solve
crime.
Thank you.
Thank you representative
Thompson.
Thank you madam chair and I I am
offended that that this
committee is being used so
politically I'm but I I want to
explain my vote like I said I
learned I learned as a young
child that you are innocent
until proven guilty and I know
well actually we had a we had a
colleague in this very house
whose son was at.
Accused of the murder of a
heinous murder and their lives
were turned upside down and he
was he was not even charged I
believe are he was found
innocent so I believe we have to
stick with the innocent until
proven guilty that that I
learned growing up thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative green
on house bill twenty seven you
have a three to two vote to
table.
Let's go to house bill twenty
eight.
Yes madam chair.
House Bill twenty eight is a
bill that went to rules
committee and both from the
democratic and Republican
analyst both ruled that it was
germane and could be heard in
should be heard.
And here we are with house bill
twenty eight so this is a felon
in Paris in possession of a
firearm.
And I worked with colleagues
across the aisle and what we
found this is that we need to
increase the penalty while it's
a third degree penalty we need
to make it an up to five years
in prison giving that choice of
the you know to the judge to go
ahead and increased the penalty
if he felt that was a the
proper.
Anyway we are this is another
bill I've introduced since two
thousand and seven it was
plagiarized and placed into
house bill sixty eight and sixty
eight is currently in the house
Judiciary Committee and I was
hoping to get it this up there
and we combined with that with
that let miss loose go ahead
make some comment.
Madam chair members of the
committee hi this is a bill
regarding sentencing I and so
the person our first has to be
proven to be a prior felony I
and it being convicted of
possession of a firearm and so
we've established that are
already committed apart from the
crime within the last ten years
that they have now been
convicted of a crime where they
have a farm so definitely this
is an individual that would be
in the category of individuals
who are intending to continue
our pattern of crime and
criminal activity and our fallen
into danger to the community it
simply gives the judge the
authority to be able to sentence
them to a longer sentence of up
to five years it's not mandatory
time as is distracted by and so
that it treats that individual
sentence differently I am very
narrowly tailored to the
specific crime and I'm we see
frequently individuals are part
convicted felons committing
other crimes with firearms and
I and gun crimes and gun
violence is a continuing problem
we believe that one this will
prevent this person from
committing on it expenses
because they have the potential
to be incarcerated longer and it
would be a deterrent because
individuals and know that they
are facing a stiffer penalty
when they're part convicted
felon I and convicted of it
having a gun thank you.
And madam chair this was forced
by the courts and corrections
Committee over the summer with
that will stand for questions.
Thank you will go to the
audience and take a call for
those who are in favor and those
who oppose.
We have the results and of the
twenty five people seventeen are
in favor and eight are propose
so those of you who are in favor
of the bill if you'll please
raise your hand those in favor.
Of house bill twenty eight.
Terry Cole.
What the timer on you have one
minute.
Thank you Robert good evening
and my name is Terry Cole madam
chair members of the committee I
am the president CEO for the
greater Albuquerque chamber of
commerce this legislation aims
to crackdown on the illegal
possession of firearms in New
Mexico we cannot make New Mexico
a comfortable place for
criminals to run around with
guns that's exactly what's
happening in Albuquerque right
now and it's happening in other
communities to keeping firearms
out of the hands of these felony
offenders will save lives and
reduce crime to say otherwise
would be ninety and if a felony
offender won't stay away from
firearms then we need to send
sentence them to longer terms we
urge you to support this policy
thank you very much madam chair
and members of the committee.
Thank you next.
Your lan summer help.
Thank you madam chair and
committee members as a gun owner
I support this bill as it gets
guns which are in the illegal
possession of convicted felons
off the streets making our
streets safer.
This bill does not punish the
law abiding people for owning
guns just for those who are
already forbidden possession
thank you.
Thank you next.
Larry some.
Good evening madam chair
committee members as Leri
Sonntag nearly half of the New
Mexico business coalition.
This bill targets repeat
offenders by definition felons
representation of firearms want
to thank the bill's sponsors and
those who are supportive of this
effort for not just this year
but repeatedly tried to bring
this type of legislation for
that can and would make a
difference in our state's
primary.
Are fully supportive of HB
twenty eight point encouraging
this committee to pass the bill
thank you.
Thank you our our.
Yes my name is Lisa Morales and
of my son was murdered November
the thirteenth and I definitely
agree with the this bill I feel
that these criminals need to be
held accountable the man that
killed my son.
Was charged with this and even
in the past had the system
worked my send could be alive
today fulfilling the goals he
had set for himself.
Thank you that's all.
Thank you next.
Madam chair that was the final
public comment and paper.
Okay so now we'll go to those
are who are opposed to house
bill twenty eight you please
raise your hand those in
opposition.
Apple's.
Good evening chairman members of
the committee my name is Lucy to
the campus I'm a policy manager
with bold features.
We respectfully oppose H. B.
twenty eight federal law already
prohibits people former felony
convictions I'm certain
misdemeanor convictions from
possessing a gun this bill does
not address the use of guns but
merely possessing a gun it is
unnecessary and we ask that you
please a post HB twenty thank
you.
Thank you next.
Rachel Bellamar.
Hi my name is Rachel Feldman I
represent a group called
indivisible sos Santa Fe and
group of ninety women working on
a law enforcement issues we
believe this bill is not
necessary well only hi more time
on people being convicted of
various crimes and therefore we
think it is a burden on.
The criminal justice system and
not share so we propose.
Thank you next.
I am Metcalfe.
I oppose H. B. twenty eight I
don't believe that adding
present time is going to be
necessarily do anything to make
us safer it may have the
opposite effect as more part
time can have diminishing
returns and research shows that
that is true it's also very
expensive for us as taxpayers
and it just comes up the system
and things don't work as well
thank you.
Thank you next.
Barron Jones.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name is parents all
of the so you back schools in
your policy strategist while we
appreciate the Sanchez effort
and the ten of the proposed
legislation we respectfully
staff of this nation be twenty
eight for the reasons stated it
throughout my young life I just
about Newman's brought crimes
including carjackings and armed
robberies involving firearms and
while those were very unpleasant
eight we recognize those active
medical stations the point up on
crime policies that they have a
bill to address the underlying
causes of crime such as poverty
and lack of access to behavioral
health and substance abuse use
disorder treatment and job
training this will require an
additional one point two million
dollars in public money need
money annually to incarcerate
falls under this law without any
real deterrent that that money
could be invested in New Mexico
communities longer sentences and
punitive measures are good good
tools for increasing public
safety thank you.
Thank you next.
That was the final public
comment madam chair.
Okay thank you very much
Representative green do you want
to go to make any further
comments before we go to
questions from the committee.
Yes madam chair one of the
comments was about the federal
system has a penalty for this it
is.
That is very true but the
federal system the penalty is
much stiffer than the state at
all the and not is still a and
stiffer than what we're
proposing and just I'm not sure
if this was have any other
comments as well.
Madam chair representative I I
would just say that as state
prosecutors I if a person is a
one hundred ten I is charged
with possession of a firearm if
the case can be prosecuted
federally I'm we are all ask the
US attorney's office to take
those because the individual on
it does receive a higher penalty
and if they have mandatory time
I and we keep those following
individuals who are pretty
repeat criminals off the streets
I thank you.
Thank you
Let's.
Go to the committee our.
Anyone like to make a any
questions.
To move to table.
Okay we have a move to table
motion is there a second.
I will second.
Okay would you please take roll
call.
Representative Lord.
All.
Representative Pettigrew.
No to table COVID.
Representative comes.
Yes to table.
Vice chair Romero.
Representative Romero.
Madam chair for our.
Yes to table and let's go back
to Representative Romero not
sure she lost her connection I
apologize madam chair New York
double duty.
I'm a yes.
Thousand dollars.
Thank you.
It will pass.
Thank you Representative bring
you have three to the table
and would you like to continue
with house bill one forty.
Your house bill one forty
Was introduced as another bill
and and the rules committee said
strip out a portion of it and re
introduce a and they would rule
it germane.
So since two thousand seven I
have introduced this bill.
This bill is are removing the
statute of limitations on second
degree murder.
Well.
We are the only state in the
nation that has a statute of
limitations on second degree
murder.
If you will look at the news
that's been coming out yesterday
was the thirteenth anniversary
of the women who were murdered
and buried on the west mesa.
Those cases most likely are all
second degree murder.
Our statute limitation is six
years if we were to come up with
the physical evidence.
To charge someone.
We could not charge them because
the statute has already run.
If you would like to see the
states with statute of
limitations or the lack there of
for second degree murder I would
encourage you to look at my
house bill one of four from the
twenty nineteen session where
the legislative finance
committee.
Put all of the statue
limitations for every state in
their.
Noting that.
R. that that we are the only
state with the statute of
limitations on second degree
murder.
This bill
Was plagiarized and maybe part
of house bill seventy nine which
is currently sitting in the
house Judiciary Committee.
And then frame I'm sorry in a
invest seventy nine is passed
judiciary.
Okay so madam chair I guess it's
going to the floor
I guess there was support work
in.
Did it come through your
committee.
Yes.
Okay so I guess there was
support for it in the past in
here and
All have agency we just go ahead
and comment as well.
Madam chair and members of the
committee I'm what this bill is
important is because I'm time
passes I and insert I'm not able
to bring charges within the
totaling period of the such
limitations that means no
justice for victims I if you
look at specifically what
Representative Rehm pointed out
as all of you I'm sure we are
well aware
that the west mesa murders I and
the time is ticking if you look
at house bill seventy nine and
look at the extension of time
that it put in place the time is
ticking if that becomes law for
those murders to be charged most
likely those would end up being
second degree and what's
important for you all to know
when a crime is charge if we
charge first degree murder which
does not have a statue
limitations.
Are we can be barred from I am
lesser included instruction
being offered at a trial because
of the the timing of when the
cases fall and the only thing
we're allowed to go forward on
is the first degree meaning that
there may be no justice for
victims family I am the first
degree murder
this is the at one of the
reasons why other policy makers
in other jurisdictions have
determined to not have a statue
limitations for murder because
it doesn't limit the our ability
to seek a conviction of a lesser
included crime I and I think
that is the most important thing
for you all to understand that
I'm when we have cases that are
pending a long time and the only
charge we can go forward on this
first degree you all are well
aware that is an extremely high
burden you all ought to speak
about overcharging I by
prosecutors and how you you
might want to try to help the
Comeaux justice system in that
regard you're giving prosecutors
no other choice in a murder case
but to see if they can put
together the highest level of
charge and to seek that when we
have a limited statue
limitations especially what we
have today at six years I even
if that H. B. seventy nine
passes on you can still look at
that the very prominent cases of
the west more that murdered I
am wondered if those two will be
I'm unable to be charged due to
a special limitations problem
thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Okay we'll go to the audience
and did you have anything else
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair not this chart.
Okay we'll go to the audience
and will first take the survey
Okay those in favor please
indicate in those of opposed.
Okay.
I'm.
All right we have a twenty nine
people responding twenty are in
favor and nine are of.
Okay we'll go with those who are
in favor you have please raise
your hand if you're in favor and
raise your hand.
If you'd like to speak.
Good evening.
Madam chair and members of the
committee my name is Terry
called I am the president CEO
for the greater Albuquerque
chamber of commerce however it's
done we must remove the statue
of limitations on second degree
murder in New Mexico solving
cold cases in particular is very
difficult to do if every case
has to be charged as a first
degree offense we're the only
state that does this CENIC
contributes to New Mexico's
reputation as a haven for
criminals at a time when we need
to be making it more difficult
to lead a life of crime here
we urge your support thank you
very much.
Thank you next.
Hi there this Madam I'm a member
of the public this Madam is not
only for this bill but the
previous one I heard it's very
disheartening to me personally
as a taxpayer and someone who is
particularly scared about
security.
That I see these surveys all in
favor of these bills and you
table them.
It's it's very disheartening I
am I am just this is the first
time I've ever done this and
honestly.
It's it's just disheartening so
I just want to say that what
what is the purpose of the
survey that's it.
Thank you next.
Elaine summer help.
Thank you for hearing me again.
The only thing I want to say is
that the victims and the family
of the victims of crime.
Especially second degree murder
deserve justice.
And two more the other ladies
comments I to so very
disappointed and very
disheartened by this committee
thank you.
Thank you next.
But there are.
Hello my name is Eliseo Terrel
and I am a mother my son was
murdered and we need this bill
our families deserve justice
many of us are crying for
justice to our elected officials
and we haven't seen any results.
you.
We need to get rid of the
statute of limitations so maybe
one day finally some of us can
have some just just we are
living a life sentence without
our loved ones thank you.
Thank you next.
Kirsten Johnson.
Hello thank you for hearing me
and Representative Rehm thank
you for bringing this bill
forward I speak as a real estate
broker in Albuquerque every week
we go to people's homes to list
them and we say where you going
and they say anywhere but here
and to the previous ladies who
made comments about their
children being lost and nobody
is being made to pay for these
crimes we're protecting the
criminals more than what
protecting innocent and I'm
really disappointed that we see
the people who are listening to
these committee hearings voting
are in voting in favor of these
crime bills and your committee
keeps voting them down doesn't
this crime problem matter to you
I don't understand why you both
these things down we're losing
people every week from our state
because of the crime problem
please do something about it.
Thank you next.
Leri Sonntag.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee.
The previous speakers up maybe
interesting observations were
seventy to thirty percent have
been in favor of the motion was
that of the bills of the table
this bill house bill one forty
she Representative bill Rehm
laid out the perfect foundation
with the example of the murders
are committed of women on the
west side.
I'm speaking to you tonight as
an individual and also as a
former law enforcement officer.
The ability to use current
technology which includes DNA.
Any anything that we can.
To provide justice to victims of
a murder should not have a time
limit on it when it comes to
second degree murder thanks for
your support house bill one
forty thank you.
Thank you next.
The program.
Hello.
I.
But I'm also a realtor in
Albuquerque.
Kirsten Johnson
Feels the same way deal with the
same comments that we get from
people moving out of state we
all hear about crime being a
huge problem nationwide and I'm
very very baffled by members of
this committee table in the
folks that are really pretty
close most of been treated to
I've been waiting online since
one thirty when this meeting was
supposed our current this is so
disappointing and I encourage
you to please stop table in you
do what your constituents want
I'm I love the state but it's
getting harder and harder to
defend it because you won't pass
some of these crime bills I
thank you a Representative frame
for what you're doing and for
trying and I encouraged the rest
of you is our acting thank you.
Crystal match.
Hello thank you for hearing me
stand with the New Mexico
considers of justice and I to
for this bill
statute statute of limitations
currently is six years which I
find it absolutely ridiculous it
doesn't allow for justice for
the victims nor the family
members
we are serving as a lease yes
said a life sentence
without our family members due
to the loss of violence and New
Mexico citizens deserve to feel
safe in our community and place
your voices we are crying we are
baking we need a safer community
it is your guys position as
elected officials to give us a
safety in our community thank
you.
Thank you next.
New Mexico presenters.
Yes I've heard a few people that
were opposed to this bill saying
that the prisons were too full I
I think we need to build another
prisoner to I mean they have
money to build the soccer
stadium to match here.
Are you want people to go to a
happy soccer came you need to be
safe for walking around
Albuquerque.
We need to be for these crime
bills we have passed some we
need a safer streets take our
streets back Albuquerque please.
Thank you this is those who are
opposing house bill one forty.
Shows that there are.
I'm actually I'm not opposing I
am for I'm not sure if I got put
in on the wrong one but anyways
my name is jobs at Otero and I
I'm for this bill my son Kyle
Martinez was killed in twenty
twenty and we do need Stricker
stricter laws we definitely need
to increase the secretary of
education you know and we
definitely these dangerous
individuals are being released
back into their communities
those are individuals who some
previously convicted of violent
offenses no they really need to
stay behind bars also do you
know it's time for us to read
how these changes we need to
start over we need to make sure
that we're insuring public
safety is our first priority you
know anyone who's watched the
news read a paper it's into the
radio in the last few years has
seen first hand all of the
crimes that are being committed
we definitely need change and
you know and you as the
legislators know we definitely
are breaking your asking you you
know you're our leaders you must
do something to stop and prevent
these career criminals from
committing violent crimes and
census data just we really need
this change so you know we would
like to
you know let you know that
please you know please make
these changes and stop table the
night these bills we need this
change you know that nobody is
safe anymore and I thank you for
listening.
Okay I'm sorry your time is up
and also we were taking people
in opposition not in favor of
the bill that you've done that.
Next.
That.
Hi good evening again I stand in
opposition to HB one forty
murder is a horrible horrible
thing and I but I think there's
a big difference between second
degree murder and cold blooded
premeditated first degree murder
and that the statute of
limitations should reflect that
changing the statute of
limitations for second degree
murder is in part a strategy to
be able to see convictions at
all first degree murder cases
given the difference in the
burden of proof that's required
without a statue limitations I
believe would become
increasingly more difficult to
mount a robust defense
particularly for someone accused
of a crime that was actually
second degree murder and that
troubles me in just a second be
done to it in that and innocent
people caught up in a charge for
something that happened ten
fifteen twenty years ago might
outweigh the justice that could
be gained in a very small number
of cases so I ask you to vote no
on H. B. one forty thank you.
Thank you.
No other hands are right.
Okay thank you
Representative Rehm would you
like to make any comments before
we go to the
a committee.
Yes madam chair the one thing
that you really should
understand about second degree
murder.
Or even first degree murder it
is the intentional killing of an
individual.
It is not accidental accidental
is in the of voluntary and
involuntary homicides area but
this is the intentional killing.
The difference between first and
second degree murder is a very
thin line and it has to do with
planning I don't know if the a
loose has a little more she'd
like to save state on that.
Madam chair members of the
committee I'm.
Do the difference between the
first three murder and second
degree murder is willful and
deliberate is we have to show
that the individual I have an
opportunity to reflect and
consider the act of taking a lot
I'm that time and thoughtful
consideration is the only
difference between first and
second degree in yet the
differences such as limitations
today it's a difference of six
and nine
at we often see on the lesser
included teacher instructions
given at trial I and a juris off
to convict on the lesser
included second degree as I
mentioned previously I if we are
if we are outside the statute of
limitations are for the second
degree we can be barred from
even allowing a jury to consider
at that second degree
and what I I would die.
Stanford to questions thank you.
Thank you all right we'll go to
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair and
representative.
I'm.
I just want to say is I hear the
people that are calling in we
have people that called in on a
a similar bill and it's heart
wrenching to hear their stories
so I guess the main thing I have
in the reason I support this
bill on a percent is because I
cannot imagine what it would
feel like to be a parent I have
a brother sister that someone
had murdered them.
And then later a jail house
conventus I'm John house
admission comes in for the
person feels guilty and founded
next to it or DNA ties into the
crime.
And it's a day too late.
And there's so many cases that
the that we still need to solve
that are cold cases in New
Mexico and I think the fair
thing to do for the people and
the first thing to do for those
that have passed a waiting for
the person to be convicted is
that we pass this bill so we can
extend that timeline to have
resolution for the people that
are still suffering and that's I
really never question I just
wanted to state that thank you
Representative refer bill and
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you and I apologize to the
audience we had a lot of really
is making comments while they
were waiting for house bill one
fifty eight and I.
meant to let you know before you
waited all this time and I truly
apologize but the sponsor has
asked for each B. one fifty
eight to be of Roald so that
means it will not come up the
real estate transfer taxes and
social security bill will not be
heard so again my deepest
apologies for having to wait for
us to get to committee and then
through all these bills
I.
Totally forgot to make that
announcement so next we'll have
Representative Thompson.
Thank you madam chair thank I do
have a question that I have a
statement so Representative
Rehm.
Bill seventy nine does.
Can you tell me what the
differences are if there are
any.
Sure and representative Thompson
so health spill seventy nine has
two components one is removing
the statute of limitations
making there are no statute of
limitations and the other
provision is increasing the
penalty from of for second
degree murder from fifteen years
state eighteen years.
Okay so so that's so your bills.
Gets rid of the statute of
limitations but doesn't increase
the penalty.
Madam chair and representative
Thompson correct okay okay I'm
that's all the questions I had
madam chair but I do I've heard
a lot of people say that
you know they look at the polls
and I want to Representative
tell the public that we have a
lot of data that we are not data
but sources we get reports from
the public safety department and
from department of health and
from
corrections department and we we
get lots of emails and phone
calls so.
I just want the public to
understand that we that our
decisions are not based solely
on what happens in this
committee we have a lot more
information that that you are
not privy to so thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
bring.
Thank you Representative Romero.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Rehm I appreciate
having her this bill in rules
and of course just getting
through the process I actually
agree with your bill and I like
it better than house bill
seventy nine which we did get
through this committee I think
it's much more straight forward
I hope that you'll work with
Representative Eli in my S. this
to incorporate your version we
had a lot of confusion on
seventy nine there is a long
term R. and some other changes
in reference to current law
which I appreciate your is being
much more straightforward
that said I support your bill
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Romero.
Is that all.
Okay I'm sorry I lost.
Representative being able to
hear you Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair.
And and I do appreciate the
comments with respect to our.
Yeah.
Sure thank you I do appreciate
comments that everybody at all
it is one version of a multitude
saying so we collect.
Every legend so letter probably
know every legislator has.
An LA are our number should be
our phone numbers during session
should be posted on the
legislative website.
And
most of us I can't speak for
right most of us keep the keep
track of people that call and an
agreement are exposed bills and
then most of us track how many
emails we get and and and how
our constituents around the
state feel about stuff.
To to add to what
Representative Townsend was top
Thompson was talking about.
We we do get.
Reports from.
The
What law enforcement.
Public safety from the
administration office of the
courts.
For a district attorneys from
the Office of the Attorney
General.
corrections crime crime victim
reparations you name it
depending on the bills
who says of reports.
And and we have several of us
have been trying very very
specifically to get these
documents posted on the
legislative websites the the the
public that are paying the taxes
for these people.
For they're paying taxes that
pay for everything that we do
actually get these without
having to go through an ever
request and it's sad that you
guys don't get to see these and
don't forget to understand stand
the depths of some of the
information we get but we do get
analysis from from all the
different locations on top of
that you know we have committee
announces.
House Republicans to an analysis
house Democrats to Alice's
server buddy everybody does one
and and and so I will say that
for for.
Right left during different
I commend our committee for the
amount of information we get and
the depth of which they do their
studies I may not agree with the
votes but it's not without a
diligence and that.
Representative remarked
appreciate you bringing the bill
DA lucite I appreciate your time
today
I am in support of this bill as
I have been in the past and the
I thank you for your passion in
continued continued efforts
thank you.
Madam chair I move a do pass.
Okay I have a motion for do
passed by Representative Thomson
and a second by Representative
Lord is there any opposition.
Seeing you have a do past five
zero thank you Representative
Rehm.
And as I
Maybe no before house bill one
fifty eight will be rolled and
we will not hear it tonight so
we will go to house bill forty
nine exempt social security
income from income tax
Representative Armstrong and
brown do you see them in the
audience.
Representative Armstrong it's
listed as Representative I think
I think in the purchase Spence's
representative of district nine
did not act there she is yes.
She she was elevated yes thank
you thank you madam chair have
anyone else.
No ma'am I'm here I myself was
laid our appreciate the
committee still being in
committee it at at your well I'm
ready to present.
You're going.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee house bill forty
nine which just happens to be
the district that I'm from so
that's kind of strange but
anyway it is this is a we've
talked about exempting social
security tax in several
different I I've run a full
exemption for six years and
senator Michael Padilla as right
now presenting it in
on the Senate side this is a
phase out of the same tax and if
you if you actually read the
bill you can see that it it
doesn't over a the over the
years we get to the first year
would be a twenty percent than a
forty that a sixty than eighty
them in twenty twenty six it
would be a hundred percent
repeal very sad just plain cut
dry and I introduced this bill
madam chair just to
Our.
Thank you that might be more
palatable that the full repeal
some of the the information that
I'm I think you guys really need
to know madam chair is that
we are one of twelve states that
still taxes so security and
come.
we are forty nine percent of our
foster children are fostered by
grandparents that live only on
social security income.
there are.
There's a lot of great things
about this there's not it's been
debated in the past and I don't
have any experts with me it's
just a plain and simple phase
out of the social security
income tax repeal so our income
tax social security tax so if I
if you all have any questions
all stand for questions thank
you madam chair.
Thank you
we'll go to the audience and
take a poll.
Those in favor of those in
opposed please vote.
It's.
Right.
Right.
Hey those in favor of the
seventeen people fifteen are in
favor and two are opposed.
So let's go ahead and do
those in opposition.
Madam chair no hand raised in
opposition okay and we'll go to
those who are in favor if you'll
please raise your hand.
Very cool.
Thank you rock good evening
madam chair and members of the
committee as Representative
Armstrong mentioned only a dozen
states tax social security and
and our tax on social security
is one of the most onerous of
those twelve we pay income taxes
on the money we put into social
security and then we get taxed
again has benefits it's just not
right and so far most of the
nation has realized that it
doesn't make sense we should
follow suit New Mexico can and
should I to be one of the best
places in America to retire but
policies like taxing social
security benefits run counter to
that goal in addition to
addressing tax paramedic in our
high G. R. T. right this
legislation is one key way to
make New Mexico a more tax payer
friendly state we are true your
support and we command
Representative Armstrong for
caring that thank you.
Next.
Martin.
Yes good evening madam chair
members of the community excuse
me members of the committee my
name is Anastasia Martin and I'm
the new general counsel for
aging long term Services
Department agent long term
Services Department sports house
bill forty nine as it will
positively impact our seniors.
as mentioned before most states
do not tax social security.
Aging long term services we is
that this legislation would also
attract more retirees to the
state and would have a positive
impact on grandparents raising
grandchildren.
Thank you again to the sponsor
for their work on this
legislation.
Next.
Your summer health.
Thank you.
Every taxpayer was been paying
taxes on our social security
income and as a person who
supported my mom at her end of
life on that same income I
support this bill thank you.
Next.
Can't beat COVID.
Thank you very much madam chair
and members of the committee I
speak in support of this bill
tying
in your your house bill one
fifty eight times social
security to the transportation.
with difficult the roll chair I
was against it but as a daughter
of the mother who's on social
security I completely understand
why some people would be in
support it but don't understand
all the consequences I just I
agree with Terry call
speak in favor of this bill and
I think representative Armstrong
urge you to support this bill
thank you very much.
Thank you next.
Linda M..
Hi there again I I am in favor
of.
Not taxing social security
income to me this representative
double taxation I don't believe
that there's any other area in
the higher asks where double
taxation exists and that's it
it's just I'm just re confirming
what everybody else has said
thank you for hearing me.
Thank you next.
Steven and I am.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Steven
and I out CEO The New Mexico
association of realtors for all
the reasons that everybody has
mentioned we actually stand in
support of all the bills that to
exempt social security income
that are just straight exemption
and so we stand in support of
house bill forty nine forty
eight that was heard earlier and
others of that just that have no
pay for so we are need to
support this thank you.
Thank you next.
Leri Sonntag.
Good evening madam chair and
members of the committee like
the previous speaker speaking on
behalf of the New Mexico
business coalition now we do
support any bill that it would.
Take away the state tax on
social security.
There are many retirees were
barely making ends meet well
we're living in a time where
inflation has stayed a forty
year high many retirees live
paycheck to paycheck with all of
their social security.
Well the tax dollars taken from
them are minuscule in the
individual basis when it comes
to our state budget they are
significant to the individual
and should be and should not be
taken.
New Mexico is long overdue and
stopping the tax on social
security earnings we appreciate
the sponsoring this bill and
your call support HB forty nine.
Thank you next.
Bob find for.
Bob Feinberg.
I'm sorry can you hear me now.
Yes Sir.
Thank you for that.
With colliers commercial real
estate resident of New Mexico
thirty six years in the same
business.
Companies businesses in Mexico
is challenging to say the least
to
to bring you here.
Yes some they will collect
social security.
It's not.
It is a detriment to have this
tax.
For.
Reserve.
For for the U..
For tracking businesses and
certainly for the folks that
have to live on social security
hi my statement is reflective of
all the speakers prior to me.
And
We please let's get this that.
Thank you.
Page nine.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee and my name is
patient with New Mexico voices
for children and I apologize I
didn't raise my hand in time for
opposition but we do stand in
opposition to this bill we
believe it is well intended but
unfortunately it is pretty
targeted in that it does not
provide a beach to those who
need it most it's also very
costly at well over a hundred
million dollars in the out years
annual last revenue and it does
not improve equity in our tax
code because it over from the
benefits higher income seniors
the aging and long term services
department points out in the FIR
that seniors with incomes up to
two to three times the poverty
standards already do not pay
taxes and we'll see no benefit
from this bill so it's such a
high cost you really have to
consider the opportunity costs
so what else can we do with over
a hundred million dollars to
promote and improve health well
being and quality of life of our
families and our seniors New
Mexico has enormous potential
but also many needs and we
believe there are better
opportunities to move New Mexico
for it in this drive process
thank you for your time.
Madam chair that was the final
hand raised in public comment.
I'm sorry I was on mute Matt
Representative
Armstrong did you have anything
else you'd like to add.
No thank you madam chair all
stand for questions okay hi
Representative Pettigrew has to
stand up first.
Thank you madam chair and full
disclosure I am one of the.
Sanchez Bill this is my second
session and I've signed on to
Representative Armstrong and
Representative Browns bills both
times I I appreciate their their
driving initiatives and.
This is a frustration for me
where and when I made the.
The.
Whirlwind decision to to do to
take this role.
I'm not gonna go into a lesson
on why social security was
created.
For those people that that they
don't understand or I haven't
done that research I think it's
important to understand.
Why we have so security to begin
with
What lessons we learned I mean
out of.
Russian and in two.
Some of the worst that we have.
But it is important to
understand that the people that
that work.
Pay taxes and the taxes that
they paid.
We're rate on the revenue that
went into an account for them
when when they when they retire.
There is another side of this
that you know just the companies
that they workforce she started
paying into those taxes well
paying into those accounts
accounts as well.
And.
At the with with the benefits
that come to those companies
look at the entire seven
numbers.
Nation wide about only seven and
a half percent of the total.
Revenue legislative that that
our income the the senior
citizen gets sent I think it's
about seven and a half percent
that may or may not have been
taxed depending on where you're
at.
The savings to the individual
saying here and and the help
didn't come to them.
In many cases through the
pandemic.
The lack of increase in income
the that they're not seen when
we're at almost seven percent
inflation now.
This is critical to they'll.
I would heard the.
The this the full tax benefit
and house bill forty eight we
saw that turned out to date.
House bill forty nine the
state's budget is still a great
thing it's it's a move in the
right direction as many of my
colleagues since I've been up
here it's said sometimes it just
takes baby steps are really
truly urged committee to.
To
To do this and to do this for
the seniors that are not seen
the benefits that so many other
people are seen right now true
this pandemic through the cost
inflation what we're all seeing
and so with that I'm proud to
support this I'm so thankful
Representative Armstrong ran for
continuing and Sweetser and and
data continue to push these
this.
This initiative for and I just
ask the committee to to.
Movie do pass and get and and
help us get to the store thank
you.
Thank you
Two passed.
Okay before we do that I would
like to ask representative
Armstrong a couple questions
about your bill I think you
might have mentioned when we
spoke that your bills was much
like Senator Padilla still.
I madam chair is going to thank
you.
Thank yes bill makes it so that
people in lower incomes who
usually don't pay social
security tax and what what don't
pay social security tax anyway
its the
upper
and middle income that do right
now and so Senator can do is was
going to
make it so that it was.
More you know graduated and is
that what you were also talking
about doing no ma'am thank you
madam chair Senator Padilla as
and and actually I'm signed on
to his as well Senate bill one
await is a full repeal all just
like house bill forty eight is a
full repeal his bill is verbatim
the bill that I've carried for
six years and he knows that and
was generous enough to let me
sign on and because co sponsor
this bill is a phase out of a
full repeal.
So if we just phased out twenty
percent forty percent sixty
percent eighty percent to a
hundred percent over the next
several years so that it's not
just so it's not a hundred
eighteen million dollar hit I am
but first here so this is a full
repeal but it is a phase out or
repeal and Senator Padilla is is
eight four yield and and
actually madam chair I was I was
just listening to it so he's
presenting right now on the
Senate side.
I see okay
And madam chair if I can out
this does go to taxed
Representative next and I know
they're working on an omnibus
bill and I'm I'm really hoping
that some kind of exemption gets
in there
for awful it our exemption but.
We'll see what happens so it
does go to tax madam chair.
Okay thank you we have
A motion
I do passed is that correct
Representative Thomson.
Okay.
Second.
Okay.
We have I do pass is there any
objection.
Okay
here okay.
Yes I would like to to go ahead
okay great okay thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
Armstrong I am in taxes well
said look forward to figuring
out you know what we do with
that I know there are a lot of
different bills
for the taking right now with
everything being deemed germane
so I'm very curious you know
what looks progressive at what
what would be progressive what
would be a good fit knowing that
we haven't yet gotten it into
the budget my concern is just
how big that gap is and I think
that's what everybody's sort of
working with so I appreciate be
able to continue to see this
through the process and look
forward to seeing you in tax
thank you madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative.
Yes I'd like to also explain my
vote I think voices for children
is very concerned about you know
what hundred plus million
dollars of programs we have to
give up and how do we make it so
that those who can't afford to
pay additional security tax
which is just like any other tax
if you make an investment and
when you get that you pay the
taxes out and then when you get
the money back start spending it
then you pay taxes on that
unless it's a author Iraq and so
this makes
Makes it really difficult for
people
To cover for our tax
To not have that income to spend
on much needed that will help
more of the lower income at the
same time so they're not paying
the taxes on social security low
income or and they're also not
going to have the benefit of
having the taxes from the people
at higher incomes who can't
afford it so I hope there's some
result for that so with that you
have a do pass
Representative Armstrong on your
house bill thank you madam chair
the line thank you I did zero.
Okay with that committee we will
recess and
we have to.
Three bills do hear on next
Tuesday we will not meet this
Saturday so in enjoy your
weekend thanks for all your time
to get caught up with all the
bills so.
Thank you again.
In nineteen.
Thank you madam chair gonna.
