The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objections or.
Okay members we are going to
introduce house resolution one
that is going to contain the new
modified rules for the conduct
of the session after introduce
it will move to consideration of
it and we get to that point as
Representative Eli the chair of
rules committee to explain
what's in there and we may hear
from Representative Townsend our
neighbors and then we'll go back
to bill introduction and get to
house bill one is other things
introduced okay so the gentleman
for Leo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business introduction of
legislation.
interjections order
to read.
House resolution one introduced
by Representative fifty nine in
either I.
A resolution amending.
The house rules to allow for the
conduct of the second special
session and second regular
session of the fifty fifty
dispatcher and ongoing
operations of the house of
representatives house resolution
one.
House resolution one having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and placed on the
speakers table.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business writing of legislation.
Really of.
Speaker I move that we go to
make sort of as a
next business announcements and
miscellaneous business you know.
Is so ordered the gentleman from
Bernalillo and Sandoval.
Mr speaker I move now that
that's been moved off the
speakers table so that we can
discuss house resolution one the
motion is to remove house
resolution one from the speakers
table and make the next order of
business no objection it is so
ordered.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval at the record reflect
election necessary for placing
house resolution one on final
passage has been taken the
gentleman to explain the
resolution thank you Mr speaker
and thank you for the bodies
patients so what yes house
resolution Dodge is it really
does just a couple of things
that I want to make clear one is
is that.
He noted all of the houses come
section seven dash four dash
three I want to make it clear to
the members of the other party.
That will change only applies to
the redistricting session does
not apply to the thirty day
session January or any other
special session is Justin
session we are currently in so I
want to make that as clear as
possible there was further
discussion on the twenty four
hour.
We originally had proposed to
suspend the twenty four hour
rule so that when bills the
final committee and came to the
floor they would have to wait
twenty four hours however.
What we have done is is we put
back in the twenty four hour
rule.
The members of the other party
correctly my judgment said one
twenty four hours to examine the
House maps and the P. C. map
sold for purposes of the house
maps PC maps because they're
starting in part chamber they
will have twenty four hours
waiting on the floor if they
needed obviously if we can work
out something that can go
quicker we will to save the
taxpayers dollars but if not we
understand twenty four hours
with respect to the maps and the
legislation that is in the
Senate and the Senate
redistricting maps and the
congressional maps so long as
they come over here and I was
trying to at least one committee
then my understanding is is that
the members of the minority will
agree that the twenty four hour
will be waived provided there
are substantial changes on the
house side that we would need to
review and then finally we are
allowing members who have a
COVID diagnosis for those who
are under some kind of mandatory
quarantine.
To be a participating remotely
what we did in the sixty day
session the concern that was
raised was that that rule might
be applied equally because the
speaker is the one that would be
determining who falls within.
So what I want to assure the
body this is what we talked
about sure the body publicly
that is relevant tarian I will
act in the filter and consistent
manner to make sure that that is
family enforced by the speaker
consistently so that if someone
is excluded because of a COVID
diagnosis that allowed to attend
remotely that that'll cost
reductions by way of example and
with that Mr speaker I will
yield to questions or comments
thank you Mr speaker.
The gentleman there are copies
being made on this to be passed
out and were working to get it
of loaded there is to be the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker this
gentleman from Bernalillo.
To yield to the gentleman from
San Juan.
Mr speaker
and in our sidebar discussions
and in your
recent to your your your
explanation of this rule change
for this resolution in the in
the title it states that this is
only for the special session
and.
And however it's a portion that
is known that it doesn't
specifically eight in the bill.
That this is only for the
session is just in the title so
we had this discussion with Mr
Fleetwood.
And I believe that is exactly.
That has to be delineated bill
for the only apply during the
session so I'd like to confer
with Mr Fleetwood.
Mr speaker German fourteen year
old for question.
Yes.
You Mr speaker gentleman what
suggestion then would you have
and I think what we could do is
just handle IT and and submit
that as a house.
Resolution one as amended on the
floor if you have an amendment
if you could reach into the body
of that please page in line
number Mr speaker I'd like to
yield to Representative Nibert
yes we do have some language the
gentleman Chavis and Lincoln.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman from San Juan and
Santa and Bernalillo you'll.
I am.
Mr speaker I would propose to
make sure that the this rule
seven dash four dash three is
only amended for purposes of the
special session.
That on page three line one.
After the word after the comma
after the word adoption that we
insert the following
language.
But only for the December twenty
twenty one special session
comma.
So it reads affected immediately
upon adoption but only for the
December twenty twenty one
special session we adopted to
remove them and then it goes on
for as follows.
When we do not have to worry
amend this to get it back in its
formal form at the conclusion of
the special session.
Gentleman from the earlier Santa
Mr speaker that's a family
amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman okay so what is it.
Do you have it on paper.
Seven on this piece of paper
I'll be happy to bring in the.
We're gonna just one of the
senator to bring you one of
those foreman meant forms.
Gentleman from civil right hand
McKinley is is on the topic of
this ammendment.
It's on the.
Mr speaker I guess it's a point
of order for on line there
like to have an idea of what the
resolution is the rest of the
house has no idea I can download
it I don't have a paper copy of
a copy of it nobody else in the
house but maybe three or four
people know what we're talking
about here yep that's a fair
point we're we're not gonna do
anything until we get the copies
distributed the folks are in the
coffee shop making copies right
now.
Some of the ground and we would
take action on amendment we
don't even know what the
gentleman just seven I can
taking actions we have the
copies distributed.
To go to the gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln to move.
House one in the number one to
house resolution one and members
I think in my nose received a
paper copy of the resolution.
We're gonna working up online it
is a very.
It is a very simple amendment
so.
The subjects I think it's fine
to have a read aloud it'll be
this what we're doing and see
some paper gentleman from Chavis
and Lincoln to move the floor
amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I move for enrollment number one
to house resolution number one.
Two oh two numbers point to two
one five three four point two.
The amendment appears on page
three line one.
Madeline after the comma
following the word adoption.
Please answer the following
words.
But only.
For the December.
Twenty twenty one.
Special session.
Comma.
And then it continues be adopted
to read and then it has the
provisions
of the gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval is this a friendly
amendment Mr speaker it is a
family member is there debate on
the amendment.
Is there objection to it.
No House women number one to
house resolution was adopted.
General Jones Lincoln used to
have a four thank you Mr speaker
no further questions.
I see no further debate.
Going once going twice gentleman
from Bernalillo and Sandoval to
close Mr speaker I now move that
house resolution one more by
adopted by this body.
We're on.
Final passage.
This is has one as amended house
resolution one as amended.
We are on final passage of house
resolution one as amended the
vote is now open.
Senator sixty three new from
there I ending in house
resolution one as adopted
concern as amended has passed
the house.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business introduction of
legislation.
No objections so ordered.
House bill one introduced by
Representative habit of Martinez
an act relating to general
appropriations making
appropriation from provided cash
balances for necessary expenses
of the second special session of
the fifty fifth legislature
making appropriations from the
general fund to the house and
Senate chief clerks offices for
leadership staff and ongoing
operational expenses making
contingent appropriations from
the appropriation contingency
fund for necessary judicial and
executive branch expenses
related to pre trial services
monitoring and administration
accounting and reporting of
funds received by the state
pursuant to the federal American
rescue plan act of twenty twenty
one house bill one.
One internet be germane pursuant
to the constitution Mexico order
for article four section six
order printed and referred to
the appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill to introduced by
Representative Lundstrom small
Sweetser Kerry Garcia and
Hochman Vigil.
And act making general
appropriations and the
authorizing expenditures House
Bill to.
Still to be determined to be
germane pursuant to article four
section six of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill three introduced by
representative Ely and actually
into the redistricting of the
house of representatives
establishing Representative
districts providing the method
for electing representatives
providing for the filing of the
I'm sorry the filling of
vacancies setting present
precincts fixing the number
residents in terms of
representatives repealing and
enacting sections of the NMFA
nineteen seventy eight House
Bill three introduced by
representative Ely.
Three editor to be germane
pursuant to article four section
six of the constitution order
printed and referred to the
state government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee sense
Judiciary.
House Bill for interviews by
Representative by an act
relating to the redistricting of
the house of representatives
establishing representative
districts providing the method
for electing representatives
providing for the filling of
vacancies setting precincts
fixing the number residents in
terms of Representative
repealing and acting sections of
the NMFA nineteen seventy eight
House Bill for.
Perform having been read twice
by title I determined to be
germane pursuit to article four
section six of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the state government elections
and Indian Affairs Committee
thanks Judiciary.
House bill I introduced by
Representative rai an active
staff wishing Representative
districts providing the method
for electing representatives
providing for the filling of
vacancies setting precincts
fixing the number of residents
in terms of representatives free
peeling and enacting sections of
the NMFA nineteen seventy eight
House Bill I.
Yeah.
I having to read twice by title
the gentleman to be germane
pursuit to article four section
six of the constitution order
printed and referred to the
state government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee then
see Judiciary.
House bill six engines by
Representative Johnson and act
relating to redistricting of the
Public Education Commission
establishing Public Education
Commission districts providing
for staggered terms and the
filling of vacancies funding
precincts setting residency
requirements repealing and
enacting sections of NMSA
nineteen seventy eight house
bill six school six seven min
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuant to
article four section six of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the state
governmental actions and Indian
Affairs Committee thence and
judiciary.
House bill seven inches by
Representative Johnson and after
leading to redistricting of the
Public Education Commission
establishing Public Education
Commission districts providing
for staggered terms and the
filling of vacancies from
increasing funding residency
requirements repealing and
acting sections of the NMFA
nineteen seventy eight hospital
seven.
House bill seven having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuit to article
four section six of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the state government
elections Indian Affairs
Committee that's Judiciary.
House bill eight introduced by
Representative even by an act
relating to the redistricting of
the house of representatives
insiders you representative
districts providing the method
for electing representatives
providing for the filling of
vacancies funding from things
fixing the number residents in
terms of Representative thinking
and acting sections of the NMFA
nineteen seventy eight hospitals
eight.
House bill eight having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuant to
article four section six of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the state government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee then see Judiciary.
House bill nine inches by
Representative Johnson and
action leading to redistricting
of the Public Education
Committee commission
establishing Public Education
Commission districts providing
for staggered terms and the I
filling of vacancies for
increasing for setting residency
requirements reviewing and
enacting section for the NMFA
nineteen seventy eight house
bill nine.
I don't mind having been read
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuant to article
four section six of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the state government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee this Judiciary.
House Bill ten introduced by
representative Nibert and even
by an act relating to emergency
powers providing that a
declaration of a state of
emergency pursuant to the all
have emergency management act
for the public health emergency
response act terminates after
ninety days unless the governor
calls legislature into special
session to address the
circumstances of the emergency
amending and enacting sections
of the NMFA nineteen seventy
eight declaring an emergency
hospital ten.
A man read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the rules committee.
House joint resolution one
introduced by Representative
Nibert and you live in joint
resolution proposing an
amendment to article four of the
constitution of New Mexico to
find that a declaration of a
state of emergency pursuant to a
power granted to the governor by
law terminates after ninety days
unless the governor called the
legislature into special session
to address the circumstances of
the emergency and to require a
three fifths vote of the
legislature to restrict suspend
or terminate the emergency
declaration house joint
resolution one.
I was touring resolution one
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
Judge of point of order.
State your point since that is
the resolution should not be
referred to a committee.
The gentleman that is true in
thirty day sessions article four
section six of the state
constitution states.
Special session of the
legislature meeting called by
the governor but no business
shall be transacted except such
as relates to the objects
specified in the proclamation
some constitutional amendments
are germane in a thirty day
session without a message from
the government not special
sessions.
Thank you Mr speaker that I
guess we'll see that in January.
The gentleman.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
I think it was that we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objection it is so
ordered.
members we can ice here's our
plan we are we will of recess.
For an hour.
An hour or so on the
appropriations committee meets
to consider house bill one will
then return to the floor to
consider that on the floor here
and then that will conclude our
work for the day.
Tomorrow morning at nine AM.
we will convene the house in a
committee of the whole house to
receive a presentation from the
citizens redistricting committee
I mentioned research a polling
will also.
The part of the so that we can
all get an update all together
on the work of this year see in
here for research and polling
who are the experts staffing all
of us for this session.
and then the state government
the collections and Indian
Affairs Committee will meet in
the afternoon to begin
considering the bills on
reapportionment sent okay so
we'll do that when they see this
afternoon that'll be it for the
day nine AM thank here to hear
from the C. R. C. and research
and polling
generally from McKinley and San
Juan with an answer thank you Mr
speaker I'd like to announce the
House Appropriations finance
committee will meet ten minutes
following the end of the floor
session up in our committee room
three oh seven.
Members take note are there
other announcements.
Gentlelady to have a job for us.
Mr speaker you.
Mr speaker what do you call a
baby snowman.
What do you call a baby so then
generate a snowball.
Thank you for getting us off on
a good start generating and Mr
speaker in the spirit of
Christmas all the jobs for the
for the special session will be
related to the holidays first
grade with four.
Are there any other
announcements.
Okay a we will the gentleman
from Bernalillo.
Okay so we'll Senate recess
subject to call the chair will
be back in about.
about an hour just gone three
fifteen and then also I mean
told will be a democratic caucus
after the floor session this
evening okay so the house is in
recess subject to college.
