Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative metal.
Garcia your.
I'm sure we'll hear.
Twenty seven members present we
have a quorum.
Great thank you for so we have
three bills that we will be
hearing today one is a house
memorial by Representative
Madrid but I don't see in here
we'll go ahead and text in other
areas
and so we'll go ahead and get
started with that house memorial
And then the other two are very
similar to bills that we've
already heard in this committee
so I'm looking forward to so
welcoming Center home academy
and and and senator couples for
now we can start with
Representative Madrid are you
ready.
Yes madam chair and three we've
already promoted Tammy Haas from
the New Mexico from the
department of transportation do
you need anyone else.
No.
great so we can begin when when
you're ready.
Thank you madam chair this is
also more twenty this is urging
the president of the United
States the United States
secretary of transportation and
the United States Congress to
include mandates and incentives
for the use of emerging roadway
technologies to promote the use
of cost effective environmental
friendly roadway construction in
New Mexico federal
infrastructure bill.
madam chair and to the members
of the committee I have a couple
other Representative is in this
committee that have a chance to
see a bill go through education
house bill two fifty seven in
which we had an interesting
discussion in there about the
fact of taking Romero then on
the side of the roads that's
darn and left for dead you know
years out out out integument and
remain on that and that
reprocessing making it.
More mental friendly and choose
to take care rural bus school
bus routes microstructure was
Rebecca Dow Representative
Rebecca Dow and the compensation
got to third interesting point
of understanding that there's
some viability but there is a
big logistical issue here so
this house memorial I think you
addresses the fact it's taking
it up a step higher being
federally and helping that to to
trickle down as I know my
colleagues are looking at this
and seeing the allotment of four
trillion four hundred billion
dollars that is a that is a
number that I think would just
accused during two thousand
seventeen would probably even
higher today but I asked if I
may madam chair because I didn't
get a chance to references but
vice chair
George Jr have some members
interesting point of information
that she had found and I over a
thank you because Senator due
diligence he does reference
these things might before couple
months before so if I may if
Last year Jorgensen mental.
Madam chairman he's calling me
vice chair from education yes
Broncos.
Thank you for the elevation.
No I just recommend that I I
like the small oil and I just
recommended that they just
released no data which basically
says the same thing so I just
recommended to Representative
Madrid that he include the
updated
information just to make it even
more timely that already yes
thank you madam chairwoman.
Sure.
I share your.
Of education that's it madam
chairman open for questions.
Thank you so much Representative
we do have thanks in the
attendees is is there anyone who
would like to speak in support
or not.
A couple questions that and I'm
behind us lower right the last
couple days
Representative Madam chair
representative this
One of the problems we've had in
the past.
For sure I would our
construction but and and getting
access to millions the state has
this is if the those mailings
come from a road that have
federal funds and it's sometimes
it's hard to get that
conversion from.
To the point where we can use
that in at the county level for
county roads your moral address
anyway.
Well.
Madam chair and.
Representative Pettigrew is a
good question and I think you in
talking in the would do a T.
that is some of the logistical
problems that we have
accordingly dealing with county
and misspellings but I will say
that in talking him to miss out
to counties and others I think
we might have come into the
right timing with this because
we are as a country looking for
more renewable ways and and more
proficient ways to those so what
you're basically talking about
some types are right away the
given the given the permission
so that's one reason I think
this will more will address that
because it is something that has
to start some fragile levels all
over the country not just here
we have certain parts that have
federal certain parts of have
County and disabilities soul I
hope I've answered your
question.
Yes and I think it is critical I
don't look at it from a
Renewable stand when I use it I
look at it from the use of of
assets that we have available
that that are so important to
making our roads more cost
effective.
And you know we're able to use
that
anywhere from half one and a
half percent asphalt inside of
of that existing mailings to do
that I would and so the other
thing is finding a way madam
chair and and Representative on
how we can
maybe
Concrete that we care.
And turn that into a viable
stone for
For for for concrete roads and
for.
PCCP and stuff like that.
We we have to do in my opinion
we have to get to a point where
we can make the grinding of of
of destroyed concrete roads so
we took that we pull up more
viable and put putting less
still in our concrete roads in
such a way that makes our.
And so I look forward to seeing
how our industry continues to
grow with respect to that
That approach for your bill as
well.
Thank you Representative we do
have a motion for do passed from
a gentleman Lundstrom can I get
a second from someone.
Jim.
I saw as for his handout first
Representative Madrid I did want
to ask a question no and this is
just more in terms of just
what happens with all of the old
like concrete like the stuff
that we don't like how is that
then repurpose it repurposed for
something else like what are
some of that the ideas that have
come out that if we really move
forward in this direction what's
what's some of the ideas that
people have had to re purpose
like old roads.
madam chair I think in the in
the in the front and that I can
talk about is dealing with the
road.
I thank you it applies the same
principle when we're talking
about concrete I think we're
still in the developmental
stages of trying to process I
know that they can be used we
grind and help to be somewhat of
the base or item one form so
again when we recycle there's a
real extensive process that.
New Mexico do to prepare the
table more extensive agency
expect a Representative chair of
education Romero has that
particular question in the
governor extensive in the
process of how they go about
this so I'm I'm glad to say that
we're moving in the right
direction and that's why I
sincerely think that we're at a
right time in the crossroads to
purchase initiative and into the
place of the president and the
secretary of transportation and
look at monumentally because I
know as you know we're we're do
plus as a nation in terms of our
roadways and infrastructure so
this is an address that has to
come I think we're just putting
our hat in the in the play early
as a state to recognize and
knowledge is a and is moving in
the way of technological.
Recycling and I think that's was
excites me about this because my
goal of this in the beginning
was to help get
the school bus routes in the
rural area page which you know
my areas a lot of dirt roads as
well as Rebecca Dow
Representative two so that was
our mission then it blew up to
something like this being really
extraordinary to see that we
have a lot of collaboration to
do one of.
Funding in these to come and I
figure it's gonna start up at
the top.
I hope I answered your question
yes Representative
Representative or did you have a
question.
One of the things that we do
recycle concrete is and and and
it's a little more difficult
with state specifications with
respect to repress but if we can
get it correctly on on some
county roads and some municipal
roads we can use.
We can use that RepRap for we
can use that material and and
bigger challenge as as Maduro
and roadside ditches and stuff
like that help with drainage we
have done that in the past again
not at the state level
at least on any projects that
I've been involved with we have
done a rural.
Representative.
So we have a motion for due
process and is up on chairman
strongest second from
Representative Crowder is there
any opposition to prosper
Hospital twenty House memorial
twenty.
There doesn't appear to be any
opposition with that
Representative Madrid you have a
due process on your house
memorial twenty.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee.
Thank you next we have and
senator Emil welcome to our
committee good morning madam
chairman thank you
Representative it's good to see
all of you I wish I could see
you in person but I look forward
to the day that I can meet to
view the person so madam
chairwoman I'm not too sure of
my expert witnesses have been
out into the zoom as of yet what
I can see that it's that Jerry
Valdez and Mallory months and
that is.
Great.
Thank you Mr Valdez.
Great Mallory should be coming
right in and then you can start
when you're ready very good so
good morning madam chairwoman
Representative you've heard us
you alright this bill before a
sister bill which was house bill
two seventy one I presented to
you by Representative Harper and
by you Madam chairwoman
Representative Rubio now Senate
bill seventy three was to do is
to direct all revenue remitted
to the state from fees imposed
by the federal United carrier
registration act to the motor
transportation fee fund which is
there after distributed to the
state road fund now this bill
Senate bill seventy three is
strictly a statutory cleanup
bill with no fiscal or
administrative impacts now
Representative Lee state road
front frontier brings in
approximately three point two
million dollars per year and
once again this bill seeks to
specify that revenue
distribution is put in statute
with that madam chair I wanted
to for to my expert witness
Mallory months and that is who's
going to say a few words
Mallory.
Morning madam chair thank you
thank you senator how to meal I
have nothing else taxes are
hungry you Representative Harper
and yourself have done a
excellent job in supporting this
bill we ask for your support
thank you very good thank you
madam chairwoman we can then
take at any public comment and
then we can take questions from
the committee.
Great thank you so much Senator
is right now folks we are on
Senate bill seventy three is
there anyone an attendee who
would like to speak in support
of this legislation.
I'm there is none but we do have
questions from the committee
chairwoman Lundstrom.
Thank you madam chair I would
just simply again just move for
a do pass.
Set.
I'm and Representative Powdrell
Culbert a second are there any
questions from the committee
before we move on.
Is there any opposition to the
do pass on this legislation.
Great I'm so Senator you have a
do pass madam chair economic
representative thank you and let
the record state that I did my
happy dance at my desk because
this is the first time I've
passed a committee of the house
and representative madam
chairwoman I appreciate all the
work that you do and I look
forward to continue working with
you have a great morning your
Senator I'm gonna.
Thank you all so next we have
Senator US senator Pete Campos
he's I think I saw him in the
ten other areas what Senate bill
sixteen Senator welcome.
Thank you very much madam chair
in a Christian members of the
committee it's great to be here
with you this morning basically
Senate bill one eighty six as
amended is also a companion bill
or that bill house bill one
hundred ninety eight by
Representative address.
In essence with this doesn't
transfers certain authority
related to the operations of the
ports of entry with respect to
the trip taxact weight distance
act the motor transportation act
from DPS to DOT you've already
heard that pretty much the
explanation and of course of
this type of relationship
has been going on since about
twenty at sixteen so the
relationship is there not what
we're trying to do is to ensure
that we sanction of the
responsibilities again moving on
from
DPS to to a D. O. T. so madam
chair members of the committee
in essence that's what it does
and I do have an expert witness
Mr Franklin Garcia with the DOT
if you'd allow him to make a few
comments and of course were
available for for questions
thank you madam chair.
Great thank you senator and we
have to.
Good morning madam chair members
of committee Franklin Garcia
with the department
transportation mole Division our
port of entry falls under our
mortal Division and we've been
handling the administrative a
permitting process since twenty
sixteen as Senator Campos
mentioned this bill is identical
to Representative Madrid house
bill one ninety eight that did
pass this committee nine zero
will stand for questions and
I appreciate your support.
Thank you very much madam chair
Senator is there anyone in the
attendees we would like to speak
in opposition or in support of
this legislation.
Otherwise we will go to
committee first we have by
servers the.
Thank you madam chair I would
like to entertain the motion of
the bass.
We have a motion from of by your
see on a second Representative
Crowder
before we do that Representative
Garrett do you have any you
have.
Thank you madam chairwoman so
currently one ninety eight isn't
Senate finance where does this
where does one eighty six as
amended Galle next is that have
another committee or will it go
to the floor.
Madam chair members the
committee Franklin Garcia this
will go to the floor this was
the the referral that we
received from the house side.
I see so Madam chairwoman and
this this one of
this is kind of a point of order
for the senior representatives
on our committee in in that case
if this one goes first will pass
this one or do they have to make
a just for my own edification of
someone can let me know the
answer.
The manager if I may.
Your.
Representative Garrett I think
the way that will work is it
just depends on who put it out
first if the house put that on
first that a low pass if it
passes or the Senate puts their
virgin on first it just it just
a balancing act with them first
I believe and I stand to be
corrected from wrong thank you
madam chair.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair.
Through four years ago that if
both bills make it to the
governor's desk whichever one
she signs last becomes the bill
of record.
Thank you madam chairwoman and
and thank you Representative I
do have one more question
Madam chairwoman did we amend
Representative madrick are they
about matching and content.
Madam chair members of the
Franklin with Mexico department
transportation yes the bills now
I've been amended so they aren't
identical bills.
Okay thank you madam chairwoman
all the clarification I needed
thank you.
Thank you Representative and so
we do have a motion for do
passed there the opposition's
motion.
So I'm Senator you do have a due
pass a unity unanimous due
process from committee thank you
for for stopping by.
Chair members of the committee I
really appreciate that okay have
a good day take care bye thank
you.
Thank you committee members so
that is all for today's agenda I
did want to just have a brief
conversation I know I spoke
Representative Pettigrew briefly
yesterday about the fact that
Senate bills are going to be
coming in our direction pretty
abruptly at some point so I just
wanted to to to get sort of a
temperature provokes on
on what you feel comfortable
with in terms of of hearing your
bills are outside of the twenty
four hour
I'll limit that we've been
pretty good at and so I just
wanted to get your thoughts I
know Representative Pettigrew
mentioned that it legislation
that comes over from the Senate
it's pretty unanimous or at
least close to unanimous there
may not be any concerns about
hearing a legislation under the
twenty four hours but I really
wanted to open it up to books to
see if there's any with nineties
left in the in the in the
session if there's any
any issues that you all might
have with hearing legislation
under the twenty four hour
deadline.
First we have Representative
grow.
Thank you madam chair in New.
My comment lose based off of.
conversations that I have we're
the senior members from the
Republican side on this
I I do want to.
Reiterated concern of things
that have the that are not
unanimous or very close to
unanimous I'm not
well we're a fan of that I think
that we set rules for a reason
and
just as much as those our our
our constituents expect us to
follow the rules and so thank
you I stand with the
conversational district and I do
appreciate you asking thank you.
Great thank you Representative
adjournments from.
Hi good morning madam chair
everybody I think my my feeling
about this is is that the twenty
four hour rule is at your
discretion as the chair and if
there is a bill that you bill
really.
That we need to either holder
here I still believe that that's
at your discretion as the chair
I know I I know from my own
perspective I I L. don't just
let things out.
And it doesn't matter how as
Senate group votes we may have
some other review and some other
issues but it certainly your
discretion I know that in HSC
we're in that twenty four hour
rule was just a general guide at
the end of the as we enter
toward the end of the session
we're gonna do what we need to
do and then what we need to do I
I just feel like you should get
that that up thank you.
Years.
Thank you for.
Where.
Act.
Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chairwoman I I
agree with what everybody said I
just
I don't want to get in a
situation where kind of a bill
just pops up all of a sudden
and we don't have time to deal
with that and we don't have time
to roll over so I trust your
judgment and you can consult
with
you know the thank you members
parties.
I.
I think Representative Powdrell
she turned up so.
So yeah I I trust your judgment
on it and I know that you'll
consult with people I just want
to get in a rollover situation
because.
I'm playing.
Get were built from thank you.
Your very.
I.
Can you hear me we can okay
thank you you know my big
concern to is is I don't believe
in just you know passing it
because the Senate has Senate
over and I totally agree with
our chairwoman Lundstrom the
other thing that I I'd like to
you to look at is how are they
listening and hearing our
legislation.
You know and to to be able to
check and see what's going on as
far as our legislation getting
through their communities
because in the past we've that
you know issues where we were.
You're listening and taking all
their bills and pass them and
ours is just sitting.
And so that's a concern.
Money I think we should hear.
I have a hearing on every piece
legislation that comes comes our
way.
So like I said my concern is are
they here in our legislation.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative next
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair I I was of
the opinion that Mario has done
a wonderful job of communicating
with us getting information to
as quickly and if we can get if
you know the bills are coming if
you can get on the secretary
church in our analysts I think
we'll be fine I I look forward
to their reviews and comments
and and I know we don't have
time to you know redo an FIR or
something like that after vote
but if you have time to get it
through the analysts that is
very helpful to us and I
appreciate that thank you.
Thank you Representative I'm and
thank you all I I'm sharing this
for the very I'm trying for the
first time so I I really
appreciate just having some
consensus and getting some some
thoughts from your from your end
so I appreciate that we don't
have I'm we're getting quite a
few we're getting a heads up on
legislation that's coming
through but I just wanted to
be sure that as we get nearer I
don't think we ever really
talked about that as as a
committee and so I wanted to be
sure we did that before things.
Came to frantic
Representative Pettigrew did you
have.
Madam chair thank you for
letting me talk one more time
I I just
I appreciate the advice that we
get from our our senior members
and and what Representative
Kudrow covered just sentence is
something that.
We didn't take deep enough into
account and allowing
Use the chair of the house
transportation to use use a.
this is a negotiating tool to
make sure that the that the
bills that are coming through
house transportation are getting
percent is just an amazing piece
of advice I just appreciate the
advice so we get from our senior
members.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative group
so with that thank you all I do
think that we may have to meet
Saturday if if if anything
briefly but we will certainly
let you know depending on what
what bills might be assigned to
us over the course of the next
there too so thank you all and
we will see you on the floor.
