The website for house bill two
then we'll go to third reading a
consider Senate bill one and
then we will adjourn seen ATA us
with just a few last bits of
work to do and then we'll be
done the gentle lady from Dona
Ana.
No thank you Mr speaker we can
go to.
Of we can go to messages.
Hearing objection it is so
ordered the clerk to read
message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in gross copy of house bill one
has been read full and signed by
the offices of the Senate in
open session of return same here
with respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk this is really
interesting message from the
Senate Mr speaker I'm directed
to inform the house of the
Senate as passed house bill two
as amended by the house of for
the amended by the Senate and
request the concurrence the
house of the house to the Senate
amendments respectfully
submitted Lenore and Lara host
Senate chief clerk message we
enter.
The gentle lady from you.
Thank you Mr speaker finger
concurrence no objection this
order the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
Martinez are you ready on item
number one house bill two
concurrent.
On yes Mr speaker I move that
the house speaker with the
amendment Senate floor amendment
on house bill two.
