The clerk to call the members of
that are recorded response.
Representative Alcon.
Okay.
Here Representative Alcon is
here.
Representative about us.
Representative about us is
present.
But.
Representative bash.
Representative bash is present.
Representative black.
Your but I wish I was there.
Representative black is here.
Representative Bunda.
Representative boom guys hear.
Prepping server difficulties
folks please stand by.
Representative Brown.
Representative Brown is here
Representative Cadena.
Here Representative Cadena is
here Representative Castellano.
As of this.
Comment on this chamber
Representative Chandler.
Representative Chasey.
Present Representative Chasey is
present.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield is
here.
The.
Representative Cook.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Crowder is here.
Representative Dow.
Representative Dow is here.
Representative Eli your
Representative Ely is here.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Harry Garcia.
This is Dan Representative Harry
Garcia is here.
Representative Harper.
Representative Lundstrom.
I'm here Representative
Lundstrom is here.
Representative Rod Montoya
Representative Rod Montoya is
here.
Representative Roger Montoya.
The representative Roger Montoya
is here.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
is here.
Representative Andrea Romero.
Representative Andrea Romero is
here.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Strickler is
here.
Representative Thomson.
Representative Thomson is here.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend is here.
And Representative Zamora.
A roll call is closed we have a
quorum.
Members please rise for today's
education offered to buy the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Garrett.
Please join me in prayer.
Our heavenly parent we thank you
today that we can be here to
Representative each and every
New Mexican and our precious
beautiful state guide us with
wisdom civility commitment.
And the shared desire to do
what's best to move our state
forward on every level the
financial the legal the
spiritual emotional meeting the
need needs of each of our fellow
New Mexicans thank you for the
privilege of serving and we
offer this prayer in names and
traditions of everybody gathered
here in this chamber and online
and.
Thank you gentle lady with the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Figueroa please
lead us in the pledge of
allegiance.
Mr speaker and which language.
Yes.
In his bonding.
What fidelity the the eleven
data that does is.
Would Representative Lane please
leave this in the salute to New
Mexico's flag.
I salute the flag.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you good afternoon members
I move that we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Hearing no objections so
ordered.
Good afternoon everyone.
Yes.
Are there any nonsense.
Senator.
Senator would you and
Representative Baca please come
to the well of the house I think
it's time for us to see the
wrestling match the you've been
promising us.
Right right check.
Are there nonsense.
The primary work today's going
to be bill introduction so folks
have built they would like to.
Introduce please make sure you
get them down to the front of
the chamber.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
messages no objections ordered
her to read.
House executive message number
sixteen.
Honorable speaker Egolf and
members of the house I have the
state signed house bill one as
amended with emergency clause
enacted by the fifty fifth
legislature second session
twenty twenty two respectfully
yours Michelle Lujan Grisham
governor.
We entered.
House executive message number
seventeen dear speaker is often
members of the house pursuant to
article four section five B. to
the New Mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature's second
session initiatives every Bill
bearing Legislative Council
Service drafting number point
two two one two nine nine a bill
enacting the hydrogen hub
Development Act creating
hydrogen related tax credits and
deductions specifying additional
duties of the department of
environment related to hydrogen
adding an exemption to the
procurement code for agreements
entered into pursuant to the act
and amending related definitions
in the rural electric
cooperative act and the
renewable energy act
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor message
will be entered.
House executive message number
eighteen deer speaker it often
members of the house.
Pursuant to article four section
five B. to the New Mexico
constitution I'm authorizing for
your consideration during the
fifty fifth legislature second
session submission of house bill
forty two a bill authorizing the
New Mexico finance authority to
make loans for public projects
from the project public project
revolving fund respect for the
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor message
will be entered and members the
remove their jackets.
The end of message number
nineteen.
There's bigger Egolf and members
of the House pursuant to article
four section five B. to the New
Mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of house bill seven a
bill enacting the op opportunity
enterprise Act authorizing the
New Mexico finance authority to
provide financing and loans to
enter into leases with
opportunity enterprise partners
establishing the terms for
financing loans and leases.
Rating the opportunity
enterprise revolving fund
transferring certain excess
revenue from the opportunity
enterprise revolving fund to the
general fund creating the
opportunity enterprise Review
Board and establishing the role
and duties of the New Mexico
finance authority and Economic
development department pursuant
to the opportunity enterprise
Act respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor message
will be entered.
House executive message number
twenty dear speaker you often
members of the House pursuant to
article four section five B. to
the New Mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
Legislative Council Service
drafting number two two one
three six three a bill amending
certain dates to expand
eligibility for the twenty
twenty one sustainable building
tax credits for certain pursuant
to the income tax act in the
corporate income and franchise
tax act respectfully yours
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor
this is Richard.
Earlier this week I move that we
go to the next order of business
introduction of legislation
interjections order.
to read.
House bill one twenty two
introduced by representatives
Madrid Dow and a lot of.
And act making appropriation to
the public education department
for the development of a
cybersecurity program for the
statewide education technology
infrastructure network including
eighty seven school districts in
seventy three charter for other
schools by the end of fiscal
year two thousand twenty six.
House bill one twenty two
introduced by representatives
Madrid dial and not a.
One twenty two having been read
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the Education
Committee then to appropriations
and finance.
House bill one twenty three
introduced by Representative Dow
and Anderson an act relating to
taxation exempting face masks
sold during a public health
emergency from the gross
receipts tax declaring an
emergency house bill one twenty
three introduced by
Representative Dow and Anderson
house bill one two three having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the consumer Public Affairs
Committee fence taxation and
revenue.
House bill one twenty four
introduced by Representative
brown endorsed by the courts
corrections and justice
committee.
An act relating to courts
creating additional judgeships
in the fifth and thirteenth
judicial judicial districts
making appropriations house bill
one twenty four introduced by
Representative brown.
I
two four having been read twice
by title I determined which
means to to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the Judiciary since
appropriations and finance.
This bill one twenty five
introduced by Representative
Ortez an act relating to
taxation amending certain dates
to extend eligibility for the
two thousand twenty one
sustainable building tax credits
pursuant to the income tax act
and the corporate income and
franchise tax act.
House bill one twenty five
introduced by Representative
Ortez.
One twenty five having been read
twice by title I determined to
be germane to article four
section five B. one of the
constitution and has executive
message over twenty order
printed and referred to the
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee then to
taxation and revenue.
House bill one twenty six
introduced by Representative
Lujan and act relating to state
personnel and acting the
diversity act creating the chief
diversity officer within the
state personnel office creating
diversity and inclusion liaisons
within state agencies creating
the work force diversity and
inclusion council providing
duties requiring state agencies
to develop and implement
policies to identify assess and
decrease institutional racism
providing criteria by which
state agencies shall implement
such policies requiring an
annual report making an
appropriation house bill one
twenty six introduced by
Representative Lujan.
House bill one twenty six having
been read twice by title is
germane pursuant to house
executive message number
fourteen order printed and
referred to the labor veterans
and military affairs committee
that's government elections and
Indian Affairs.
House bill one twenty seven
introduced by Representative
McQueen.
And act relating to radioactive
waste amending the radioactive
and hazardous materials Act
prohibiting the storage or
disposal of spent fuel and high
level waste amending the
definition of disposal facility.
In the duties and composition of
the radioactive waste
consultation task force
declaring an emergency house
bill one twenty seven introduced
by Representative McQueen house
bill one two seven having been
read twice by title is germane
pursuant to Senate executive
message number fifteen order
printed and referred to the
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee events
Judiciary.
House bill one twenty eight
introduced by representatives
is L. nai bird Scott cook and
Andersen.
And act making appropriation
from the appropriation
contingency fund to the
Department transportation for
infrastructure projects on a
certain portion of United States
highway three eighty house bill
one twenty eight introduced by
representatives he's L. and
divert Scott cook and Andersen
house bill one twenty eight
having been read twice by title
I determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the transportation public works
and capital improvements
committee thence appropriations
and finance.
House bill one twenty nine
introduced by representatives
Sweetser and Maestas.
The staff.
Act relating to taxation
requiring all business income to
be apportioned by the single
sales factor hospital one twenty
nine introduced by
Representative Sweetser and my
Estes.
One twenty nine having been read
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the commerce and
economic development committee
then to taxation and revenue.
House joint resolution eleven
introduced by representatives
Townsend lane Scott Montoya
seizing brought Representative
Rod Montoya Representative Lord.
A joint resolution proposing to
amend articles for nine and
twelve of the constitution of
New Mexico with the approval of
Congress to allow for the
distribution of public school
funding to parents or legal
guardians of school age children
for home school or private
school including private virtual
schools house joint resolution
eleven introduced by
representatives Townsend lane
Scott brought one Toyota and
lord.
House joint resolution eleven
having been read twice by title.
Is authorized by article
nineteen section one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the Education
Committee then some Judiciary.
House memorial twenty four
introduced by Representative
Alcon yes.
A memorial requesting New Mexico
county managers in collaboration
with animal shelters animal
welfare organizations and
interested individuals to
develop a comprehensive plan to
save the lives of healthy
adoptable dogs and cats in New
Mexico's animal sheltering
system House memorial twenty
four introduced by
Representative Alcon.
House memorial twenty four
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the consumer public affairs
committee.
House memorial twenty five
introduced by representative
Lente a memorial requesting the
public education department to
investigate how to incorporate
curriculum pertaining to
agriculture food and nutrition
indicator twelve school systems
House memorial twenty five
introduced by representative
Lente house memorial twenty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Education Committee.
Hospital for introduced by
representatives Lundstrom small
Martinez Representative Harry
Garcia.
And act relating to economic
development and acting the
hydrogen hub Development Act
providing for the designation of
hydrogen hubs allowing public
partners to enter into public
private partnerships partnership
agreements to facilitate
development of hydrogen how
projects creating the hydrogen
hub development board and
specifying powers establishing
criteria for approval of
hydrogen help projects creating
hydrogen hub project fund
authorizing grants loans and
revenue bonds.
Pacifying powers and duties of
the New Mexico finance authority
requiring reports creating
hydrogen production and energy
generation income tax credit.
Hydrogen production and energy
generation corporate income tax
credit and first receipts and
compensating tax to the
deductions for hydrogen related
sales and use.
To provide additional duties of
the department of environment
adding an exemption to the
procurement code.
Amending definitions in the
rural electric cooperative act
and the renewable energy act
declaring an emergency.
House bill four introduced by
Representative Lundstrom small
Martinez Representative Harry
Garcia.
Just before having been read
twice by title is germane
pursuant to house executive
message seventeen order printed
and referred to the Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee tents
taxation and revenue for.
House memorial twenty six
introduced by representatives of
Rubio and Garrett.
A memorial requesting the
University of New Mexico bureau
of business and economic
research and collaboration with
the Legislative Council Service
to conduct and report the
findings of the survey of
legislative person on the needs
of the legislature and a survey
of legislators to identify the
activities and time devoted to
their legislative duties outside
of legislative sessions
industry the costs and benefits
of legislator compensation
modifying the length and scope
of the legislative session and
provided staffing including
staff for legislators House
memorial twenty six introduced
by representatives Rubio
Garrett.
House memorial twenty six having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee.
Been told that we are expecting
bills from Representative small
and had a.
So we'll hold it open.
For a little bit.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business committee reports
hearing no objection it is so
ordered.
The clerk to read.
Mr speaker your rules in order
of business committee team has
been referred house bill nine
has had it under consideration
and provide same to be germane
in accordance with
constitutional provisions
respectfully submitted Andrea
Romero chair.
Move adoption production a
favorable committee report on
house bill nine all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
All this was named reports about
that.
Mr speaker your rules in order
of business committee team has
been referred house bill twenty
five has had it under
consideration and provide same
to be not to germane in
accordance with constitutional
provisions respectfully
submitted Andrea Romero chair Mr
speaker move adoption production
of an unfavorable committee
report on house bill twenty five
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
This was may.
Committee report is adopted.
Mr speaker your rules in order
of business committee team has
been referred house bill twenty
six has had it under
consideration and provide same
to be germane in accordance with
constitutional provisions
respectfully submitted Andrea
Romero chair Mr speaker move
adoption credit option a
favorable committee report on
house bill twenty six all those
in favor please signify by
saying aye.
Calls may be point about the.
Mr speaker your rules in order
of business committee team has
been referred house bill twenty
seven has had it under
consideration of provide same to
be germane in accordance with
constitutional provisions
respectfully submitted Andrea
Romero chair.
For the option of federal
committed for has to twenty
seven all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
All this was may refer to
doctor.
Mr speaker your rules in order
of business committee to is been
referred house bill twenty eight
has had it under consideration
and provide same to be germane
in accordance with
constitutional provisions
respectfully submitted Andrea
Romero chair move adoption on
adoption Senator could you for
house bill twenty eight all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
The report is adopted.
Mr speaker your rules in order
of business committee team has
been referred house bill forty
four has had it under
consideration of fines same to
be not germane in accordance
with constitutional provisions
provisions respectfully
submitted Andrea Romero chair
food options for an adaption of
an unfavorable committee report
on house bill forty for all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
Those names Reports adopted.
Mr speaker your rules in order
of business committee team has
been referred house bill one oh
five has had it under
consideration and provide same
to be germane in accordance with
constitutional provisions
respectfully submitted Andrea
Romero chair move adoption
wanted option of a favorable
committee report on house bill
one of five all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
All this was a report is
adopted.
Mr speaker your rules in order
of business committee team has
been referred house bill one oh
six has had it under
consideration and provide same
to be germane in accordance with
constitutional provisions
respectfully submitted Andrea
Romero chair food option branded
options a federal committee
report on house bill one of six
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
All this was a.
Reports about.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill fifteen has had it
under consideration point same
with recommendations that do
pass and this refers to the
taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted Georgene
Louis chair unanimous consent of
the committee portrait together
act on a single vote and
referred to the journal so
they're acted upon individually
hearing objection it is so
ordered Clark to read house bill
twenty two to pass and then just
to the appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill eighty nine to pass
and then to the appropriations
and finance committee
respectfully submitted Georgene
Louis chair.
Move adoption across the run a
deficit favorably Reports house
bill fifteen twenty two eighty
nine all those if favor please
signify by saying hi I was was
may three point are adopted.
Mr speaker your Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee team is been
referred house bill eleven has
had it under consideration and
report same with recommendation
that I do pass as amended and
it's referred to the taxation
and revenue committee
respectfully submitted Matthew
McQueen chair it was considered
the committee point right to
gather acted upon a single vote
reflects in the journals of
erected on individually hearing
no objections so ordered for to
read.
House bill thirty four do pass
and thence to the taxation and
revenue committee.
House bill thirty five to pass
and then to the taxation revenue
committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen chair that's an
we are on adoption a favorable
committee point on house bill's
eleven is amended thirty four
and thirty five all those in
favor please signify by saying
hi.
All this was named reports or
drive.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too has been referred
house bill eighty six.
That it under consideration for
state with recommendation that a
do pass and that's referred to
the provisions of finance
committee respectfully submitted
Georgene Louis chair.
Move adoption right not sure if
they wrote the report on house
bill eighty six all those in
favor please signify by saying
hi.
This was an eight reports up to.
Mr speaker your government
lections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill sixty two has had it
under consideration forcing his
recommendation that it to pass
an answer for to the provisions
of finance committee
respectfully submitted Georgene
Louis chair move adoption.
We're adoption a favorable
committee report on house bill
sixty two all those in favor
please signify by saying I.
All this was in a committee
point adopted.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
As as a hero to the left them at
a the proposal go I am on the
books in order than the media no
since.
Scene of.
Sixty on the.
Is the.
In order.
Mr speaker.
Really.
Mr speaker house judiciary will
meet at one thirty we hope if
we're off the for our ten
minutes after we're off the
floor we are only going to be
hearing one bill today house
bill ninety two and the other
the measure will not be heard
today.
Members take note well
serviceable the bills to pull
now from the rules committee.
House Bill seven Representative
Dixon.
House bill seven Representative
Dixon is germane pursuant to
house executive message in
nineteen I order printed.
Remove the rules committee and
referred to the E. commerce and
economic development committee
thence appropriations and
finance.
Still seven is germane pursuit
has executive message nineteen
hours removed rules committee
printed and referred to the
commerce and economic
development committee thence
appropriations and finance.
House bill forty two
Representative Herrera.
House bill forty two
Representative Herrera is
germane pursuant to house
executive message eighteen hours
or is removed the rules
committee printed and referred
to the appropriations and
finance committee house bill
forty two Representative
Herrerra is germane pursuit has
executive SCG team ordered
removed rules committee printed
and referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
The phone bills.
Will be removed for the rules
committee pursuant to the action
of the rules committee this
morning house bill nine.
Is germane pursuant to today
determination the rules
committee.
Order it removed the rules
committee printed.
And referred to a consumer
public affairs committee.
Thanks Judiciary then to
appropriations and finance house
bill nine referred to the
consumer public affairs
committee it's Judiciary thence
appropriations and finance.
House bill twenty six
Representative remain.
Is germane pursuant action of
the rules committee.
Comment right removed from the
rules committee printed and
referred to the consumer public
affairs committee thanks
Judiciary that's appropriations
and finance house for twenty six
is referred to consumer public
affairs judiciary and
appropriations and finance.
House bill twenty seven is
germane pursuant to a
determination of the rules
committee ordered removed the
rules committee printed and
referred to the consumer Public
Affairs Committee that's
Judiciary than some procreation
and finance house bill twenty
seven Representative Rehm is
referred to the consumer public
affairs committee since
Judiciary Vince appropriations
and finance.
House bill twenty eight is
germane pursuant to action of
the rules committee.
Ordered removals Committee
printed and referred to the
consumer Public Affairs
Committee then statute sherry
then separations and finance
house bill twenty eight
Representative Rehm is referred
to consumer public affairs and
Judiciary thence appropriations
and finance.
Finally house bill one oh five
Representative Reem and others
is germane pursuant to
determination the rules
committee.
Reporter it removed from the
rules committee printed and
referred to the labor veterans
and military affairs committee
dense Judiciary house bill one
of five Representative Rehm is
referred to labour Veterans in
military affairs committee then
situation very.
Finally house bill one of six is
germane pursuant to the
determination of the rules
committee.
In order to remove the rules
committee printed and referred
to the labor veterans and
military affairs committee
that's Judiciary house bill one
of six Representative Rehm is
referred to the labor veterans
and military affairs committee
then situation here.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business introduction of
legislation.
No objections so ordered.
to read.
House bill one thirty introduced
by representatives master this
budget Sweetser Allison and
Powdrell Culbert.
And act relating to public
education allowing personal
finance to count is elected in
sixth through eighth grades
amending graduation requirements
allowing one half unit of
personal finance to count as an
elective unit prior to
graduation making appropriation.
House bill one thirty introduced
by representatives my Estes
Madrid Sweetser Allison and
Powdrell Culbert.
After one thirty having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order it printed
and referred to the Education
Committee then to appropriations
and finance.
House bill one thirty one
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero and act making
appropriations for the agencies
subject to the water data act to
carry out the purposes of the
water data act and implement the
water date data act house bill
one thirty one introduced by
Representative Andrea Romero one
thirty one editor to be germane
pursuit to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the agriculture sec use and
water resources committee Vince
appropriations and finance.
House bill one thirty two.
Introduced by Representative
added us.
And act relating to financial
institutions changing the
permitted percentage rates for
loans pursuant to the New Mexico
bank installment loan act of
nineteen fifty nine and the New
Mexico small loan act of
nineteen fifty five.
Wearing a license for certain
lenders changing certain
reporting requirements requiring
notice making an appropriation.
House bill one thirty two
introduced by Representative at
us as for one thirty two
internet be germane pursuit to
article four section five B. one
of the constitution order it
printed and referred to the
consumer Public Affairs
committee thanks Judiciary.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business Serino
junction is so ordered right
members that is it for today.
Are there announcements.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Garrett.
Thank you Mr speaker just
reminder that house
transportation meets tomorrow
morning at nine AM.
There is a no Representative
Harry Garcia.
Mr speaker of Representative
here just announced this
announcing thing transportation
will be words and capital
improvements for tomorrow at
nine AM.
Their research where great minds
think alike gentleman the
gentleman from civil and
McKinley Representative Alcon.
Thank you Mr speaker having been
released from the witness
protection program your labor of
Military and Veterans Affairs
Committee will be tomorrow
immediately after the floor
session thank you Mr speaker.
About the general Hurley a Santa
Fe Torrance and Valencia.
Thank you Mr speaker House
Energy Environment natural
resources will be tomorrow
morning at eight thirty the as
soon let's we'll hear two bills
as listed on the gold a thank
you.
The.
The general Representative
Maestas thank you Mr speaker I
will members the house commerce
committee will meet this
afternoon fifteen minutes after
the floor session.
no bills this afternoon
introduction and orientation
thank you Mr speaker state of
the gentle lady from Rio Arriba
Santa Fe and Taos thank you Mr
speaker
the real development land grants
and cultural affairs for me
tomorrow morning as scheduled at
nine nine AM on this soon thank
you.
It's so on brand.
Breakfast from the spec it's
been.
Of course.
Good.
The gentle lady granted Dogo and
Sierra Representative Dow thank
you Mr speaker at the Republican
house will have a caucus
immediately following interment.
In room two oh seven thirty
three sorry three of seven.
Okay.
Members say they'll try to get.
The gentleman from the Indiana
thank you Mr speaker your house
appropriations and finance
committee will be made
following the Republican caucus
this afternoon.
Okay in going forward the jelly
for the leader Townsend has been
the practice of both caucus
leaders to let us know that
they're planning caucus that we
could.
give schedule appropriately with
committees and whatnot so if you
can go back to that practice
just so that we can let the
public know before we announce
all the committees that would
certainly be appreciated.
Thank you that's my fault I
apologize and I should have
notified you are here.
No from John thank you.
The gentleman from Rio Arriba
Sandoval and San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
agriculture sec use water
resources committee will meet
tomorrow morning eight thirty B.
is assumed to have an
organizational meeting then
there after have a presentation
by Mr my cam and the senior
water adviser for governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham thank you
Sir members.
Okay folks have one more bill
and chairman Lewis is asked
pretty please if we can have
introduced today.
And there's a chair there's a
cherry on top so I said yes.
So we will go to the general
from Bernalillo Representative
messes with us and thank you Mr
check that house covers five
minutes after the.
The a caucus meetings five
minutes immediately following
the caucus meetings thank you
members take note.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr Gramm of the go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation no
objections ordered click to
read.
House bill one thirty four
introduced by Representative
Maestas.
House bill one thirty three
introduced by Representative
Hernandez and act relating to
victim restitution clarifying
that municipal courts have
statutory authority to order
restitution for violations of
municipal ordinances house bill
one thirty three introduced by
Representative Hernandez for one
thirty three having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules committee.
House bill one thirty four
introduced by Representative
Maestas and act relating to
sports changing the focus of the
sports authority division of the
tourism department clarifying
duties adding members to new and
changing the name of the sports
advisory committee making
appropriation house bill one
thirty four introduced by
Representative Maestas house one
thirty four have been read twice
by title I determined to be
germane pursuit to article four
section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the commerce
academic Development Committee
fence.
Appropriations and finance.
House bill one thirty five
introduced by Representative
Lewis and act relating to
children and acting the Indian
family protection act
consolidating provisions
specific to child custody
proceedings involving Indian
children into the Indian family
protection act.
Adding additional requirements
governing child custody
proceedings involving Indian
children providing for
confidentiality of certain
records providing a penalty
creating the office of tribal
affairs within the children
youth and families department
requiring a cultural component
in case plans in abuse and
neglect neglect proceedings
amending repealing and acting
sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight house bill one
thirty five introduced by
Representative Lewis.
House bill one thirty five
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr chairman of the go
to the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business interjection is so
ordered I think we had
announcements the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
hundred.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
I have a letter from the
American Association of
university women they'd like to
thank the legislators and would
like to I would like to read the
letter generally we the the
rules don't allow for the
reading of letters or scripts
are prepared remarks but you can
work with the sergeants had a
letter distributed to members
yes.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The generated million of
Representative Ferrary thank you
Mr speaker we were going to have
just a quick organizational
Meeting for the house consumer
and public affairs committee we
will do it five minutes after
the Republican caucus members
take note.
Further further nonsense.
Gentlelady from Valencia.
Mr speaker do you know why jelly
fish are sad.
General anyways and it is no
peanut butter fresh.
It is kinda said isn't.
And Mister speaker today is
national peanut butter day.
Members take note.
General earlier.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
the house stand in recess until
eleven thirty tomorrow morning.
Thank you I appreciate all the
work that we do this morning
please make sure you follow the
work or committees thanks
everyone who is with this in the
gallery and watching our work
online enjoy your afternoon
evening house in recess until
eleven thirty eight AM tomorrow.
