And accounting and auditing
standards and so we're just
looking at making sure that
we're paying attention to the
big stuff and small staffed with
which is why this is so needed
with that madam chair I will
introduce John Chavis to talk
about why we need this now.
Get.
Good morning.
madam chair and all
representatives are hello but
the representatives of the
committee yes
Myself and several members of
the community members that and
then while the non profits have
been working over this over the
summer and what we found out
that in this at this level of
activity in non profits
there has not been a great need
for for audit in fact it takes
an audit that did not and cost
up to fifteen thousand dollars
and a lot of these smaller
nonprofits don't have a bottom
line to support it we raised
this with the AG's office and
the state auditor's office
who then looked into it state
AG's office actually ransom
statistics for us he said that
about two hundred organizations
would be affected by this they
have not found a systematic
fraud.
At that level of organizations
and as such they offered a
friendly amendment the friendly
amendment being that if the
limit is raised to seven hundred
fifty thousand before you happen
on it and if they do get
complaints as and that as part
of the proceeding that they
would then require an audit in
accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles
at that time our reserves over
the summer also let us find out
that no state around us even
requires an audit at any level
on the New Mexico does and at
the federal government level
this seven hundred fifty
thousand dollar amount is the
same number that the federal
government uses for nonprofits
that receive federal funds and I
believe that's why the AG's
office was was willing to accept
a the proposal
they'll nail and a Hochman and
been very helpful with getting
this up and it seemed it to get
a lot of it got a lot of support
from the other side of the
house.
And that's basically how it in a
nut shell thank you madam chair
that will stand for questions
okay with with the unusual start
I forgot to have Allison take
rules that we will do that first
thank you Representative
Barreras for reminding me and I
will ask my fellow committee
members if I forget to do
something are I do it wrong
don't hesitate to call me out or
send you text or whatever sort
by an elephant.
Representative arrest.
Your.
Representative Lord.
Yes
Pettigrew.
Chairman.
Madam chair Thompson I'm here
okay and now we will go to the
poll.
So if you are here in favor or
support I'm in favor or
opposition to this bill please
that please weigh in on this
whole.
All right looks like we got one
vote okay from where we're not
on the R..
The most down.
Exotic of of legislation here so
we will now go to the to the
audience if if you would like to
speak in in.
Opposition if there's anyone I
know you didn't vote I'm so I
don't see anyone in opposition
in support.
Okay and I I'm a boy this first
name is the top one too yes I do
I'll just let you pronounce it
so we can all learn go ahead
good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Secora Nefish and I am a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico thrives the state
nonprofit association and we
stand in strong support of
Senate bill ninety nine as
mentioned it brings the audit
level in line with the federal
level and it takes the burden
off of smaller non profits so we
think this is a great bill and
thank you for your time and your
support.
Madam chair if I can just say
something I want to apologize
for how the
But coming out of she was
speaking some rather graphic
wording came out so I apologize
to the members of the audience
who saw that
I did not see that thank you
Representative Lord so we will
go to the committee for
questions I see Representative
Pettigrew go ahead.
Thank you madam chair.
Just a few quick questions.
How many.
Non profits in the state of New
Mexico.
Are there that fall within the
current two hundred and fifty
thousand dollar limit.
Madam chair of deferred to
John Chavis.
Yes I might answer madam chair
there is around two hundred
nonprofits that fall in that
category that would be affected
by this change.
So put your real quick
Representative group so are the
are is that two hundred
nonprofits in the state that
have less than that in in income
or is that two hundred nonprofit
to do business with the state
with that amount of income.
That is that settlement
chair that is two hundred that
would be affected better in that
sweet spot between it's five
hundred thousand to seven
hundred fifty thousand there are
two hundred that would not be
required to have an audit of
because they're in that five
hundred to seven hundred fifty
thousand dollar range.
Representative Pettigrew connect
just so are you saying that
those two hundred do do business
with the state or they they have
the possibility of doing
business with the state.
They have The Boston quit.
What he's saying is that once we
get the laws changed two hundred
now don't have to be audited the
big fall and beneath the seven
hundred fifty thousand dollars
threshold right now there's an
excess of two hundred that fall
between that are over two fifty
and under seven fifty.
I understand that I'm just
saying are all of those
contracting with the state at
this moment or are they
potential a combination of
potential and current
contractors.
Madam chair that they're just
tax exempt organizations.
The.
Regardless of their status with
doing business with the state
thank thank you for let me jump
in there Representative
Pettigrew go ahead.
No worries so you and I are
going down the same road madam
chair so right now the the way I
read the bill it's two hundred
and fifty but the documentation
that that I find
Online.
through council non profits
indicates that New Mexico's
limit is actually five hundred
thousand is that correct.
May I speak to that yes mentor
please yes.
Representative chairman Thompson
and fellow the other
Representative said the
committee
the bill actually has two parts
the first part of is for.
Nonprofits that support
governmental agencies
that those nonprofits previously
had a limit of two hundred fifty
thousand that's the two hundred
fifty thousand that
Representative Romero is is
mentioning those organizations
those nonprofits support
organizations such as
educational institutions APS
schools.
They're not mostly like
foundations your exams they
support those type organizations
the second part of the bill is
for all nonprofits and number
all non profits.
Representative that is correct
that current limit is five
hundred thousand.
And the siege Debayle re
increases that limit to seven
hundred fifty thousand AG's
office about that having those
two and us supporting the bill
having those two minutes was
confusing so they changed on
both the seven hundred fifty
thousand dollars.
Thank you madam chair you know
there's part of me that says
that the.
The lower the threshold the
better because we're getting
that audit the other side of
me caesareans reading needs.
Thank if I'm reading the FIR
correctly that this audit which
is typically cost somewhere
between ten and twenty five
thousand dollars is that correct
madam chair.
Madam chair and chair of.
And share a
I'm also I didn't mention it but
I am also a CPA I work for a
private company now but and
involved with CPA's we also
discussed this with the local
CPA society
they had some concern obviously
its business lost to them so
they do have some concern but
after discussing with them and
the pros to their clients they
felt that unnecessary regulation
is also a detriment so they they
didn't take a position on this
but they kind of understand
where we're coming from on that
point where
Representative Pettigrew
mentioned of not having an audit
that to give you some
level of comfort
we did discuss that with the
AG's office as I mentioned they
went back to their records and
we we basically discuss have you
seen any audits that have any
organizations in the size and it
had problems they mention that
their problems are used in large
organizations and then when they
do have problems like this it's
a special circumstance one that
a blanket on it be where and
when when discovered.
Thank you very much for that
answer and madam chair and so.
Without violating anything can
you tell me.
Madam chair of the give me an
example of of of nonprofit that
we may have had problems with in
the past.
Madam may
Matt.
The.
Yes madam chair
One has been in the paper has
been and it really has been a
problem but the AG's office was
trying to get some more
information from the U. N. and
Anderson school foundation
it didn't really fit the mold on
this that's another example of
why this law with her.
the AG's office at it was a
whole different situation but if
I could speculate one would be a
smaller organization a
Executive director absconding
with the funds of the
organization that would be an
audit concern by the AG's office
I believe handles that is by
specific complaints and they
would at that point they require
a forensic audit which is not a
generally accepted accounting
principle on it and again the
AG's office left that provision
in there should they get such
type of specific complaint they
would require not an of an audit
at that time.
Thank you madam chair are you
but.
No further questions I actually
I have just I have sat on quite
a few nonprofit boards and it is
amazing how expensive the the
audits can I mean Madam when you
think in our twenty five
thousand dollars to go toward
the mission of the nonprofit as
opposed to towards
on it but
I guess I will ask John John is
if there's why did why did the
Senator decide to do this did
what their problem was this just
cleaning up what what was the
impetus for doing this now.
Well it's been
madam chair it's been lingering
for a number of years the and
but this was the fact that know
fundraising has been able to be
done by non profits and they
were exhausting every possible
source the date that they could.
The funds okay I hear you there
okay I will not entertain a
motion.
I'm sure we do passed.
It was the second okay and okay
so we have a due pass from
Representative Barreras and a
second from vice chair Romero
Allison will you take the role.
Representative arrest yes.
Representative Lord.
Yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes.
Thanks chair marrow.
Yes.
Madam chair Thompson yes.
Okay by a five two zero
Representative Romero and John
you have a do pass and you you
you have a big favor to you from
the Senator please mark that
down in your.
Madam chair.
Thank you for being here and
that is all the the bills we
have for today we'll see what
kind of play it by ear if we
need to do a meeting on Thursday
it will probably be at eleven
thirty if we do about what the
what bills come in and thank you
all for being here and thank you
Representative Romero stepped.
Chair thank.
Couple hours lost until we're on
the floor again.
Thank you bye bye.
