A memo from the roll on Germanus
although with ask for it we
haven't we haven't seen that so
would certainly like to see
that.
Okay thank you Representative I.
The I believe Elaine sent this
out yesterday at five forty two
I'll go ahead and forward it to
you as anybody else need a copy
of the memo okay Sir
Representative Garrett still
send those to you on one grand
okay great you just resend it to
everybody Madam chairwoman.
Happy to and the the webcast is
live we can you can see.
Okay great so when if you
wouldn't mind forwarding that to
all of our members that memo on
germane ness and to what since
we're at it will we'll go ahead
and send out the memo that was
sent today by Megan Dorsey on
how will deliberate upon bills
so we'll get started again
welcome to rules committee what
we're going to be going through
today is how we will be
receiving bills from members in
regards to whether or not they
are germane our committee is
active going to be active
participants in the evaluation
of possible bills that members
want to hear for whether or not
they're germane so the process
will be the following and I
don't know that would be helpful
if you have recommendations for
how to sue this out since we're
test driving some of these
process sees we can go to a Q.
and a after that so first and
foremost if a member wants to
add request that their bill be
heard
in committee and it has not been
deemed to germane there's gonna
be a three step process for how
it gets to rules and to be able
to possibly be heard for whether
or not it is streaming number
one if there is a message that
member believes eight falls
under that category that makes
their bill germane they have to
recognize the message sends the
bill that is germane under that
message and send their bill on
that they would like to be
recognized for whether or not it
is streaming we will have to
analysts at this point in time
evaluating those bills of
Republican and analyst and a
democratic analyst looking at
those bills providing there at
assessment for whether or not
the bill is germane that will
send to that assessment to to
myself and Representative
Garrett.
And and and of course our our
staff and will distribute
basically a list of bills for
what our analysts believe are
germane or not Germany they may
agree they may disagree and so
we'll get those scheduled for
subsequent rules meeting and
hear those bills two for both
the member to make their
argument and any clarification
from the analyst if there is is
that they need to do that and
then the committee will vote on
whether or not that bill is dean
germane by this committee so so
those are the that's the process
that we have in tow now for how
the analyst will evaluate those
bills I'm hoping that this
committee can read the memo
written by Megan Dorsey today I
know the Republic our Republican
colleagues have seen that today
and agree with the philosophy
for how we will evaluate bills
for our members I'm hoping that
brought on as far as democratic
members of the caucus have a
look at that memo for the
process and we're hoping to
adopt that sort of philosophy as
our reasoning for how our
analysts will look at bills in
short and I know Megan is here
and she can help clarify I'll
try to be brief about what that
and that sort of analysis will
be and I don't know if she's
panel still
but generally what we're hoping
to do is that
if a bill is possibly germane as
far as how the analyst will look
at it is that if in the message
right the governor's message the
bill fits within that message
and it is beyond the scope of
what the bill that was deemed
germane will be have or has
already been Dick deems germane
it is very likely not for me so
if it goes beyond that scope of
the mess.
Age it's likely not going to be
included in an agreeable bill
that is germane however if it's
more limited in scope than the
bill that has been deemed
germane it is very likely that
it will be considered for
Moving to committee so I'm that
was really difficult for my aunt
that was unclear please ask
questions but that's essentially
the philosophy that I'm asking
members to adopt before we
conclude this meeting if it or
unless we wanted to do before
the next meeting will leave it
up to to everyone here but Megan
do you want to clarify what I
just said so that we all members
are understanding what's going
on and I see Representative
Egolf when you go ahead
speaker before we get Megan
clarifying stuff thank you madam
chair I I just want to get the
members that that sort of a
brief background of.
The conversation I had with
Representative Townsend and in
my part and then if I may ask
Megan to be walked members
through that memo it's it's not
too late so we think it's going
to do that I think it be helpful
but we wanted to find a way to.
It is transparent but it's also
I'm gonna give it's basically an
algorithm that we can apply in
an even handed way to all of the
bills that are not appropriation
bills were budget revenue bills
so that.
We've got the same objective
criteria that we are going to
apply to do everything that is
also respectful of
Protect your legislative
provocative and maybe making
sure that there is an
appropriate separation of powers
that.
That we're not allowing.
Usurpation of our prerogative
if we proceed to consider
whether of bills are.
Your mate or not so this Dorsey
is that at I think it's a very
good job with this memo and
madam chair with your permission
each she could walk what is
through it I think that would
be.
but folks.
You Mr speaker make any of the
floor.
Thank you madam chair Mr speaker
members of the committee I'm
although the memo that I
submitted for your review and
consideration is somewhat
lengthy I hope that the concepts
that it contains are relatively
simple as madam chair indicated
in is the speaker explained we
did to try to develop this
proposed policy in concert with
the minority and majority as
well as in consultation with
Council services and I do
believe that the proposed policy
reflects what is appropriate
under the constitution and if
you look at the memo that I
submitted it first details what
the issue It and but to put it
in plain speak we have been
receiving that the house has
been receiving and so is the
Senate executive messages from
the fourth floor which identify
areas of law that she is asking
to be considered by the body for
enactment revision or deletion
however the vast majority of the
messages she has issued include
either at two oh two number or a
house bill number which has that
brought before the body an issue
of deciding what that means an
application so I did a bit of
research consulted with a number
of other people who have
experience in this area and
determined that the
constitution requires the
legislative body to be the only
body writing law the governor is
not permitted to write law she
is within her statutory and
constitutional authority to ask
the body to consider areas of
legislation needing review but
she cannot be the one directing
exactly which piece of
legislation is considered by the
body and to do so would be a
separation of powers so while I
hope the members do a pre.
She ate any specificity she can
give to help guide the process
it is up to each of you members
to decide and how law is right
and so after doing some
constitutional analysis and
reviewing some Attorney General
opinions it seems fair and
constitutional to require the
messages to comport with the the
major purpose of any bill to be
considered germane so what I
mean by that is if we get a if
the house received a message
that asks the body to consider
drafting legislation on a
variety of topics and there is a
number of bills addressing those
topics and the body can consider
some of those bills germane even
if the message includes a house
number out Bill number that is
not the same for each bill so we
get executive message saying we
would like the governor would
like to consider and legislation
addressing A. B. C. and D. any
bill that includes a B. C. and
D. E. would be germane because
it is identical substantive
message and we can disregard the
House Bill number or two oh two
number if it is included in the
message I'm if the bill for
consideration includes some
combination of A. B. and C. and
D. but not all of the subjects
in the executive message it
would still be considered
germane because the scope of the
bill is smaller than the scope
of the message and can still be
reasonably expected by the
governor based upon the message
that she sent.
However if the bill up for
consideration exceeds the scope
of the message that would not be
germane so the bill includes
additional substantive
information that is not included
in the original message it would
not be considered germane
because the attorney general's
opinions of the constitution
indicate that that is unexpected
legislation that can't be
crammed into a message I'm and
of course at the end of the day
this is up to the body to
consider whether to adopt this
policy and procedure or not but
the hope is as you've heard from
the chairwoman in the speaker
that adopting this nonpartisan
policy and procedure will
expedite the process for rules
much the way the committees
committee operates allows there
to be consistency in determining
what is and is not germane and
allows the members to reasonably
anticipate in advance whether
this committee would find their
bill to be germane or not I do
think it bears noting that once
a bill has been deemed to
germane any reviewing committee
here on the floor can and then
to the bill as long as it
doesn't change the primary
purpose outlined in the short
title so if in the process of
legislative considerations the
body decides to add additional
sensitive pieces to a bill that
were not originally included in
the house executive orders and
executive message that's
possible but in order for it to
be initially came germane and
must either identically include
all of the substantive
information the message or part
of the substantive information
included in the message I hope
that is helpful and I'm
available if anyone has
additional questions thank you
madam chair.
Go ahead and take questions
thank you Megan for helping
clarify does anyone have any
questions regarding the memo
Representative Rehm.
Madam chair and I guess this is
a.
A question more for Megan so
could you if your bill is too
broad can you amended in rules
and then we go ahead and debate
whether it's germane or not.
I I we haven't discussed this at
go head Megan.
Thank you madam chair
Representative Rehm thank you
for the question that's actually
a very interesting question
I honestly had not considered
I think I would need to do some
are additional research and
consult with some of the other
experts to give you a an answer
I feel confident in
but I think that.
It might be cleaner and simpler
to draft legislation initially
that you believe would be
germane and and if you prefer to
file a new bill that is germane
and within the scope of an
executive message that might be
a more efficient way to handle
things but of course would defer
to the chair and other members
of this body for additional
support in answering that
question thank you Megan we have
my interpretation of that
Representative Rehm is that if
if you know the point the
portion of whatever bill is
filed is what is going to be
evaluated by the analysts so
following that algorithm if it's
already beyond the scope of the
the message so far it that's
what the Anil the analysis will
basically provide so I think a
subsequent bill would have to be
filed before it's actually
evaluated
before you know it basically
that objectivity of following
this algorithm so
essentially you would have to be
ready to go with the bill that
you will believe it's to be
germane are we're seeking that
that status before it came to
the rules committee for that
assessment.
Thank thank you madam chair
that's my question.
Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam chair I have I
have several questions.
But first one just.
It's just a general question to
to to our members about really
just.
Why.
We want to limit.
Germanus in any way currently I
think returning general opinion
sixty six twenty five which is
under former governor.
Jack Campbell.
Which was dealing with liquor
licenses but the attorney
general's opinion at that time
was that in order for a position
be germane it must be
exhilarating and promoted of the
bill's main purpose
that's much broader.
And then what we're talking
about here and and and literally
when I got here I was told that
Germanus essentially by the
legislature's whatever the
legislature deemed to be
germane.
and it it appears as a four we
are are actually limiting our
our own power a little bit if we
go and and and follow this
process.
and I.
You know in in in the lead up to
this site I I just looked up the
definition of germane.
And
it is being relevant and
appropriate or in other is
relating to or bearing upon the
matter in hand so it when we're
talking about.
whether or not it exceeds the
scope.
Of the of the governor's
message.
I I think that maybe going a
little too far as a matter of
fact looking in in in Mason's.
in chapter seventy two section
seven eighty.
when you read the item six it
says in determining whether
given act germane to the subject
stated the proclamation.
The entire proclamation should
be considered.
And should be reasonably
construed to be to bring the act
within its meaning if possible.
Really it just seems that the
ideas for the legislature not
to.
handcuff themselves
unnecessarily
I and at a previous legislator
old timer told me that the the
best way to determine whether or
not if it's something as germane
as if it could not be considered
log rolling where it's going
outside of the section of law
that's being
Being discussed so and I know
every governor's gonna want to
limit that that's why both
discovering the previous
governor would put two oh two
numbers trying to force us to
only deal.
with what what's what's what
they're wanting specifically.
Bill they're specifically
wanting to have.
Discussed.
But.
The only reason I have a the
reason I have a problem with
that is the governor can amend
her call anytime with messages
this this just means that of the
governor.
Is essentially if the governor
is allowed to amend her original
call or the original call.
Then anyone anyone can go and
lobby for something and then the
governor then allow that to be
discussed in.
As far as I'm concerned I I
think.
From the standpoint of
separation of powers that to
some degree is limiting.
Legislation could be passed so
and this is I'm glad we're going
down this route I'm glad we're
discussing this it's it's better
than.
We've previously done but I I I
am concerned that we may be
restricting.
A little too much I think if
a it's a section of laws being.
Being discussed.
I I think that whatever is in
that in that section.
should at least be up for debate
and I and I do know under you
know.
Current practice it has been
that.
If the legislature decides they
want to DO something especially.
When it comes to special.
Sessions for for.
Extraordinary sessions.
We have defined germane as much
more broad than what we're
discussing today.
So I'm.
Madam chair I just want to know
if you have any or or Mr
speaker.
You have any thoughts on on that
overall discussion of us.
Maybe unintentionally limiting.
The legislature's authority.
You madam chair I you know I.
I think we have to live and
operate within the constitution.
Right to the constitution limits
the authority of the
legislature.
During thirty day sessions to
the consideration of.
Budgets appropriate content
revenue bills.
And I'm reading from the
constitution.
Article article four section I
do so we can consider budget
appropriations and revenue
bills.
To just bills drawn pursuant to
a special message the governor.
And three bills of the last
previous regular session detail
by the governor that's it.
And so we are what we're trying
to do it majority's memo.
It's twice out what does it mean
to be a bill drawn pursuant.
To a special message
And you know it.
I think this is actually a
fairly broad reading of bank
which.
This proposed by the memo.
Right so it's anything that is
within the scope of the message
is going to be germane.
it goes beyond the scope.
You know if you got a message on
the cultivation of.
Cherry trees.
And you try to use that to say
well that our culture so we're
going to put in a bill
regulating livestock.
I mean I think you do yes
related to agriculture back in
the same section of law that I
don't think you could say.
Bill dealing with livestock
point for ending policies and
procedures instructors to a to a
message.
Directed it the cultivation of
cherry trees.
And I think there has to be it
has to be some if if
constitution meeting there has
to be some constraints on
legislative action or we just
decide with the constitution.
Every bill is introduced to
germinate.
Right if we if we if we're going
to try to follow the
constitution we have to have
some sort of we will follow our
system to guide.
That is just nor it and make
everything today.
And I I don't I I definitely
don't think that would be
complied with the constitution
madam chair to say anything that
they would pretend it's be
germane.
I certainly think that would.
You know.
That would not be within the
constitution
so there's got to be so so we're
trying to get come up with the.
Opioid guidelines that respect
separation of powers you've just
the.
Representative authority and as
an adjunctive standard members
can.
Reasonably rely on.
That that's that we Madam chair.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Mr speaker
that when you did right from the
constitution I I think you to
some degree made my point which
says pursuant to relating to the
associated with this you talked
about school.
My concern is it yes if we're
talking about.
Gun laws.
For the worst something like
that then we should be able to
talk about gun laws I mean
that's that is the way I read it
when it says pursuant to or
germane to or relevant or
relating to our bearing upon the
matter at hand I think that's
why the attorney general's
opinion.
it in sixty six
basically says that is it's just
has to be exhilarating and
promoted of the bill's main
purpose I don't know that.
Size and scope.
Or contained within.
The
within the the specific.
Language of the message I I
think that's maybe going just a
little bit too far
you know obviously at cherry
trees and.
Okay out hunting or two
different things just because
they're in the same section
I'm I'm talking more specific
and I believe that's what sets
pursuant to I think percent two
leaves broad discretion to us
and I think what we're doing is
limiting that discretion thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Montoya
and the the only response that
have that and in conjunction
with they think what speaker it
office saying is that this is
the process that this body can
deliberate upon for X. precisely
what you're discussing that the
message that you are would like
to debate in that process it
goes through that analytical
lens and then this body gets to
decide whether or not what
you're discussing you know is
germane and so I think that we
haven't had this is you know
this is the process that we're
designating hopefully that the
body would at least have that
opportunity you know members
that wanted to discuss this
could do that so you know that
is precisely what you're saying
is precisely I think what this
office is actually hoping to to
go through so madam chair one
last thing.
it was not really clear on the
memo and I know was briefly
discussed slide and Megan ABC
Indy could it could A. B. C. and
D. B. discussed again because.
I I the the analysis report that
we got doesn't really say that
so I I'd like to be able to at
least write that down to.
I know it's discussed I didn't
catch all the.
Sure sure thank you I would make
and you wanted to talk about
rate to.
Have your memo.
Yes madam chair thank you
Representative Montoya thank you
for the question I'm.
The ABC thank that I referenced
earlier is included at the very
end of my analysis I'm in the
proposed Canadian policy section
in what is hopefully just
slightly more clear manner and
but the sensually what I was
trying to simplifies the idea
that if the I'm if the message
from the governor asks for three
substantive issues so
let's say she says she'd like to
consider legislation relating to
guns that has to DO with
possession of a gun I'm in a
school zone in February right if
the proposed legislation that
the body is trying to decide if
it is germane under that message
or not is talking about all of
those things it's germane if it
is just talking about gun
possession in February it's
germane if it's just talking
about gun possession in a
schools on its germane if it's
just talking about gun
possession it's germane but if
it's talking about
Possession of guns on a roller
coaster in Europe then it
wouldn't be germane because the
bill is outside the scope of the
message and so we're trying to
capture any types of bills that
could be considered under the
umbrella of what the substantive
message presents but not
anything that's unexpected and
part of the reason for that
process Representative Montoya
and madam chair is because of
the same Attorney General
opinion that you're referring to
earlier which talks about the
main purpose that Siemens canyon
also says that the body can not
insert unexpected matters into a
piece of legislation and have it
be considered germane under the
constitution.
I hope that clarifies answers
your questions are.
Thank you Megan thank you madam
chair.
Right Representative
underestimate of.
Thank you madam chair so on.
Page two under the appropriation
bill.
it's the last sentence however
respect to assist with respect
to a special appropriation bill
the Attorney General warns that
it does not include a bill
proposing general legislation
simply because as in grafted
upon it a section making
appropriation
Could you make in place talk
about about exactly what that
means and maybe have an example.
For me.
I will have my fast.
That.
When are you getting feedback
from Megan percent.
Or is it just me okay there's a
little bit of feedback on here.
Mike there million.
I think so go ahead and local
yes and I.
It's.
That question.
Perhaps Mr Burciaga and.
In a little bit of revert there
do you have like a head set or
something we might be able to
use.
Sorry.
If I may madam chair
Chair over were you reading from
the to the point to that's page
two of the Germanus memo by at
Raul Burciaga it's the second
page
under budget appropriation
revenue bills for everyone to
follow along under appropriation
bills Representative Romero was
talking about that last line
however with respect to the
special appropriation bill the
Attorney General warns that it
does not include a bill
proposing general legislation
simply because it has been
grafted upon a section making
appropriation.
Are you are you on Megan thank
you.
I think so can you hear me now
okay that's better much better
yeah okay great hopefully that
works at apologies for that yeah
I think that the the purpose of
that piece that you're referring
to Representative Romero is to
try to keep everybody honest to
keep it simple and that the
constitution does limit what the
body can consider in a thirty
day session and although members
may try to be creative and to
force round pegs into square
holes that is unconstitutional
and so and you are not supposed
to try to force a piece of
legislation that is focused on
something that is not germane
into a bill that is germane by
tap dancing so I'm if the in the
executive message example that I
just gave about the guns in the
roller coaster if the if the
governor is asking for and bill
that has to do with not
possessing guns in the schools
on and it is I'm fairly and
potentially unconstitutional to
try to say that it would be
germane to discuss at a bill
about manufacturing guns and so
you just try to be true and
honest to the scope of the
message and whether or not in
section five B. one bill is
truly focused on appropriation
revenue or the budget.
And.
Madam chair thank you for that
for that so if I can give also a
an example and then Megan if you
could kind of walk me through
some director not in it so if
you have a bill that's talking
about
substantive changes to career
technical schools and what
should constitute a credit for
carpentry and mask blahblah
blahblah blah and then at the
end it says making an
appropriation.
Eight million dollars to the PED
for X. Y. Z. would that be an
example of.
Crafting a appropriation to a
substantive bill when my bill is
really about career technical
schools but I'm putting in an
appropriation and in an attempt
to to get it real germane.
You're on mute.
Madam chair representative
Romero potentially I'm I think
that is a slightly different
analysis than exactly what I the
memorandum that I put together
today was focused on at the
memorandum that I prepared today
is really focused on the
analysis under article and
article four section five B. two
regarding the executive messages
the analysis that you're
discussing is more appropriate
under article four section five
B. one in determining whether a
bill is germane as the revenue
budget or appropriations bill
and at back in February on
February fourth of twenty twenty
that rules committee during that
legislative session adopted I'm
in a unanimous bipartisan vote
the major purpose analysis where
we were trying to again sort of
and make a more clear boundary
on what is germane and under
that in Alice's the body decided
that if the main purpose of the
bill I'm not the primary purpose
which had been used in years
past but the major purpose of
the bill is for the purpose of
an appropriation revenue or
budget that it would be
determined germane so I think in
that example that you're
describing if the appropriation
that was tacked on to the
substantive piece of the bill
was come on related to the to
the substantive issues than it
would likely be not germane
under five B. one if however the
tacked on appropriation was
integral to the policy change
and it could potentially be
considered germane under the
major purpose and house it is
kind of that even though we're
trying to make these broad
sweeping ideas of what is
germane.
That works for most bills and
sometimes we do have to get into
the nitty gritty of what the
real purpose of the bill is not
can be challenging to identify
particularly in bills that have
a lot of different policy
changes included in.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Megan for that answer thank you
yes thanks and I think if we can
promote rules since he wrote
that portion of the memo it.
he has any clarifying you know
comments surrounding that we'll
go ahead and promote him to
participant.
The panelists rather.
I don't know if failing to hear
me.
Okay we got promoted okay thank
you well I don't know if you
heard that just hoping it I
don't know if you heard the
question.
if you want to comment about her
meanness is it as appropriations
are attached to substantive
policy madam chair and members
of the committee I I believe
that making good at a very good
job explained that the idea
behind that particular provision
and or that that comment is
actually from the Attorney
General is that if you have a
well as they say general
legislation.
Creating something not providing
for something etcetera and just
because you put in
appropriations section at the
end of it adding fifty thousand
a hundred doesn't matter the
amount that in and of itself
does not make it an
appropriation bill because as is
mentioned in that memo that we
wrote.
In summary on page three primary
yes as to whether it's budget
appropriation revenue is what is
a principal purpose or object of
the bill and again that would be
for you madam chair and and your
committee to decide if that if
that's the case with the primary
purpose is and whether or not
that is germane to the to our
budget appropriation revenue or
to a special message of the
governor.
Thank you for that role did you
any follow up I don't know on
the system we'll go ahead and go
to the next have.
Thank you awesome Representative
Gaydos.
Chair.
Can go ahead you are thank you
madam chair and thank you and
Mister sea for your memo I think
it was very helpful and this is
a little bit off subject but I
think it's already happened
how we determine our has there
been any discussions if one
chamber determines did a bill is
germane and the other does not.
So I I let me up if I can
understand your questions you're
saying that if the Senate
received a message for a bill
that is germane and a house
member wanted to also pursue the
same sort of bill for whether or
not it's germane.
Madam chair if if
if so if the house.
If the rules
If the rules
Many different determined it was
germane and the other chamber
decided their rules committee
decided it was not is there any
presidents on that.
I don't believe so I'll look
I'll look to make an I'm I know
that we're able to use both
team both chambers messages for
Germanus but I see
Representative yeah yeah I can't
that so.
It is our our practice did yeah
the Senate makes it determines
bill germane we don't question
that and the and vice versa.
It's not in a rural that said
that it has to the.
So madam chair and and Mr
speaker so if it's been if if if
the bills been assigned
committees in the house and then
the the other chamber just
decided it was not germane then
the bill would just die.
On that side of that she chamber
I'm guessing go ahead yet no no
no so what's the bill at if the
bill passes the house they go to
the Senate should decide to
committee in the Senate.
They don't they don't put it to
the committee to committee
discussed are to a substantive
committee.
Okay thank you madam chair thank
you Mr speaker.
That's how I got.
Thank you Representative Gaydos
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam chair I just
didn't know if we were going to
have public comment today or not
I just want to ask that question
thank you.
Thank you Representative Rehm
this Committee does not do
public comment as a I think a
general discussion so we're
it'll while it's broadcast there
is no public comment for this
since it's a legislative matter.
Representative Townsend.
Thank you madam chair.
A couple of questions.
But
there be a regularly schedule of
meetings of the rules committee
if we practice burden on the
rules will.
Do I have any.
Confidence that the rules
committee's gonna make.
Thank you of Representative
Townsend test will be meeting
right now the plan is to meet
once a week and still
legislation is the deadline for
legislation is is done and any
member that wants to make their
case in front of this
this body will will here there
will do the analysis and hear
their bills
for whether or not they're
germane and will come up with a
list that you know hopefully we
can review these bills in a
timely fashion in the committees
committee they're seeing fifty
bills at a time on the Senate
side so you know I think we can
do that due diligence for for
this body and keep it you know
efficient but yes I we plan to
meet at least once a week until
we hear all of the bills that
are our body would like our
members would like to present
that said will definitely need
to schedule our subsequent
meeting to hear bills so that we
can get them analyzed over the
weekend and for for next week
subject to when folks can me I
know that we were trying not to
conflict with other committee
hearings but we're you know
hoping that we can get this a
foot quickly.
Thank you for that and will that
requirement be part of the
written rule that a process that
make them
that we adopt if we did that I
mean it will it be written that
the committee's gonna meet
weekly.
That's what subject to the chair
so of representative will
basically you know depending on
how many bills as with any
committee worse we're hoping to
hear it are looking to hear and
of course what will have to wait
on analysis before we can have a
and an actual meeting so that
every member has the opportunity
to review that will then have a
meeting but as far as volume and
you know what what the timing
will be on that at this point
time I I can't anticipate that I
know that that members here up
participating in this meeting
are looking to get that get
their bills heard I don't know
how many however so we're
looking right now to Monday
being our next meeting
and we haven't designated time
of all propose you know an early
morning meeting just well
actually eight thirty is when
the force meeting so possibly
following that for a short time
no.
That we're meeting were beating
up.
What eleven thirty okay okay so
maybe early before floor session
we can have a pre meeting
but that again is subject to the
analysis provided that we get
these bills and for that
analysis sure thank you for that
in so with that said is this
proposed rule.
isolated to this session or is
it on going.
Representative I believe that
this would be for this session
as far as what this how we want
to propose you know evaluating
that he sees that speaker.
Madam your.
I think you know it would be.
Your future sessions much like
we follow the guidance to this
committee for two years ago
about that major purpose test
for the appropriation bills I
suppose that you know this could
be used.
In the future as well may I
I'm of the state you know again.
My main hope here is that we'll
have some.
Objective.
Standard it will be applied so
that everyone can know more less
what's you know what can be
expected with introduce a bill
it gets pursuit to message the
other thing is
yeah we do have you know the
plan here's of bills Monday
morning.
I suppose it's possible that if
we adopt
yes this guidance that we could
do it.
Basically you know on the fly
it's bills are being introduced
without having to convene a
committee for bills are
introduced.
You're going forward and I
appreciate that Mr speaker my.
My concern
Which is just that we don't get
Down on the fact that we have a
good rule but no meeting there
should be some process where a
member or a couple of members
could request a meeting in a
meeting with.
Would contain so that.
The rules that we're adopting
could be utilized so.
I I think if we had that I think
I think Megan's done
A good job.
Guarding you know to get the
scope defined but.
Who determines germane us and
how often it's determined.
is I think critical to a process
that.
You know everybody can support.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative Madam I
yeah I'm happy you know I'm
happy to do that you and with
your town Senator Martinez after
this is done if you if we want
to have some more streamlined
process you know so if if the
member of the Republican Party
has built the it's been a
message they could bring it.
To you and you know we could
just decide you you and me and
leader Townsend that we don't
need to send it to rules that
you know we all agree that it
fits in the scope and at the
time of introduction I could
just.
Senator committee and I you have
like what we've been doing with
appropriation of budget.
So I I I mean I I don't object
doing that at all
it just it it if we are going to
go down the road at doing that.
I would I want to have something
like the memo that Megan is
prepared madam chair so that I
can do.
It's like I just said you're
transparency of this I believe
the states based on the analysis
adopted by the rules committee
and
It'll that way too I also wanted
respectful of the provocative in
the forty rules committee so I'm
thinking this throughout out
honestly
what's that what's the best most
efficient way personally I'm
happy either way to do it in
consultation with the floor
leaders with care and do not
apply bills coming in work with
regular meetings the rules
committee.
Whichever is the preference of
this committee because it's fine
with me.
I appreciate that Mr speaker.
Thank you Representative
Townsend
I don't know if we want to solve
for that at this point in time
since we didn't have any part
but appropriation far as you
know what the process was going
to be outside of
halau infirmaries to see an
analysis on a bill that wasn't
being germane out the gate from
a message
Perhaps we can conference before
our next meeting on that and
then decide what we can present
to the to the rules regarding
that process for transparency
sake so
one more question I see
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam chair I just
want to suggest that.
We try to avoid Monday rules
always just to meet on Tuesday
and Thursday and I know we're in
a hurry on so I get it but we've
got the government elections in
Indian Affairs on Monday morning
early and then we have Judiciary
one thirty
so.
It's it's Monday morning is
going to be a problem because
we.
Representative Lewis is
committee we rolled built over
from today you so that's already
added to the agenda next week.
Thank you for that input
Representative Chasey if if
Tuesday Thursday you know is is
more helpful I think for this
meeting I'm hoping that if you
you know members are feeling
comfortable about voting on the
process regarding
what was proposed by Makin
Dorsey and the and the memo
about how we would evaluate
bills whether or not it's that
small bipartisan group or this
committee
we can we can just yes but if we
are in a place to
adopt that memo as our means for
how we would evaluate I would
like to at least have a vote for
that
We'll take Representative Roybal
Colorado's question or comment
and then we'll see if we can go
ahead and have a have a vote on
that.
Excuse me thank you madam chair
there's a few things that I've
been kind of grappling with this
we're discussing this and you
can then mentioning it and I
agree madam chair that
transparency is really important
that's one and the second and
that's very important as group
process and so we have a rules
committee for us to be able to
do what we're just talking about
the passion out of what we have
on the table which is is really
important decision making
process
and it's going to affect your
organizational capacity to
address what Representative
Townsend product as well so
so the the the questions I was
having is that or relating to
part of what you're going out
there madam chair for us to
handle is
first of all the logistics of
when to meet at the we
definitely have to coordinate
with other committees and the
house education.
Monday morning early and then we
also have a committee the us on
to support it so that that's
going to take a logistical
coordination effort but I trust
you and and and every.
Associated with inflation staff
will take care of so but more
importantly I think.
We have I feel I need to and I
just a little bit more the
proposal on hand so I appreciate
having this discussion but I I
really would like to give it a
little bit more I kind of go
through some exercise of the
what it.
just to play them out
between myself and and but is
willing to listen to the
scenarios that the of it meeting
the criteria for I in the
position of making a decision I
just don't feel comfortable I
didn't get the memo sent twelve
just before no injury as we're
talking and that's simply
because the Legislative emails
not working for me right now so
the secretary and thank her for
that legislative assistant was
able to send the the the the
documents so I can scan through
them right now and although I've
been part of this process madam
chair for several years I just
don't feel comfortable I'm the
type that goes through all the
everything that make inside it
you have a tendency to want to
go and look up and I'm not so in
in defense of letting us
complete our organizational
discussions as per your
direction and then
perhaps giving us some time to
think about it and then come
back for what you suggested
somewhere down in the line of
discussion but we come back and
have a meeting where we can land
on both on what will be our
process for making those
determinations once they come
through to us and I'm not
comfortable at all with
differing our responsibilities
of the rules committee I am just
not comfortable with that but I
am comfortable with streamlining
and being all of us part of the
decision making process of what
criteria we're going to be using
in making the determination of
German in our in our
responsibilities and that's
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Colorado so at this point I'm I
I understand that Representative
Colorado has reservations about
adopting the policy today are
there is there anyone else
feeling like we.
They would vote no if we were
gonna have hold a vote today I
guess we could anyone else with
reservations because otherwise I
think I'd like unanimous.
support for that I see speaker
egolf madam chair you know we.
We're in a thirty day session of
course and I think that if share
this to the members you have
built in the rules committee.
We should proceed in a way that
allows us to make a decision on
those bills on Monday as we
promised everyone that we would
do on the floor.
so.
You know and I those are
commitments that makes the
democratic and Republican
members as well that that we'll
get an answer on their bills in
the morning with the rules
committee.
Meets I'm I don't think there's
anything in the
proposed guidelines from at this
point the it is.
surprising or.
Particularly novel
so I I would like to.
See if we could take the
temperature of the committee
yes I think getting an answer of
whether or not it leads to major
the committee can support that
that reasoning that will inform
your conversation with you to
Martinez leader tells it over
the next few days in terms of
putting in place a policy that
is streamlined and workable
so at the appropriate time.
Madam chair I would.
The suggested we take a vote on
adopting the.
At policy guidelines in the
Dorsey memo and then.
You need to have a meeting on
Monday to evaluate built before
it's using those criteria and
then
what we can you can we're
work with the floor leaders to
see I want to.
Create the process going forward
bills are scheduled for a
hearing on Monday.
Thank you Mr speaker I see
Representative restaurant
Garrett.
But I think Representative
Nibert has had up before me.
Sure go ahead Representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam chair
My only comment is that it seems
to me that the the store sees
memo gives members of we some
guidance as to how this
committee is going to view of
bills and and so to the extent
that they know that they covered
topics a BMC might be left off
the.
That they know they'll be in
good shape if they have a B. E.
F. and G. right now they're
probably not in good shape and
so I think it's your it's more
maybe not for for us but more
for the other members as to how
we're going to deal with that so
I I think I think I would
supported and and certainly
would
Want to get all these bills
determined one way or the other
so as we can.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative I
better go head are by your
Garrett.
Chairman I'd like to make a
motion to adopt the guidelines
that Mr C. has prepared for us.
Thank you Representative so we
have a motion to adopt the
The proposed process for
evaluating bills that are
germane Elaine are you on if we
could go ahead and take the
role.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
Speaker you got yes.
Representative Ely yes.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes.
Representative Gallegos yes.
Representative Johnson.
Yes.
Representative Lewis.
Representative Maestas.
Yes.
Representative Martinez.
Your it is yes I'm here yes
Representative Montoya.
Yes.
Representative night Burt yes.
Representative Rehm yes.
Representative Andrea Romero.
Yes.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Yes and I will explain my vote.
Representative Townsend.
Yes.
Representative Cook.
Representative Fajardo yes.
Madam chair I just got a text
from that group that said he
would like to be made a
panelists about.
The areas that will hand any
attendees column.
Representative Cook.
Yes.
Yes.
And madam chair role metal yes.
Thank you all seventeen
permitted additional you know.
Excellent thank you all for
participating this I
I just want to be able to
okay on my belt.
I'm sorry I'm sorry yes go ahead
and explain your mobile home and
thank you madam chair and it's
very as I mentioned in my
statement I'm workgroup process
so not to be obstructionist it
was pretty clear that the group
wanted to proceed this way and I
think it's important to go with
the will of the majority and I
always will do that I won't
obstruct anything or appear to
be instructions on the passion
even if it's a nice there but I
also want to guard and and and
for all of us to be as clear as
possible and hopefully during
our assessments as we go through
the bills I don't clouded up so
much with so many questions I
will do my homework and
hopefully avoid having to pass a
lot of questions but I do have
are questions that they will
relate in terms of playing out
what we're being cast to do not
so much
Assessors but just how it's
gonna play out and that's what's
concerning to me so bear with us
as we go along there with me as
we go along madam chair thank
you.
Thank you for that
Representative Cup Roybal
Caballero that at the the
feeling is very mutual for this
process and as we just adopted
I'm really grateful to this body
to really figure out how we you
know proceed with this so I'm
really grateful for for
everyone's participation we'll
go ahead and call in meeting for
Monday given the situation that
we were in and the promise that
we did make to members on
evaluating their bills I know
members are looking to
understand this process so we'll
probably have the clerk sent out
a at an informational sort of
memo about how to get built
heard in this committee for now
with what as we can for with
with the majority we get more
majority minority leader on on
process to try to expedite
further if possible but that
said so Monday if we could
convene
I know that committees are also
being heard I don't know if
there's there's not an ideal
time at this point but
how do people feel about eight
AM Monday.
Okay great.
This is a virtual breakfast
burritos madam chair given that
really are.
Just MOD burritos for now I
think unfortunately I see
Representative Garrett.
Yeah madam chair are meant
health education meets at eight
AM Monday Wednesdays and Fridays
and at least three of us are on
that committee I don't know if
there's a way to meet.
Right after the floor session
which I guess if we have to have
a answer the four sessions.
Just to before but just a heads
up madam chair maybe what if we
did at a meeting at eleven.
That would give morning
committees you know quite a bit
of time and then that would give
us at least thirty minutes to
meet at rules before go on the
floor and if we need to push the
for back we could do that.
Okay that that makes sense thank
you for that
so okay eleven AM on Monday will
host this meeting before that
meeting we'll have analyses sent
out for those bills that have
already been brought to our
attention and I'll work with
those sponsors to so that we
have a format that works for
analysts and I know to with the
Republican members we I haven't
identified yet your analyst will
be for that so if we could get
that to Elaine that would be
very helpful for you want to
point to to evaluate the your
bill's or all bills rather so
Levin AM on soon this committee
will only convene by zoom and
again no public comments
and we've adopted the the policy
so we'll have that in a format
that follows that that policy
for Monday any other questions
before we madam chair.
can I just request from everyone
on the committee I know that
when I first put this together I
used only your NM Legislature
emails or whatever email was
identified on our website so if
you have a specific email you
would like for me to use I would
certainly appreciate if you
could email that to me at my end
and I just website so that
everyone will get the
appropriate documents in time.
When not have Elaine's email you
can text me or email me.
And I will get that to you.
Madam chair.
We know how many bills we're
talking about for Monday morning
one and you can now.
Shop for right now I believe
there's probably about we'll say
less than ten for Monday morning
of from what I've gleaned from
members so far it'll be under
that amount I see you
Representative Townsend.
Yes thanks Mr speaker you called
earlier about another topic is
that still on the agenda for
this meeting or not no that is
not on the agenda okay thank you
Sir.
All right any of final questions
otherwise this meeting is
adjourned.
Thank you Raul Preciado thank
you everybody.
