Members roll call is about to
close.
Roll call is closed we have a
quorum.
The chief clerk to call members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Here Representative alkaline is
here Representative Anderson
Representative Anderson is here
Representative bash.
Here Representative bash is here
Representative bone cuff.
Representative well guys here
Representative Castellano.
Representative Cook.
Representative dela Cruz.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Fajardo is here
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Harry Garcia is
here Representative Harper.
Representative Lente.
There.
Representative Lente is here.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Matthews is here
Representative.
Sorry guys of Andrea Romero.
Representative Rubio.
Representative Castellano your
Representative Castellano is
here.
Roll call is closed we have a
quorum please rise.
Today's.
Today's invocation will be given
by the gentleman from curry
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam speaker.
It's about with me.
All mighty creator god lord of
the host of angels.
Thank you for today for the
beautiful weather that we have
outside.
Thank you for the protection of
our families while we're away
and and doing the people's
business.
Thank you for the men and the
women.
The staff the roundhouse.
That serve and protect all of
us.
For the bless and protect them
and their families.
Mostly father I thank you for
your son Jesus.
Who covers us with your
forgiveness mercy through grace
and your loving kindness.
Our father who art in heaven.
Hello the the name that I
condemn come.
Will the gentle lady from Santa
Fe Representative Serrato lead
us in the pledge of allegiance.
The gentleman from.
Curry to Baca Guadalupe.
Roosevelt and San Miguel leaders
in the pledge to the state I.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you madam speaker good
morning good morning members I
move that we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Seeing no objection so ordered.
The gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you madam chair of I have
a couple announcements the first
one
Touches me personally because my
sister is recognized for an
award.
The that is being given to us a
couple of our independent school
districts it's called the
blossom award and it was given
to the Albuquerque public
schools district Senator Campos
and their nutrition and food
service program as well as my
sister from the rules will
Independent School District Kim
Meeks from there being
recognized for supporting local
of locally grown produce and
vegetables that are then
incorporated within the
menu that our school children
eat at the at the school so I'm
really proud of my sister in
that regard and there's a number
of other of folks around the
state have been recognized and
everybody probably got the an
update from the New Mexico Food
and farms day which was
celebrated
today February eighth so if we
need to keep our local farmers
and in our thoughts is they grow
the produce the the we all rely
on.
for you for.
Madam speaker as you all have
known for
well it's going on for for a
couple years now I am most
interested in and
making sure that we have a body
At our constitutional
responsibilities in regards to.
Being engage during the pandemic
and to take our proper place of
the table and and I have tried
for a couple years now to get
legislation passed not only in
the special sessions with our
general session to address that
issue and.
Madam speaker we we do have a
matter that I brought forward
And that's house joint
resolution three.
That the dealt with that issue
and it's
Kind of hung up in committee and
it's that lot forty four in
goverment Committee.
And I think that we need to have
that debate on the floor of the
house and you all know that I
wanted that for for quite
awhile.
And so at this time Madam
speaker.
Mr speaker.
I would move the house joint
resolution three be withdrawn
from all committees can be made
the next order of business and I
would request a recall vote
photo of roll call votes
this wrong.
There was another joint
resolution.
The that we the the have a roll
call vote on them and that we
engage in yeah and the debate on
all rules you may have a roll on
roll off of and with that issue
opinion yes we can do that.
So that is a proper.
Which is a motion to withdraw
his every it is our and I
believe it's not debatable.
We're gonna get it up it is
debatable.
It is okay thanks.
Both the but only on the
residual issues not the read
more okay.
So I'm my policy because I don't
understand what's happening on
the screen here so just give me
a second.
Gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln did you put your baby
pictures up on my screen here or
did someone else to the.
I have no control over
technology I rarely have control
over technology at my desks or
they're very cute baby.
Got the new pictures
Okay is there debate on the
motion the gentleman from San
Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln you know Mr speaker and
gentleman I do yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman this house joint
resolution three
That was deemed to be germane
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman it it
was referred to committee
because it's a house joint
resolution for the counterpart
which was a bill I went to rules
and.
His second rules.
Thank speaker and and gentleman
so joint resolutions are always.
Germane even a thirty day of of
sessions budget sessions that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman you're
you're correct and we have four
I have introduced this.
Or a version of this legislation
in every special session that we
have sense June of two thousand
twenty.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman this has been germane
every single session that you've
introduced is that correct the
speaker Jim.
The constitutional amendment
joint resolution has been
germane every special session no
Sir thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
For as many times as you have
introduced the this a joint
resolution how many times has it
been heard in committee being
that it has been germane during
every session.
It's been heard in Committee.
If I recall correctly of it or a
bill got out of committee.
And state government elections
in Indian Affairs.
Last year but did not ever get a
hearing in Judiciary.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so it is it's it's
been referred to committee and
it has not been heard is that
what I heard you say miss Jim Mr
speaker and gentleman no that's
not correct we we did have a
hearing and government elections
and Indian Affairs and the vote
on that matter was four to four
so it's neither advance nor.
Free treated kids hanging in
limbo speaker and gentleman this
bill this constitutional
amendment that is
Relating to the legislative
body's power should be heard by
the by the house that is your
belief Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman the the
the whole effort to very is to.
Allow us to have the debate on
that issue of what is our role
with respect to
Emergency powers issued by the
executive that are of duration
for more than ninety days.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I I do know that this
has not always been of the law
the way it is today I believe
the way the law is today was the
the legislature gave up that
power and I would hope to see us
actually have a debate about
separation of powers and the
legislature's authority so I I
support your efforts today and I
will be voting with you to
pull it out of committee and
have the next order of business
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman is further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
chairwoman Lewis thank you Mr
speaker will the gentleman yield
Mister speaker I will certainly
yield to my chair thank you Mr
speaker and thank you gentlemen
I recall hearing this bill in
the house government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee do
you remember what day that the
let's heard Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I do
not recall the date but it is
ma'am serves several weeks
removed some of.
What I'd consider never never
land we have a four to four
voting committee.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct we do had we did have
four of four.
Committee vote and will you
remind you Mr speaker and
gentleman how many committee
members we have on the
committee.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
believe we have nine members on
that committee.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct and I think when we
talked about this bill that was
first heard on January twenty
sixth which was relatively early
in the committee we did have a
complete hearing we to of you
know the pole from members of
the public and we also heard
from members of the public that
wanted to voice their support or
opposition to the bill so Mister
speaker and and gentlemen do you
think that the committee and the
heard this bill in a fair manner
that we've heard other bills
during the session.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
believe that we have the hearing
in the committee I believe that
the people that were present
which was eight got to voice
their opinions and Ambode
quarterly.
The issue still has persisted
for almost two years now and we
have not had any substantive
debate on the floor of this
house.
With respect to our role our
constitutional role in these
types of situations in fact the
courts have spent more time on
this issue that we have.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen have you talked to
the committee member that was
not present at the meeting to
see if that vote count could
change or taken other reasons
before this action today has
occurred.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I did
mention it to her.
I believe it was the other night
as a matter of fact.
Thank you Mr gentlemen and thank
you Mr speaker yeah so I I want
to say that I hope that you
think that we did have a fair
hearing on house joint
resolution three we take it as
every other bill that's been
heard before the committee where
we've received public comment
we've heard discussion from the
committee members or they had an
opportunity to debate the bill
and that's why I will not be
voting in support of this motion
thank you Mr speaker thank you
John.
Mr speaker gentle gentle lady
please don't take this is any
criticism for your handling of
this particular matter it's just
that I as you well know have for
almost two years firmly believe
that we need to have this debate
on this floor regardless of the
outcome we need to have the bay
on our constitutional role.
As a legislative body when it
comes to the crafting of public
policy and the expenditure of
public monies in connection with
these extended a margins so that
that's all I'm trying to do is
get to get that debate to occur
thank you Mr speaker gentle and.
Thank you John thank you madam
chair.
Remembers watching and for those
following home that is exactly
what we talk about when we say
that the debate is focused on
the process not the merits of
the bill thank you.
The gentleman from Chavis AT NO
Tero Representative Townsend
thank you Mr speaker with the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln field.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
certainly yield to the minority
leader.
From my County.
Thank you the speaker and
gentleman the process that
you're using to bring this to
ten to bring this bill to the
floor.
Is a bill that although heard in
committee has not been heard by
the body and that is your.
that's the reason is to bring it
before the body is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman
gentleman that is very precise
reason that we're using this
procedural effort to bring it to
the floor of the house this
morning.
Then Mr speaker and gentleman
that process has been used by.
Both parties
it has been used by
it is historically is and it is
one that is provided for in
Mason's and our house rules is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
think I'd be standing here
debating this if it were not
provided for in our rules for
New Mexicans and Mr speaker and
gentleman that's my point is it
is not an effort to discount
anyone for the process it is
part of the process to bring the
bill forward I am a member of
the body believes that their
bill is important to their
constituents and to the
betterment of the state is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
say that this is not the
ordinary course that one would
want to take for it is a course
that allows the body to
determine what's in the best
interests of the state and
frankly what is in the best
interest of the legislative
branch of government and so if
that issue is important it's
worthy of debate and getting
hung up in committee of you know
if it's important to the
majority of the people in this
for then it ought to be brought
to this for and and debated.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
appreciate your consistent.
And bringing
such
a topic forward.
In all over New Mexico.
That is something that I think
our constituents expect us to do
on both sides of the aisle and I
appreciate to bring it forward
and I look forward to support
your bills thank you Sir.
This further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval Representative Ely.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln yield Mr speaker and
gentleman I certainly yield to
my colleague from Santa and
Bernalillo Mr speaker John and I
as you know we're co sponsoring
this but on this issue we
disagree and so I want to ask
you as I'm understanding this.
And correct me if I'm wrong.
We use the committee process.
Unless it's really important and
then it by passes the committee
and comes to the floor is that
the way I'm understanding we
should now operate Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman
When a majority of members of
this body deem something to be
of importance.
The rules provide for the
ability of the body to bring it
directly to the floor and bypass
unity Committee that may be
holding of the for whatever
reasons and so if the majority
of the people in this body think
that this debate is important.
Thank you bring this matter up
for debate and that is the
motion that is pending before
assessor Mr speaker and
gentleman I did just what one of
us really about is the president
the were Senators so this is
what I understand is I I mean
and I will mention the
constitutional amendment in fact
that I had was importantly in
addition to this so what I
should do now because it's it's
still in committee is because
it's important to me.
I should be bring that bill up.
In front of the body.
I'm just trying to figure out
when I advise my colleagues as
to whether to try to blast the
bill out of committee.
What kind of bill on my looking
for am I mean the importance
seems to be a pretty vague
standard so help me understand
where the line is when we bypass
the committee and come to the
floor and when do we trust the
committee process to vet the
bill because as you know Mr
speaker gentle in the advantage
of the committee process is it's
not just us talking the public
gets input to so what are we
going to by pass the public and
come right to the floor to be
debating these issues I just
want to know where the line is.
Mr speaker and and gentleman the
the line is.
Thirty six votes on this floor.
The the line is a major have
this body decides whether to to
do it or not and.
You know do do I know if thirty
six people are interested in
this particular piece of
legislation and I think that
this debate needs to occur
So far we have four people the
the the do not believe that it
ought to be heard but we've also
had that same committee passes
almost identical legislation out
of the same committee with if
our recall correctly basically
the same people on the committee
so it has received of some
traction in the past for
whatever reason it did not
receive a majority vote this go
around but as you know Mr
speaker and gentleman the debate
on this issue.
Is important and the debate on
this issue has.
Baited us for.
What would be twenty.
Twenty.
One month Sir so
went when it was first brought
up the and I believe June of
twenty twenty.
Businesses bigger challenges so
I know what the ground rules are
for advising my members in the
future as to whether they want
to attempt this it should be if
it.
Got some traction in the past
that's one and second if it's
important to me.
That would be the factors by
which I would go to my members
and say he's had some traction
in the past and it's important
to me so we should braid
bringing up bills on the floor I
would think that would be
virtually the majority built for
talking about so why have a
committee process at all Mr
speaker gentleman is the
committee process really
valuable in terms of involving
the public in the discussion so
we're not just doing this on the
floor isn't that why we have a
committee process part and of
that these bills and amend them
we're not taking up the entire
body and isn't that what we did
in fact with this how to a
resolution which we took it to
committee you when I together
and it didn't get out of
committee so I'm trying to
figure out is that what we're
talking about corruption in the
past an important and if that's
true why have a committee
process.
Mr speaker and gentleman
We have a committee process to
do exactly what you stated.
And we have a situation that.
Exists where I don't have the
power to add a member to a
committee I don't have the power
to.
Direct
certain actions I don't have the
power to
compel member to attend all I
can do is utilize the procedures
that are available to us in our
house rules.
That is backed up by masons.
On an issue that one person for
me.
Bills that is critically
important to have a debate on.
And if there's thirty six people
in this body that believe that
that debate is important.
That we protect.
Our constitutional
responsibilities to the citizens
of this state.
Then we all need to engage in
that discourse and that this
course will not occur.
In its present situation and Mr
speaker and gentleman you know
that I've made this plea.
Not once.
Not twice but several times now.
And I think it is as important
today.
As it was in June of twenty
twenty and you know that I feel
strongly.
That we protect the integrity of
the legislative branch of
government and that we not
easily peel away that power.
And that's the debate that needs
to occur.
German I I I don't want to be to
dead horse and I realize some
members were thought I've
already done that but hi I do I
do want to say to you that I
don't disagree with you on the
substance you know I don't in
our legislative progress in the
I don't want the parliament
during to stand up to we were
debating the bill I want to do
that.
I am also concerned about the
integrity of the body.
And in terms of our process and
protecting that process.
And if the factors that you've
identified.
It's important we really need to
have this debate if that for
talking about literally every
bill bypasses eventually the
committee process comes before
because of all of us have.
In our heart of hearts real
issues that we think are
important we'd like the body to
discuss.
And even of an involved the
issues that you and I are
thinking about in terms of
constitutional issues and we
think they're weighty issues yes
I have to tell you.
The where the lawyers they're
members of this body that are
not the equally important issues
that affect real people on a day
to day basis and they want to
bring those to the floor to and
I have to tell those members.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
not our process we go through
the process the committee
process so that we can amend the
bills there we can have a real
discussion a long discussion and
get the public's import come
back and work on these bills
that process was followed with
respect to be fair three.
You and I hard for us to admit
it failed and it ended in
committee and that's what the
process should and Mr speaker
gentlemen I appreciate the bait
thank you.
Gentleman is further debate the
gentleman from Chavis The New
Mexico Representative Anderson
thank you Mr chairman Mr speaker
I just have a couple of quick
questions for the gentleman will
he yield Mr speaker and
gentleman I certainly yield to
my friend across main street.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman my question is.
A could you remind me if we
today take this bill to the
floor make it the next.
Issue.
We have said what does that
bills still have it's not a bill
to resolution what does that
resolution still have ahead
after a house action.
Mr speaker and gentleman if
thirty six people or more in
this body decides to
Passes.
The motion that's pending right
now.
Then we have a debate on the
resolution.
If that passes this house then
it gets sent to the Senate and
it goes through their process
over there being assigned the
committee and going to their
floor for a vote.
Mr speaker chairman then what
happens.
Depends on what the vote is Mr
speaker and gentleman if it
passes the Senate then it goes
to the people of New Mexico to
decide whether to enact this
provision into our constitution
thank you and that was the
answer I was listening for Mr
speaker I'll be short.
I don't think there's an issue
that I hear more constituent
complaints concern.
Fear at all about.
And I think perhaps.
Putting it to a vote of the
people.
Is.
Is an issue that is probably one
of our.
Greatest duties because the
people sent us here to sort
things out.
But in fact some things.
Get to go to a vote of the
people.
Of all New Mexicans.
And the for that reason I guess
I look at gentleman was there
any consideration given in the
committee for a no
recommendations.
Mr speaker and and gentleman of
the the motion was made for do
pass and it was a tied vote.
I see.
So there wasn't any further
action taken at that time Mr
speaker chairman
Mr speaker and gentleman the
only action taken was on to the
next bill.
Thank you I rise in support of
the motion I think of of we
cannot.
Air on such a an important
issues to so many New Mexicans
not to give this resolution
further consideration thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentlemen
for the debate the gentleman
from Bernalillo Representative
right.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln County yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
certainly yield to
my fellow colleagues on both
committees.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lincoln and Chavis
I want to reiterate that this
isn't a negative comment about
the operations of the committee
it was in I have great respect
for the chairwoman
I think Committee works wealth.
but I think the issues a little
bigger than that.
When we look at our constituents
I don't think there's any of us
who have not been contacted us
for some restriction on
government
and in particular the.
The governor in in this
pandemic.
I think the statute that it was
under was originally designed
for something other than this.
But.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis let me ask a question
another way.
By bringing it to the floor
since it had a six to six vote.
A tie vote I'm sorry for the for
type of.
Are you asking for the committee
of the whole to them analyzed
this legislation.
And see if it should proceed.
Mr speaker and gentleman we're
really not asking for committee
of the whole but that's a fact
the effect of it is to bring it
to the floor of the house so
they can so that it can be the
next order of business so that
we can engage in a debate on the
merits of the.
A joint resolution.
Mr speaker gentleman from Chavis
I agree with you hi I agree that
this is turn large an issue
there or constitutional concerns
that are in there.
you the governor's appropriating
money that is the duty of the
legislature and I will support
this motion I think that we need
to all discuss this in thank you
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis.
Thanks to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Santa Santa Fe
Representative Lord thank you Mr
speaker will the gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln County please
yield Mr speaker and gentle lady
I certainly yield thank you
madam it's going to be a very
brief question Mr speaker
Representative so do we as a
minority do we have the ability
to add members to committee.
Or can you let me know if anyone
has the ability other than the
speaker to add members to a
committee especially while we're
ready and session.
Mr speaker gentle lady
I don't believe that the
minority has the ability to
appoint members to committees
and I would not be aware of any
provision that would provide for
such.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative I'm just curious
because I'm all about I I like
to be as fair as possible and I
I get a little concerned when we
being in the minority have such
a small voice as it is and that
we don't have the ability to
move people into committees at
well of the I I think that's
kind of problematic and I have a
deep problem with that but that
was my only question so thank
you Mr speaker and
representative.
Further debate the gentle lady
from granted although in this
year Representative Dow thank
you Mr speaker thank you John
Whitfield please Mr speaker and
gentle lady I certainly yields
that thank Mister speaker I
think Representative Lord sort
of as I listen to date and and
so much discussion for one of
the members on how important it
is to honor the process is
wondering and how long have you
served on Judiciary.
Mr speaker gentle lady I've been
on judiciary since I became a
member of this body so the
Sixers thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentlemen and you said
that the vote was a tie vote and
therefore was tabled.
Mr speaker and gentle lady there
was a tie vote in the government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee it's not reached.
Judiciary that thank you Mr
speaker and and thank you
gentlemen do you think that all
bills should be heard when we
get to committee.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady I
I think that all bills should be
heard but I also recognize that
there's broad as of the the
chair of committees to
Maybe he said honor not hear
certain pieces of legislation
and it happens from time to time
thank thank you Mr speaker and
and thank you gentleman and then
on this tie Committee do you it
was their procedural change and
a new appointed to a committee
that was something unique and
what you've seen in your six
years.
Mr speaker gentle lady with
respect to this particular
legislation and with respect to
the committees I serve on
and state government.
For government now no there was
no
there was no special situations
there I I am aware of a special
situation secretary Judiciary on
other legislation.
Mr speaker and gentleman a new
appointee to a committee and a
tie vote seems unprecedented to
me it would seem that it would
be a strategic procedural move
to assure that votes that could
pass either tire di and I
misunderstanding that Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady if I
understand your question I vote.
It's not technically dead but
it's also not moving and can't
move without a majority vote and
Mr speaker gentleman that's your
reason for bringing this for
this is been bipartisan issue.
Since the enactment of her
health orders and every New
Mexican and the state and every
member of this body should be
concerned when only executive
one of three branches is
virtually controlling all
aspects of government and I'm
really excited to vote for your
amendment and I think that the
people of New Mexico are asking
us to limit the governor's
powers and we have a duty to do
so thank you.
Thanks to the gentleman for San
Juan.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
with the gentleman from the
rules will please you Mr speaker
certainly yield to the gentleman
from Farmington thank you
gentlemen in a pastoral
resolution for a what does it do
exactly can you give us a little
summary I know it's a very short
resolution.
Mr speaker the Representative
Joe move is to bring the issue
to the floor of this house for
debate
the very very good the substance
of the joint resolution we've
heard
Discussion on that before
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentleman well it's
information with the resolution
thank you the the US to serve
fooled full debate on this house
for all of us are affected
by the overreach I think of the
executive branch we won't have
Google more balance
every every job in my area is
essential unfortunately that
wasn't the case for many many
months and my community in
Farmington really suffer.
A lot of businesses shut down.
And it was unfortunate we we had
more restrictive for more more
restrictions on our state to
participate yes it is severe Mr
speaker and gentleman and then
California New York and New
Jersey so you know we're small
state for state so that was a
extremely difficult on us and
we've got a lot of small
businesses in our state in the
state the bottom shut down so
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman for
bring this motion for so we can
do further discussion on the
merits of the of the resolution
thank you Sir.
Thanks we have the gentleman
from curry Divock at Waterloo
rate Roosevelt and San Miguel.
Representative Zamora.
Mr speaker will the gentleman
yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman from my
home tell I certainly you.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
thank you.
Representative for bringing this
house Joint Memorial forward.
I hope the body is paying close
attention to what's going on
here.
And.
The debate that has taken place
so far.
There was a statement made
earlier on how.
If we brought this resolution to
the house floor.
How it could affect the
reputation of this body.
Quite the contrary.
I think it would improve.
The reputation of this body.
It is our job as legislators.
When the citizens of the state
have an issue.
To pay attention to them and
bring those issues to the house
floor and take action on.
Here we have a chance today.
To bring one of the most
important issues.
That has been.
Due to come to this house floor.
And it hasn't happened.
We all respect the process of
the committees.
And we all respect the vote of
the committees.
And we respect the process here
on the floor.
But in the process.
We as legislators.
Have the rights to.
To bring our opinion and our
vote.
And we're not breaking the
rules.
We're going through the process
with all due respect.
But the citizens of the state of
New Mexico also need respect in
these issues the lie in front of
us.
I hope that the body votes to
listen to the debate.
It will be a good debate and we
will be doing the job of the
people of the state.
There are too many issues at
hand.
That this house joint resolution
can fix for us not to bring it
to the floor.
And I want to thank the
Representative for bring this
resolution.
Or trying to bring it to the
floor today.
And I hope the people are paying
attention and the representative
will step up.
To do the job for the people
thank you very much.
Thanks to the gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln yield.
I certainly yield Mister speaker
to the gentleman from Lee my
next door neighbor.
Thank you.
Mr speaker and gentleman from.
I've heard and and the debate on
the process and the procedure.
That we shouldn't.
B. by passing the committee
process Mr speaker and gentleman
can you point me to the exact
number in the house rules.
The gives us the capability to
pull the bill from committee to
the house floor.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
have it at my fingertips right
now but the the the procedure as
we discussed and.
Our sessions a couple days ago
Allow.
The.
Withdraw
of bills from the committee to
this house for.
To be put on the next order of
business if a major.
Of the body wish to pursue
whatever issue it is.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen for that what do you
think that rule exists.
Mr speaker and gentleman a it
exists because of the whole
delivered of process.
Of this body.
The whole deliver process of
legislatures around the country
Congress.
Any
Democratic Republic such as
ours.
It is in the development of
public policy through a process
of debate.
Process of allowing each and
every one of us.
The voice the or to care the
voice of the people who have
elected us to this body to
present their views on points of
interest that come before us and
so you have a process the that
is supposed to be delivered of
it utilizes a committee process
to be sufficient and to
developers of expertise
alternately.
It's our collective voice that
determines the public policy of
the state.
And if a piece of legislation.
Get hung up for whatever reason.
The committee process.
Then the majority of people in
this body.
In bring that matter to this
for.
Our debate and consideration by
passing the committee process.
And it's it's been in the rules.
Since I guess since the
country's them down to but it is
it's part of the deliberative
process is part of the ability
of the body because it's this
body that help hold the power.
And one small committee to small
committees can not towards the
will of a majority of people.
With them this chamber.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen for that response I'm
curious Mr speaker and
gentleman.
This is a.
Of the sixty day legislative
session I have a special
supposed to into the special
session and another special
session and now this one.
Mr speaker and gentleman in each
one of those sessions.
I believe there's been a.
Adoption of of numerals to fit
the will of the majority.
Would you agree with that Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman sense
Since we have been.
Up on the a gentleman of the
twenty twenty
sixty day session two years ago.
The first special session that
occurred after that and beyond
were all subject to special
rules to deal with issues that
have arisen so I would agree
with your statement the.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman would
it be fair to us then that if
this is a rural.
The.
We don't think we should be
using for members of our
of this the seventy member body
don't think we should be using
it for adjusting the rules that
are will.
Every session Mr speaker and
what do you think this rule
hasn't been pulled out.
Mr speaker and gentleman of.
I don't believe that you can
pull this rollout because.
In.
The basic tenants of what we do.
Allows for the majority to.
As long as it's fall in the
process the majority can can.
Do virtually as it wishes it
just has to follow the process.
And so you never want to have a
a situation where.
A small minority improve the the
will of the majority.
That's not that that's how the
rules are written that's what
what what masons is all about
it's it's to have a little bit
of process.
An organized process to
alternately get to the point
where the majority views of the
body control or prevent.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
appreciate that answer I would
have I would debate some of the
context of that answer with
respect to how we deal with
things yeah we have an electoral
college for example to ensure
that the majority.
Does not over way.
All the other states and so that
we don't so that we have the
ability to look at things just a
little bit differently so I feel
like Mr speaker and gentleman
that we have adjusted some rules
that the majority is will.
When when the majority when the
rural communities don't agree
with those and so Mr speaker and
gentleman I appreciate you
trying to bring this out of
committee and bring this forward
I do feel like we are picking
and choosing rules as which as
we go and I thank you very much
Mr speaker and gentleman for
bringing this for thanks to the
gentle lady from a terrible.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman my neighbor from the
neighboring counties yield.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Otero I certainly you thank you
gentlemen Mr speaker gentleman I
rise this morning in support of
this effort it is been.
Far too long.
That will that we've been
dealing with this and I just
wanted to thank you for bringing
this forward and and I hope that
we can get this through thank
you gentlemen thank you Mr
speaker say no further debate we
are on to the vote on the motion
is to withdraw house joint
resolution three from committee
and have it become the next
order of business.
The vote is now open.
Everyone super I'm just.
Give us a second.
I was waiting.
I was winning.
Okay you we may if we we may be
on the verge of trying another
rule for a test drive which is
to vote by division.
Okay here you go the vote is now
open for real.
It's called members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon votes no
Representative bash.
Representative bash votes no
Representative Blanca.
Representative will go votes no
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Harry Garcia
votes no Representative and on
this.
Representative Hernandez you
won't know.
Representative Representative
Hernandez is.
Yes.
Representative Lente.
No Representative Lente votes
no.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Now Representative Roybal
Caballero votes no it is close
by a vote of twenty five in the
affirmative forty three in the
negative the motion fails.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Okay we're going to now go to
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Lewis.
I have some guests to introduce.
would you please state that we
have folks.
From the gentle lady's family's
ranch is here today.
The act and number eight grants
we have three generations of
Gilbert Lewis is
Lewis senior junior and the
food.
The one of them.
The third meeting is ranger of
the year
and we also have the gentle lady
from his parents Mr Mrs Lewis Mr
Mrs Gilbert Lewis are here would
you please way that is a less
walking into the house and
congratulations.
We also have folks from
farms into to get Pueblo.
a medio the loan to suit a
farmer of the year we have the
tenant governor Louis henna we
have a Tony Normie junior.
and we have again the Morgan who
is to seek a pharmacist and
chair please give us a wave of
lettuce walking into the house.
Now I believe that the gentle
lady from Dona Ana
Representative Ferrary to make a
motion.
Thank you Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent that house
memorial forty six be removed
from the speakers table and be
made the next order of business
no objection it is so ordered
but the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House memorial forty six on
final passage is been taken.
The gentle lady to explain the
memorial thank you Mr speaker
today during agriculture week
we are championing The New
Mexico food and farm state and
the many twenty twenty two
forties who you just introduce
some of them.
And also would like to recognize
the food farming hunger
initiative that was in
partnership with the governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham and it's
a twenty four million dollar
funding plan that will ensure
that thousands of food insecure
New Mexicans have access to
healthy meals and this
initiative will deliver critical
support to food banks and hunger
relief organizations throughout
New Mexico and in addition to
expanding the state food system
by providing additional
resources for state local
agriculture produce producers to
grow more food we are committed
to fostering a food system that
addresses hunger while improving
economic resiliency in New
Mexico communities.
and with the chief clerk please
read the memorial.
to read.
House memorial forty six
introduced by representatives
Ferrary nada Fajardo
Representative Andrea Romero and
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
A memorial declaring February
eighth two thousand twenty two
New Mexico Food and farms today
in the house of representatives
and celebration of community
food and farm initiative so
toward ending hunger.
For as New Mexico Food and
important farm state celebrates
the efforts of individuals
communities organisations and
agencies and creating a thriving
local food farming and ranching
economy the sizing that everyone
in New Mexico New Mexico should
have access to fresh local
healthy nutritious food and
whereas New Mexico Food and farm
state celebrates the following
two thousand twenty two award
recipients.
Hey the good food for New Mexico
award celebrating New Mexico
farmers markets love the million
gross market beyond that and
seen us the the sewing change
award for organizations engaged
in creating sustainable food
systems Anthony you important
Maki to go.
See the heart of the land award
for outstanding leadership in
farming or ranching.
Bubble of Aqaba Gilbert Lewis
and public to secure him make DO
the loan.
Do the growing the future award
for new or young farmers and
ranchers sublime pastors Kirsten
Cuevas the the living land award
for outstanding leadership and
land stewardship.
Malina data ease organics Ralph
V. Haile and half New Mexico
grown program awards Albuquerque
public school district sandy
camp sandy camp.
Sandoval County senior program
done over these and Janice
Mortensen help New Mexico family
resource center in Deming
Russell Independent School
District Kim Meeks and city of
Las Vegas senior center program
one to Salazar now therefore be
it resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico that February eighth
two thousand twenty to be
declared New Mexico Food and
farm stay in the house of
representatives in celebration
of community food and farm
initiatives toward ending hunger
and be it further resolved that
a copy of this memorial be
transmitted to the executive
director of the New Mexico
farmers marketing association.
Thank you the gentle lady from
you still have the four thank
you the initiative of food farm
today has been to you know
recognize different groups and
people who have been
Critical to improving the food
security of New Mexico and I'd
also like to recognize The New
Mexico legislative caucus and
there is a key partner in making
the food farming hunger steering
committee in initiative a
reality for our state and I'd
like to thank our colleagues for
their support in this critical
initiative and also I stand for
questions.
Thank you gentle lady there is
debate the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative bash.
Thank you Mr speaker and
body I am one of the founders of
the hunger caucus here in the
legislature and I enjoying that
caucus because food insecurity
is one of the issues that drove
me to run for office.
I'm very concerned about people
in our state who go hungry and
especially children and I would
urge all of my colleagues to
join the hunger caucus to work
toward food security for all New
Mexicans thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentle lady.
Is there for the debate the
gentleman from Dona Ana
Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr speaker will need
only eight are.
Excuse me is a bit of long
morning is John with the
gentlelady yields at yes I will
yield to the gentleman from my
same county Dona Ana.
Thank you gentle lady Mr speaker
I wouldn't spend setting and
support defender of recognition
for the Anthony you for the
Anthony you form and the good
work that they're doing there is
critical to our schools they
provide many first vegetables to
our to our school kids and the
work they do there's really
important this is that a new
forms about ten minutes away
from my home and I know there's
of many locals who also
participate in purchase of
vegetables and then to you for
some not only do they provide
critical training for the use to
continue or to looking to
careers in agriculture but they
also provide a valuable service
to the community as well
generally the Mr speaker I would
also.
Be remiss if I didn't mentioned
Representative I it goes and her
the central work as well and her
investments into the economy you
farmers well
because this is something that
we all work together to to
support and to to make sure that
it succeeds thank you Joe only
for bringing this forward I
really appreciate you doing this
the play very important role in
our community and once again I
want to thank you for that thank
you Mr speaker thank you John
this for the debate the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady yield yes I yield to
the gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady thank you for the work I
rise in support of this
initiative and all the work that
has been done by a stakeholders
meeting weekly throughout the
year throughout the entire
interim regardless of COVID
regardless of pandemic folks who
are committed to the work all
along the food chain.
To address food insecurity in
New Mexico from supporting our
farmers.
And ranchers with initiatives to
encourage agriculture.
All the way through distribution
and transportation of food where
we where house where we store
where we process to keep these
products in New Mexico.
And then working on developing
the markets at the end not just
retail grocery store markets but
the markets where the food
insecurity exists.
I'm on our seniors and reaching
out to senior centers of other
schools to get fruits and
vegetables to our schools with
food banks so folks who are low
income have this access to fresh
fruits and vegetables.
I appreciate and I stand in
support of all of this work.
Mr speaker and gentle lady thank
you for it.
Thank you.
In general the did you have an
amendment to this.
Yes Mr speaker was just a change
at the bottom of the who it goes
to.
We have it here do you want to
do the amendment.
Yes.
It will pass it out welcome back
to the gentle lady from
Valencia.
Thank you Mr speaker with with
the kind lady please yield.
Yes gentle lady I will yield
thank you so much this I just
want to stand up in support of
the bill thank you so much for
allowing me to sign on to it you
know we do have a representative
from the state County the town
area we have a lot of small
farms and our and our districts
in our area farmers markets are
huge huge way for small
communities small farmers to get
their product to market we have
this sublime pastors is
mentioned in the bill the
specialized regenerative and
holistic approach to farming
which I think is wonderful are
far community and be in rural
and all of sure a little funny
story early early on in my local
career still freshman
I think I was I think it was on
our speaker and he was
attempting to lecture me on
green on being green on the oil
and what it means you know for
local farms and I reminded him
living out in the country
everything in my fridge rater my
freezer we had a group or we
killed ourselves.
And I told him I said when it
comes to green that we know a
green is.
And so we really know how how to
handle the small farms and
things like that so madam chair
I just want to rise and support
thank you for bringing this to
our attention and thank you for
supporting those small farmers
that only have a few acres that
but but they need the help of
the legislature because
sometimes we can pass bills we
can pass legislation not going
to really affect the the the the
small guy so thank you Mr
speaker thank you kind lady.
The next third with the Germans
have is the result
Representative Anderson.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Gentlelady I certainly rise with
in support of your memorial will
you
Perhaps it's not a question it's
an observation.
Gentle lady that New Mexico is
long have a vibrant.
And we're cultural sector in our
economy.
And that today we we recognize
that contribution in this
memorial and we recognize the
many changes going on in
American agriculture and New
Mexico agriculture.
I think today about the New
Mexico's role in the production
of of.
Because milk.
B..
She's.
She wore it goes on and on
alfalfa corn.
But that production agriculture
is production agriculture that
not only benefits New Mexico it
feeds a nation.
And.
We have a need in New Mexico for
sufficient food for our New
Mexicans and we see that.
That if you're if you're making
cheese in a in a roll of six
hundred pounds that's a little
hard for a food bank perhaps but
what is remarkable is the
success of food banks have had
just a few years of of.
Picking up.
Contributed food from.
Walmart and many others and and
I think that is sort of in my
mind where we are trying to see
New Mexico not only be a leader
in food production agriculture.
But we're also seeing New Mexico
meeting the needs of our seniors
of our children of New Mexicans
who are.
Who face insufficient food and
this is where we are directing.
Hey a middle initiative and
braced in this memorial and I'm
glad to be part of your caucus
and I appreciate you bringing
this the floor because I think
it it shows the way that New
Mexico agriculture in New Mexico
is going you can meeting this
important need thank you thank
you gentlemen.
K. we'll go back to generally if
you on your amendment it has
been passed down I believe the
two oh two number is triple two
five twenty one point one yes
thank you Mr speaker gentlelady
to movie.
Thank you I move this just
changes to the
Notification of the award is
given to and
it is to the exists executive
director of the New Mexico
farmers marketing association.
I move the house floor amendment
number one to house memorial
forty six.
Is there debate on the
amendment.
Interjection to it.
There is there is debate on the
amendment the gentle lady from
katra score of once you
Representative Armstrong thank
you Mr speaker all the gentle
lady yield yes Mr Deputy Mr
speaker I will yield.
So can you
Mr speaker kind lady can you
explain why you're making those
changes.
Yes Mr speaker gentle lady it is
because it was in in Burton lady
put into the wrong person and
should have gone to the
governing board of the chair New
Mexico food and agriculture
policy council.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Further debate on the amendment
the gentleman from curry thank
you Mr speaker rural gentle lady
please you.
Yes I will yield.
Thank you July the agility I'm
not real familiar with this can
you explain the difference
between the executive director
of the New Mexico farmers.
And the governing board chair
New Mexico food or are they.
Can you just tell me a little
bit about the difference what is
the difference.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman the
the executive director at there
isn't and executive director of
the farmers marking Association.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
and and the
governing board chair of the New
Mexico Food neger culture policy
council for they housed in in
Albuquerque or they in Los
crucis with the department of
agriculture where is that
governing board
Four were they part Mr speaker
and gentleman from curry I don't
know perhaps you could tell me.
Thank you gentle lady Mr speaker
I have no idea this was us so
but perhaps some of our
colleagues can help explain that
I was just trying to understand
why the change if there's a
stark difference between what
the functions of the two
governing bodies are or.
A deeper understanding of why
you made the change Mr speaker
and gentleman from curry I it
was the
the sponsoring group that needed
it to be changed.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
I will do some further research
so that I can understand it
better and when I do I'll let
you know where to find out thank
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you Mr speaker.
Is there for the debate on the
amendment every night is
objection to it hearing none
house floor amendment number one
to house memorial forty six is
adopted there is for the debate
on the oil the gentle lady from
granted augmented Representative
Sweetser.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Dona Ana please
shield.
Yes the lady I will gladly yield
thank you and gentle lady Mr
speaker I just rise and support
of your house memorial and I
wanted to call attention my
colleagues attention to the back
page of the handout that we got
and you'll see this for our
award.
So cute goes to a head start in
Deming it is a head start where
they are teaching kids about
food by a having an edible
garden and I just think that is
so impressive they purchased
Mexico grown produce as well at
the Deming family resource
center and head start but the
fact that the kids have an
edible garden they're actually
able to grow and eat the food
they produce is such a huge
learning experience I quickly I
just want to tell a story when
my son was in kindergarten we
had the three kindergartens in
his school out to our farm
dimming as you know not a big
metropolitan area but in those
three kindergartens my son was
the only student who had been on
a farm before that just was
shocking to me so even in Deming
the fact that we have
a disconnect of how our food
gets to our table is amazing and
so when we have something like a
little head start growing their
own food so that the students
have the ability to see where
their food comes from is just
impressive to me and I just
appreciate the fact that it's
being recognized here with the
sprout aboard because that's
just so cute so thank you for
and having this food and farm
state memorial and I stand in
strong support thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you delays.
Next to the general office more
Rio Arriba and San Diego
Representative Roger Montoya.
Mr speaker thank you for the
lovely gentle lady from Dona Ana
County please yield thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman yes I
yield.
Is in support of this memorial
and to your work your leadership
the fact that this caucus exists
allowed me to join it in my
first year.
Representative northern New
Mexico where the bread basket of
our state really.
Was in full force years ago we
have a huge potential to revive
sallow land in fact foreseen
renaissance of young people
returning to farms.
Just this year.
Representative that it on the
Senator how to meal
Representative Romero and I
joined forces with our junior
funds to support strategically
farming initiatives to support
our seconds.
Traditional farming is super
important for when we apply
appropriate technology to
conserve water to become the
food production.
force The New Mexico can be it's
super important so it's a deep
honor to to rise and support of
this very important initiative I
yield my time back thank you.
Thank you for the gentlelady
from Bernalillo Representative
Lewis thank you Mr speaker will
the gentlelady yields yes Mr
speaker I yield to the gentle
lady thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady and thank you Mr
speaker for announcing my family
it's actually my aunt and my
uncle my cousins who are all
great I'm super proud of my
cousin Gober who is well on the
heart of the landlord he's a.
In the Albuquerque fire
department for a long time and
is now within the fire marshal
so he does that is in addition
to his normal job so I just want
to say how proud I am of him and
congratulations to cover blue in
the act my number requests for
eight rounds award.
And then also my third home is
basically the public to say that
to say okay say wanna give a
shout out to of the members from
the to to go public farms that
are here today as well and I
stand in support of your
memorial gentle lady and I want
to thank you and all the co
sponsors for bringing it forward
thank you gently.
They generate X. we will go to
the gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln Representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Dona Ana yield
yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Mr speaker delayed Ms I'm sorry
if I got ahead of myself this
morning the with the
congratulations Sir my sister
but I was really proud over and
I can tell you that my my son's
engaged in them the farming and
he is an active participant in
the Rossell of farmers market
and these programs that we have
are vital to our communities
they are being well received in
our schools and I think for
supplying healthy and fresh
vegetables and other
Products that are grown in each
community are are very important
for children to learn and to see
how those things get to their
table and so it's been a real
blessing for for my family and I
think for all of New Mexico so
we're very fortunate to have
communities that are really
closely tied to local farms and
and local produce and and
vegetables and I certainly thank
you for diligently bringing this
to our attention and bringing
this memorial before us thank
you Mr speaker and thank you
gentle lady thank you chairman I
Nasser the generous amigo said
if it Torrance.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield yes Mr speaker I
yield to the gentleman
from all four I just want to go
knowledge was for real for free
he'll for the morning ladies
last for that because a lot of
it goes to Mexico for receiving
the outstanding leadership and
land stewardship also Mr speaker
I want to thank one of cells are
with the senior citizens for it
is for these farmers and and
using the food to feed our
pricing is a Las Vegas thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady.
Thank you Sir the gentleman
senior for the debate the gentle
lady to close thank you Mr
speaker I just like to say
congratulations to all the award
ease of the New Mexico food and
farm state and we need to keep
up the good work of what we've
started in these past couple
years and with that I now move
that house memorial forty six as
amended do now pass and I ask
unanimous consent that the house
that the record show that the
role is been called and all
members present present voted in
the affirmative.
There is a request unanimous
consent that the record show all
all members present and voting
in the affirmative hearing no
objection it is so ordered the
vote is now open.
Close revenue seventy the
affirmative zero negative house
memorial forty six as amended
has passed the house.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally.
The gentleman from.
Bernalillo.
I
think it was regrettable that we
go to the next order of business
committee reports.
No objections so ordered.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee to is
been referred house bill one
forty four.
Has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do pass as amended
respectfully submitted on
helical Rubio chair move
adoption we are adoption of a
favorable committee report.
On house bill one forty four.
Pose a favor please signify by
saying I have.
All this was may.
Committee for stuff that.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to is been
referred house bill fifty seven
as amended has had it under
consideration for some as
recommendation that I do pass
respectfully submitted Patricia
Lundstrom chair there was
consent of the creative force or
the other acted upon the single
vote reflected the journal so
they're acted upon individually
no objections order clerk to
read.
House bill ninety two two passed
as amended.
House bill ninety six do passed
as amended.
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill one
zero one two passed as amended.
House bill one oh four do pass
as amended.
House bill one twelve as amended
to pass.
House bill one sixteen as
amended to pass as amended.
House bill one nineteen.
To pass.
And house bill one twenty four
as amended to pass as amended
respectfully submitted Patricia
A. Lundstrom chair.
Move adoption Mr speaker it
shows me as a X. excuse the.
Mr speaker move adoption.
Here on induction if ever will
committee reports and house bill
fifty seven as amended ninety to
ninety six.
Energy environments resources
committee so super house bill
one oh one has built one oh four
one twelve is amended one
sixteen is amended one nineteen
and one twenty for all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
This was a three point
reductive.
Mr speaker government elections
in Indian Affairs Committee too
is been referred house bill one
twenty six has had it under
consideration for them as
recommendation that a do pass
respectfully submitted Georgene
Louis chair.
Move adoption we are denture
favorable committee report on
house bill one twenty six all
those in favor please signify by
saying hi.
All this was named.
Pretty point out that.
Mr.
Mr speaker you Judiciary
Committee was referred house
bill sixty A. as amended has had
it under consideration forcing
with recommendation that it do
not pass but that house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill sixty eight do
pass and then for the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Gail Chasey chair unanimous
consent of the could force it to
gather act on a single phone
reflect in the journal so
directed to one individual
hearing objections ordered for
three also one twenty seven do
pass as amended.
House bill one eighty do pass
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Speaker move adoption we are
adoption of an unfavorable
committee report on house bill
sixty eight is amended a
favorable committee report on
Judiciary Committee subsidy for
House Bill Sixtyeight.
And favorable committee reports
house was one twenty seven and
one eighty all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
All this posting reports are
adopted.
Mr speaker agriculture as a kias
and water resources committee
team has been referred house
bill one sixty nine has had it
under consideration point and
with recommendation that I do
pass and then for the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Derrick J. Lente chair unanimous
consent of the committee
portrait to gather acted upon
missing of a reflection in terms
of their act on individually
here in objections were click to
read.
House joint memorial one to pass
respectfully submitted Derrick
J. Lente the chair.
Mr speaker would option your
adoption of a favorable
committee report has to one
sixty nine and house joint
memorial won all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
All this was a three point
reductive.
Mr speaker your rules
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee to
Mr referred house bill one
seventy three has had it under
consideration point I was
recommendation that I do not
possible that house rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee
substitute for house bill one
seventy three to pass in this
referred to the provisions of
finance committee respectfully
submitted Susan J. Susan K. and
a chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we are
honored option of an unfavorable
committee report on house bill
one seventy three but a
favorable committee report on
rules of of land grants and
cultural affairs committee
substitute for house bill one
seventy three all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
All this was a.
A point about that.
Mr speaker you're enrolling in a
grossing Committee too much for
me for house resolution one has
had it under consideration
report same has been duly
enrolled in gross preparatory to
signing by the officers of the
house respectfully submitted
Christine or yes chair Mr
speaker move adoption.
We are direction of a favorable
committee Porter house
resolution one all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye if this was a.
Three point out that the record
reflect the duly enrolled in a
gross copy of house resolution
one as assigned by the officers
of the house in open session.
Mr speaker your rules I'm sorry.
Mr speaker you're rolling into
goals in committee team is been
referred house memorial six
house memorial fourteen house
memorial sixteen house memorial
nineteen has had them under
consideration point same.
They have been duly enrolled in
a gross properties signing by
the officers of the house
respectfully submitted Christina
or yes chair Mr speaker move
adoption transaction a favorable
reinforce house memorial six
fourteen sixteen and nineteen
dollars a favor please signify
by saying aye.
This was a pretty point are
dotted the record reflect to the
do rules immigrants copies of
house memorial six fourteen
sixteen and nineteen have
assigned by the officers of the
house in open session.
Mr speaker really engrossing
Committee too is been referred
house memorial eight House
memorial twenty three house
memorial twenty seven house
memorial twenty eight house
memorial twenty nine House
memorial thirty has had them
under consideration point saying
that have been duly enrolled in
gross preparatory to signing by
the officers of the house
respectfully submitted Christine
or yes chair Mr speaker move
adoption.
We are adoption a favorable
committee reports House Morris a
twenty three twenty seven twenty
eight twenty nine and thirty.
All those in favor please
signify by saying hi.
This was a three point are
adopted let the record reflect
the duly holding press copies of
House Morris a twenty three
twenty seven twenty eight twenty
nine thirty have been signed by
the officers of the house.
Open session.
Jennifer Lee are.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business messages no objections
so ordered.
Click to read message from the
Senate Mr speaker I'm directed
to inform the house of the
Senate has passed Senate bill
forty Senate bill one twenty
three Senate bill one forty one
with emergency clause and
request the concurrence of the
house respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk this is really
entered message from the Senate
Mr speaker I'm directed to
inform the house of the Senate
has passed Senate bill one
thirty four Senate bill one
forty four as amended and
request the concurrence of the
house respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk Mrs Richard.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you speaker with that we
go to the next order of business
introduction of legislation.
No objections ordered.
to read.
House joint resolution fifteen
introduced by Representative
Townsend Montoya Pettigrew lord
and Scott the joint resolution
proposing to amend articles for
nine and twelve of the
constitution of New Mexico with
the approval of Congress to
allow for the distribution of
public school funding to parents
or legal guardians of school age
children for home school for
private schools including
private virtual schools showing
resolution fifteen introduced by
Representative Townsend Montoya
Pettigrew lord and Scott strong
resolution fifteen having been
read twice by title is ordered
is authorized by.
Article nineteen of the
constitution.
I ordered printed and referred
to the Education Committee then
it's government elections and
Indian Affairs.
House memorial forty eight
introduced by Representative
Lujan a memorial requesting the
Public Education Department
deleted comprehensive science
technology engineering and
mathematics education to career
pipeline study including high
quality professional development
for teachers and report findings
and recommendations to.
And the legislature.
As more of forty eight
introduced by Representative
Lujan is inside.
It sounds like someone might be
in distress if you need help.
You're in trouble state to state
Louisiana is developing state.
House or forty having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Education Committee.
The moral forty nine introduced
by Representative Rebecca Dow
and Representative Gail
Armstrong.
A memorial requesting the
department of game and fish to
study and provide
recommendations on how to
provide greater protections for
livestock and address economic
losses caused by the
reintroduction of the Mexican
wolf House memorial forty nine
introduced by Representative
Rebecca Dow and Representative
Gail Armstrong house memorial
forty nine having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee.
House memorial fifty introduced
by Representative Castellano a
memorial honoring Renaldo McGill
Florida's and recognizing his
exemplary service to New Mexico
house memorial fifty introduced
by Representative Castellano.
House memorial fifty having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and placed on the
speakers table.
Senate bill one.
Introduced by Senator Stewart
and Representative certainly on
a endorsed by the legislative
education study committee and
act relating to public education
increasing the minimum salaries
for level one level two and
level three licensed teachers
Senate bill one introduced by
Senator Stewart and
Representative Sarinana Senate
bill one have you been read
twice by title is referred to
the Education Committee then to
appropriations and finance.
Senate bill forty one introduced
by Senator Stewart and
Representative Chandler.
An act relating to university
research parks amending the
university research park and
Economic Development Act
designating research park
corporations as public employers
for the purpose of the public
employee bargaining Act
declaring an emergency Senate
bill forty one introduced by
Senator Stewart and
Representative Chandler.
Senate bill forty one is amended
having been read twice by title
is referred to the labor
veterans and military affairs
committee then see Judiciary.
Senate bill one thirty eight
introduced by Senator Kernan.
And act relating to taxation
providing the receipts from
payments of a Medicare
administrative contractor be
eligible for a gross receipts
tax deduct deduction for certain
medical and health care services
Senate bill one thirty eight
introduced by Senator Kernan
Senate bill one thirty eight
having been read twice by title
is referred to Health Human
Services committee then to
taxation and revenue.
Senate joint resolution three
introduced by Senator Servan
tastes the joint resolution
proposing to amend article six
section thirty five of the
constitution of New Mexico to
provided that it appointed
appellate judge serve at least
one year before the general
elections held for the office to
which the judge was appointed
Senate joint resolution three
introduced by Senator Servan
tastes.
Senate joint resolution three
having been read sorry Senate
joint resolution three as
amended having been read twice
by title is referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill forty introduced by
Senator Ortiz Y. Pino and act
relating to health care
repealing the delayed repeal of
the health care quality
surcharge Act Senate bill forty
introduced by Senator Ortiz he
Pino.
Senator forty having been read
twice by title is referred to
the health and Human Services
Committee dense taxation and
revenue.
Senate bill one twenty three
introduced by senator Munoz for
the legislative finance
committee and act relating to
state agencies providing a new
sunset date for the state racing
commission Senate bill one
twenty three introduced by
senator Munoz.
Senate bill one twenty three
having been read twice by title
is referred to the government
elections and.
Indian Affairs Committee.
Senate bill one forty one
introduced by senator other meal
and Representative at a at a and
act relating to gas providing
and emergency exception to who
may fill in owners LP gas
container declares an emergency
Senate bill one forty one
introduced by senator about a
meal and Representative it and.
Senator one forty one having
been read twice by title is
referred to the rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee
events government elections and
Indian Affairs.
Senate bill one thirty four
introduced by senator.
NC Rodriguez and Representative
small and act relating to public
finance allocating severance tax
bonding capacity to the New
Mexico housing trust fund
authorizing severance tax bonds
requiring certain reversions.
To the severance tax bonding
fund requiring the New Mexico
mortgage finance authority to
prioritize expanding or in
covering certain balances in the
New Mexico housing trust fund
Senate bill one thirty four
introduced by senator Nancy
Rodriguez and Representative
small.
Senator one thirty four having
been read twice by title is
referred to the taxation and
revenue committee.
Senate bill one forty four
introduced by Senator Duhigg an
act relating to elections
amending the crime of
intimidation to include acts
against employees and agents of
the secretary of state county
clerks and municipal clerks
Senate bill one forty four
introduced by Senator Duhigg.
Senator one forty four having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you Mr speaker I move that we go
to the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objections so
ordered members we have the
committee report on house bill
fifty five from the Judiciary
Committee it aronie Asli listed.
Representative Alcon has.
Excused when in fact she cast a
vote on the bill this is been
brought to the attention of the
four leaders is rejection to the
previously adopted report being
expunged and replaced with the
correct version hearing no
objection it is so ordered.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker not being
live incentive I move we said in
recess until till one PM.
Welcome to order.
Mr speaker.
Generated million Mr speaker I
ask unanimous consent that the
rules be suspended and that the
journal show that all those
present in the morning session
are present this afternoon in
this afternoon session junction
sorter Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent that the rules
be suspended and that the record
show that the journal has been
read in full and approved
subject to the revision and
approval of the rules and order
of business committee of
business committee gestures
ordered.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business third reading of
legislation no objections
ordered.
Members if your call is a little
late when we adjourn by side by
if we will do items that are now
numbered one two three and six.
Jennifer Sandoval Representative
Harper Lee you have item number
one.
Mr speaker thank you continue to
that point for the record
reflect all action necessary for
placing House Bill sixty seven
as amended on final passage is
been taken the gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and what is
a gem of a house.
my co sponsor.
The gentle lady from.
Los Alamos is not able to join
us but I would like to begin by
thanking her for her help and
support.
On this legislation.
So very briefly.
Ladies and gentlemen you'll
recall that last session we
passed.
The tax credit so this is not a
new tax credit this is something
that we passed last session
passed the house unanimously I
think the one dissenting vote in
the Senate and the governor
signed it into law.
And what this does this is
called the technology right as
gross receipts tax credit in the
purpose is to help businesses in
New Mexico.
The chief technology maturation
of their business to help them
cross that valley of death
develop a product.
these are technologies that were
developed at New Mexico national
labs
as we want to treat economic
development in the state by
leveraging these technologies
are involved in the labs and
turn them into a higher value
product.
So speaker and ladies and
gentleman what this bill does it
does three things to the credit
the first is we tried a a new
kind of funding mechanism for
this credit it established a new
fund and and actually that was
way more complicated than we
imagined anticipated and
actually took about a year and a
half to get this fund set up and
working properly and so working
with the tax department and
economic development apartment
what this legislation does is it
goes back to run this credit
like every other credit in.
In our tax code we we remove
this fund and distributions from
this fund that we go back to
funding structure like a
standard tax credit capped at a
million dollars for each
national lab.
That's the first thing it does
the second thing it does so and
I'm just going to no for no
particular reason there's no
debate on the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker
so I'll I'll make this very
brief the second thing it does
the balance in the fund will
revert.
To the general fund we're should
go and then the servicing it
does is there's a chance
pipeline of businesses that are
interested.
It's only a three year pilot to
starboard a year and a half in.
We need to get more more folks
that can benefit from this
there's a this the restriction
in a beautiful way that it's
transparent and as a search
party that will evaluate the
effectiveness of it don't have
enough data to actually evaluate
and so we're extending the
sunset
from a eight years and so those
are the three things that this
legislation does that was that
Madam speaker I stand for
questions.
There's further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman this gentleman from
from Santa yield ministerial.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman gentleman I don't want
to hang in there was a very good
if description of what the bill
does and I just
Madam speaker and gentleman
This is been a an issue that
you've championed for awhile
In part madam speaker and
gentleman there been some very
notable businesses that could
have happened here in New
Mexico.
but unfortunately that
technology ended up
going elsewhere and then going
really big could you briefly
describe what's happened in the
past and maybe what we've missed
out on the passes briefly so
that is bigger and and gentleman
from San Juan great question I
mean obviously a a great example
is like Microsoft right there
several simple I'm of I'm aware
of some from Sandia some
technologies that were developed
a Sandia.
small businesses started here
and then they were relocated to
other areas of the United States
and of course we're grateful for
we're we're excited for them but
we really like it to happen here
in New Mexico and.
Mr chairman although I'll just
say that.
I really I'm not that excited
about kind of giving away the
farm when it comes to tax code
to try to track some business to
land here I I really don't think
that's good policy.
But I also really like the idea
of leveraging what we have like
we have an incredible actor
culture industry in the state
and so when we make sense that
we would have the largest cheese
factory in the US here in New
Mexico and we do southwest
cheese which is amazing price so
that's that's a value added
right and so here again in that
same vein we have these
incredible resources these
national laboratories here.
Of that employ the best and
brightest have incredible
resources and and they prevent
amazing new things.
To take that invention across
the valley of death to a
product.
A little bit extra help and I
really think this will do it.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman that I I really don't
have much more to us than that
but it is by no one the past
we've missed out we were there
several.
World renowned businesses that
started right here and if we
could have kept them
knows what position of New
Mexico the New today so I've I
fully support this and like I
said administrative
administrative Grisham I just a
lonely to hang it was such a
great introduction.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you John and.
We do have one member on the
board but I don't see him at his
desk.
Gentleman from Chavis Lee and
Roosevelt Representative
Anderson are you in the
chambers.
Okay seeing no further debate
the gentleman to close.
Thank you madam speaker I will
connect with the the the
gentleman from Chavis Lee and
Roosevelt at a future time but I
appreciate the option to present
this legislation and I move that
house bill sixty seven as
amended do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill sixty seven as amended the
vote is now open.
But.
That's because.
The clerk to call those members
who do not have a registered
vote on the board.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative bash.
Dance Representative bash votes
yes Representative boom cough
yes Representative will go vote
yes Representative Cook.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente both
yes Representative Ortez.
Representative four yes votes
yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes.
Five of the six sixty six in the
affirmative zero in the negative
house bill sixty seven as
amended has now passed the
house.
Thank you madam speaker.
Gentlelady from done and are you
ready on item number two.
Yes madam speaker we get me to
that point.
For the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill eighty one on final
passage has been taken to the
lady to explain the bill.
Thank you madam speaker H. B.
eighty one are fine and fees
reform will ensure that New
Mexicans are both held
accountable without punishing
poverty and that are limited
state resources both in time our
taxpayer dollars are not spent
in efforts to collect money from
people that simply don't have
it.
HB eighty one will reduce court
dockets to maximize efficiency
within our justice system and
ensure New Mexico again is not
spending our limited dollars on
collection efforts that in the
end are not successful HB eighty
one was developed in cooperation
with endorsed by the New Mexico
sentencing commission it was
also unanimously endorsed by the
courts corrections and justice
committee this fall.
Thank you madam speaker.
Hi there is further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative lame.
Thank you madam speaker Madam
speaker to the gentle lady from
Dona Ana County yield yes madam
speaker I yield to the gentleman
from San Juan thank you madam
speaker thank you generated from
Dona Ana just a couple of
sections I wanted to ask just a
couple specific questions about
so madam speaker gentle lady
from Dona and if I could turn
your attention to page two.
I notice I notice the new
languages I understand this is
it's trying to
Put in statute a what I would
say is an affordable number for
persons for to defendants to be
able to pay fines and fees on a
on a sort of a monthly payment
plan is that correct madam
speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes H.
B. eighty one among other things
incorporates principles from the
already established New Mexico
court rules that require payment
plans and thirty day
installments as well as sets
limits on payments to to not
exceed two percent of a person's
monthly net income.
Madam speaker generated from
Dona and since two percent or
ten dollars whichever is lower
is that correct yes Mr speaker
and gentleman that's correct
Madam speaker.
Madam speaker Julie for Dona ana
and so I I just want to ask a
question about the ten dollars
so the you know I I my the way
my mind works as I like simple
so if you're convicted of a
first T. W. I. for example state
statute says it's a mandatory
five hundred dollar fine and
there is usually court costs and
fees that are tacked on it it
gets close to seven hundred
dollars like six ninety three
depending on the court but even
if you just take the five
hundred dollar fine
I'm just worried about how long
a person is going to have to
have in order to pay off a few
like this if it's a if it's a
ten dollar monthly payment Madam
speaker gentle if you could
address that for me please.
Madam speaker gentleman I don't
expect that you'd like me to do
math on the spot but I imagine
if we divided that six ninety
four by both the number of
months of the year the ten
dollar fee we could come out to
how long that would take and
madam speaker and gentleman I
really appreciate you raising
this question because while we
might consider how long it takes
someone to pay off a finer fee
this this legal debt they've now
walked into I'd also like to
consider the certainly why I'm
bringing this legislation
forward is because the the hard
reality is that for New Mexico
so many of New Mexicans they
never had this money to begin
with and this is a reasonable
way to make sure that the state
has the opportunity to collect
without putting an impossible
burden on families that of
course are still managing
getting some food on the table
paying their rent a managing
their household budget as they
might otherwise.
Mr generated from Dona Ana and I
I I understand this is a balance
rights will make sure that we're
not punishing people just
because they're poor.
At the same time we need to hold
them accountable for further
actions and I understand there's
a balance there and so.
It in a way the I get the ten
dollar but my fear is if you you
know I think it comes close to
almost seven months you know
it's it's
offered by diversity W. I. C. of
the approaching you know six
years that they could be making
payments and at some point I
think that also becomes on fair
to the defendant and and becomes
a problem for them.
so then speaker generated for
Dona ana can you just help me
reconcile those two things.
Miss madam speaker and gentleman
thank you as I'm sure you're
aware it is already common
practice in courts have the
capacity to allow payments well
we're just making sure that we
are solidifying this in New
Mexico statutes but Mr speaker
madam speaker and gentleman the
other thing that I would want to
consider there is the cost that
we all pay is New Mexico taxes
taxpayers when folks don't have
practical options to either get
themselves on payment plans or
convert these fines and fees or
something like community service
the reality for this for New
Mexicans today is sometimes when
people don't have the money and
the from the bench it's been
ordered otherwise that that that
there's a legal and illegal debt
that they need to pay what often
happens now is that people are
picked up and put in jail for
failure to pay and what that
means is that we as new Mexicans
are paying the cost to
incarcerate someone because they
did not have the money to turn
in a fight or flee and madam
speaker gentlemen I've certainly
not chosen someone that had the
Quebec I would I would not know
I would not recognize that
anybody I know if they had the
ability to rate would somehow
instead choose to go to jail for
a weekend or a couple of days so
right now part of what's
happening is we as a system are
paying to lock people up when
they don't have the ability to
show up with the money this at
the cesses says a tainted by
these fines and fees.
Madam speaker generate from Dona
and I'd I appreciate
That perspective if your if your
Charles Dickens fans you know
that for the for a long time the
U. K. had a debtors prison
and we don't want to create a
similar scenario here.
but I also think at some point
if you string it on for too long
it also becomes a disservice to
the defendant and I have seen
payment plans a fifty dollars I
I haven't been in courts for
criminal defendants I haven't
seen him set for ten dollars.
And and I think the last piece
with this section Madam speaker
generated from Dona Ana is.
If you have a court of limited
jurisdiction let's say municipal
court where I. D. W. eyes charge
through the state they have
limited jurisdiction so they
have opted basically one year up
to twelve months.
If you've now created a payment
plan word for it's going to be
extended beyond the twelve month
time frame what happens if if
the defendant fails to make a
payment after that twelve month
I time frame.
Madam speaker gentlemen I I
first to just one offer on your
point there are no prepayment
penalties or
obstacles to a defendant that
would elects to pay more or to
pay that debt off sooner should
they be able to.
It's a room in the budget or
maybe get a refund check or
whatever it looks like they can
certainly prepay that without
any consequence.
might you repeat your the more
you're more direct question
madam speaker and gentleman Mr
gently from Dona Ana I will I
will try.
So certain courts records of
women jurisdiction administer
court for example if if you are
chart of the D. W. I. through
municipal court they they have
basically one year from the time
you're sentenced to to continue
to have jurisdiction over you I
think it's technically three and
sixty four days but if you
create a payment plan that
extends beyond those twelve
months.
and then let's say I'm in month
eighteen and I and I failed to
make a payment.
How do we address the court
still is able to address the
defendant who is not in
compliance with the sentence
even though to be on the twelve
months.
Madam speaker gentlemen from
what I understood they still may
be compliant and actually the
defense can ask to extend the
probation period instead of
going back to jail for that
failure to pay and many
defendants today frequently
already due to this option
instead of being incarcerated at
the end of that term.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Dona and I guess what I'm really
getting out is is is do we have
a jurisdictional problem now if
if this creates
a payment plan the on the the
agency will courts jurisdiction
and I don't know the answer
because I I generally never seen
a payment plan extend beyond the
twelve months so it is an open
question I don't know what the
answer is does this create a
jurisdictional problem.
Madam speaker and gentleman my
experts would say no it does
not.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Dona Ana and and the last
section want to ask about a
section eight on the very last
page page fourteen.
Mr daily from down under are you
on page fourteen.
Yes madam speaker Johnson and I
am with you on page fourteen Mr
generated from Dona Ana so just
the last section the way
understand this is if you
qualify as any person under the
indigent defense act phone
you're convicted of a criminal
offense
court costs and fees cannot be
assessed against you.
I can understand that I I maybe
not agree but I think I can
understand it with my question
though is the finance.
The way I understand find is
those are set by statute.
Whenever you are convicted of
certain offenses and so how are
we able to negate the fines from
statutory offenses.
Thank you madam speaker
gentleman and certainly first
year read of that new material
on page fourteen is accurate and
the piece here that we're trying
to distinguish is that right now
the majority of justices in New
Mexico are not leveling these
fines because folks don't have
the ability to pay them and
what's coming into play here is
that on the mandatory side when
those situations were still
applicables we would still be
leveling the ability to pay
increase in that situation.
massacre generated from Dona Ana
but.
But I I do notice in line twenty
two it says shall not but I
don't think there's
discretionary I think if you
were a needy person.
As that's define an indigent
defense acting you're convicted
of a crime offenses said shall
not be assessed fines I don't
think it's discretionary.
madam speaker gentleman's we
appreciate the the language in
naming that it does they shall
not here he shall not be
assessed but also looking at the
court process there is that
difference between what is
assessed and what is collected
so the assessment on this may
not be leveled in the same way
but when we get back to the
other sections that referred to
the ability to pay increase then
we get to the question of what's
reasonably collected.
Based on the mandatory sections.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
don't I guess.
Nibert were were really the
lawyer word smithing and now but
whenever I think of says I I
guess in my mind that's that's
taking place at the time
sentencing.
That that you're being assessed.
And and so this language would
suggest to me that at the time
of sentencing that they cannot
impose a fine on you if you are
a new person under the indigent
defense act am I reading that
incorrectly.
Madam speaker gentleman I might
also if you really directed to
page seven to look at the
language there to.
Hopefully we can better connect
on the interplay between the new
language on page seven.
Section eight I'm sorry section
letter eighty.
And madam speaker gentlemen
because of that language that
we're now we're moving it seems
like the common practice today
is that judges are saying they
don't have the authority to
waiver differ and that they
actually are obligated to assess
and collect so we're trying to
do here is removed that language
again they still have room to
assess and collect on this piece
of the law based on that degree
that's ability to pay.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Dona Ana and I.
I think if I understand what
you're saying the design is is
and in my opinion I think the
word maybe should be the first
word in line twenty two not the
word shall because actually when
you point me to.
Page seven.
subparagraph a it does actually
use the word shall assess the
same word again says.
And so I think if you read that
in harmony with your new section
eight.
I think what it does is it it
carves out an exception were if
you're an indigent person if
you're needy person underneath
the engine the fence Act that's
what is what this language is
now saying is when it comes time
to assess if you're one of those
individuals the court actually
has no choice they cannot
assess fines against independent
so it seems to me that.
If you want the court to have
the ability to have discussion
of the words may would be more
appropriate.
Madam speaker gentleman again
going to the practice of today
that the way that they assess
these fees then become suspended
and the distinction here now is
that instead of these fees being
suspended they also have room to
to waive them completely.
And then there's been them.
Mr generated from don't M..
I'm generally not trying to blow
up your bill I'm just trying to
I'm just looking at the way this
is going to work in practice
because if there's a judge takes
the bench and I do understand
the practice of suspending fines
and fees that's very common but
that's also discretionary act
that takes place from the bench
and if I'm a judge and I I read
the text of this new law it
removes that discretion and if
I'm a needy person and now says
that that I cannot that it shall
not be assessed.
Lines.
And so maybe I should ask did is
are you trying to make a
discretionary for the for the
court to be able to assess or
not assess fines for any person
or do you want them to be
prohibited from assessing fines
against any person.
Madam speaker Madam speaker
gentleman certainly I appreciate
the question and yes there is a
distinction in this
impossibility one between folks
that have the ability to pay and
folks that are already qualified
at under the indigent defense
act as as someone to be eligible
for a public defender so yes
there remains discretionary.
Capacities with the judiciary to
assess.
Those that have the ability to
pay and in the section of the
law it does not stand in the
same way.
And madam speaker gentle lady
from Dona and so I just let me
let me give an example that I
think maybe could highlight the
problem there there are certain
statutory offenses where the
only possibility is a fine.
Joe is not on the table
community service not on the
table it's just a flat fine.
And so you've committed you've
committed a criminal offense
you've been found guilty by a
jury of your peers it comes time
to sentencing it's a term
insurance a needy person an
indigent fence Act and now what
this language says that you you
the court cannot assess the only
thing that is in statute to keep
you accountable for that
criminal offense and it I think
that's the scenario that we need
to try to avoid to give the
court discretion.
And and make it may instead of
shall because I understand your
intent here is
you know there's times where any
person you know the for whatever
reason in life you know maybe
they need some some grace but I
think it's important to have.
That disruption discretion live
the court I'm afraid that if we
keep the word shall here there's
no room for that discretion.
Thank you madam speaker dental.
Okay master digitally so I guess
are you.
Are you open to changing shall
to may.
Madam speaker and gentleman no.
And madam speaker option
gentlelady from Dona Ana I mean
obviously it's that your bill
But you have to understand what
this language does is it means
of if you have a defendant in
court and they've been convicted
of a criminal offense.
This language means that a court
it's impossible for the court to
be able to to assess a fine
against that person even though
the statute mandates that.
And I don't think that's the
intent of our criminal statutes
is based upon your socioeconomic
status you you get a free pass I
don't think that's what our
colonel statutes are designed to
do so I would just ask as this
bill moves forward out of here
today on the Senate side if
maybe you'd consider looking at
this language and I appreciate
the dialogue thank you.
Thank you madam speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo county
Representative Chasey.
Thank you madam speaker and will
the lady from going on a yield.
Thank you madam speaker I yield
to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
I thank you madam speaker and
lady from Dona Ana County I I
wanted to emphasize a couple of
things because years ago I was
trying to help the counties
because the counties and up
incarcerating these particular
individuals and nobody
reimburses the counties for the
cost of those prisoners being
locked up for whatever period of
time so the bill that I carried
that governor Johnson actually
approved was to be given to try
to avoid the debtors prison.
phenomenon so that people would
receive.
Twelve four hours that they
spent in prison and the counties
were extremely grateful to have
that enacted and I think the
important thing to realize here
is that it is in most cases
costing us more to collect a
dollar van a dollar so right now
the scheme that we have to fund
these programs is.
It's a it's a diminishing
returns situation.
So what the point is ultimately
our state general fund should be
funding whatever the programs
are whose revenues might be
slightly just decreased because
of eliminating fines and fees
this is an incredibly regressive
method of finding state
government and services and
programs so for that reason I
really urge the body if you have
any problems at all please look
at the FIR and please support
this legislation.
There has been a request for the
gentleman to remove their coats
which is being granted.
This for the debate the gentle
lady from Bernalillo Santa and
Santa Fe counties Representative
Lord.
Thank you madam speaker and will
the gentle lady from Dona Ana
County please yield yes madam
speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Santa fits on the
violin Bernalillo county's thank
you.
Chairman had some questions on
your bill I apologize it it's so
far from me to the table that
I'm constantly squinting so hold
on one second I'll bring this up
to my eyeballs.
So madam chair do the question
so I want to look at this bill.
Target interrupted chair
representative
so I look at the first page of
page one is it talks about
expanding community service
options and then I move on to
page.
Three.
Online I and that's where I have
my first question on the changes
some insurers instances instead
of a person performs community
service shall receive credit
towards the fines fees and costs
as.
Twice the rate of the prevailing
federal state county and
municipal hourly minimum wage so
look Department wages now eleven
fifty as of this year so double
that would be twenty three
correct and then that would be
and Santa Fe it's twelve thirty
two so that would be twenty four
sixty four and our from doing
that correct.
Yes madam speaker and gentle
lady I know we we got we trip
each other up on the math in
committee but I think today
we're on the same page thank you
madam speaker gentle lady thank
you madam speaker and
Representative so I just I
calculated so that if they did a
community service for ten hours
I'm not talking about that being
the and the and course and just
talk about the community
service.
So ten hours I I calculated
based because last time we were
we have some differences on the
on the amount so one one if they
did ten hours per week that
would be two hundred thirty four
in Santa Fe that would be two
hundred forty six dollars and
now I have the the amounts
correct in there because we were
confused on on that.
So madam chair and
representative
I would ask you.
On page five.
On line twenty one chair
Representative so we're going
from.
Fifteen days I was so the so the
census should not be required to
serve more than fifteen days was
before used to be thirty is that
correct.
Madam chair and gentle lady yes
it is.
And the other question I have
madam chair and representative I
look through the bill and.
This bill also would include
somebody who was convicted of a
serious violent offenses occur
because I couldn't find any
exclusion in the bill for that.
And madam chair that is correct.
Okay you madam speaker gentle
lady that is correct that's okay
I'll be elevated madam chair and
Representative okay.
So I was looking at something on
here so the governor recently
came out.
this was just in January and
governor shoulders Lujan Grisham
had said that quotes.
She wants to keep violent
criminals accused of murder rape
and gun crimes and other.
Funds are redundant gun crimes
because dot the street will
pending trial so basically she
came out with the press release
recently that one of our
representatives here was at are
you familiar with that press
release it was with her mayor
Tim Keller I think the district
attorney and a couple other
representatives.
Madam speaker gentle lady I may
have seen a photo of that on
Twitter but I I was not Herbie
purview to the the details of
the funding or the coordination
of that and did not have any
part in that event.
Okay thank you Madam speaker and
Representative so what I did
when I was reading through this
bill I have an amendment that
would actually address some of
these issues and has at
ammendment been passed out yeah
madam chair.
Gentlelady from said this
counties I don't have a copy of
that I think it's being passed
out right now okay so thank you
I do have an amendment and it's
going to be amendment number
gentle lady we actually do not
have the amendment.
Good.
I.
That.
Madam speaker.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Madam speaker I was just wanting
to make sure that the clock was
paused while we're figuring out
what's going on yet.
Generally we did not deposit
prior to your request a deposit
but we can deposit now.
Okay gentle lady we have the
amendment loaded online can you
please read the to to number.
Yes thank you madam chair the
two oh two number is two two two
four seven three point one.
Gentlelady to explain your
amendment.
Thank you madam chair
representative so what we're
doing here on page three.
Line five
strike the word twice.
On page four.
Line one.
After the word defendant.
Comma.
Answered not charged with a
serious violent felony offense.
On page five.
Line sixteen and certain the
following new subsection.
F. as using the section serious
violent felony offense means one
murder in the first degree.
To first or second degree human
trafficking of a child.
Three first degree child abuse
for sexual exploitation of a
child and the first or second
degree I am a serious violent
offence as provided in
subparagraph a through and
a paragraph for an subsection L.
of section thirty three dash to
dash thirty four NMSA nineteen
seventy eight and the final
amendment.
Is on page.
Five point twenty one.
The brackets in the line through
thirty and online twenty two
straight fifteen.
Thank you gentle lady gentle
lady from Dona Ana is this a
friendly amendment Madam speaker
gentle lady does not.
Okay madam madam chair
Hold on one second.
Figueroa.
Madam chair asks that we.
This ammendment amendment one to
H. B. eighty one for
consideration with a roll call
vote.
I want to further explain the
bill Madam.
Sorry amendment.
Gentlelady are we we are asked
for explanation and we already
asked this is a friendly
amendment so I I I I think we're
now on to debate of the
amendment.
Answerable yes it is.
Okay is there debate on the
amendment.
On I also confirming there will
be a roll call vote thanks I'm
sorry I didn't see hands on the
amendment that Representative
from Travis county
Representative Ezzell.
Bernalillo county Representative
Rehm.
Madam chair that was just to
make sure that we we do we're
afforded the roll call vote
thank you.
Okay there is a bit on the
amendment of the gentle lady I
cannot see where she's from
Representative black.
Thank you madam chair does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield yes I do.
Thank you gentle lady thank you
madam chair speaker.
Madam speaker sorry so
generally.
The I'm I'm assuming from from
reading this ammendment.
We're only addressing the most
serious
offenses is is that correct
gentle lady yes madam speaker
and and Representative we're
looking at the the most violent
people and like how the governor
had said she wants to keep those
people off the street and I
agree with that at that's what a
been fighting for along with a
bunch the bills are presented
and voted with that we want to
keep the most violent of the
violent off of the streets we
stop having repeat offenders
that will go out and do more
serious crimes and we're trying
to clean up the crime issue in
New Mexico.
Thank you for the gentle lady
and
One other question is that are
these.
Provisions in section F. I guess
my question would be.
And I'm not a lawyer so forgive
me forgive me gentle lady so.
First degree child abuse.
I'm I'm assuming that is the
worst of the worst.
Madam chair and representative
yet anything.
When I made this ammendment I
try to think of the most serious
violent felony offenders and
also go by what it says in our
state as with a service
following offenders and
personally anybody who does
anything to a child is the worst
of the worst and should not be
out it's not beginning have time
and should not be getting credit
for anything and they should be
the ones that spend the time
locked up to do their crime do
the time for the crime.
Thank you gentle lady for at
answering my questions I stand.
In approval of this ammendment
thank you so much thank you
there's further debate on the
amendment someone from Chavis
and Lincoln County
representative Nibert.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe and
Bernalillo you'll yes I will
thank you thank you madam
speaker gentle lady so.
The crux of your amendment is
to.
Do what Madam speaker and gentle
lady.
Thank you madam chair the crux
of this is that.
We want to remove the serious
violent offenders we want to
stick with the theme that we've
been hearing.
And this particular session
which is to keep the most
dangerous the dangers people
locked up.
The amendment also does not we
strike.
We start this section that we
move back on page five section
twenty two that that goes back
to from fifteen days to thirty
days because we want the most
violent of the violent
criminals.
To do their time and without
giving them the luxury.
And the benefits of this twice
the rate of the per family what
I'm trying to do with this
ammendment.
Basically honestly is to keep
the worst the worst people
locked up and having them do
their time and not allowing them
to have these privileges of
twice the rate of minimum wage
and allowing and also keep them
in for a longer period of time
instead of giving them the
luxury of fifteen days they're
going to do the thirty.
Madam speaker and gentle lady is
that something that was your
idea or where did this idea come
from.
Thank you madam speaker and
representative so I don't know
if you remember the last session
I did a whole bunch of
amendments to try to keep sex
offenders off the street and not
give them half time so this is a
collaborative effort with
knowing that I'm the person who
is always trying to keep our sex
offenders off the street and not
giving them any leniency and
remember this bill also says
convicted.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
I thank you read a quote and so.
If the.
Thrusts.
Of.
A lot of legislation this
session
is based on.
A review of our criminal justice
system and am crimes are being
committed.
And is that
of effort that has received
great attention not only in the
news but.
With them.
This administration.
Thank you madam speaker and and
Representative so yes we've seen
the theme of this session is
we're supposed to be along with
working with the budget we're
supposed to be trying to fix the
crime issue because I'm a tell
you my constituents are tired of
us being the worst and
everything especially in the
crime I'm in Albuquerque of a
section of Albuquerque member
land county and some of the
biggest issues are the crime
issues and the things I keep
hearing over and over and over
again is Representative Lord
please fix the crime issue I'm
begging you and I don't know if
you went out to the Vigil last
night.
That was heartbreaking to hug
the parents and family members.
For their family members been
murdered and I haven't talked
about this but one of my very
good friends his sixteen year
old son was just murdered in
Albuquerque and it breaks my
heart I can go to the funeral
because we were here crime is a
genuine opposition I don't I
can't understand why this would
not be a from amendment cause us
as representatives are one of
our jobs besides doing the
a budget is to keep the
community safe and this
ammendment is to keep the
community safe thank you.
madam speaker and gentle lady so
the the whole thrust of the
amendment is to try to keep the
violent offenders.
From receiving.
maybe the.
You see provisions that are
provided in this bill.
That correct chair
representative you're exactly
correct.
Them to Madam speaker and.
Surprise if the whole thrust of
much of what we're doing this
session is to try to deal with
the violent offenders and to
make sure that they.
all are not back on the streets
and receive of this
Receive certain benefits that it
seems to me that this should of
been accepted as as friendly and
so with that madam speaker and
gentle lady thank you for
explaining that and and
answering our questions.
There's further debate on the
amendment gently.
From Santa Fe County
Representative Romero thank you
madam speaker I just want to
clarify for the body when it
comes to how we are allowed to
amend bills and bring the
possibility of amendment our
house rules state that we shall
not revise or amend the
provisions of our laws.
By reference to its title only
but the section there of as
revised amended or extended
shall be set out in full in each
section being amended to be
contained in a separate section
of the amending bill Madam
speaker Representative this
tends this
Amendment as presented would
basically change the elements of
the bill in total this is a a
fine fee and cost bill this
actually creates.
A new definition for this bill
about violent offenses which
then changes the merits of the
bill and therefore the title
would have to be changed this is
what we would use the term log
rolling with if we were to
accept this amendment without
having it go through the
committee process without
ensuring that it was following
the rules of our house Madam
speaker Representative.
Madam speaker.
Speaker for the there's further
debate on the amendment
representative of Montoya.
Mexico address the the
discussion of logrolling.
Thank you madam speaker madam
speaker this would not be log
logrolling because violent
crimes is is within the general
term of crimes and so madam
speaker and gentle lady this is
not expanding it beyond what is
currently in the bill itself it
just further defines one section
with in the section of crime so
madam speaker and and gentle and
gentle lady I do not believe and
if if this were to be talking
about a different section of law
that would that would be one
thing the only reason the title
changes because it addressed a
specific subsection of that
section madam speaker so this is
not log rolling.
Thank you gentleman there's
further debate on the amendment
of the gentle lady from Dona Ana
representative representative
Cadena.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Santa and Santa Fe counties
yield.
Generated.
Yes I do thank you madam chair
thank you madam speaker gentle
lady in the presentation of the
amendment I keep hearing
repeated that this is about
keeping offenders off the street
keeping the worst of the worst
locked up Madam speaker gentle
lady.
It might you might you confirm
to me that you understand HB
eighty one is not changing
sentencing not changing
conditions of release not
changing conditions of
confinement is not addressing in
any way the number of days that
someone would be locked up for
any offense or a failure to pay
and it would certainly not be
adjusting in any way the number
of days that someone would be
incarcerated after being
convicted for a serious violent
offence is that accurate for you
madam lady brought speaker
gentle lady.
Madam speaker and a
representative I would question
you on that just say at the end
of this bill it's a sentencing
bill so there for this does have
to do with sentencing and we are
addressing.
Relating to the course.
Madam speaker gentle lady we
absolutely are related to the
process addressing the
procedures related to the courts
but again Madam speaker gentle
lady we are not doing anything
HB eighty one and I'd offered
nothing coming in your amendment
actually changes it changes the
sentencing that relates to the
convictions of anyone in these
criminal statutes or certainly
within the serious violent
offender list that you've
offered in the amendment.
Madam chair representative I
would disagree with that just
because this does have to do
with.
How long a person has to do
their community service if
somebody goes in and they have
to do community service if we
remove that half of the amount
then that means there is a
variation how much time they're
going to have to do the
community service and they no
longer have the luxury of
getting this double time to do
their community service so it
does I mean.
We could argue all day about
what it does but I'm telling you
doing community service is an
extension of your criminal
sentencing.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
would just say that's an
accurate.
Madam chair representative and I
would say that's an accurate.
Madam speaker gentle lady might
you demonstrate where in your
amendments that you're actually
doing anything to keep someone
incarcerated than they would be
otherwise under the the
proposals within eighty eighty
one.
One second please.
Madam chair and representative
so in this bill we have a
section where the people that
are indigent.
So madam chair representative so
if somebody is deemed to be
indigent then they won't.
They won't spend much time in
jail under this bill.
Madam speaker gentle lady that
is not correct.
Madam chair representative would
be based on the fines.
Madam speaker gentle lady you're
conflating two things here
you're conflating someone
sentence which would come from
the judiciary and determine how
long for instance if they had a
felony conviction there under
the custody of the New Mexico
corrections department that is
completely separate than what's
happening in this bill in which
we're addressing the ways that
fines and fees are assessed and
collected for folks once they've
been leveled as part of their
legal debt.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
would like to add again that
this bill is actually an agency
bill that was brought by the New
Mexico sentencing commission I
failed to introduce my witnesses
today and I'll take the
opportunity to do so now I have
with me Douglas carver the
deputy director of the New
Mexico sentencing commission
money called legislative
director for the fines and fees
organization what's important to
share is that The New Mexico's
sentencing commission is made up
of over fourteen state agency
partners including the New
Mexico corrections department
the dust and DPS the department
of public safety I'm proud that
over a two year process of those
three agencies among many others
both collaborated to craft build
and eventually endorsed this
legislation before they brought
it to me and asked us for
introduction in the session.
Chair Mister Representative so
with a serious violent criminal
under bill.
Who is deemed to be indigent.
Madam chair representative so
with a serious violent criminal
under your bill who is dean
engine to spend less time and
lock up due to fines.
You madam chair and madam
speaker and gentle lady.
Anyone in New Mexico that is
convicted of a criminal offense
will be sentenced and then face
the conditions of that sentence
whether it be appropriations a
term of incarceration ankle
monitoring whatever it will be
HB eighty one will not affect or
deviate from that sentence in
any way what H. B. eighty eight
eighty one does and the section
you're referring to is offer and
and put in front of the
judiciary again a codification
of rules they've already
established through the AOC to
make sure that there is an
inquiry leveled around someone's
ability to pay.
maybe madam to madam speaker and
gentle lady where your confusion
stems from is that yes today for
all those New Mexicans who have
not had the dollars in their
bank account or the resources to
pay these fines are fees what's
currently happening is that our
local governments are spending
our taxpayer dollars to lock up
these New Mexicans simply
because they did not have the
capacity to pay for locking them
up for failure to pay what is at
play here is that right now if
you get locked up to pay down or
work down here provide a few
mounts then you get credited for
the hours that you're in jail at
an hourly rate that pulls down
that that overall dollar amount
that you owe it is possible that
in an indigent person would
would.
That we would not be paying to
lock up in an indigent person if
HB when it came to Platt came to
play again we would not be
impacting their overall sentence
but yes it's possible but if
they don't have the ability to
pay we would not be paying to
lock them up because they did
not have a fines or be ready.
Madam chair representative the
question I have does that
include serious violent
criminals.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
serious violent offenders again
these are conviction fees are
likely spending decades in
prison and of course facing the
punitive conditions and
punishment that comes along with
those heinous crimes and they
are paying for that I'd say bye
bye losing liberty and being
locked up because of those
crimes and convictions.
So madam chair and
representative of state you're
saying as Senator is violent
criminals will have the
advantage of this bill with
double the
double the amount of minimum
wage and by doing well to start
with that question so that
they'll going to reap the
benefits of this is one trying
to ask you.
Madam chair gentle lady I'm I'm
not quite sure I understand your
question what I would say is
that if they are convicted of a
serious violent offence they
will be facing a sentence of
incarceration for a pretty long
time and as such will be have
their ability to pay assessed
upon those conditions of
confinement.
Thank you madam chair
representative so I guess what
I'm trying to ask you is if
somebody rapes a child and they
are convicted they get the
luxury of getting twice the rate
of the prevailing federal state
county municipal hourly.
No wage with this bill.
Madam speaker gentle lady yes
but that would not mean they got
out of prison early or would
return to our streets they would
still have their underlying
sentence it's called the J. and
just when you get to the
corrections department the
judgment sentence that tells the
corrections department how long
they are required to be locked
up or potentially on a probation
and parole term at the end of
their incarceration.
Generated done and are you are
you through with your computer
question the amendment.
Madam chair gentle lady just.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you madam speaker I move
to table the amendment.
We got a motion to table house
affirmative one to house bill
eighty one vote of yes the
amendment is table the vote of
no and the man is not table the
vote is now open.
That is.
Yes.
The health.
The clerk to call those members
on the board without a recorded
vote Representative Alcon.
Thank you.
Results for the house of a
regular basis.
I got the message.
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash is yes
Representative will cost.
Representative Bonga is yes
Representative Crowder.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
is yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Representative Miguel Garcia is
a yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente is a
yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew is no.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
All Representative Roybal
Caballero is yes Representative
Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo is
yes.
We will go on is yes
Representative Alcon is yes.
I voted forty three in the
affirmative and twenty four and
the negative on the motion to
amend amendment one house bill
eighty one has been tabled.
We're back on the bill there's
further debate.
I'm sorry Representative are you
still have the floor.
Thank you madam speaker and
Representative.
While I don't know what to say
anymore about this bill and
discussing close and I can't
believe that we would allow
luxuries to people that right
children and that's all of the
state thank you I yield my time.
There's further debate on the
bill for to go to the gentleman
from Colfax more every rebound
San Miguel Representative
Montoya.
And will the thank you and with
the gentle lady from Dona ana
county please.
Thank you madam chair you'll
deal to the gentleman from
Colfax mode everybody of a and
San Miguel counties thank you so
much I stand in support of this
legislation and I I just want to
share a little bit of history
about one year ago if I had the
honor of working with the
sentencing commission on the
general version of this bill.
I want to thank Representative
Chasey for working on that bill
as well.
What is so important I am normal
here.
I don't have a deep
understanding of the juvenile
justice system with the criminal
justice system but when I see
legislation that affects the
health and wellness of human
beings.
Families it is meaningful.
Since the bill house bill one
eighty three passed last year.
I had seven young people in my
town of Espanola arguably the
epicenter.
Concern is growing drug abuse
poverty it's a beautiful
beautiful place but there are
serious challenges.
Those children and the families
have come to me.
And I've seen the efficacy of
the policy that we passed.
Simply did not have the ability
to pay.
By eliminating those fees.
Them a pathway to
rehabilitation.
To course correct.
To nourish themselves and
provide a pathway that is
productive I believe with my
heart and that's why I stand
today to support funds from
eighty eighty one if that this
adult version does essentially
the same.
It does not affect the
sentencing pieces it's talking
about what really matters to
people.
It has the decency of humanity.
And the type of criminal justice
reform that frankly this state
and this nation needs more of I
commend your work I have no
questions I just rise in full
support and admiration for the
work thank you.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Lee County
Representative Scott.
will we'll turn lady from
Donahue.
Yes madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Lee County.
Course of regional and.
The gentle lady's amendment that
was just too troubled.
I looked at the community
service provision.
Was.
No.
Allowing twice.
The prevailing wage for
community service.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
Thanks committee service jobs
require a.
To.
The special skills.
Education.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
it's possibly.
It's it's possible that they do
it depends of course madam
speaker gentleman's on the kind
of interesting commitments and
needs that that person might see
when they look around to their
neighborhood and their families
and the schools and and figure
out what it would look like to
actually show up in a meaningful
way so quite possibly yes and
there's others I would imagine
that would not require any
particular background.
We'll find.
We're.
Wage.
Some specific connotations with
the department of workforce
solutions applies.
It's Carol would use was very.
Language.
Madam speaker and gentlemen
where we have prevailing in H.
B. eighty one is existing
language not new language so
what we've done is to change the
rate you're accurate and in
articulating that but the
prevailing languages existing
language.
Speaker gentle lady.
For answering the question that
this will.
Wages.
ministers met madam speaker and
gentleman no it's the prevailing
minimum wage but the prevailing
in certain sections of this law
was already existing it's not
new language.
To ensure.
Places on the legislation.
Madam speaker gentle lady we're
we're now closed during.
For each of labor.
For each twenty four hours.
Of
service.
Jail.
Toured this.
Funds and freeze Senator.
Madam speaker and gentlemen yes.
Madam speaker gentle.
I
should
for for over time.
Is.
Yes.
Which Madam speaker gentlemen
I'm not sure what you mean by
your over time speculation.
Is generally considered to.
More than four hours of service.
So madam speaker gentleman I
even asked the question with
that context.
So twenty four hours a day of
service.
Substantial of four hours.
The time
experience our our.
Madam speaker gentleman no.
Print journalism I was actually.
You would say that.
Generated that's all the
questions thank you.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo county
Representative rams.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady.
Yield.
Certainly madam speaker I yield
to the gentleman from Bernalillo
county.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady Mr want to take you to page
four.
Line twenty two.
And I'd like to read the new
language so cost.
The costs associated with the
representation in any trial
including the cost of an
attorney.
The cost of depositions experts
exhibits are other trial costs.
Let's assume.
The we have an individual before
the courts.
And as you say.
Over here on page two.
One six.
You can only use ten percent of
their self reported income.
So I tell this person tells
record might self reported
monthly income is a thousand
dollars.
So that two percent is twenty
dollars.
But.
Has a three day trial.
And I'm not including experts
exhibits and depositions.
The cost of that attorney
representing him is about
fifteen thousand dollars.
Is going to turn that into the
court.
That's the way I read that is
that correct.
Madam speaker gentlemen I mean
just to make sure I'm
understanding your question if
you'll see here on page the
first page you turn this to page
four this is within what's used
in the avid indigent defense act
so if he if the if the defender
potentially have that monthly
income they would not be
considered indigent.
Mr speaker gentlemen like many
benefits that come through
government provision date would
have to do a calculation that
looked at the family size and
household of that defendant then
of course there self reported
income would come into play and
there would be a calculation
used like the one used by the
loss of a law office of the
public defender's today to
determine whether they qualified
for and for for defense under
the indigent defense act.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
don't believe that this says.
That you have to go to the
public defender and be indigent
the way I read this I can go
higher.
A private attorney to represent
me.
Go to trial in hand the court.
The cost of that attorney's.
Madam speaker gentleman's but
the indigent defense act only
applies to needy persons.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
are you still reading this the I
can go ahead and go to the court
and have that included in the
analysis of the cost of that of
the overall cost of the trial
and then
go ahead and have the judge do
whatever.
On the cost according to your
new one your new legislation.
And I think that this is a huge
area.
I don't think that this from
what I can tell want to
appropriations.
And I can't believe that the
court is not looking at the
overall cost because every time
the court.
Comes before this legislature
there are crying for more money.
And clearly this is going to
cost more money.
Madam speaker gentle gentlemen I
actually would argue that it's
not clear it's not clear enough
and as IT took on sponsorship of
this legislation of HB eighty
one I myself started to have
pretty significant questions
about the way that our
government is following the
amount of fees assess to the
amount of fees collected and
finally where those fees are put
back into these vital services
and programs that we say and
believe are good for New
Mexicans so madam speaker gentle
lady what I've learned over the
course of the last couple of
months working on this issue is
that frankly we don't have any
evidence that there would be a
hit to New Mexico's general fund
because again we are not
eliminating all fines and fees
we are instead talking about
leveling an increase on
someone's ability to pay before
we assess and then attempt to
collect those fees so as it
stands madam speaker and
gentleman it's commonly held
understanding that the money
coming in through the threes
through these fines and fees is
coming from New Mexicans who
have the ability to pay them
today and should HB eighty one
become law those same.
Groups of people in New Mexico
that have the resources to pay
these fines and fees will still
be assessed and collected they
will still have those fines and
fees assessed and collected just
as they do today.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
and I know we had this
discussion and ginger Geoffery
does the judge have the ability
to suspend finds.
Madam speaker and gentlemen
today the judge has the ability
to just suspend fines but not
fees.
Madam speaker gentle lady high
have told you that I've been in
court.
And have watch the judge go
ahead and suspend fines and fees
and the best example I can give
you of that.
Is an individual that was placed
in jail and they give credit for
time served and that's for
everything more fees everything.
But let's move on just a moment
and talk about.
Let's assume.
The I'm a college kid and I'm
driving a hundred miles an hour
up in the gallery below of our
to forty mile an hour zone.
And I get a ticket and I go to
court.
Since I'm in college do I pay of
fines or fees.
Madam speaker and gentleman it
depends.
Madam speaker gentle lady you
have in your bill that I can get
credit for going to go to school
and having trading so I'm not
going to pay for that ticket.
Which brings me to my next point
the the it doesn't show or
doesn't work to deter future
behavior.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
believe the section you're
referring to on page two section
be first of all that is a maze
so that the person that was
being faced with that fine or
fee would then have the
opportunity to present
themselves in front of the judge
and asked that their finer
Phoebe converted into community
service but Mr madam speaker and
gentle lady if they had the
ability to pay that would not be
weights they would still have
the obligation of that fine or
fee and then they would have
their own decision point to
decide whether or not they like
to pay that or whether they'd
like to work it down on
community service but just
because they were in college
would not mean there is an
automatic erasure of that fine
or fee again it would start with
the increase on whether or not
they had the ability to pay.
Madam speaker and gentle lady is
one of the fees that's collected
is set for the
A jury of soul of the June two
pagers.
Madam speaker gentleman there is
a variety of fees that exists
that go back to court
appropriations yes.
Madam speaker gentle lady I'll
take that as a yes is one of the
fees there's a D. W. I. fi
there's brain injury Fiji but
let's go ahead and talk about
the jury of witness for the
that program every year.
and and I'm talking about during
the year.
The court goes before.
The legislative finance
committee in requests an
additional appropriation.
They're always not having enough
money for that fee.
And so I find it ironic that the
court is going well yeah that
study look like it's going to be
bad in the FIR.
But when you look at all these
families that are in here.
In the photo programs at the
fund there's a domestic violence
fee.
All of that are are all of the
fees and now included in house
bill two for those agencies as
organizations receiving the
money to fund them.
Madam speaker gentleman this
certainly is part of my
motivation for running HB eighty
one there are incredibly
valuable programs that exist
across the state whether they be
in DV prevention or work to
resource and rehabilitate folks
struggling with addiction and
it's my belief that if these
programs are evidence based or
promising practices we should
also make sure we're investing
in them in a significant
consistent reliable way so that
we can be more responsive and
responsible ins in spending
taxpayer dollars
I would also like to add as
we've shared earlier Madam
speaker and gentleman that if
there are questions about any
deviations from revenues
collected we will certainly have
more information and a watchful
eye of what that looks like to
date the FIR as you might look
at madam speaker and gentleman
has widely varying estimates of
what could happen because again
today we don't have any accurate
information about the
distinction between fees that
are assessed and fees that are
collected so we know how much
the courts ask for some how we
don't quite know how much
they're bringing in and to what
purpose of those dollars
actually landed so this actually
to me is also good governance
bill so that we can pull
together not be paying better
attention to what's happening
with those taxpayer dollars.
Speaker and gentle lady of body
I think that this is going to be
a huge cost to.
The the court system.
And hit those other programs.
We saw a bill like this last
year and when it became apparent
of the cost of the fees the bill
died.
This bill goes even further than
last year's.
I see that it's going to be very
expensive.
I attended the meeting and where
the governor said we're going to
be tough on crime that was in
Albuquerque.
Yeah we're going to start.
Making criminals and criminal
behavior accountable.
I see this bill as.
Not even approaching this I see
this bill as not being a
deterrent to crime.
And
I think that.
That we need to rethink this
this bill should probably say we
need the court to become more
efficient in how it collects
fees I do agree with you that
they haven't been efficient.
And they don't operate
efficiently and I think that
should be the focus not we're
going to not penalize
individuals who are going to see
this as you know another
revolving door get out of jail
free card thank you madam
speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Cibola McKinley
County the voice in the sky
Representative Alcon.
Thank you all thank you Mr
speaker with me on a yield thank
you madam speaker I do yield to
the gentleman from Cibola
McKinley counties.
The lady I does that with this
was the last gentleman and the
stocking about a jury.
If you were.
If you were to go stayed seven.
Very simply says a jury yes
three collected from them
already demanding trial by jury.
So this has nothing to do with
that what we're talking about
that's just part of the
legislature that the six.
This.
Would not give credit for Jerry
V. to be honest with you.
If you will if you.
The civil suit.
The magistrate court.
You demand a jury trial all it's
going to cost you twenty five
Bucks.
If you don't demand a jury trial
as that will cost you anything
but if you read the cost of a
jury trial to see six years.
Legislative trial for six point
twenty five dollars how much
money the court is losing and
that's the way it does remain
for ever just wanted the things
are not seeing.
On the other assumed that we had
gentle lady that I heard there's
the one above the gentleman is I
was worried about the value must
pay the fees.
The following that but I know
that there is no on that I on
the basement the fees.
Six years to pay the by saying
yes.
It takes six years to do so and
that's the way it works.
Our.
This is a great deal.
We we need judges and seeing
hundreds and hundreds and
hundreds of files sit gap that's
our.
Basically gathered law falls I
think this will be a way that's
going to make life easier for
everybody in the state of New
Mexico and make life easier for
the judges.
And the their life could
continue I I just wore on I.
The only thought is when I go to
section eight the new section.
I really don't think that
section is necessary.
I honestly wonder gentle lady if
you would consider removing
section a from your bill I think
continuing forward because
honestly I think it'll be
removed on the Senate side.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman it's not a
considerations for making at
this moment.
The last.
Overall you have madam speaker a
the lady and it's devastating a
recommendation that I'm making
because I can see that with
everything that we we are
providing right now this is Greg
the leg in excess of what we
need to do and I can almost
guarantee you that when it hits
us Senate Judiciary
it's going to be slashed out and
it would be a lot easier if you
did it.
As early as possible other than
that I am ready to log for your
bill
I think you've done a good job
thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady who will not.
This for the debate lady from
granted although and Sierra
Representative Dow.
Okay we'll go to the gentleman
from Lincoln Ontario counties
Representative Cook.
Thank you madam speaker will
generally yield.
Yes madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you madam speaker and and
gentle lady appreciate you
bringing this bill like that is
you know I voted for the
committee.
but just a short time ago our
friend Representative rings.
Came over any pointed something
out to me that.
Gave me a little concern and
it's and it's that cost section
and I I was trying to pay
attention to the conversation
with him.
And the representative of all
culminating catch Representative
of all clones points I was in a
sidebar with Representative
Strickler over here.
But you know I'm not I'm not too
concerned about.
The state's budget.
Or anything you know or the the
concerns they re was brought up
but.
I just I just speaking as an
attorney.
On page four.
Line one it says is essentially
says that a defendant whose
order sent to jail will receive
credit.
Towards his costs.
It twenty four times the
prevailing minimum wage and then
you scan down see what costs are
and says costs associated with
representation at a trial it
doesn't say whether you're
represented by government
attorney or private attorney it
simply says that your costs will
be credited against your bill to
to an attorney so.
Can you.
Explain to me why I shouldn't be
concerned by private defense
attorney should be concerned
with this bill and when they
Representative client and rack
up a fifty thousand dollar bill
on a trial and and they lose and
and there I get sent to jail can
you help me work through that.
Madam speaker and gentlemen
again as we're using this in the
indigent defense act only
applies to needy persons and as
you continue reading that
definition down in section D.
that's where it names and Red
River and clarifies the
definition of the needy person.
Thank you.
Madam speaker gentle lady can
you point me to the page in line
on that my apologies madam
speaker gentlemen on page five
line eight section do.
So madam speaker gentleman the
reason it says courts is because
courts will hold that
responsibility in the
jurisdictions where the public
defenders do not have a brick
and mortar office.
Madam chair and generally
appreciate that what about your
your.
Your attorneys out there that
have contracts with the public
defender do they still do that
manager.
Madam chair gentlemen they do.
And how would it affect the
private attorney on the street
is got a contract with the
public defender's office Madam
speaker.
Madam speaker gentleman I'm not
sure that this legislation.
Addresses that question.
Okay I'm not sure either and I
guess that's.
Continues to give me a little
bit of doubt now that about a
bill that I uh have supported
and I really like the concept of
what you're doing just from a
very
You know I don't eat I don't
even do criminal defense but it
it it's a bothers me a little
bit that there are some criminal
defense lawyers I and I really
respect the work that they do
when I think this could
potentially harm them and.
Madam.
Speaker and gentle lady can you
answer one more question for me
absolutely madam speaker and
gentleman Madam speaker speaker
and gentle lady what is
contributions meeting.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
will fall gentleman willful.
Willful
when you're at madam speaker
gentlemen when you're acting in
content.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
why didn't you just say that.
Madam speaker gentleman isn't a
term of art.
Madam speaker and generally I
don't know I don't like big
words like that so I just that
caught my eye and.
Thought I'd ask you so madam
speaker gentle lady I appreciate
your time.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman about to the gentle
lady from grant Hidalgo on
Sierra Representative Dow.
Thank you madam speaker the
gentility also.
Madam speaker do you.
Madam speaker internally so I
just wanna make sure I've been
listening to the conversation
this didn't go through my
committees but the over arching
theme that I'm hearing is that
we are placing a hardship.
On the courts.
And the person who has been
given a fine or a fee whose low
income.
And that the judge and the point
want to waive both fines and
fees but the current law does
not allow them to do so is that
correct.
Madam speaker that last
statement in particular is
correct.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
why are you not just presenting
a bill.
That means existing lawns as.
That courts and judges can.
Or may waive fines and fees and
then we're leaving this up to
the judges based on their
deliberation and what they know
about each individual case why
why all of this big complicated
bill rather than just saying.
That the the court shall or may
waive fines and fees.
Madam speaker gentle lady you
certainly have had many years
here to see that sometimes the
simplicity gets lost in existing
law and what we've done here is
make sure that we have
continuity and consistency to
have the impact that we desire
in introducing this bill I would
also add and madam speaker
gentle lady to your first
comment about the hardship for
potential hardship on the
judiciary what's really
important for us to name and no
is the age of eighty one does
not limit a judge's discretion
in imposing their conditions of
convictions such as probation
jail and other punitive and and
rehabilitative act
rehabilitative activities this
again merely applies to the
leveling assessment and
potential collection of fines
and fees thank you madam speaker
thank you to let you could you
please describe specifically
what you are learning the
court's ability to do.
Madam speaker gentle lady we are
standardizing the process so we
are actually putting into
statutes principles that the AOC
in the New Mexico courts already
established in their own rules
what we're standardizing here is
requiring that payment plans be
allowed and thirty day
installments then we're setting
limits on those payment amounts
should someone be on an
installment plan that would be
capped at two percent of a
person's monthly net income or
ten dollars whichever is
greater.
Guy.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you lady.
So explains.
Thank you madam speaker
internally so could you please
explain to me again why it's too
simple to simply allow the
courts to have discretion in
fines and fees.
And madam speaker and gentle
lady we certainly done that with
this legislation we've also made
sure that the appropriate
sections of law that are
implicated in this this policy
decision are dressed in H. B.
eighty one.
Thank you madam speaker so in
your current rewrite of the bill
courts have discretion to waive
fines and fees.
Madam speaker gentle lady yes
thank you madam speaker do they
have the discretion to impose
fines and fees.
Madam speaker gentle lady they
do but they are required and
instructed to first level an
inquiry that assesses someone's
ability to pay.
Thank you madam speaker
internally and you're sure that
the courts ask for this and
they're saying we we need this
in order to have discussions in
to release the burden of of of
the cost of imposing fines and
fees fund this is something the
courts have asked for Madam
speaker gentle lady I never said
the courts of us for the state
have said that this bill was
brought to me by The New
Mexico's sentencing commission
that has over fourteen members
agent members that are agencies
of other state departments
including AOC but also the
department of public safety the
dust and the New Mexico
corrections department there's
also representation on the
sentencing commission of three
judges who all stood in full
support and voted to endorse
this legislation.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and who appointed that
commission the sixteen member
commission.
What is this a nonprofit is this
a legislative appointed
commission where they come from.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
this is statutory the the the
commission as is detailed
instant our New Mexico statutes
there's twenty seven members
they represent over fourteen
state agencies the governor as
we should expect the governor
has a couple of appointments as
do leadership in both of our
chamber is reflecting both of
our political parties thank you
madam speaker thank you
generally I think the thing that
is most disappointing to me.
Well we've been debating this
bill.
Another bill.
That could hold violent
criminals responsible for their
actions being heard in the
Senate.
There's been a whole lot of talk
about crime there's even an.
The executive branch holding
press conferences.
Vigil for victims of crime that
that members of my.
Party who are.
Committed to seeing criminals
behind bars went by to be part
of an and how did is bipartisan
and yet what I'm seeing is
extremely disappointing.
Does a bunch of talk and no
action and I'm I cannot support
this bill thank you madam
speaker.
Next we have the gentleman from
San Juan Representative Montoya.
Thank you madam speaker does
gently from million a year yes
madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you generally I to have
questions about on page four.
Under the definitions used in
the indigent defense act.
Costs means the costs associated
with representation in trial.
Including cost of internet and
the cost of the depositions
experts exhibits another trial
costs and the costs and fees
imposed by the courts pursuant
to statute resulting from
conviction or the issuance of a
bench warrant Madam speaker and
and generally.
That language already exist in
the didn't indigent defense act.
Madam speaker and gentleman no
this is new language As
indicated here.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
All of these changes are within
the indigent defense act Madam
speaker gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentlemen in
section two in that starting on
line nineteen of those
definitions yes.
So madam speaker Angela I guess
my question is are we or are we
we're performing multiple
sections of law here then.
Is that correct Madam speaker
and gentlemen yes.
Thank you Mr speaker and Angela
the best we can gently.
Because I'm not seeing that the
title it it appears as if for.
As the term we use earlier log
rolling.
where we're trying to determine
what the any person would pay.
But we're also amending
language.
In the in the definition section
of the indigent defense act.
Madam speaker gentle and
everything in the bill relates
to court costs and court
processes yes the cost across
these different sections of law.
Speaker gentle and that's why in
the title it's relating to
courts.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady I just and and I'm
wondering if that might cause
some problems
On the other on the other
chamber so madam speaker and
gentle lady I I do believe in in
changing the definition.
I'm not sure that was necessary
Madam speaker and gentle lady
because we we maybe introducing
new costs.
that can be.
held.
On the two the person.
is going to be incurring having
to pay fees so it says in the
back the the in the last section
that.
Senate all convention in new
material.
That.
If a person is determined to be
ready under the individual
intended to factset Defense act.
That these costs will not be
associated so I'm reading.
the item a line twenty one under
section two on page four.
As being associated with page
fourteen beginning online
nineteen.
So.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
maybe introducing.
More costs.
Into the indigent defense
backed.
That if.
The individual is not determined
to be needy.
It looks like all of these new.
costs that you've put in here.
Could be assessed now.
To the indigent to the person
who is not determined to be
needed.
I I'm not sure if you're if that
is the the other that could be
an unintended consequence by
changing that in the definition.
Madam speaker gentle lady no
that is the intention because of
their the defendant is not
assessed to be needy then they
will be paying for their own
attorney and will not have an
attorney provided by the law
office of the public defender
for have the other costs
potentially waived.
Thank you madam speaker and and
generally I'm I'm just reading
this that.
Once again if you look at the in
in the back if they're not
determine to be needy to that
level because there's a very
specific.
Definition of needy on page
five.
The courts then if they did not
to determine to be at that level
of need could potentially now.
Charge all these costs.
So I'm just saying I'm not sure
there could be some unintended
consequences here I'm not going
to debate that with you here but
as this moves forward if I were
you I would make sure that
you're not unintentionally.
Adding new costs new fees that
someone could be charged ago I
think it would defeat the
purpose of your bill thank you
madam chair Madam speaker.
Seeing no further debate
generated close.
Madam speaker I move a do pass
on H. B. eighty one.
We're on final passage of HB
eighty one the vote is now open.
Is about to close.
Click to call those members on
the board without a recorded
vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash votes
yes Representative Boone cough
yes Representative boom call
votes yes Representative Harry
Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente both
yes Representative Lord
absolutely now Representative
Lord votes no Representative
Maestas.
Yes Representative my S. as both
yes Representative McQueen yes
Representative queen votes yes
Representative Nibert.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative Scott.
Representative Scott votes no
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend both no
Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo
votes yes.
The forty five in the
affirmative twenty one in the
negative house bill eighty one
has passed the house.
For now on item number three.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill fifty
five Ginnelly from Bernalillo.
Are you ready to present the
bill thank you madam speaker
would you get me to that point.
Reflect that all action
necessary for placing House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill fifty five on
final passage is been taken and
is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
substitution.
Gently from Bernalillo thank you
madam chair in my expert witness
today is Larry Horan who is the
general counsel for the Rio
metro regional transit district
this is the most exciting bill
you're going to hear today
folks.
I'm going to introduce a bill
introduced a one word floor
amendment and then my three
other Sanchez will say a few
words so you know what the
agenda is
the house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill fifty
five stab wishes and enacts the
public private partnership act
and this comes on the foundation
of the work of many many house
members three of whom are
sponsoring it with me today it
allows public partners to enter
into public private partnership
agreements to facilitate public
projects it creates a public
private partnership board that
creates the public private
partnership projects funded some
teams sometimes I'll just say P.
three for short providing for an
exemption to the procurement
cord
authorizing grants loans and
bonds legislative powers and
duties of providing a delayed
repeal which is new since it was
passed unanimously on the floor
and twenty nineteen.
And it requires three point what
I like about this it really stab
wishes accountability
transparency communication of
any public partner
Wanting to enter into this.
Okay.
It's a prudent use of public.
Money with the weirdness of
private parties madam speaker I
have eighty one word amendment.
I believe it's been passed out.
It's number two two two five six
two point one.
And it just goes to page seven
line seven strikes to replaces
it with shall can I move the
amendment.
The latest movie amendment.
Gentlelady just explained that
the one word if you could please
yes if you go to page seven.
It says
part thirteen find that
operations and maintenance of a
public project except a public
project that is broadband
infrastructure shall be
performed by the public partner.
Is there any debate on the
amendment I move house floor
amendment number what.
I'm seeing no debate the
amendment is adopted.
Is there objection to the
amendment.
Seeing that you have an amended
bill thank you madam chair and I
I would like to yield to us it's
one of my co sponsors chairwoman
Patty Lundstrom.
Ready thank you madam speaker
thank you gentle lady I would
first like to madam speaker
gentle lady compliment you for
all of your hard work I am one
of legislators over the years
myself and Representative Jane
E. Powdrell Culbert the work
very hard on these P. three
built over the years but I need
to compliment you because as I
look at our agenda for today you
get a heck of a voting record
here
that is very very good to see
what the what the vote count was
that came out of both of your
committees so I need to
compliment you for that Madam
speaker gentle lady.
And it generally I stand in
strong support of house bill
fifty five the public private
partnership legislation
certainly it's an important tool
for economic development
particularly with the new
opportunities regarding
transportation infrastructure
development.
Without madam speaker and gentle
lady.
We're behind you and I hope this
thing flies service with as
quickly as it did with your
committees thank you madam
speaker thank you gentle lady.
Thank you gentle lady from
McKinley and San Juan and I
would like to turn it over to
the spawn another sponsor of the
gentle lady from Eddy County.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you gentle lady from
Bernalillo I am very honored to
be a co sponsor of this bill
from what I've noticed is that
the team of co sponsors I
believe each one of us has at
some time.
Or another served on the house
transportation committee.
And madam speaker gentle lady
through the years we've been
studying P. threes
we've made great progress and
I'd like to see this move
forward.
Madam speaker and members of the
body so a lot of our communities
are in great need of
infrastructure and I believe
there are many people who would
step up as partners to help
those projects.
Come about and so I think what
this does is set up a system of
protections for risk management
for the parties involved and
just would I think open up the
gates for capital to flow so
that our communities committees
can benefit from public projects
so madam speaker gentle lady I
again thank you I think all the
members who have through the
years supported this idea and I
fully support your bill and I'll
just mention that this is house
bill fifty five in my house
district number is fifty five
kind of like that coincidence
thank you madam speaker.
I think the gentle lady and
madam speaker
our third other sponsor on the
floor I'd like to invite
the gentle lady from Santa Fe
County district forty four.
Thank you madam chair.
And and gentle lady from
Bernalillo yes we have been
sponsoring P. three I think
since two thousand thirteen
fourteen and the late Larry
Larranaga was the first one to
bring the concept to the house
of representatives it's seeing
nationally B. three has seen
many different forms and it's
doing many different things
throughout the country there are
states that are working across
state lines to provide
employment opportunities.
For their communities.
New Mexico P. threes are already
being utilized they're just not
being utilized by the state of
New Mexico and though with
flourishing in dollars now we
know that this is not going to
last so I'm really hoping that
this time that the fifty five
fifty five plays a role in it
and that we get this through
because they can certainly
expand the dollars that are
available here in the state of
New Mexico but throughout the
session and throughout this past
year we've talked a lot about
jobs and we've talked a lot
about business development what
better way to develop both jobs
and business development other
than working hand in hand with
the
business private community and
the state of New Mexico so thank
you.
Madam speaker and lady from
Bernalillo.
Thank you gentle lady and madam
chair with that we're open for
questions.
Thank you generally differently
other is debate on the bill on
we're gonna go to the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady of yes I do I yield
to the gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you
Gentle lady I just wondering of
I've seen the previous P. three
bills that have come through you
know are there any limitations
on this or is there.
Is this open to virtually any
type of private.
Public private partnership or.
Is this specific to any one area
for.
Few areas.
Madam chair and representative
thank you for the great question
as you'll see on page three the
public project means and section
eight two calling this number
one the construction or
improvement of a public
transportation facilities or
public transportation
infrastructure other than a toll
road or number two public
construction or improvement of
broadband communications network
facilities this bill limits it
to those two areas of public
projects.
Thank you
Speaker and gentle lady died as
I stated earlier I I support.
B. threes I generally with the
support them that are.
More broad sense there are since
there's so many needs across the
state
I I would see it with the amount
of money that we're talking
about here though to start the
fund I I would imagine you start
small is and and tension would
you say to try and expand in the
future.
Madam chair and representative
I'm sure that many people in
this body you're thinking about
that right now just like you
are.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady did yes that's exactly what
I'm thinking because obviously
broadband is a very specific
area of need right now I'm a
little.
Unsure as to a public
transportation facility or
public transportation
infrastructure.
Other than a toll road I'm I'm
not sure what kind of a private.
Introduce how they would be able
to recover.
of money there could you give an
example of
of something other than a toll
road that this could be
referring to in transportation.
Madam chair and representative
great question an example might
be a city bus route in a given
the agency of holiday.
Thank you for that the madam
speaker and gentle lady if if
you could get a private entity
to come in and we can download
the rail runner on I'm I would
really support this legislation.
Chair representative I was
waiting for that.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for Representative so okay
so some something like public
transportation where they could
charge fees a short.
View of.
Of something maybe even a
covering
In areas where there's not
public transportation maybe some
sort of partnership with.
A cab service or something it
could potentially qualify if
it's not feasible in an area.
Yes
Madam chair representative a
rural bus service for example.
Okay thank you very much I was
just trying to figure out of I
was flipping through this I have
not seen this before today and I
was just flipping through trying
to see what this was limited to
I would love to see this in the
future a greatly expanded
but for for the purpose of today
in the amount of money that
we're talking about I I can see
why would be limiting it I would
hope I would think there's a
number of broadband.
Partners potential partners out
there that
Probably in very quickly even
dilute this fund quickly so
thank you madam speaker thank
you gently.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield please madam chair I yield
to the gentle lady from Travis
county.
Madam speaker gentle lady thank
you very much I've been trying
to find something in your bill
and maybe I just haven't gotten
there yet maybe you can answer
this question for me for me.
We're in there is there any
protection for the public sector
as far as and improve request
might be.
And the gentle lady there is a
piece that protects a private
partner.
From there.
Confidence from their
confidential business for
example only in the case of a
public partnered needing a
specific thing to operate it
would be shared with that public
partner but this is all a
protected information under
contract.
And madam speaker gentle lady
can you tell me where I might be
able to find this in the bill.
Madam chair and and gentle lady
it's actually and it brought for
you have protection of
proprietory information.
And the procurement code but
it's also
let's see.
There's also a paragraph in here
which of course I cannot find.
Madam chair and gentle lady.
Page seven line one.
On page seven line one madam
chair gentle lady.
It says and number twelve
provide for the protection of
proprietary information of the
private partner except as that
information is needed for
operations and maintenance by
public entities or for public
health and safety.
Madam speaker gentle lady thank
you for pointing that out I
guess I missed it when the
restaurant scanned this bill
real real fast to me that's
important if we're going to go
forward with this the public
private partnership I think it's
very important that we do
protect the public aspect of
that and I just wanted it
spelled out and I needed to see
it for myself so madam speaker
gentle lady thank you for that
information.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Santa Fe County
Representative Lujan.
Thank you madam chair and then
well the gentle lady from
Bernalillo county jails.
Yes madam chair and gentle lady
from Santa Fe County I yield
thank you at.
I just wanted to
This building coming from the
front of any of the committees
I'm on but it did come up during
the interim committee and there
are some questions and based
upon the procurement code and
based upon the the proprietory
Protected information so I
wanted to ask
How
are those to come fifteen pieces
and can you explain that and how
if it could be in the future if
they could be potential problems
for this legislation madam
chair.
Speaker.
Madam chair and gentle lady
there's no conflict the business
itself can identify what's
proprietory and we incorporated
feedback from the New Mexico
finance authority as well to
make sure we abided by all the
appropriate statutes.
Thank you madam chair the gentle
lady so this is already being
taken care of in order to
practice through the NMFA is
that correct.
Madam chair and gently through
the procurement code.
The state.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
think that was and I'm just
trying to remember that the
conversation some of the the
the.
The questions we had about this
and I just wanted to make sure
so I appreciate the time and
thank you for answering my
questions.
Seeing no further debate gentle
lady to close.
Madam speaker I now move that
house Judiciary Committee
committee substitute as amended
for house bill fifty I do now
pass.
We are on final passage of the
house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill fifty
five as amended the vote is now
open.
Is about to close.
The clerk to call the roll of
members about a recorded vote.
Representative I'll point.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative bash yes
Representative bash votes yes
Representative boom cost.
Yes Representative boom gravel
yes Representative Harry Garcia
yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero votes yes
Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo
votes yes.
Sixty three in the affirmative
to the negative house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill fifty five as amended has
now passed the house.
Will now go to item number sixty
woman from Bernalillo thank you
to that point.
The record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill fifty six on final
passage has been taken is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution gentleman to
explain the bill thank you madam
speaker members house bill fifty
six in the New Mexico veterinary
practice act it allows for the
ages of the six month temporary
permits to non resident
veterinarian employed or
contracted with the state or
local government to provide
services in nationally
accredited zoo or aquarium with
that'll simple questions.
There is a bait gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln County
representative Nibert thank you
madam chair our madam speaker
will the gentleman from
Bernalillo county yield I gladly
yield to the gentleman from
Chavis.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman.
Morning.
Your legislation I presume
Madam speaker and gentleman that
this was brought about because
of sixty day limitation was not
sufficient to meet the needs of
veterinary needs and certain
places is that correct madam
speaker and gentleman that's
correct.
Them Madam speaker and gentleman
are you aware that the same
issues that may plague some of
these focuses and other
institutions also for a.
There is possibly feed yards.
And I would certainly even small
animal
veterinary clinics where and a
veterinarian
has become ill maybe cancer and
is out for a period of time the
on sixty days that there are
those needs elsewhere as well
the madam speaker and gentleman
are you where those Madam
speaker and gentleman that you
you you provided a lot of great
insight in our last committee
hearing is to those issues as
well yes Sir.
And so madam speaker and.
Gentleman if this need for
veterinarian services in New
Mexico.
Is not just confined to zoos and
aquariums and other governmental
run institutions.
I would submit to you Madam
speaker and gentleman that this.
Issue the lack of veterinarians
generally affects.
The dairy industry my mic of the
woods and I believe it affects
other large operations aware of
cattle or other livestock
presented possibly affects the
horse racing industry I don't
know that I know it affects very
but I'm I and I suspect that
maybe we'll hear some debate on
how it affects the course racing
industry.
But I think there's just need
that that is.
Across the board in New Mexico
we need the ability to secure
out of state veterinarians for
temporary periods of time often
times exceeding sixty days.
Without them having to go
through the licensure program
that would otherwise be required
for them so.
It's with that backdrop that I
believe we need to expand four
of the existing law because
right now the veterinarian from
out of state can come to New
Mexico for up to sixty days.
Practice veterinary medicine
of through this program.
You are now creating your bill
creates a situation that if they
work for a government entity.
They can do that for six months
and it can be extended for one
additional six month period so
up to basically here.
Yet those same needs are needed
in the dairy industry.
And so
Madam speaker and and gentleman
I have prepared an amendment to
address that issue specifically
and it's basically to treat the
government.
And private.
Industry the same.
Technology in the need for
veterinarians across the state
and so what for the amendment
basically of the
of would be to make.
Senator Arnold low level playing
field that we can bring in out
of state veterinarians to New
Mexico for a period of service
six months.
And that could be extended for
an additional six months that
they
get the board to to extend it
them so much Madam speaker and
gentleman with that I would like
to move house floor amendment
number one to house bill fifty
six and I believe it was passed
early today in that two oh two
number is.
To to to.
Five four nine point one.
Thank you gentlemen.
Like a roll call vote.
I will call vote has been
requested.
Gentleman from Bernalillo is is
the from the amendment Madam
speaker John from Travis thank
you for the thought full
amendments we we've talked about
this at length so I do want to
clear up a couple of things
madam speaker and and gentleman
of my bill is not some sort of
government veterinarians bill we
are trying to address a problem
in my community where we don't
have enough
Vent areas that have expertise
in caring for the thousands of
animals that reside at the
Albuquerque's who are so that
this is not some sort of
government program we're
creating this is simply a way to
expand the pool of of
professionals can come into our
state and provide the services I
do not at all disagree with the
needs that you raise because
I've I would assume and I'm not
an expert in this area but I
would assume that those issues
are very real and very true
however this is a very narrowly
tailored bill that I am caring
Ford on behalf of my community
and I just unfortunately could
not accept this amendment as
friendly given the time
limitations that we have in the
session I think it is you know
the fact that we I would like to
see this bill get through to to
support my community and again
not at all
diminishing the needs that you
raise which are very valid so
with that madam speaker
it is unfairly but the gentleman
is always always very friendly
so.
Is there for the debate on the
amendment madam speaker that I
explain the amendment.
I'm sorry John I thought you
already done that please explain
the amendment.
speaker what this bill does is
on the changes the title
slightly and moves to.
Page three where the substantive
changes are and what it does is.
Essentially on page three line
thirteen.
You'll see the call one after
the war that.
It strikes all the language
be getting that that called on
all the way through.
Page three.
Line twenty three.
Well actually through line
twenty four through the comma
that appears online twenty four
so it would basically read
A non resident veterinarian
validly licensed and in good
standing with the licensing
authority in another state
territory District or
Commonwealth of the United
States provided that.
The temporary permit shall be
issued for a period lasting no
more than six months and no more
than two consecutive six month
temporary permit shall be issued
to any one individual.
So the essence of this amendment
is to take the current
limitation of sixty days.
Make it six months with the
possibility to extend an
additional six months.
Four out of state veterinarians.
It doesn't matter who they're
working for.
Effects of the situation in the
representative from Bernalillo
those.
The certificate of need.
It also fixes the need that I
see here my district in Travis
county as well as curry county
rose of county Eddy County Lee
County where we have large
dairies and I believe following
I haven't confirm this Senate
may be needed among the various
counties where horse racing
activity occurs as well as any
other area with large.
Groups of livestock if and I
believe it would also meet the
needs of local veterinarians and
everyone's community for that
but Marian get sick because
there's not enough that Marian's
in New Mexico to cover all the
needs so that is the crux and as
some sort of money.
Amendment simply taking the
existing sixty day limitation I
think it does six months and
allow that six months extension
in the difference from this
amendment and the proposed
language suggested by the
gentleman from Bernalillo is his
only applies to.
The query and other what I
consider government related
places that that house animals
so that's the crux of the
amendment and madam speaker I
now stand for questions.
There's further debate on the
amendments will go to the gentle
lady from captaincy curls
Carlinville into counties
representative Armstrong.
Thank you madam speaker the
gentleman yield.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
certainly yield thank you madam
speaker and and gentleman I'm
not sure if a lot of the the
part the house is aware of some
legislation that were caring at
that a that helps you know.
Quicken the publication for a
lot of licenses here in the
state of New Mexico reciprocity
we have we do have some
reciprocity with veterinarians
but they're not it's not quite
as well known as some of the
others so I stand in full
support of your amendment you I
do have a son in law that is a
veterinarian and he was offered
really hi sign on bonuses madam
speaker and and gentleman to
come to New Mexico.
But he chose Montana.
Thank you madam speaker.
This any further debate
amendment okay Representative
from
chose County Representative
Ezzell.
Madam speaker thank you very
much for the gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln County you'll
please madam speaker and gentle
lady I certainly yield to you.
Madam speaker and gentleman
thank you very much of I'm
really disappointed that the
sponsor of this bill is not
going to consider the rest of
the population of the state of
New Mexico as it stands right
now there is is to an rules full
are we nationally accredited.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
I do not know the answer to
that.
Madam speaker and gentleman I do
not believe we are to limit.
When veterinarians can come in
and perform the work.
Limited do this to just a.
Twelve suse or aquariums.
Is not spilling the need that we
experience in the more rural
areas of New Mexico Madam
speaker and gentleman.
Several years ago and I don't
know if the sponsor of this bill
was in the legislature at that
time but there was an EHV one
outbreak at Sunland park New
Mexico.
Forces we're being afflicted
with some disease that was
carried in and none of our
veterinarians could figure out
what was going on Madam speaker
and gentleman we had
veterinarians coming in from all
over the United States to help
figure out what was happening
there and the after effects of
this madam speaker we are
lacking that on Ariens.
That are treating the large
animals as it stands right now.
There has been and the shut
down.
On the sale of bulls over the
age of.
What is the date ten months I
believe it is.
Because of a sexually
transmitted disease that will
kill all herds of cattle.
Madam speaker gentleman.
I think that you're not seeing
the whole picture there.
Whenever we are limited doing
that to just a credit nationally
accredited zoos or aquariums the
need is there madam speaker.
Of this is going back about
twenty five years now.
There was a virus that was
picked up whenever the.
Best.
The secular stomatitis was the
name of that disease that was
being passed around.
Every animal that went into the
state fair fair grounds.
Livestock gates.
Every animal had to be checked
personally by a better Marian
these animals also had to have
health certificates that had to
be submitted to the state a week
prior to them arriving at the
fair grounds madam speaker
whenever we are restricting.
This language right here
nationally accredited zoos or
aquariums that is a very small
area whenever there is a major
outbreak madam speaker and
gentleman that affects our
livestock as well as our
wildlife as well as our wildlife
there might be a problem before
we are going to need
veterinarians help from out of
state Madam speaker and
gentleman whenever we are
talking about feral hogs do you
know how many.
Different diseases that federal
hogs can only the are
transmissible the other species
of livestock and wildlife and
human beings it's over twenty
nine different diseases and all
that information came from.
Not only our local large animal
veterinarians but from bed
centenarians from out of state.
This is very crucial that we
didn't get input from.
Other veterinarians to help our
veterinarians not just dealing
with nationally accredited zoos.
Antiquarians Madam speaker.
Whenever there is a flood
situation.
Whenever there is the need for
rescuing of animals and
protecting these animals that
may have been afflicted by some
natural disaster.
We need the help of these the
veterinarians that can come in
and the effects of what is
happening to these.
The livestock and wildlife
species may take months and I
think that we're being very
disingenuous as not to allow
this to grow just a little bit
it would be easy to do to
protect all of our animals Madam
speaker with the I will yield
thank you very much.
is further debate on the
amendment of representative from
Chavis Lee and result counties
Representative Anderson thank
you madam speaker.
will the gentleman yield from
Chavis and Lincoln.
Madam speaker I certainly yield
to the gentleman from Chavis
blue and Roosevelt who is also a
father of a very fine that
Merion here in Santa Fe.
Yes only proves some genes are
maternal Representative.
I think.
I would like to ask you first on
your amendment he has it have
you had any input from the New
Mexico veterinary Association or
those type of groups who would
have a very vested interest in
your amendment.
Madam speaker and gentleman I've
had some input I believe from
their lobbyist.
And gentleman Mr speaker madam
speaker it was that the input
the how would you describe that
if you could please.
Madam speaker and and gentlemen
I would I would the.
Describe that input as they are
very protectionist and and they
may not want to go as far as
what I am proposing I see.
By a gentleman madam speaker
Reminds me of the bill we had
dealing with lawyers and the
American Bar Association
suddenly became quite
protectionist so I certainly
understand that that phenomenon.
However I want to say madam
speaker.
Former representative Britney
Burrus.
Worked hard on this very
specific bill.
And it was her first bill and.
I don't suppose it would be
possible to imagine it any more
narrow as it affects.
Veterinary medicine in New
Mexico.
And I do think that whether
you're nationally accredited or
not if you have a sick fish do
you really wish you could do
something about it because.
A fish floating on the top of
the.
The Korean is not particularly.
An exciting of that for the
visitors so I see.
Exactly veterinarian to practice
on exotic animals exotic animals
being snakes reptiles toads
fish.
Why does the elephants.
I think that if they need
veterinary services we should be
open to allowing those services
to.
Come to New Mexico if that
service if that specialty is not
available in New Mexico.
So.
Representative I worry about
your amendment not that it's a
it's not valid about the dairy
industry.
The right horse racing industry.
And their need for
veterinarians.
My concern is we're we're taking
a very narrow.
Bill addressing veterinary needs
in New Mexico it seems to me
were brought again in a rather
last minute effort.
So although I appreciate what
you're minutes doing I am going
to oppose it because I think we
are
Taking a reach too far on the
house floor and changing of the
narrow intent to a much broader
one and it would seem to me it
would be worthwhile to seek out
the good counsel of.
The New Mexico veterinary
Association and understand their
position better.
So with that Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you for your
efforts thank you madam speaker.
Thanks for the debate on the
amendment the gentleman from.
Curry.
The Baca.
One of the bay Roosevelt in San
Miguel County Representative
Zamora.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you for Representative for
bringing this ammendment
forward.
Is this ammendment about
fairness to the veterinarians
across the the coming in from
other states.
Madam speaker and and gentleman
the way I do this legislation
when it first came before us.
The other day.
For the it was an effort to try
to address as the representative
from Chavis Leandro's L. pointed
out the very narrow if perceived
need in the Albuquerque area.
But Madam speaker and gentleman
as we heard in committee.
The need.
Is not confined to the
Albuquerque metro area.
The need.
This virtually statewide.
The lack of specialist the lack
of veterinarians period in New
Mexico exist.
And I think it was brought out.
The there are particularly
certain industries that are
particularly affected by this is
Sam yeah they can come in for
sixty days but we've had some
vets that have gone down for
more than a sixty day period.
And so you have an issue of
trying to meet the critical
needs of.
Right there in my in my County.
That.
Can only be filled often times
by bringing some people in from
other states.
I don't think it's a.
I don't think if you have.
Traveling that's the the do this
on a regular basis but the need
is there them and they try to
meet the needs of the state can.
And and so you know I think the
probably the Albuquerque's who
is trying to meet the needs I
but they they can but they found
that sixty days is not an
appropriate period and I would
submit to you that a sixty day
period for very very large dairy
that's having pro problems
probably not a reasonable period
and as a representative from
Chavis pointed out.
If there's a huge outbreak.
Racetrack sixty days may not be
the appropriate period of time
for those facilities will as
well and so it seems to me the
easiest thing to do is just
recognize of that fact exists
Center treat.
The profession Senator
regardless of their specialty
can treat the king just like the
the the people.
Working in this situation would
be that government of run.
Zoos and and and.
Koreans free to the dairy farm
street the feed yards tree the.
Our racing industry the same is
are being treated in
Albuquerque.
And and thank you for that
answer and thank you madam chair
and and Representative.
I think.
There's a lot of people across
the state that at one time or
other needed a veterinarian and
and I think.
That there's a lot of small
animal people even sit in these
chambers.
That this would help this
amendment would help.
We have I have a a town and in
my district Santa Rosa for they
had a
Overpopulation of dogs and cats
and they needed participate
Notre a bunch of dogs and cats.
They didn't have the facilities
and enough.
Help from the veterinarians
there and so they brought in a
mobile unit.
And they do that on a on an
annual basis sometimes I
believe.
And this.
Amendment would help.
In other places where there is a
need.
For.
Some help and then in the in the
from the veterinarians.
And another thing I was thinking
about madam chair and
representative is.
Your amendment could possibly
help.
Texas a and M. school.
In in having some of their
veterinarians from over into New
Mexico.
When they when they come out of
school.
And it be nice.
To be friendly to Texas a and
M..
And to the kids.
That devote their time in their
life to become a veterinarian at
that school and let him come
into New Mexico and practice
here.
For a limited time.
Like stated in this bill.
Do you madam chair and member of
Representative believe that that
might hold true.
Madam speaker and and gentleman.
I believe that.
Allowing a temporary period of
of six months to allow out of
state veterinarians to come to
New Mexico and made some
critical needs is a step in
getting more veterinarians into
New Mexico now if they like it
here and get Lysons I may be in
competition with with the
existing veterinarians but the
need that the man.
Is much greater than the supply.
And so.
The the the competition of.
Should be welcome not the month
the.
Rejected.
Because at the end of the day
New Mexico does not have enough
that Marion's to service that
demand and so I I think that
this is a step in the right
direction getting students
whether be from Texas a and M.
for Colorado state for other
institutions that have that
Merion colleges would would be
good to highlight the
opportunities for veterinarians
in the state to maybe.
I stayed here for a few months.
They like the community that are
room they like the work that
they're doing.
They may apply for the board and
take the board here and and
become citizens of our great
state and that's what I would
really like to see happen just
as you mentioned gentleman.
And and thank you for that
answer madam chair and
representative I don't believe.
That your amendment would anyway
and and.
Her the Albuquerque zoo.
And getting what they want done
for those who and I think it's
very important for that
Albuquerque's it exist.
I support him in there every way
I can.
And I hope they find a
veterinarian.
But I also think.
That we ought to be fair and we
ought to be a process across the
board.
And be fair to the people of the
state of New Mexico and be fair
to the veterinarians that are
willing to come in for have they
want to come into the state.
And I believe your amendment
does that and that's why I'm
gonna stand in full support to
your amendment.
Thank you.
Representative and Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker thank the
gentleman for those questions
thank you Jennifer chairs are
you here up for debate on the
amendment or the bill.
Mr speaker I'm waiting to by the
bill.
San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln you Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan I yield.
Thank you mistaken gentleman
I was looking at some of the
fiscal impacts of.
Of this legislation that's
before us that you're trying to
amend.
And I'm reading here that the
board of
Veterinary medicine expects the
extension of a temporary
permits.
To increase the number of
applications for temporary
permits to to non resident
veterinarians.
And that they expect
that.
No really increase to cost but
could see an increase to
revenues.
To the state so as I'm as I'm
looking at this your amendment.
And the underlying bill there's
not a cost.
To the state.
If if if this bill passes as
written there wouldn't be a a
real cost.
And if your amendment were to be
added to it there would not be a
real cost as a matter of fact.
those those permits have to be
paid for they're not free and so
it could increase revenues.
So Mr speaker and and and
gentleman.
We had breakfast earlier today
kind of a late breakfast.
We were talking about our
communities and a mistake and
gentleman that the discussion
was your community like my
community all of the
representatives and senators who
live within those.
Foundries kind of see.
The entire boundary of all of
the legislators combined in that
area as legislators of that
entire area not just our limited
down three of our district.
you Mr speaker and and and
gentleman.
That that's how it is in San
Juan County myself
Representative Lane
Representative Strickler
senators Neville and share and
representative Allison
We're at a lot of the exact same
meetings dealing with the exact
same issue some of the people
live in one of our districts
work in another district have
family in another district but
it's just one big community.
Mr speaker and gentleman I've
I've stated this before when I.
When I first came to Santa Fe
was with lieutenant governor
John Sanchez as his chief of
staff.
The very first meeting.
That
I was invited to the very first
one that the to the governor
Sanchez made sure that I had to
meet these two gentleman that
was Kiki surveyed a collective
relevant.
And Mr speaker and gentleman
that put what I was told at that
time was.
You've got to learn how to be.
A public servant like like these
two gentleman.
And I was also told to sit there
and to listen and not talk.
And so the speaker and gentleman
as I listen to them one of the
big things that was conveyed in
that conversation was.
That all of us who are state
representatives yes we represent
our districts yes we represent
our communities but we are
state.
Representatives.
Mr speaker and and and and
gentleman as we said in here
today.
Issues come before us that may
not affect my district.
But the effects somebody else's
district.
But regardless those are
citizens of New Mexico in those
districts.
Senator John and I I it's when I
when I hear something like this
in a minute like this that.
Will not harm.
The district.
That is the purpose of the
legislation but it could help
other districts across the
state.
When I first got here.
Those are the type of amendments
that happened that was a type of
bipartisanship that took place
in these chambers and I was more
familiar with the Senate
chambers that's that's where I
was serving.
lieutenant governor.
That's what used to happen here.
But Mr speaker and gentleman as
I've served especially the last
several years in this body the
last few years in this body.
we have less and less.
Been able to say.
yes I understand that's a need
in your community health.
And I and I and I what can I do
to help.
I less and less see in this
chamber.
The willingness to say you know
what I'm not of your same party.
I don't have you seen
constituents.
But I understand that need.
And it sounds like it's a real
need.
Especially if there's no cost to
it.
Especially of the there's no
fiscal impact there's no real
big problem with it that damages
or is.
Eighty politically offensive or
whatever but something like this
which is just academic.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Sports just academic.
There's a need.
It doesn't cost anything if we
fix this need.
But instead of what I've what
I've heard today.
And not just today.
But.
One more is.
My bill is meant to fix my
problem.
In my district.
And the speaker and gentleman I
see.
The polarization that has taken
place it I think it's not just
politics obviously politics
plays a role different
perspectives Mr speaker and
gentleman but what I see.
Is this polarization is taking
place because.
We've been unable.
To put ourselves in somebody
else's shoes and look at those
people who are not like the
people that I represent.
And so we do nothing.
Can we say the.
You know what run your own bill.
Of course we see what happens
with our bills I just get.
Sent to a committee and they die
there
because part I I think some of
the concerns sometime Mr leader
gentleman is.
I can't let that guy get a wind
he might get reelected and I'm
run somebody against a.
And so with speaker gentle as
it's it's devolved into this
ugly.
Cesspool of.
Partisanship.
That anyone there's a
possibility to.
Emphasize.
And do something for someone
else that doesn't cost me
anything we don't do that and Mr
speaker and gentleman I I think
it's very obvious that this type
of feeling breeds contempt.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I I'm
I'm looking at this this one in
particular this was such an easy
fix.
No cost.
I'm looking now at how to how to
set up how can I have a vote.
First for a bill of somebody
else's caring just because
they're of the other party.
and it does affect my district.
Speaker and gentleman I I just I
I'm looking at this and I guess
just a greater committee more
than just on your amendment.
But on the way that we do
business in the state of New
Mexico and and unfortunately the
people who are really harmed are
not the members individually in
this room but all the people
that are the residents of the
state and I'm I'm just
disappointed more than anything
and you can go and I can get you
a Mr speaker and gentleman I can
get you a dummy bill and you
could run a specific issue it
won't get a real hearing bill
gets stuck in the committee and
the people and frankly beyond
people at this point now it's
animals.
That potentially going to be
harmed here service speaker
gentleman I I I wish that the
gentleman will reconsider I
don't believe this harms the
effort.
To his district it would
definitely help many districts
across the state and many people
who are just animal lovers
people who have businesses
around animals and and and folks
who suggest.
Quite frankly other analysts are
friend so the speaker and
gentleman I I would if I would.
Urged the body to vote for this
amendment because like I said it
it doesn't come at a cost
there's no cost to the state
coffers on this and I I would I
plan on supporting a plan on
supporting your measure is there
do you would you would you like
to Mr speaker and gentleman
would like to respond.
Mr speaker and gentleman
I think that you hit on the head
this this ammendment.
Addresses not only the concern
that was raised in the original
bill.
That focused on a very.
Mero group of institutions if
you will.
And it allows.
The opportunity.
That exist outside of the narrow
scope to have the same benefits
and and I think it's without
question that the demand and the
need is there in fact I I would
say at times it is critical.
But.
That's all we're trying to do is
is basically keep the existing
law intact.
And just simply change it from
sixty days to six months that I
might point out.
Representative the veterinary
board has control over this in
fact these temporary permits can
be revoked by the board at the
any time if they see there's.
There's more supply of
veterinarians and there is
demand They can revoke the
permit they can revoke these
temporary permits and so I think
the I think some of the concerns
raised that this may be
competition or this or that the
board has within its power to
address those things but this is
a definite need and it exists be
on the metro area Canada exist
in virtually all corners of the
state and and I would submit.
Probably every community has a
lot of that Marian's not an over
supply of that narrative.
Thank the speaker and gentleman
I appreciate that I do agree
with the Representative Anderson
though I would not want to
extend this to lawyers who are
out of state.
There's further debate is is on
the amendment Representative
Terrazas.
No okay seeing no further
debate.
The gentleman earlier.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
colleague from Chavis go ahead
Lee you.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo I yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis but when I heard this
bill a couple times and you know
one of the things that I noted
in there
that there's a need for
veterinarians at so many
different areas when we look at
it we've got at the meet
processing plants that we have
you know the horse breeding that
we have in the state for the
horse racing.
In one of on the.
I was unaware of is at the our
rescue where the rescuing the
horses a need of that they're in
so it's much like what I see.
The shortage of medical doctors
in our state.
And I think we have to do
whatever we can to encourage
those individuals to come to our
state.
And hopefully after they've been
here they decide that for this
pretty good morning out of state
here so I want to rise and
support.
And I hope that we can get this
on here and and help our state
with the a critical needs thank
you.
Generated you.
Thank you Mr speaker I move to
table.
The motion to table the
amendment.
A vote
Local state and the local okay.
Two eight.
You're not allowed to interrupt
me to do that but I'll let you
have a roll call.
A vote of.
J..
And the amendment.
Will move on to the table.
A vote of.
Hey the.
I will be back to debate.
On the amendment.
The vote is now
and I don't know it and with
our.
This portion of the vote is
about to close.
The clerk to call the members
who had a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash votes
yes Representative Blanco.
Yes Representative book of both
yes representative Cadena.
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lewis.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative
Trujillo.
Yes it will Representative
Trujillo votes yes.
Is a close relative thirty six
in the affirmative twenty seven
in a negative.
The amendment has been tabled.
Gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln you still have the floor
thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
and gentleman I I support the
legislation
I I think we need to meet the
critical needs of that their
services in the state.
I I can't stand here and not
tell you I'm not anticipate
coming the.
Of the vote disappoints me it
does but we still have that need
throughout the state this puts a
small bandaid on the problem but
it exists in every corner and I
hope that the maybe the
veterinary board and others will
try to address the critical
needs that are apparent in many
parts of the state can be
protection this is not the
answer and putting the putting
making a bandaid for the
government but not allowing
others to
sure the same benefits the I
think we need to look really
carefully when we when we do
that because well be treating
the people the same as we treat
the government thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen
thank Jones for the right gentle
lady from.
Chavis Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the gentleman yield please I
yield to the gentle lady from
Travis.
Mr speaker to say the least I'm
very disappointed that the rest
of the body didn't feel it was
important enough for the rural
areas of our state to stand up
to Representative all the people
of the state to me that set.
I just can't believe it.
Mr speaker gentleman.
This is very specific in the
bill it does say.
Nationally accredited zoos or
aquariums located in New Mexico.
So Mister speaker.
Gentleman from Bernalillo would
this be applicable to the dexter
national fish hatchery as well.
Mr speaker gentle lady I do not
know.
Mr speaker I'm sorry I couldn't
hear you speaker and gentle lady
from Chavis I do not know.
Well I'm kind of curious because
this is nationally accredited
zoos or aquariums but this
national fish hatchery has to do
with stocking.
The Koreans as well as our.
Endangered species so why
wouldn't that be applicable to
them as well Mr speaker deleted
not state that it would be
applicable to them and to say
that I do not know.
Mr speaker gentleman I'm sorry
I'm getting background noise in
you're talking way too fast okay
can you slow down and your
annunciation please.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Chavis a whole lot better Mr
speaker excellent.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Chavis I did not see that it
would not apply to them.
I said that I do not know.
Mr speaker.
Rate that we're doing a bill
wastin time appeared discussing
this.
Whenever we are focusing on just
one area of the state I
understand the.
Why you are pushing this I
guess.
But it's important that the rest
of our state is recognized in
the needs of have been
veterinarians come in for longer
periods of time.
And I'm real disappointed that
the body didn't feel it was
important enough to the rest of
the state of New Mexico.
And Mr speaker gentleman I don't
know what I'm going to do.
Whenever my primary care
provider my veterinarian does
retire.
Because it looks like I'm not
going to be able to bring in
another veterinarian.
With all the
the lack of veterinarian
services we have now.
Mr speaker that's all I have
thank you.
Thank you generally.
This for the visually from
Bernalillo Representative
Thompson.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman yield.
Speaker DeLeo.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman for you attempting to
solve all of the veterinary
issues in New Mexico or were you
targeting a need that was
brought and I I I understand
that you picked up this bill
from someone who was carrying it
previously so if you don't know
the answers.
I understand that so so is that
the case that you it was used
you were.
Out of a specific problem was
brought to the member who came
up with this bill to address
that specific problem correct of
exotic animal veterinarians
correct madam Mr speaker and
deleted from really the that is
correct and our former colleague
from district twelve brought
this together brought a
coalition of folks together to
deal with a specific issue are
of the of these
and so you know that's the
specific target of the bill.
Not to say that a the all of the
other issues brought by my
colleagues are not valid in fact
I had conversations with the
with the sponsor previous
amendments on several occasions
and I completely agree with but
the purpose of this bill is very
narrowly tailored to address the
issues of lack of.
Of in areas who have expertise
in.
With exotic animals particularly
as it was an experience so
that's really the purpose thank
you Mr speaker and gentleman and
and you may not know this but
did I would think if we were
going to do something as big as
statewide for the veterinary
board there should be some
conversations around that before
we add an amendment on the floor
that has not gone into the FIR
that has not gone into any of
the analysis.
was there Mr check Mr speaker
and gentleman was there anything
precluding either another bill
to be carried on this for an
amendment attempted in one of
the previous committees madam Mr
speaker apologies and and
delayed from Bernalillo the
conversation was had in the
second committee I believe but
there is no amendment presented.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that's my point that
that we cannot come to the floor
and totally revamp a bill that
has had no no input from the
people involved just because we
know it's a problem and I I
would suggest to folks that if
you know of a problem bring the
bill thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Thank you ladies for the debate
the gentleman from curry
Representative Crowder thank you
Mr speaker gentleman from
Bernalillo please you I yield to
the gentleman from curry thank
you guys and I I've been looking
over there and string lights to
see if there is an expert and
then I'm not seeing on so I'm
assuming you're the expert Mr
speaker gentle as a critical.
It Mr speaker doom I don't but I
play one on TV.
The gentleman I'm hoping you
state holiday last not only have
one question so don't it goes
back to the same the nationally
accredited to aquarium the
community I'm from has the third
largest in the state.
and and I know we have giraffes
we have a a lot of exotic
animals to take a a lot of
tending to the we don't have the
expertise in our community so
don't like my only question is
do you know how many nationally
accredited zoos are within the
state that's about as a question
Mr speaker and gentleman from
curry I believe there are two or
three there's the Albuquerque
there's Alamogordo and I think
maybe Carlsbad hold on that last
one I'm not entirely sure.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
gentlemen do you know where I
could find that answer I believe
that Clovis being the third
third largest suit is a likely
nationally accredited I texted
back home and then if you had to
get a response from the city
manager's assistant city manager
so you know where I might be
able to provide that information
the that's a great question
by.
leave it is on a website that I
have a screenshot of but I can't
make the actual name of the
website but I couldn't.
As it on to you here thank you
kind gentle and Mr speaker kinda
look forward your text for your
email thank you thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you John exit gentlelady
from Eddie.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo please
yield to yield to the gentle
lady from Eddie.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so I I think I can't
confirm that Carlsbad does have
a nationally accredited zoo it
is on the top of we got what we
call C. hill Carlsbad hill it's
the living desert zoo and
gardens state park and Mr
speaker I'm I'm sad to say and
gentleman that the lock down to
the last two years has not been
good for the zoo animals and for
the park itself and I hope that
energy minerals and natural
resources which is over state
parks will put to good use the
money that we've appropriated to
bring those facilities back to
where they were but we're very
proud of our park and this bill
would probably help us in
Carlsbad so I thank you for
bringing it thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you generate that next to
the gentle lady for granted all
go into this year.
You Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield yield to the
gentle lady for granted I'll go
in Santa Fe thank you Mr speaker
and gentleman and and I I will
be voting for your bill because
I think it's good for your
district and whether my district
or not I want the quality of
life for your community to the
proof and so but I did have a
question just you know the
suggestion of the of the kind
lady from Bernalillo that we
should introduce a bill similar
I think we still have a a dummy
bill available so my question is
did this bill have appropriation
Mr speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady the noted
on appropriation thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman so that it
did have a message from the
governor Mr speaker delay I
believe we did have a message
from the governor thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady and was
just a point of order just to to
thank you Mr speaker and and
thank you a gentleman and was it
specific to only nationally
accredited zoos like was it
house Pacific was a language in
the message Mr speaker Joe lady
I do not have the Mr from me so
I cannot tell you how specific
it was thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentlemen so
If you were to add.
To broaden its allow
veterinarian services to to have
the same experience even in
rural communities are this this
waiver would no longer be at in
response to message.
Matt Mr speaker gentle lady I I
I would assume it depends on how
much or how broad how broad it
becomes although I would submit
to you that this bill as it
stands and as you heard earlier
does also support.
Leave created zoos in rural
communities such as in my
community.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
and thank you gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman sorry
I'm okay thank you.
Si no further debate the
gentleman close thank you Mr
speaker thank you members for
the wonderful debate I do want
to elevate our former colleague
the gentle lady from district
twelve who work so hard on this
bill over the course of the
interim and we miss her very
much and I'm glad that we are
having a floor debate I will
also send it to you Mr speaker
and members of the of the body
armor because the number one
tourist attraction in the state
so even though it is in my
district in the district that I
represent a budget all of us at
the end of the day and I look
forward to continuing the debate
that the gentleman from Chavis
brought up brought up some very
good points that I think you
need to be addressed in the near
future that Mr speaker I move
that house bill fifty six I'll
pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill.
Fifty six the vote is now open.
That will.
This portion of it is about to
close.
The clerk to call members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon yes
Representative Alcon both yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative black.
Representative phone call.
Yes Representative book of votes
yes representative Cadena.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Harry Garcia yes
Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Representative at a.
Representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente both
yes Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis both
yes Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew votes
yes Representative Rehm.
Representative Rehm votes yes
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative
Trujillo yes Representative
Trujillo votes yes
Representative Zamora.
What we do.
Representative Cadena.
Representative votes yes.
The roads are closed revenue
sixty three in the affirmative
zero in the negative house bill
fifty six has passed the house.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business committee reports no
objections ordered.
Thirty three.
We're doing this just for you
Representative Montoya.
Mr speaker transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee to is been referred
house bill one eighty three has
had it under consideration for
some of the recommendation that
it to pass an answer for to the
taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted a
Hanukkah Rubio chair move
adoption we are honored option a
favorable committee report on
house bill one eighty three.
All those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
This was named three point out
to.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business messages.
No objections ordered her to
read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed Senate bill thirty eight
as amended.
Senate for substitute for Senate
bill thirty nine Senate bill one
fifty eight as amended with
emergency clause and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
Mr reentered message from the
Senate Mr speaker I'm directed
to inform the house of the
Senate has passed Senate bill
forty three Senate bill one
fifty nine and requested the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief
clerk.
Message we entered.
Gentleman from Bernalillo Mr
speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business
introduction of legislation.
No objections ordered.
Corporate.
House memorial fifty one
introduced by Representative.
Representative Raymundo Lara
Willie D. Madrid Luis M. tosses
Doreen Y. Gallegos anything P.
small a memorial for claiming
February twelfth twenty twenty
two colonia stay in the house of
representatives of requesting
the governor and her cabinet to
assist local efforts to improve
the quality of life in New
Mexico by adding rural
communities and colonias to the
state's priority actualised
programs house memorial fifty
one.
House memorial fifty one having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
Senate bill thirty eight as
amended introduced by Senator
Gonzales and Senator Hemphill
and potentially leading to
government organization
clarifying statutory provisions
pertaining to child care
facilities clarifying the early
childhood education and care
department's responsibility for
infants toddlers and children
without developmental delays
authorizing the early childhood
education and care department to
perform criminal history
investigations for child care
facility licensure and other
purposes requiring
confidentiality including the
early childhood education and
care development in the
membership of real relevant
Ford's providing a penalty
Senate bill thirty eight as
amended Senator thirty eight is
amended having been read twice
by title is referred to the
health and Roman Services
Committee that's government
elections and Indian Affairs.
Senate for substitute for Senate
bill thirty nine and actually
leading to procurement
increasing the preference for
New Mexico resident businesses
and contractors eliminating the
time limitation for special
preferences for New Mexico
resident veteran businesses and
residents veteran contractors
providing for a preference for
New Mexico native American
resident and resident veteran
businesses and contractors
Senate for service to for Senate
bill three.
Center for substitute for Senate
bill thirty nine.
Having been read twice by title
is referred to the labor
veterans military affairs
committee that's commerce and
economic development.
Senate bill one fifty eight as
amended introduced by Senator
Brandt.
And act relating to anatomical
guess prohibiting discrimination
against anatomical gift
recipients based solely on
physical or mental disability
prohibiting insurance coverage
discrimination against persons
with disabilities receiving
organ eye or tissue transplants
and associative Care declaring
an emergency Senate bill one
fifty eight as amended.
Senate bill one fifty eight as
amended.
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill forty three
introduced by Senator Sedillo
Lopez and Representative Chasey
and Hochman Vigil for the courts
corrections and justice
committee and potentially
leading to juvenile justice
prohibiting the imposition of a
sentence of life without parole
on a child's providing parole
procedures Senate bill forty
three.
Senator forty three having been
read twice by title is referred
to the consumer and public
affairs committee then state
judiciary.
Senate bill one fifty nine
introduced by.
Senator Ingle and senator Wirth
and act relating to legislative
retirement changing the
calculation for the amount of
pension pursuant to state
legislator member coverage
planned to Senate bill one fifty
nine.
Senate Bill.
One fifty nine having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Judiciary Committee.
House concurrent resolution
number one introduced by
Representative McQueen and Scott
a concurrent resolution amending
the joint rules of the house and
Senate regarding availability of
analysis and propose committee
amendments and substitutes house
concurrent resolution number
one.
Okay I would explain this
referral so people don't get
upset so.
Looking at you guys.
and put this on the speakers
table and tomorrow or some other
time we feel like if we can just
pull up the speakers table make
the next order of business I
just visited with the chairwoman
of the rules committee this is a
good idea we don't need to find
a time that works for everyone
to schedule rules committee
meeting so to expedited
I'm happy to just do that so I
just wanted to studies when ever
to know why we're doing this and
not towards me on Twitter.
Representative Montoya I'm
looking at you know okay so
house resolution everyone having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
The general for earlier.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
the house blue.
Sorry sorry.
The speaker I move that we go to
look services announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objections so ordered the gentle
lady from McKinley in San Juan
thank you good afternoon members
the house appropriations and
finance committee will meet ten
minutes following the floor
session.
Members of the general from
command center one.
Thank you Mr speaker we will
have a democratic caucus meeting
tomorrow immediately after the
floor session.
Members take note the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thompson thank
you Mr speaker the help house
health and Human Services
Committee will not meet tomorrow
because we don't have built but
then we got Senator today so we
will get meet again on Friday so
enjoy your morning off thank
you.
The generally very and
Representative Ferrary thank you
Mr speaker your consumer public
affairs committee will meet ten
minutes after we adjourn.
There was another gentleman from
Bernalillo chairman Romero thank
you miss it has Education
Committee will meet tomorrow at
eight thirty seven of the time
change eight thirty for the
members of house education thank
you Mr speaker there is a no the
generally feels almost thank you
Mr speaker your house taxation
and revenue committee will meet
at eight thirty tomorrow thank
you they were signal the
gentleman from civil and
McKinley chairman Alcon.
Thank you Mr speaker house
flavored Veterans Affairs
committee will meet at five
o'clock five o'clock member
signal gentle lady from
Bernalillo chairman Louis.
Thank you Mr speaker the house
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee will meet
tomorrow at eight AM that's
eight AM tomorrow we have to
have a couple of rollover bills
and then we're also hearing
house bill six Senate bill six
and house bill one ninety one.
Member center.
Are there any other
announcements.
For us I I sort of the body you
know that on the of veterinary
bill the chief clerk is getting
that message expedited we
thought it would be a bad idea
to wait till tomorrow.
The gentle lady from once you.
Mr speaker I don't know if I can
top that one.
Mr speaker.
Why did the golfer wear two
pairs of pants.
I'm dying to know why thank you
to get to hold in one.
You talk to all those low bar to
you did you did.
Generally familiar Mr speaker
I'm objecting all of your animal
noises are not those of exotic
animals.
You have completely forgot what
the narrow focus of that bill
was Mr speaker gentle a point of
order point of order you
obviously are not embarrassed to
demonstrate to the house of
representatives on the your lack
of knowledge that it could do
sounds exactly like ago.
Going into for all those asking
what is it could do how the
state you need to learn a little
bit about exotic animals.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker a move that
the house stand in recess until
eleven AM tomorrow morning.
Thank you thank you for being in
the gallery once your work be
sure to check out our committees
that will begin momentarily
enjoy the rest of your afternoon
and evening we'll see tomorrow
the house in recess until eleven
AM.
