The clerk to help the members
without a.
Recorded response all you gotta
say yes now Representative
Alcon.
Representative well good is
here.
Representative bash.
Representative bash is here
Representative Boca.
Representative bone because here
Representative Chasey.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Fajardo is here
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Harry Garcia is
here Representative Lord.
Here Representative Lord is here
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Lujan is here.
Representative Lundstrom.
This.
Representative Matthews.
Representative Matthews is here
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya is
here Representative Roger
Montoya.
Here Representative Roger
Montoya is here Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
is here.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Methadone Representative Roybal
Caballero is here Representative
small.
Representative yes the.
Was closed reform Senator.
Representative Lujan is here.
Water is not a point of order
the vote is closed we have a
quorum please rise for today's
indication offered to us by the
gentleman from Chavis AT NO two
Representative Townsend.
We pray with me.
There have been a father we
thank you for this day.
We just need to.
Watch over those legislators
their families.
The need to support.
Their families because in this
role it takes it's not just the
legislators it's the families
and those that they love that
are all ways of support lord we
just just to protect each and
everyone here today the to
strengthen them and the to
protect their health fourteen
price they might pay a man.
With the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
Hochman Vigil please leaders in
the pledge of allegiance.
To the to this to the United
States to.
To the public stands one nation
under.
This somebody is on zoom in on
muted so please be yourself
whoever's talking distance
healing with the gentleman from
committee please leisure and
saluting New Mexico's flag.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr good afternoon good
afternoon members I move that we
go to the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business interjections sorters.
Members and I I wanted to make
a.
Couple of announcements if I
could have everyone's attention
on this piece this is an
important technical piece
We at the beginning of the
session decided that we were
going to use our voting buttons
on the floor and that the chief
clerk would call anyone who
didn't have a recorded response
there's been a number of things
that have come up since that
decision was made and it was a
bipartisan agreement at the
beginning of the session I'm not
saying anything else but we are
confronting a few problems that
would be solved if we could
switch to the virtual voting
consul.
I understand there's a couple
members that don't like it but
let me explain it is a
bipartisan problem it happen
today we've got members of both
parties marked excused.
Then log into the zoom.
And are not called on by the
chief clerk because they're
marked excused.
They have no way of excusing
themselves because they don't
have a button to push because
they are not here in the room
and this happened today with two
Democrats and two Republicans.
If we switch to the virtual
voting consul you could be in
the chamber have your phone with
a yes no request to speak button
on your phone just as we did in
the sixty day session it would
solve that problem of people
being excused and they were
excused request but they have no
way of notifying us without
sending a text message in us
managing that process here in
real time which is also
potentially fraught with the
opportunities for there to be
more so instead I understand
this can be brought up in the
Republican caucus.
It would be very much
appreciated if instead of
members simply stating that
thank.
Don't want to do it if some
critically to reason why.
I don't want to do it so that we
can address that be a simple
opposition is not helpful to try
to solve the problem so if folks
are again suggests the state
could be against it that's one
thing if folks don't want to do
because they believe that there
is some sort of problem that is
raised we can address that
problem so I I I would
personally appreciated
if we could have an
understanding of why we have two
or three members that don't want
to do this.
then I I feel like it's a small
number and anyway so that would
be my request that we do that
also I want to acknowledge that
we are today house of sixty nine
members
now with Representative Barreras
having departed the house we we
sure will on her next steps in
her life's journey and we Mr.
the Bernalillo county commission
is accepting applications for
appointment to that seat through
five o'clock tomorrow they will
appoint a new member Wednesday
and we'll have a new colleague
on Thursday.
So that's the plan as we
understand from Bernalillo
county.
thanks again to come in for the
generally frivolous F..
Mr speaker I now is the
appropriate time but I do have
some questions if we decide to
go to virtual voting.
If you want to ask a question
now that's fine greeted leaders
so Mister speaker the way it's
done now is we we get we hit our
button and then if you're not
registered then we called out
the the individual's name
whether they're excuse or not
excuse so how would that change
please go to the virtual would
we still be calling out the
members names Mister speaker.
So what we would so right now if
someone is marked excuse on the
board.
The chief clerk does not call
their names because they are
excused.
So Mister speaker in the past of
somebody's mixed use and we come
back for third reading.
which is using the afternoon
they're able to vote in the
afternoon and on the morning Mr
speaker.
Inject it is not about whether
you're able or not able to vote
so if you are marked excuse and
you're on the floor and you push
your button to vote you're
automatically unexcused and the
vote is recorded.
So that's what's not able to
happen now because we've got
members on zoom they do not have
a button to push unless there in
this room and so they continue
to be marked excuse if we were
to switch to the virtual voting
council a person who's not in
the chamber that same person
being excused on the board could
then open up the virtual voting
console and vote yes their vote
would be recorded and they would
automatically be funny no longer
marked excused that's the that's
what I'm trying to achieve okay
so Mister speaker if there were
if they are not excuse and their
vote is not recorded will we be
calling them out.
After the vote is closed yes.
Mr speaker I don't understand
what the differences.
The difference is if you are
remote and marked excused and
you wish to vote you would open
a virtual console and vote.
If they cannot do that now
because there remote they're not
in the chamber to push their
physical but that's the
difference.
And so today I want to mention
the name of the Representative
there's there were several
representatives who are marked
excused.
Because they're more G. excuse
the chief clerk did not call
their name.
The work in the zoom they're
logging on to the zoom does not.
Have them marked as not excused.
So they're they're unable to
access something that those of
us in the chamber have access to
which is B. March no hundred
excuse and voting by pushing a
button.
Mr speaker I'm just very
confused so and so I think that
mark excuse before when I've had
to go to the Senate to do a bill
or I'm later than percent like
that and I just go to the clerk
and I asked to be have that
removed.
That's one way of doing it the
other way of doing it is walking
to see on the floor pushing your
button.
There are two ways that the
excuse was taken off the board.
When you ask to vote so why
couldn't somebody and soon asked
to not be excused.
They can be there when we've got
ten or twenty people and we're
doing the vote in real time it's
too much for me to ask of the
staff to monitor that because
there's not a unified way.
This gentleman cell phone
numbers not in the position of
members there's someone
different sitting here all the
time the chief clerk is running
the vote I'm running the vote I
can't take text messages to
people in real time it's just
not possible Mr speaker I can
hear the frustration in your
voice and I'm not trying to add
to that frustration I'm just
asking for clarity on my end
and so how would the time limit
then happen if we go virtual.
We'll stick to a one minute vote
as we have been doing.
And if at the end of it if
there's someone who's not
excused and doesn't have the
vote recorded the chief clerk
would call those names as we did
in the sixty day session and
Mister speaker how many times
with their name be called and do
what we do it once or twice or
will it just be honest once.
I think we did it once in the
sixty day session.
Thank you Mr chairman remember
Toby.
If someone indicates that there
we would go back to them I I'd
it's definitely not of the rule
and so was just based on how we
did in practice thank you Mr
speaker like I said I understand
the frustration that we as a
body are dealing with I'm not
trying to add to it but you know
it's it's just weird I'm trying
to understand for my own benefit
how we're going to how we're
going to move forward on this so
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you generally.
Okay.
Mr speaker.
The gentle lady the gentle lady
from.
Terrel.
No Mr Stanley from Eddie I'm
sorry thank you Mr speaker I am
present I'm showing on the board
is up for their thank you.
Okay at this point it is
completely relevant of someone's
markets excuse on the board
because we're not voting.
Okay.
Mr speaker so.
Yes gentleman Representative
Pettigrew thank you Mr speaker.
Last year during the sixty day
session voting through the
virtual console.
I specifically push know who's
registered is a yes I tried to
grab your attention Mr speaker
before we gaveled down and that
did not happen so I have the
bill is very important my
constituents who shows that
I ordered against their will so
I I will stay opposed to the
virtual voting consul thank you
Mr speaker.
Okay now we will go to I want to
mention members anyway doesn't
have their financial disclosure
form in.
ms Carey fresca is the secretary
of state's office is in the
members lounge.
to help anyone that needs help
with their financial disclosure
forms so if you haven't already
done it.
If you need help logging on
generally from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Ezzell I know you
mentioned you were having
difficulty with the secretary of
state's website we have at this
moment Mr frisk is of the
secretary of state's office in
the members lounge to help
anyone with any problems they
have I know you mentioned on
Friday so under that was taken
care of so issues here for us
until
Senator will be here to about
twelve thirty one o'clock to
help anyone that needs help now
I will go to.
the general is doing and
Representative Rubio.
Representative Rubio.
And Representative Rubio.
To make a motion.
Thank you Mr speaker I would
like to remove.
Give me one second.
I would like to remove House
memorial nineteen from the from
the speakers table.
And bring.
And move it forward
as the next order of business.
Action is so ordered.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House memorial nineteen on final
passage is been taken the
gentlelady to explain the
memorial.
Thank you Mr speaker House
memorial nineteen.
but is recognizing the teacher
of the year Lauren and get it I
believe she's here today
and if we could have the clerk
read out the memorial.
Absolutely the clerk to read.
House memorial nineteen
introduced by representatives
Rubio Lara Madrid Trujillo and
guide us a memorial recognizing
more and and got out of as the
twenty twenty to New Mexico
teacher of the year whereas
Lauren and get out of a high
school English language arts
teacher at new America school
Los crucis was selected by the
public education department as
the twenty twenty two New Mexico
teacher of the year and whereas
Lauren will focus on expanding
pathways to graduation to create
a more individualized experience
for students during their one
year tenure.
Representative representing.
The state teaching profession
which began on January first
twenty twenty two and whereas
Lauren was selected for her
teaching practices an advocacy
that supports all students
taking into consideration their
personal circumstances to
implement learning opportunities
and pathways to meet that
students wholistic needs and for
us Lauren is in her fifteenth
year of teaching.
And led an effort to open a
child care center in New America
school Los crucis to support
team parents on their path
toward receiving a high school
diploma and whereas Lauren began
her career in two thousand six
in hatch where she taught both
middle and high school students
and whereas Lauren Todd at the
organ on high school in the Los
crucis public school district in
twenty twelve and then moved to
the state chartered New Mexico
School Los crucis.
Where it ninety seven percent of
the students are economically
disadvantaged.
And whereas Warner Seve her
bachelor's degree in secondary
education from New Mexico State
University and has a teacher.
Of English as a second language
endorsement from eastern New
Mexico university and an
Advanced Placement certification
in literature and composition
from New Mexico highlands
university and whereas in
addition to teaching Warren is
currently working toward a
master's degree in educational
administration which she expects
to complete and may twenty
twenty two and whereas the New
Mexico teacher of the year
represents New Mexico in the
national teacher of the year
programs and whereas the twenty
twenty to teacher of the year
Lauren will receive ten thousand
dollars worth of support and
professional development
opportunities now therefore be
it resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico that recognition be
extended to warn and get out of
for being selected as the twenty
twenty two.
New Mexico teacher of the year.
And be it further resolved that
copies of this for Mario be
transmitted to learn and grow
and the secretary of public
education.
Deleted you.
Thank you Mr speaker I would
just want to open it up to the
body to congratulate Lauren I
know that teachers have had a
really tough two years and the
fact that she's been able to
commit so much of her life and
her dedication to America school
which is located in my district
is incredibly it's it's really
an honor and solar and thank you
for for your work and for your
service and and for if the if
the if legislators can please
give her a round of applause.
Thank you generally
Is good at all welcome to the
house were also joined by our.
Education secretary Dr Steinhaus
welcome to the house or.
The there is debate the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady yield.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
I I will yield.
Thank you Mr speaker I rise in
absolute support of this
recognition of Lawrence
excellence in teaching as the
New Mexico teacher of the year
two thousand twenty two but I
also rise and support and
celebration of all things
excellent education to recognize
and ask your help recognizing
the two thousand twenty one
teacher of the year Lisa Cooper
date will be may.
Because of our unusual
circumstances last year did not
get this recognition on the
floor.
So we joined together.
To recognize her as well.
First grade Spanish immersion
teacher at the New Mexico
international school in my
school district I am honored and
proud and delighted to lift her
up as another example of
excellence in education in New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generate a and members of house
please join me in welcoming to
the house
Lisa Cooper day at the bay who
is here this up in the gallery
twenty twenty one teacher of the
year.
There is for and congratulations
there's further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Romero.
Thank you Mr speaker will
generally yield.
Yes I will yield to the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady in in
congratulations miss get it and
and miss Cooper they would be
with for last year's recognition
and for this year's recognition
you truly are an inspiration
will continue to be an
inspiration to our fellow
educators and to our students in
the classroom and and in a time
when they need
a lot of inspiration and and
things to look forward to doing
going into certainly the
profession and the wonderful
profession that is working with
our young people each and every
day on certainly the house
Education Committee and I think
the house of representatives at
large is looking at doing all we
can in order to support you all
and and students within the work
that we're doing and provide you
all the resources I'm necessary
to make that happen so
congratulations on the
recognition certainly appreciate
the administration that you all
present to us each and every day
and please keep at it
congratulations on your
recognition thank you Mr thank
you generally.
Gentleman there is further
debate the gentle if you
Representative Lara.
Thank you Mr speaker will
generally yield.
Yes I will yield to the
gentleman from Diana.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Representative I also stand and
sit in in recognition of agency
we have at all
let's get it all in the work
that she does is appreciated and
is.
Very impactful to many of our
students to prove you're
teaching ESL and those systems
that need the most help and I
believe that you are an
inspiration to him I appreciate
you keep on doing the great work
are on the thank you thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentlemen
this further debate the
gentleman from Chavis any under
terra.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentlelady yields.
Yes I will yield to the
gentleman from all those
counties.
The gentle lady and I just the
press's supporter Memorial.
This recognition of excellence
by these two teachers should not
be taken lightly it is
desperately needed and and
wouldn't it be a wonderful
opportunity.
If every child in New Mexico.
I had the opportunity to have
that type of teacher and so
gentle lady I just the I rise to
support education in general.
These particular teachers and
for your efforts to recognize
and thank you very much.
Thank you gentleman is for the
debate the gentleman from
Valencia Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady yield yes I will
yield to the gentleman from
Valencia thank you as a educator
myself as a teacher myself I
understand the important role
that you guys about the impact
that you guys have had with
students at this time of
pandemic how you guys have
continued to fight through and
do what needs to be done for
your students I think you're an
inspiration to all teachers
across the state in New Mexico
and I want to thank you on
behalf of those kids that you
will serve for those of you will
serve in the future so thank you
guys and graduation thank you
Representative for bringing this
bill before the memo before us.
Thank you gentlemen there's
further debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Trujillo.
Yes thank you Mr speaker will
the gentle lady from Los crucis
sealed.
Yet Mr speaker yes
Representative gentlelady from
Bernalillo I will yield thank
you very much thank you very
much for bringing this austere
group the young lady to to be
acknowledged I appreciate that
very much both of you ladies
thank you for your service you
know that get it all is the word
for the Spanish word for water
here I truly believe that these
women are why years being in a
positive way because you have to
really work hard in a classroom
to do the things that you need
to do and I just wanted you
don't need to respond you can
just not but Mr speaker and
gentle lady I wanted to see if
these ladies had been had been
able to find good substitutes
number one.
And that and number two was the
governor on call.
I I really you know the work is
hard in the rate thank god it's
going to go up but it's not
nearly enough for the amount of
work that gets done and I taught
for a long long time I
absolutely loved it it was a
grown ups that didn't behave so
I really really appreciate that
you brought this forward I
commend you both thank you thank
you madam chair thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you gentle lady is there
further debate.
And the members of the
any information we will we did
not get have an opportunity to
introduce the memorial for time
is good for the ability to and
we'll be doing that at a later
time or will get you a copy of
the signed fancy stamped and.
Festooned memorial before two on
here that is that is that on its
way I see no further debate the
gentle lady to close thank you
Mr speaker once again miss again
I don't think you so much for
all your service particularly
for folks and Los crucis and and
all the work that you've done
since being involved in in
teaching I know you're getting
your masters and you'll be
finishing in may so
congratulations
Mr speaker I now move that house
memorial nineteen past with all
members voting in the
affirmative.
There is a request for unanimous
consent that the record the vote
show all members present and
voting in the affirmative on
house memorial nineteen hearing
no objection it is so ordered
the vote is now open.
The vote is now closed I go to
sixty nine in the affirmative
zero negative house memorial
nineteen has passed the house.
Graduations.
Members would you please join me
in giving a standing ovation for
very special guests in the
gallery our former and longest
serving house chief clerk Steve
this is with us.
I like to announce a few more
guests.
These are guests of
Representative Andrea Romero his
shadow is here Brandon Jr
right in are you there.
Welcome Brandon is a second
semester junior majoring in
political science and philosophy
with a minor in communications
at UNM.
I'm glad I read that whole
process sentence because I
thought it versus its second
greater than I saw you standing
there I thought I thought we did
pass a bill to hold gets back
over and over again.
I was born and raised to say
that he was born recent of New
Mexico and he wants to attend
law school two Representative
the underserved and less
fortunate who cannot afford
legal help and wants to be come
a public defender very noble
work and wonderful aspiration
welcome to the house and I hope
you enjoy your time shadowing
Representative Romero.
Are there other announcements.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker sorry general's
jumped a little bit later I
wanted to announce to the
members that the house Judiciary
Committee will be meeting this
afternoon at one thirty there I
built on the golden rod agenda
but the last one house bill nine
will not be heard today at the
Sanchez requests so there would
just be the four bills that are
ahead of that number on the
calendar and see you on House
Judiciary thank you.
They were signal the gentleman
from Bernalillo thank you Mr
speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business
introduction of legislation your
interjections sort of surgery.
House bill one seventy one
introduced by Representative
Hochman Vigil and act relating
to aviation amending the rural
air service enhancement Act to
broaden eligibility for rural
air service enhancement requests
increasing the amount of
requests allowing the director
of the aviation division of the
department of transportation to
extend the time frame of
existing requests temporarily
reserving a portion of the rural
air service enhancement fund for
eligible applicants with new or
expanded air routes.
To be used by aircraft with the
capacity of not more than nine
persons making appropriation
house bill one seventy one
introduced by Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Bill one seventy one having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuant to
article four section five B. one
of the constitution order it
printed and referred to the
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
thence appropriations and
finance.
One seventy two introduced by
representatives could Anna
Lundstrom and Hochman Vigil an
act relating to landing imposing
a cap on interest rates waiting
contracts that exceed the
interest rate cap lowering the
maximum annual percentage rate
for loans pursuant of the New
Mexico bank installment loan act
of nineteen fifty nine and the
New Mexico small loan act of
nineteen fifty five making
appropriation house bill one
seventy two introduced by
representative Cadena Lundstrom
and Hochman Vigil one city to
having been read twice by title
I determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order it printed and referred to
the consumer Public Affairs
Committee dense appropriations
and finance.
House bill one seventy three
introduced by Representative
Roger Montoya and act relating
to public infrastructure and
acting the role infrastructure
crisis response that creating
the rural infrastructure crisis
response provide establishing
establishing eligibility
requirements for financial
assistance creating the bureau
of rural infrastructure crisis
response providing powers
allocating a portion of the
severance tax bonding fund to
the rural infrastructure crisis
response find making
appropriation house bill one
seventy three introduced
Representative Roger Montoya.
House bill one seventy three
having been read twice by title
I determined to be germane
pursuit to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order it printed and referred to
the rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
committee fence appropriations
and finance.
One seventy four introduced by
Representative Trujillo an act
amending certain sections of the
New Mexico insurance code and
health care purchasing Act to
require hearing aid coverage for
certain persons amending certain
sections of the New Mexico
insurance code and health care
purchasing Act to require
expanded hearing aid coverage
has to one seventy four
introduced by Representative
Trujillo house bill one seventy
four having been read twice by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
One seventy five introduced by
Representative Serrato.
And act making appropriation of
aging and long term services
department to hire two full time
employees who will engage in
community based and culturally
appropriate outreach campaigns
related to Alzheimer's disease.
And other forms of dementia in
native American tribal rural and
underserved communities in the
state house bill one seventy
five introduce Representative
Serrato.
The one seventy five having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuant to
article four section five B. one
of the constitution order
printed and referred to health
and Human Services Committee
then to appropriations and
finance.
One seventy six introduced by
Representative Serrato and act
making an act relating to
private sector retirement
creating the retirement savings
facilitation income tax credit
clarifying certain definitions
in the New Mexico work and save
act requiring certain employers
to register as participating
employers and to automatically
enroll their employees in the
New Mexico work and save
individual retirement account
programs.
Allowing employees to opt out of
automatic enrollment aligning
provisions of the New Mexico
work and save act to enable the
formation of an auto IRA.
The partnership with one or more
other states making
appropriation house bill one
seventy six introduced by
Representative Serrato.
The one seventy six having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuant to
article four section five B. one
of the constitution order
printed and referred to the
consumer.
For the.
To the conversation Development
Committee then to appropriations
and finance.
The one seventy seven introduced
by Representative Sweetser and
act making appropriation for the
New Mexico department of
agriculture to fund wine
production by New Mexico
wineries house bill one seventy
seven introduced by
Representative Sweetser.
House bill one seventy seven
having been read twice by title
I determined to be germane
pursuit to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the agriculture safety is in
water resources committee dense
appropriations and finance.
Also one seventy eight
introduced by representatives
Baca Townsend had at us and Lane
an act relating to public
education amending the
definition of bilingual learners
to include American Sign
Language house bill one seventy
eight introduced Representative
Baca Townsend had added and
Lane.
House bill one seventy eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
House resolution to introduce my
representatives Townson and Rod
Montoya a resolution amending
the house rules regarding
advance notice of legislation to
be heard in committee and for
third reading house resolution
to introduce Representative
Townsend and Rod Montoya.
This resolution to having been
read twice by title is referred
to the rules committee.
Solution three introduced by
Representative Townsend and
Representative Rod Montoya a
resolution amending the house
rules to require a vote of two
thirds for certain motions you
can current and Senate
amendments house resolution
three introduced by
Representative Townsend and
Representative Rod Montoya.
House resolution three having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the rules committee.
House resolution four introduced
Representative Townsend and Rod
Montoya a resolution amending
the house rules require expert
witnesses to provide testimony
in committee under oath house
resolution four introduced by
representatives Townsend and Rod
Montoya.
House resolution for having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
rules committee.
Also one seventy nine introduced
by representatives Chatfield
Taos Sweetser headed up and
Allison and act relating to
water projects providing that
severance tax bond proceeds from
the issuance of an additional
nine percent of the estimated
bonding capacity be dedicated
for requests for drinking water
and wastewater projects
including wastewater projects as
water projects and maybe funded
from the water project funds
allowing the water transport to
authorize wastewater projects to
the New Mexico finance authority
house bill one seventy nine
introduced Representative
Chatfield Taos Sweetser headed
at and Allison.
One seventy nine having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
We have.
House joint resolution thirteen
introduced by representatives
Townsend and Rod Montoya a joint
resolution proposing to amend
article twelve section six of
the constitution of New Mexico
to create the New Mexico
education agency and the state
board of education which is made
up of ten elected members and I
appointed members and which show
point of superintendent of
public instruction how straight
resolution thirteen introduced
by Representative Townsend and
Representative Rod Montoya.
House memorial thirty
house joint resolution thirteen.
Is authorized by article
nineteen section one of the
constitution.
I ordered printed and referred
to the Education Committee
that's government elections and
Indian Affairs.
House joint memorial two
introduced by Representative
Townsend and Rod Montoya Joint
Memorial expressing the
legislature's support for local
control of public education and
requesting the legislative
education study committee to
convene a task force and report
to the first session of the
fifty six legislature on
statutory and rule changes
necessary to enhance local
control house joint memorial to
introduce my representatives
Townsend and Rod Montoya.
Yes.
Strong moral to having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Education Committee.
House memorial thirty one
introduced by representatives
guy a goes Rubio Lara and
Ferrary memorial remembering and
honoring river Toby Estrada
Misia valley icon House memorial
thirty one introduced by
representatives guy ago Rubio
Lara and Ferrary.
House memorial thirty one having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and the
place on the speakers table.
Thirty two introduced
Representative earned a memorial
requesting the legislative
education study committee in
collaboration with the public
education department the
department of finance and
administration the national
education association New Mexico
and certain educators to convene
a task force to develop a
comprehensive plan to enhance
teaching a multi cultural
historical events House memorial
thirty two introduced by
Representative funded.
House memorial thirty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the Education Committee.
Also more thirty three
introduced by Representative
Trujillo.
A memorial requesting the public
education department to study
and report the legislative
education study committee.
Report to the legislative
education study committee it's
recommendations for gifted
education programs and services
House memorial thirty three
introduce for Representative
Trujillo.
House memorial thirty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the Education Committee.
Also more thirty four introduced
by Representative Figueroa
memorial recognizing a Lisa
Cooper day you're PED.
As the twenty twenty one New
Mexico teacher of the year.
For
more than thirty four having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
While thirty five introduced by
Representative turned in a
memorial requesting the
department of public safety to
convene a task force to assess
and make recommendations to
provide incentives for law
enforcement officer retention
for twenty five years or lateral
hiring of law enforcement
officers from out of state
agencies to New Mexico law
enforcement agencies House
memorial thirty five introduced
Representative current and.
House memorial thirty four
having been read I'm sorry House
more thirty five having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
Also more thirty six introduced
by Representative Roger Montoya
memorial requesting the
Legislative Health and Human
Services Committee to hold a
hearing on hospital charges for
New Mexico's uninsured patients
and for the Human Services
department to report on the New
Mexico hospitals use of public
funds and provisions for
financial assistance for
uninsured patients.
House memorial thirty six
introduce fire Representative
Roger Montoya.
House memorial three six having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the health and Human Services
Committee.
Mar thirty seven introduced by
Representative Serrato a
memorial recognizing and
honoring the contributions to
the United States made by the
Mexican two hundred first
squadron during the World War
two.
House memorial thirty seven
introduce fair presented
Serrato.
House memorial thirty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
placed on the speakers table.
Also more thirty eight introduce
Representative Andrea Romero a
memorial requesting the
department of public safety to
conduct a statewide study to
assess gaps in service training
for law enforcement and first
responders regarding culturally
and socially relevant responses
to emergency situations house
memorial thirty eight introduce
Representative Andrea Romero.
House more of thirty eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the consumer public affairs
committee.
House bill one eighty introduced
by representative Ely and act
relating to senatorial officers
repealing a section of the
revise uniform law on Torio acts
regarding the inspection of
public records acts declaring an
emergency house bill one eighty
introduced Representative Ely
house bill one eighty having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the rules committee.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
That we go to the next order of
business messages.
No objections ordered thirteen.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate bill thirteen as
amended with emergency clause
and request the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk.
Mr really entered.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business committee reports.
Terry no objection it is so
ordered.
Third reading and as a reminder
to the committee chairs we have
multiple reports for committee
we will do the votes for the
single both civil.
Do that before you make the
motion.
to read.
Mr speaker your Education
Committee tomb is been referred
house bill fifty seven has had
it under consideration and
report same as recommendation
that a do pass as amended an
answer for to the appropriations
and finance committee
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair unanimous consent
of the committee forced her to
other active on a single vote
and reflected in the journal so
they're acted upon individually
hearing objections ordered clerk
to read.
House bill one oh three.
To pass an amendment to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one oh nine do pass
and then see appropriations and
finance committee respectfully
submitted G. Andrés Romero chair
for production of the committee
reports we're not option a
favorable committee reports on
house bill fifty seven one oh
three and one oh nine all those
in favor please signify by
saying aye.
This was named reports
reductive.
Mr speaker taxation and revenue
committee to is been referred
house bill eight has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that I do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair.
In NMAA consent of equity point
read together acted upon a
single vote reflected the
journals of their act on
individually hearing objections
were quick to read.
House Bill fifteen to pass as
amended respectfully submitted
Christine Chandler chair.
Move adoption our adoption
favorable committee reports
house built AT fifteen always in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
Well as was named reports
redacted.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee to miss
been referred house bill eighty
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it do not pass but that
house commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House Bill AT to pass an
answer for to the taxation
revenue committee respectfully
submitted Antonio Maestas chair.
Ms consented reports for the
other act on a single vote
reflection the journals of the
record on individually right
objections were quick to read.
House bill one oh to do pass and
thence to the taxation and
revenue committee.
House bill one oh four do Path
and thence to the appropriations
and finance committee
respectfully submitted Antonio
Maestas chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we are
on adduction unfavorable
committee report on house bill
one eighty and favorable
committee reports on commerce
and economic development
committee says you for house
bill eighty in house bill's one
oh two and one for all this
favor please signify by saying
aye.
Was was me reports or drive.
Mr speaker consumer and public
affairs committee to Mr referred
house bill sixty eight has had
it under consideration point
same without recommendation as
amended an answer for to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Joanne J. Ferrary
chair members consent of the
force for together acted upon a
single vote reflected in the
journal so they're active on
individually hearing objections
ordered her to read.
House bill eighty four to pass
and it's to the Judiciary
Committee.
House bill ninety nine do pass
as amended and thence to the
Judiciary Committee.
House bill one thirty two.
Do path as amended and thence to
the Judiciary Committee.
House joint resolution aids do
pass and then to the government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrary chair.
Move adoption committee report
we are on induction a favorable
and if the report with a
recommendation on house bill
sixty eight and favorable
committee reports a house was
eighty four ninety nine one
thirty two and a strong
resolution eight all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
All this was nay reports or
drive.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
to is been referred house bill
six has had it under
consideration reports and with
recommendation that it do not
pass without House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill six is reported
without recommendation an answer
for to the government elections
and you Affairs Committee
respectfully submitted Matthew
McQueen chair that's an option
of an unfavorable committee for
house bill six in a report the
recommendation on energy
environment natural resources
committee says to press the six
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
Raul was named.
It is close to the point about
that.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too has been referred
house bill one sixteen has had
it under consideration point it
with recommendation that a do
pass as amended and it's
referred to the appropriations
and finance committee
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Unanimous consent of the career
point right directive on a
single voter function the
journal so the record on
individually hearing objections
ordered for to read.
House bill one twenty four.
To pass as amended and thence to
the appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Gail Chasey chair.
Mr speaker move adoption of the
committee report there and
option a favorable committee
reports and house bills one
sixteen and one twenty for all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
All this was make reports are
adopted.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house bill five has had it under
consideration forcing with
recommendations that a do pass
and then through for to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted Georgene Louis chair.
Move adoption.
Unanimous consent of the reports
for the other acted upon the
single vote and reflected the
journal so they're acted upon
individually hearing objection
it's ordered.
Click to read.
House bill one fourteen do you
pass an answer for to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
House Bill.
House joint resolution I do pass
and thence to the Judiciary
Committee.
House memorial six to pass.
Respectfully submitted Georgene
Louis chair.
I move adoption Mr speaker.
We are adoption favorable
committee reports on house bill
five house bill one fourteen
house joint resolution I in
house memorial twenty six all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
This was nature reports or
drive.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business
interjections ordered.
Gentlelady ready.
Thank you very much Mr speaker.
Mr speaker I move that house
bill forty eight.
Be discharged from the house
labor veterans and military
affairs committee and the house
taxation and revenue committee.
And immediately be made the next
order of business.
This motion is necessary because
this legislation.
Which excludes social security
benefits for New Mexico's
personal income tax has
bipartisan support in the house
it is one of the governor's
priorities which the house GOP
caucus has been advocating for
for a number of sessions.
House bill forty eight was
considered in the house labor
veterans and military affairs
committee where there was a four
four tie vote.
Under the version of the FY
twenty twenty three budget that
is currently being considered by
the house appropriations and
finance committee there is a
soon to a four hundred million
dollar tax cut in fiscal year
twenty three and the cost of
house bill forty eight is a
hundred eighteen million.
In FY twenty three so there are
sufficient dollars.
In the upcoming state budget to
pay for this bill.
Time is limited in a thirty day
session the handle budget
priority issues so of house bill
forty eight.
Has a reasonable chance of
passage in this session.
We must discharge the bill from
its to referred committees now
and bring it up for immediate
consideration a request a roll
call vote on the motion.
Generally the pursuant to
section seven twelve to maces
rules of order our motion is not
in order at this time.
The Mr speaker Mr Bernalillo Mr
speaker Mr speaker.
Generating your motions on
order.
Mr speaker I would ask for
consultation with the
parliamentarian and of the
gentleman from Chavis of on the
Republican side for consultation
please.
What you mean by consultation
gentlelady.
Mr speaker of like review the
rules to make sure we're on
solid ground okay the gentle
lady for Santa Fe Representative
Romero House parliamentary.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman the general Santa Fe
has the floor.
Mr speaker thank you for a
moment second for
if you look at Mason section
twelve point certain motions are
in order
the.
Motion that the with gentle lady
maybe because during
announcements in minute
miscellaneous business when we
look at the ability to make a
motion in order it must be
during the time that the
committee reports are.
Under way.
If you look at page five twenty
five section seven twelve of
motions.
And Mr speaker if the gentle
lady wants me to read the rules
I can as well.
Might be a good idea generally.
Mr speaker of section twelve
insertion certain motions are in
order a motion to just charge a
committee for further
consideration of bills in order
only under reports of committees
our motions and resolutions.
Thank you generally generally
from Eddie you still have
before.
Mr speaker I would just give for
proletarian our side would like
to add anything generally there
is no parliamentarian on your
side there is a house
parliamentarian.
Mr speaker I would like to
recognize representative Nibert
from Travis county.
Gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Mr speaker the.
The gentle lady yield.
Mr speaker gentleman I yield so
Mister speaker this is an issue
that is not unique to I believe
we brought this up thank you
last year and this is a
procedure that we were by to
follow directly from Legislative
Council Service at this motion
was proper during this period of
time and so that is the
direction that we receive from
Legislative Council Service.
M..
Gentleman I I'm sorry I'm
reading the rule again it's
section seven twelve subsection
two of Mason's States the motion
to discharge that is the motion
the gentle lady made a motion to
discharge a committee for
further.
Consideration of a bill is in
order only under reports of
committees or motions and
resolutions the motion is on
order at this time we were on
analysis miscellaneous business.
Mr speaker.
Are we planning to have reports
from committees.
We will consider additional
committee reports of throughout
this legislative session.
Okay generate minister speaker
I'm I move that we go back to
committee reports.
Okay all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
Those may.
Motion fails.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you Mr speaker I have an
announcement.
Since we are on else's injuries
business members remember that
tonight is the annual cable
communications dinner at six
thirty PM at this site on my own
it is open to members of family
and children on the social
calendar I hope to see you all
there thank you members techno
the generation you
Representative Rubio thank you
Mr speaker descending on
financement that tomorrow at
nine AM the house transportation
will be meeting and we will see
if we have to bills thank you.
Thank you generally
the gentle lady from
The other committees.
Generated gentlelady from
Valencia.
Well before gently from was very
good does anyone else have any
other houses before I go to the
gentle lady from one to the
gentleman from Chavis at in a
terror.
Thank you Mr speaker I would
just the.
I would just like to report to
the body that this was this
motion was not done off the cuff
it was done after council with
our eight council service and
that's exactly.
What they told us to do.
And when they told us to do.
So Mister speaker.
Hi I realize this is not the
first time that this has
happened.
And.
I am
I'm I'm I'm disappointed.
That when we go through eight
council.
And it is recommended by the NM
for.
The point in our process the
motion be made.
And when it's overwhelmingly
supported and is on the
governor's.
State of the state address.
We use some parliamentary
procedure the state it's not
proper this time when is it
proper for the New Mexico public
to have the right to have a bill
heard.
Gentleman I am happy to work
with you in a bipartisan basis
to find a way to get that idea
move forward there are a number
of things that were working on
the tax committee to address
that issue directly he can be
done the ending of taxation of
social security benefits can be
done through other means besides
a bill we're working on that the
members of the text me you're
well aware of the Representative
Harper is aware that in we're
doing it is a bipartisan basis
and I don't know what to tell
you about the advice of counsel
I read to the rule which says
that the motion is not in order
at this time it's black and
white on the page and I know the
gentleman you are always wanted
to make sure that we follow the
letter of the rules that is why
I read it from the for this with
parliamentarian read the rule we
follow the rules exactly as it
was written.
I don't know what to tell you
other than that's with that's
with Mason's manual says and
that's what we're going to
follow Mr speaker it hasn't been
that long.
When we had eight council down
here on another motion.
They ruled in your favor.
And a few days later they
admitted we made a mistake you
are right.
So
I'm.
Mr speaker it's
I understand from a position of
the speaker that you can make
that rule but I'd I take great
concern.
That a bill that has been on the
house floor a number of times.
By this Representative and one
other.
And it has been repeatedly shut
down.
The governor comes out and says
that if one of her main
priorities.
And.
And we're going to we're going
to use this I mean it would be
just as easy for you to rule
that the other way this is of.
This is very unfortunate and
it's unfortunate for the people
in New Mexico thank you.
Thanks to the gentleman from
Bernalillo Santa Fe Torrance
Valencia.
This is because the House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee will meet
tomorrow morning at eight thirty
the as soon we have three bills
on the agenda as listed on the
golden rod thank you members say
no the gentleman from Rio Arriba
Sandoval and San Juan chairman
today.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
reminder that your house
agriculture cities and water
resources committee will not be
meeting tomorrow
because House Appropriations is
apparently having a meeting in
the morning and I are eight
members are in the
Appropriations Committee so we
will not be meeting tomorrow and
house agriculture secures water
resources thank you.
German would we.
Would it be worth looking at the
schedule with the gentle lady
from killing someone to see if
if you'd like to the meeting
press we get started at a later
time.
I I'm not sure when the
probation committees meeting.
Generally for killing someone
thank you Mr speaker tomorrow
the appropriations committee's
going to take action on house
bill two we could come in at
eight it won't take long Mr
speaker if that's helpful we
were originally scheduled to
start at eight thirty if that
helps the other committee were
happy to do that gentleman
chairman Monday would that work
with your schedule.
It does recognize my schedule Mr
speaker in our schedule so we
will we will have a committee
hearing ten tomorrow
nine thirty
very good gentle lady from
McKinley and someone thank you
for the combination you still
have the four thank you Mr
speaker good afternoon everyone
I'd like to announce the house
appropriations and finance
committee will meet tomorrow at
eight eight AM thank you Mr
speaker.
And vice chairman small is
bringing breakfast the gentleman
from Bernalillo Representative
Maestas.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
house commerce committee will be
meeting this afternoon fifteen
minutes after the floor session
fifteen minutes after the floor
session also Mr speaker.
The Los Angeles rams.
By the NFC champions.
Of the world and the census go
forty niner forty year reign of
terror.
Is finally in the trash bin of
history thank you Mr speaker.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
thank you Mr speaker tomorrow
your house rules in order of
business will be meeting at
eleven on soon we have three
bills for consideration.
Or signal the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Montoya
thank you Mr chairman house
Republicans will be meeting
medially after this floor
session in the leader's office
shouldn't take more than fifteen
minutes or so.
Every signal gentle lady from
McKinley and San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker we will
have a democratic caucus meeting
tomorrow tomorrow at eleven
thirty AM in room three oh seven
thank you.
Members signaled the gentlelady.
From sprint.
Did you have an answer
okay the gentle lady from
Valencia.
Mr speaker I have a question for
you what's your question why did
the jaguar E. type the tight
rope Walker.
Why he was looking for a
balanced meal.
I like that one especially given
the.
I works on the floor today has a
good way to wind up.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
the house stand in recess until
one PM tomorrow afternoon.
Members take note of the
different time tomorrow you
tomorrow only one o'clock.
On the floor of the house
please watcher Committee work
this afternoon enjoy your
afternoon and evening see
tomorrow the house is in recess
until one PM.
Tomorrow.
