School school for the deaf ones
that are going to need to go off
and do you plan to do all in
fifth grade and Catherall
Hackler interpret for the
students.
The president's.
It is a little.
Members please remain standing
well we received today's
indication from Representative
Martinez.
Thank you for bringing us
together in service to the
people of our beloved will miss.
For the health of all of our
members are staff and all of our
families because when black on
the work ahead in the next
thirty days.
The person was honorably to the
challenges that we face to the
responsibility that we have as
leaders elected by our
communities.
Let us to.
Common sense in the best
interest of all of New Mexicos
families from top of the to
should block and points in
between.
As intelligent decisions.
Is the courage to make tough
decisions.
As the character to make the
right decisions.
Please fill our hearts with
love.
Passion.
This statement.
Thank you.
The national.
News.
C.
Then.
So.
No.
Strong some.
I still
then moves me.
Mrs.
Senate.
Rendition of our and then and
Bennifer interpretation thank
you.
Color guard members and guests
please be seated the critical.
Good morning everyone and
welcome back to the capital.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon is here
Representative Allison.
Representative Allison is here.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Anderson is here
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong is excused
Representative Gail Armstrong
present Representative Gail
Armstrong is present
Representative Barreras.
Representative but it but it is
is present Representative bash
is excused Representative black.
Here Representative black is
here.
Representative Buka present
Representative will cause
present Representative Brown
here.
Representative Brown is here
Representative Cadena is excuse
Representative Castellano.
Representative Castellano is
present there.
Representative Chandler present
Representative Chandler is
present Representative Chasey.
Representative Chasey is present
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Cook.
Representative Cook is here.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Crowder is here
Representative Dixon present
Representative Dixon is present
Representative Dow.
Representative Dow is here
Representative Eli here
Representative Ely is here
Representative B. Val.
Press Representative Ezzell is
present Representative Fajardo.
Representative Fajardo is here
Representative Ferrary.
Representative Ferrary is
present Representative Figueroa.
Representative Figueroa is
present them Representative
Gallegos present Representative
Gallegos is presents
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Harry Garcia is
present there Representative
Miguel P. Garcia.
Representative Miguel P. Garcia
is present them Representative
Garrett is here Representative
Garrett is here Representative
Harper.
Representative Harper is here
Representative Hernandez.
Representative non this is here
Representative Herndon.
Representative Herndon is
present.
Representative at a.
Representative at a is.
Here Representative Hochman
Vigil here Representative
hopping the hill is here
Representative Johnson Zana
present.
Representative Johnson is
present thank you for that.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lane is here
Representative Lara here.
Representative Lara is here.
Representative Lente present
Representative land they is
present Representative Lord.
Representative Lord is here
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lewis is here
Representative Lujan.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative years the
privative Representative
Lundstrom is here Representative
Madrid.
Representative Madrid is here
Representative Maestas.
Representative Maestas is here
Representative Martinez.
Representative Martinez is here
Representative Matthews here
Representative Matthews is here
Representative McQueen.
Representative McQueen is here
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya is
here Representative Roger
Montoya.
Representative Roger Montoya is
present them Representative
Nibert is excused
Representative Ortez Sen
Clemente.
Representative Ortez is percent
them.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew is here
Representative Powdrell Culbert
here Representative Powdrell
Culbert is here Representative
Rehm.
Representative Rehm is here
Representative Andrea Romero.
Representative Andrea Romero is
here Representative G. Andrés
Romero your Representative G.
Andrés Romero is here
Representative Roybal Caballero
is excuse Representative Rubio.
Representative Rubio is here.
Representative Sarinana here
Representative Sarinana is here
Representative Scott.
Representative Scott is here
Representative Serrato here
Representative Serrato is here.
Representative small.
Your Representative small is
here Representative Strickler.
Representative Strickler is here
Representative Sweetser present
Representative Sweetser is
present Representative tied off
of.
Representative Thompson here
Representative Thomson is here
Representative Townsend for the
Representative Townsend is
present Representative Trujillo
here Representative Trujillo is
here Representative Zamora.
So Representative Chatfield is
excused.
Representative Lujan is excuse.
Representative Terrazas is
excuse.
Representative Zamora is excused
and Mister speaker I'm here Mr
speaker is present.
You have a quorum.
Also come.
Speaker gentle really.
Consent that we proceed to
receive the commission of
appointment of Bryan Baca who
has been appointed to serve as a
member of this house to
represent the lands accounting
district eight no objection it
is so ordered.
Surgeons.
The the appointment of the
lawful of point of pride Baca to
service a representative of the
state of New Mexico for district
eight.
Could you please rise and raise
your right hand repeat after me.
I do solemnly swear.
That I will support.
The constitution of the United
States of America.
In the constitution and laws of
the state of New Mexico.
That I will true faith and
allegiance bear to the same.
Or independent against all
enemies whatsoever.
And that I will faithfully.
And impartially.
Discharge the duties of my
office our.
As a member of the house of
representatives.
According to the best of my
abilities four five so help me
god.
Welcome aboard imaginations.
Representative could you please
remain standing to
be administered the oath of
ethical conduct by the chief
clerk.
Please raise your right hand and
repeat after me.
I Representative.
Duly appointed member.
Of the house of representatives.
From district.
Do hereby recognize.
The irrefutable principle.
That a public office.
This is a public trust.
Representative.
And do solemnly swear that.
For the I shall be fully
support.
Support the United States
constitution
and the constitution of the
state of New Mexico.
The effect of I shall this
chart of the for our with
integrity and ethically.
The high responsibilities.
Placed upon me.
By the constitution of the state
of New Mexico.
State of New Mexico and the
voters of my district.
I shall abide by the spirit and.
as well as the letter local
level of those house rules.
Pertaining to ethical conduct.
I shall not use my office.
For personal gain.
K. and shall scrupulously avoid.
Any active impropriety.
Any act
which gives the appearance of
impropriety.
Welcome to health
representatives.
The general release
thank you Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent that the
members of the house of
representatives elected or
appointed to serve in the second
special session of the fifty
fourth legislature appointed to
fill and subsequent vacancies
codes because the house of
representatives for the second
regular session section is so
ordered thank you Jennifer
Williams I ask unanimous consent
that the officers of the house
of representatives for the
second special session of the
fifty fifth legislature.
The officers of the second
regular session no objection it
is so ordered the second
gentleman from Bernalillo I ask
unanimous consent that the house
of representatives percent
subject to revision under the
rules adopted by the second
session of the fifty fourth
legislature.
Hearing no objection it is so
ordered.
Mr speaker.
Really I move that the house I
know that the house will be
suspended to allow the seating
of guests in the chamber.
No objection it is so ordered.
Like to take this.
No it welcome everybody
introduce a few guests.
We have with this the honorable
Maggie Toulouse Oliver the
secretary of state of New
Mexico.
I think we may have our
treasures the honorable Tim
Eichenberg maybe is here.
The honorable Stephanie Garcia
Richard commissioner of public
lands.
We have the honorable Michael
the V. you the Chief Justice of
the New Mexico Supreme Court.
The honorable suggestion and
bacon justice of the Supreme
Court.
The honorable David toms and
Justice of the Supreme Court.
The honorable Julie Vargas
justice of the Supreme Court.
I believe we have the honorable
David Norvell former speaker of
the house and former Attorney
General.
We have with us governor mark
Mitchell of anticipate public
who is the chairman of the all
public council of governors.
When the vice president of the
Mescalero Apache tribe.
And have here today as mayor of
the city of someone park.
And the county clerk of Dona Ana
County Dr Amanda Lopez us.
And last but not least we have
my amazing wife Kelly.
I also want to think of the
color guard
the I believe it was Air Force
National Guard I was with this.
And one thing to see Ortiz for
the national anthem our
interpreters from the New Mexico
school for the deaf needed off
into the implants do an
interpreter Catherall heckling
and Scott million.
and our children is in the
chamber for the opening day or
Halle Harrison and Meagan
Goldberg thank you very much and
thank you leader Martinez for
the invocation.
So we'll know soon the
legislature is never easy a
global pandemic is needed even
more challenging we're all of
course making sacrifices
sacrifices for our families our
communities in order to serve
our communities our last years
you had to do this while also
facing the pandemic that is
honestly because unspeakable
loss and up ended our daily
lives is impacted our daily life
here in the capital but I'm
proud of how we have responded
to the crisis we have found ways
to come together safely to
expand opportunities for public
input into continue to pass
legislation for the communities
we represent all over the Mexico
we're going to continue this
session to follow protocols to
help us stop in.
A of COVID nineteen while
preserving transparency and
public participation two things
are crucial to the process and
masks will be required again
social distancing will be.
Sought out when possible we're
gonna be having virtual
committee meetings and the
building of course will be open
to the public please let's all
chip in and do our part to use
common sense to make sure that
we're doing everything keep our
friends and neighbors
healthy and safe I want to thank
everyone serving I want to
specially thank a major leader
have you Martinez the jury would
during I goes Vigil ready caucus
chair wanted Johnson and the
leadership of the Republican
Party leader Jim Townsend our
with Rod Montoya and caucus
chair Rebecca Dow thank you all
for what you do to make sure
that your caucuses have what
they need and that the needs of
the whole state are brought to
this floor every day I also want
to thank especially Lisa Ortiz
McCutchen and her entire staff
in the chief clerks office they
do an incredible job in the
number of things they've had to
change in the processes and
procedures to to to legislating
in a pandemic is really
remarkable simply so thank you
for a great job.
Thank you for the working
together with all of you to make
our state the next it's state
it's important we always keep in
mind that if we have a New
Mexico everything we need to
build and create a great future
for the people that we serve
whether it's economic
development improving education
making our streets safer
approving health care delivery
there's a lot of work to do and
I'm sure that we all work
together we can all get it done
so thank you for your service.
I will now.
Ask members to.
Okay so members of the instead
of the fund over there we are
ready to sign the roster to
fund.
They were to have it by now so
members can come now we could do
it if you at a time well we're
doing the rest of the business
of.
this morning so the gentleman
from Bernalillo.
I move that we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business no
objection it is so ordered.
Okay so members of one we take a
few minutes announces
miscellaneous business for
members to come down and sign
the roster if you would when
that's done we'll go on to the
next bit of.
Business of the day so it's to.
Let's get this done.
Thank you San Juan do have an
answer.
I do think you good afternoon
Mister speaker and I need to
compliment you on your regalia
today maybe you can explain that
to the to the body as we're
waiting under miscellaneous
business but on another note Mr
speaker and members the house
appropriations and finance
committee will be meeting at two
o'clock today as opposed to four
thank you very good thank you
gentle lady I appreciate the
compliment this is I was raised
by my mom
learning about our family
history as a member of the
current plan in this is our
family's tartan and this is the
address of our family's clan
from long ago just calling the
clan is still exists it comes
from around the loch ness area
in Scotland and we were one of
the clans that resisted English
colonization of Scotland and I
with William Wallace to try to
preserve the independence of us
calling a long time ago.
We are all signed in.
So we're gonna do is we're going
to bill introduction we're going
to introduce house resolution
one.
That is the rule packet for this
session we have I understand we
have an agreement between the.
Four leaders of both parties and
the rules chair
on the contents of the rule
basically for members
information the rule packet
allows for virtual participation
and
As the mask requirement and it
this is similar
but somewhat less a lot less
than previous sessions but
there's nothing new in here and
we are creating the rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee and
we are also creating the
agriculture is a key is in water
resources committee that is also
in the rural package so that we
will do it is after you
introduction we'll think of
action us this miscellaneous
business and take up the
resolution which will require a
two thirds vote because it's not
going through the rules
committee I understand that that
is.
We'll do that and then
we're not going to have the
virtual voting system so we'll
just vote with the keys and
buttons at our desk rather and
in those members who are
participating virtually will be
called on at the close of the
electronic portion for them to
announce their vote and there's
nothing in the rules of the we
just to clarify we will be using
for Mike's to debate during the
session and those are very
virtually will.
Speak it is for this guy so.
with that let's go to the.
Let's go to the gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business introduction of
legislation act interjections
order.
to read.
House resolution one introduced
by Representative Andrea Romero
a resolution amending the house
rules regarding standing
committees and procedures for
the second regular session of
the fifty of the fifty fifth
legislature house resolution one
introduced by Representative
Andrea Romero.
House resolution one having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and placed on the
speakers table.
House bill one introduced by
Representative Martinez and act
relating to the the legislative
branch of government
appropriating funds for the
expense of the fifty fifth
legislature second session two
thousand twenty two and for
other legislative expenses
including the Legislative
Council Service the legislative
finance committee the
legislative education study
committee the Senate rules
committee the Senate chief
clerks office the house chief
clerks office and other expenses
of the legislature declaring an
emergency house bill one
introduced by Representative
Martinez.
House bill one having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objection it is so ordered the
gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that house resolution one
Is adopted.
Thank you madam chair Mister
speaker I move that the next
that the house joint resolution
house resolution one moves from
the speakers table and is moved
for adoption.
In the hearing no objection it
is so ordered it is taking the
speakers table and made the next
order of business.
that the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
house resolution one on final
passage is been taken the
gentlelady to explain the
resolution.
Thank you Mr speaker this just
amends the rules as you
described and the standing
committees for regular procedure
for the second regular session
of the fifty fifth legislature.
There's a gentleman from San
Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield are from Santa Fe and Los
Alamos yield I'm just incentive
thank you Mr speaker I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanna make sense of the make
clear the discussion that we had
and I believe the the agreement
that we made that
The house floor debate will
continue.
As normal using microphones away
we are now using the system as I
just did now to for right to
speak and to
and to vote and then when that
portion of the vote is over the
folks the members of the house.
Who are not here because of some
COVID related issue will then be
asked to a voice vote.
On the on the bill before us is
that correct Mr speaker gently
Mr speaker gentleman that's
correct.
Speaker gentle lady of but maybe
it could be described a little
bit more in depth for the
members who are not here
yesterday for the week for
Legislative Council.
Of what will be taking place in
committee of the rooms because
that will be different than what
we're doing on the floor could
you explain that to the members
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen so we have in these
roles of outlines that committee
hearings will be on zoom in
available by zoom for all
members here and all members are
expected to zoom in or attend
the zoom meeting telephonically
can with their computers at such
a that said once we get to the
floor and once a bill moves to
the floor of the more moves to
the floor we will be hearing
that on the floor as you
described Mr speaker gentleman
thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I I'm I'm not sure
No the Senate chambers when
members who were not present
they were allowed to then
debate.
built from their location I so I
know that can be done
and so what we will I would I
would assume follow a similar
procedure as the Senate on the
Senate floor.
Mr speaker gentle and I'm not
entirely familiar with how the
Senate is running their
committees however on our our
side of the chamber when it
comes to committee hearings
everyone will still be expected
to be on zoom whether they're in
the building in the committee
hearing on the floor they can
attend as they see fit and must
follow the rules of course that
we've established for the
building that said Mr speaker
gentleman there's no specific
location that they have to be
for committee hearing they just
must be on zoom.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
I appreciate this this this was
offered to leadership in part so
we would not at least on the
house floor experience the
technical logical technological
problems that we had last year
trying to be present on the
floor be using a voting system
and I I appreciate leadership
taking this request on our part
I think it will make things run
smoother obviously there be a
little bit more time at the end
of the vote
to record the voice vote of
those not present
but
other than that I understand as
well we are reinstating
So the the low the local
government land grants and and
I'm sorry that for me for
getting it right now but with
the committee was dissolved and
the special session at the end
of the year that or
Representative Garcia chaired.
That that is having a name
change but it will have very
similar
parameters could you discuss
that briefly yes Mr speaker
gentleman the committees that
are changing there's three
separate committees that will be
amending in this of in these
rules the first is the
agriculture a secular is and
water resources committee so
we're adding the a second
component to that committee the
next committee is striking the
words state government from
government I'm sorry the words
state from state government so
it's government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee now and
finally of as we discussed the
reinstatement of the rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee
that's the third committee that
will be amended and so those are
the only changes in regards to
committees.
Thank you Mr speaker and gently
this probably a question for
after the after this is passed
but have we and maybe this is a
question for the speaker us to
and.
Likely to be answered later the
members of that we're serving on
that committee since we're in
the middle of the legislature
that that will have a cascading
effect so
it any idea how we will handle
that Mr Mr speaker gently
General once we get through this
all in the make in a sense of
the committee membership.
Thank you the speaker thank you
gently.
This is Jennifer Lee.
Thank you Mr speaker my
questions were were answered.
Related violence.
Thank you Mr speaker whether
kind lady from Santa Fe.
Please yield thank you I will
happily yields thank you I just
have a few questions I don't
have the rules in front of me I
can't I have not read them so
I'm going to have to take the
work your word and everything
you're telling us today but I do
have one question regarding so
it's my understanding as far as
the floor goes
it will be conducted as normal
as we are doing right now is
that correct Mr speaker kind
lady Mr speaker gentle lady
that's correct and Mr speaker
time lady we will be using our
my ex as we are now Mr speaker
highlighting yes Mr speaker
gentle lady that's correct and
Mr speaker kind lady we will
have a electronic device and
app.
Or some other form to actually
vote on that Mr speaker hi lady
no I'm hearing a shaking their
heads please explain we're gonna
go using the buttons at our
seats and then after that is
done the chief clerk will call
the names of the members who are
participating virtually and they
will cast their votes I voice
thank you for that I appreciate
that clarification Mr speaker
kind lady so how will people
those who are not present let
others know that they want to
speak on a particular bill Mr
speaker kind lady and how will
we know on the board to help
with that looks like Mr speaker
kind lady so I can answer that
because that's that's my role so
what we do is we'll have the
zoom open for the five or six
members who are there they will
raise their hand send me a text
message go like this and we
though it wasn't an issue the
sixty day session and then what
happens is we just.
Mark them on the request to
speak using the computer here.
Okay Mister speaker kind lady
and so Mr speaker and ask you
this will that be on our board
so that the entire body can see
who would like to speak usually
we I think in the sixty day
session I'm I'm looking at
Representative house and I feel
like they were the few times
that.
Someone wanted to speak and
didn't get on the board and we
went to the vote and they
interrupted and said no way I
wanted to speak and so we went
back committee we don't have a.
The voting is either all on the
virtual for all on buttons
there's no way to merge them
together so we have to just kind
of do the best we can and as I
said in the sixty day session
you know wishes operate with
patience and kindness one
another we're all doing our you
know we're all going to do our
best to make sure that folks
upon the board's request to
speak if you know of someone
that wants to speak and they're
not listed as such on the board
you can let me know if there's
there's a bunch of ways to do it
but we don't have a way for
someone not in the building to
put themselves on the list to
speak Mr speaker thank you and I
appreciate that we are going we
are to have a usual times right
now and like I said I don't have
these in front of me and so I
can only go at your word with
with what we're being told
and I think that is the last of
my question one point clarity
I'm sorry thank you Mr speaker
kind lady so and committees will
all the virtual we will all do
voice vote in committees just
like we did during the sixty day
Mr speaker kind lady is that
correct Mr speaker generally
that's correct okay thank you Mr
speaker kind lady and I
appreciate your comments.
Next to the gentle lady from
Chavis.
Thank you we'll the gentle lady
yield please Mr speaker I will
happily yield.
Mr speaker gentle lady my
question was asked by
Representative heart of us about
the order that we would speak
during debate on the house floor
because in the past it always
has not been in that any
particular order and sometimes
if you had touched in to speak
on the house floor and somebody
punched in after you to speak I
went ahead.
So I I have been very concerned
about that Mr speaker.
Regarding committee rooms if
there is
a and.
Rescind that wants to come into
the committee room can you
explain how they are going to be
able to speak.
Well we are supposed to be
virtual.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
so the idea when we are in
committee is that even members
of the public will also be
available to zoom in so they may
be here present in our building
Mr speaker gentle lady but they
will still be expected to either
call into the zoom the phone
number or the link that will be
provided on the NM Legislative
website as will as will every
committee be updated on the
house side online as as they
become available you know with
things moving and changing we
still expect members of the
public to attend committee
hearings by zoom has with anyone
who would be presenting COVID.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady will they be able to get
onto the secured website of the
New Mexico legislature gov is
that correct Mr speaker gentle
lady of course each of the
chairs will manage how they take
in a public comments
but that said Mr speaker gentle
lady every resume link for each
committee hearing will be
available on and logistic of the
official link to our committee
hearing.
Mr speaker gentle lady will
committee members be allowed to
go into the committee rooms as
we are having the of bills being
heard is that correct Mr speaker
gentle lady that is correct
members of the public and
members of this chamber will be
allowed into the committee
hearing should they want to
attend it from that space Mr
speaker gentle lady we will
encourage those to obviously
stay socially distant six feet
apart and and and of course
follow the rules of the building
that said Mr speaker gentle lady
everyone will still be expected
to be on zoom that want to
participate.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
very much for your responses.
The next the gentleman from
Santa thank you Mr speaker does
the gentle lady from Santa you
are Santa Fe Santa Fe.
Happily yield to the gentleman
from Santa thank you Mr speaker
second gentlelady.
Missing the resolution
containing a duration for these
rules that we are adopting.
Mr speaker gentleman the rules
will of basically spend the
thirty day session as we hope of
course we are going to be
cognizant of what's happening
with the corona virus in our
communities and of course what
what we look at today what we're
seeing today is the best
practice of of how to keep
everyone safe now.
The speaker gentle lady that
that was just my my question to
understand the duration so it's
just these thirty days.
That's correct Mr speaker
gentleman which was because I
could only see no further debate
the gentle lady to thank you Mr
speaker I now move that house
resolution one is moved for
adoption.
Okay we are final passage of
house resolution one the vote is
now open.
The vote is about to close.
Representative Crowder is here
wanting to vote so yes Sir my
button is working okay.
How do you wish to vote Sir.
My goodness of yes.
Okay the roads are closed with a
sixty the affirmative one of the
negative house resolution one
has passed the house.
Okay we are still announcements
and miscellaneous business.
we are now going to.
Okay.
So ladies and gentleman it is.
My distinct pleasure and honor
to introduce to all of you.
The honorable Michelle Lujan
Grisham the governor of New
Mexico to deliver this.
The state of the state in about
two minutes.
She's being live streamed here
into the Senate chamber.
While we wait for the governor
gentlelady from Valencia.
Trying to get us started.
Mr speaker I have a quick
question for you.
What's your question Mr speaker
how do you keep a bagel from
rolling away.
Urgently how.
A lot of content.
Thank you gentle lady.
Strong start.
Members of the house please join
me in welcoming our state
auditor the honorable Brian
Cologne.
This may be the first time in
the history of our great state
that there have been three
Brian's three elected Brian's in
this chamber the same time.
No will spell our name the
correct way with an eye.
I'm gonna get hate mail from the
Brian with a why.
This.
Okay Sir thank you for being
here.
Sir we don't allow displays from
the gallery.
So it includes the gentle
but we don't allow the helpers
from the gallery.
S. or otherwise.
Scalia otherwise.
So thank you everyone for
remaining calm.
Representative Lord.
Representative Regina Beatty and
maybe for the balloons.
Actually representative
Representative remaining Tana
just to grab it.
Hi ladies and gentlemen I'm
doing in the.
Mr speaker Madam Senate pro tem
distinguished senators and
representatives and my fellow
New Mexicans in a very Happy
Birthday to my mom Sonya I am
humbled once again to have the
opportunity to address the state
of our great state I know there
is a temptation to view to the
ocean and gallery can remain as
long as you are.
Not having a for please but I
encourage
you to resist the perception of
the competition.
Right feeding a plot line that
we pay one team against another
this isn't the sports page.
To do the people's business.
On the same team today.
That every day.
Legislative session I encourage
my colleagues in this building.
The people who serve I think
about.
It's and there's.
What service means about what
effective service can deliver
workers and families all across
New Mexico.
Senate here in this building
on Supreme tourism job creators
for seniors and students
Mexicans of every background and
belief system.
No we don't agree on everything
we don't have to believe that
the values we share as Mexicans
still to reunite us to see our
families grow and thrive the
willingness to work hard to
enjoy what we earn the optimism
that tomorrow can and will be
better than today for ourselves
and for our neighbors in the
last three years this
legislature in this
administration have gotten a lot
done we raise the minimum wage
for the first time in a decade
guaranteed paid sick leave to
every worker in the state we
made early education a key
priority invested hundreds of
millions of the future of our
earliest learners we've invested
in new economic sectors and
we've sent thousands more New
Mexicans of every age and
background to college for free.
No strings attached and I could
go one I could talk for a long
time about the good work of the
last few years.
What we need to talk instead
about what people viewing the
needs of this moment remain
great the grief loss volatility
brought on by this hideous
pandemic has wreaked havoc on
the lives of every family every
American every human being
around the planet.
And on top of that inflation
supply chain Crisis gridlock in
Washington.
It's all making it harder for
everybody and especially regular
working people to feel safe to
feel comfortable to feel
optimistic we all feel it my
family and I my daughters my
fiance when green kids all of us
there are no exceptions New
Mexicans are calling out for
safety and stability for more
and more equal opportunity for
an open and fair and free
democracy that works and works
for them.
Over these next thirty days we
can and we will answer that call
together once again this
incredible state our home is on
the precipice of momentous
positive change said that three
years ago when I first sworn
oaths to carry out the duties of
this office to the best of my
ability it's been true every day
since then.
If anything the opportunity has
grown and has multiplied
exponentially the sun is rising
on a pivotal day and I believe
everything and anything is truly
possible we have right now
unimaginable financial resources
at our disposal I believe we can
fulfill once and for all after a
hundred and ten years of
statehood the destiny of New
Mexico is a genuine homestead of
the American dream a place where
people can grow and thrive and
live in peace and prosperity
where people have the resources
they need to support themselves
and their families what we do
here now what we do in the
coming weeks we'll set the stage
dating back decades the timid
mindset because of what the
people in this Capitol Building
a pessimism they can be self
fulfilling thinking small is a
curse big and meaningful changes
are possible but the biggest
change maybe our attitude or
perspective the moment in time
we have the money to do it all
let's not limit ourselves let's
not be unnecessarily
incremental.
In New Mexico the state can we
be best state for everything
anything is possible.
So on that note let's give every
single educator in this state a
seven percent raise this year
anymore that would be the
biggest pay Bob in recent memory
and it would put us first in the
region for average educator pay
they deserve it and we can
afford it and it's the right
thing to do what's also raise
the starting salaries for every
tier of educators which means
some teachers will see a twenty
percent raise this year.
Let me be clear this kind of
progress pays for itself when we
support educators when we retain
high quality teachers and keep
our schools brimming with
talented professionals or other
strategic investments in New
Mexico children and in public
education are supported and
sustained graduation rates will
continue to rise for literacy
rates will continue to improve
especially with the targeted new
phonics program that we have
initiated and that the
legislature must continue to
support we get more kids in the
high quality apprenticeship
programs and institutions of
higher learning that would help
them build for filling careers
and lives it all starts with
demonstrating support and
respect for our educators day
one I said we would do that and
we're getting it done.
We're going to keep going let's
cut taxes for every single
person in New Mexico.
We haven't cut the sales tax in
this state in forty years it's
only gone up and up and up for
decades burdening New Mexico
households making it harder for
our small businesses to be
competitive but under my tax cut
proposal New Mexicans would save
more than a hundred and seventy
million dollars every year as my
colleagues from across the aisle
and pointed out in years past
correctly the money doesn't
belong in government accounts
that belongs in the pockets of
hardworking new Mexicans I agree
and I expect the legislature to
prioritize this relief.
I feel the same way about the
taxes that are taken out of
social security benefits.
Mexico is only one of a few
states that taxes social
security I'm calling today for
that taxation and we must fund
burden The New Mexicans who rely
on social security benefits by
cutting their taxes this is good
government serving the people
who have asked us to serve them
New Mexicans deserve it because
I believe we have an obligation
to find ways to make life easier
for the people of New Mexico and
I will keep looking for ways to
do exactly that.
And there are more tax cuts on
the horizon our expansion of the
working families tax credit last
year has already saved hundreds
of dollars each for about a
quarter of a million New
Mexicans The New Mexicans who
need those savings the most
every dollar counts when we're
trying to support the middle
class we're trying to help
workers build careers and help
families build stability next
year.
Half a million more New Mexico
taxpayers will benefit from
these expanded credits this is
been the most significant
and progressive reform of our
tax code in a generation this is
real and meaningful change that
helps family keep the lights on
and keep food on the table this
is the money that is going right
back into the pockets of the
single mom the small business
owner the veteran who served our
country and our state day one hi
so we're going to make this
economy work for the everyday
New Mexicans and we're getting
it done so let's keep going in
the next twelve months your
state government is going to
deliver an additional two
hundred and thirty million in
rent and utility assistance The
New Mexicans who need it most
your state government will
continue to help keep the heat
on in hundreds of thousands of
households across our state we
will not leave families behind
and if the Legislature provides
the resources your state
government will do more than
just help families stay afloat
we can and we will genuinely
invest in New Mexico families a
lift them off because families
don't need to be worrying about
a surprise medical bills or car
repairs they don't need to worry
about hunger either in the first
two years of this administration
New Mexico reduce food and
security at the second best rate
of any state in the country.
We all know there's more to do
that's the kind of progress you
can build on it should inspire
us to keep going we do sing
poverty and shielding more
families from its effects is the
most important work any
government any worker anywhere
can do.
In the last year we're eleventh
best for job growth in the
country overall in three years
we have created over ten
thousand jobs in every corner of
our state and those jobs now
have an average salary better
than ninety thousand dollars a
year that's a record high and
it's a big bright signal to
other businesses what the
hundreds of businesses that have
relocated here in the last three
years showing them how
successful are public private
partnerships can be and how
business friendly New Mexico is
for cutting red tape and it is
making a real difference for New
Mexico business owners hi I'm
thinking of folks like Murray's
Loomis and reptiles we're seeing
business evaporate into Colorado
before we make changes he was
the first New Mexican to receive
a new liquor license.
The long overdue reform we
enacted.
That kind of aggressive go get
it attitude supported by
proactive state government.
That wants to actively support
businesses will not only keep
more patrons in Reese's
restaurant that help
entrepreneurs throughout our
state.
People see the economic
potential of New Mexico now.
We are creating a real pipeline
jobs and opportunity.
We are the frontier of economic
growth.
Unlike in the aftermath of the
Great Recession.
We're not gonna let the pandemic
stall us and take away years of
growth we will not have lost
another decade.
In fact despite the challenges
of the last two years we've
hardly lost a step.
The fact is unemployment has
gone down every month for ten
straight months.
The number of unemployed New
Mexicans drop by five percent in
November alone.
We're expanding our economic
footprint and every single
community legal cannabis is
going to create thousands of
jobs and serious tax revenue for
local governments to support
local services in every corner
of our state.
Almost forty thousand more
students receiving high quality
education for free under my
opportunity scholarship program
needs more skilled workers
building twenty first century
careers right here in Roswell
Espanola Sunland park Rio Rancho
shama and so many more.
The intellectual infrastructure
of a nationally competitive
state economy is being built
right here right now on campuses
and in communities throughout
our state and clean hydrogen
will support thousands of jobs
especially in rural New Mexico
while helping us sprint toward
our net zero carbon deadlines
and decarbonize the
transportation sector.
But if we want to keep off the
canonic momentum we have to
we've got to get crime under
control I don't accept the
argument that this is an issue
in only one part of our state I
don't accept that any decision
maker in this building we say
that somehow this isn't their
problem.
We all have a role to play in
keeping New Mexico safe.
Public safety doesn't just exist
on its own we have to create it
and supported and own it.
So we need tougher penalties for
the worst of the worst the
repeat offenders and those who
have proven themselves to be a
danger to our communities I
support rehabilitation and this
administration has done a lot of
innovative good work in that
area but at the end of the day I
stand with the families and
communities who have been
victimized unnecessarily by the
violent criminals this system
needs to secure.
The worst offenders the most
serious and dangerous criminals
in our state need to be behind
bars simple as that.
And we're going to pass a law
this session that will keep
violent criminals behind bars
until justice can be done we
will put a wedge in the
revolving door of violent crime
in New Mexico the safety of our
communities can not be up for
debate a smart on crime approach
can work affected has worked in
my first year in office violent
crime went down for the first
time in six years.
We can regain that momentum when
we make sure our local
communities and public safety
officers have the resources and
support they need so I'm asking
the legislature for a nineteen
percent increase in the budget
of the department of public
safety to fund innovative new
crime fighting strategies and
hundreds of new positions
including in nineteen percent
raise for our state police
officers and I am asking for a
hundred million to support
hiring and retention efforts to
get a thousand more officers in
place statewide as quickly as we
can.
And I'm advocating for those
things because New Mexicans are
asking for them New Mexico is a
state that respects and supports
law enforcement officers I
reject the rhetoric from
Washington and elsewhere that is
made public safety a political
battleground this isn't about
politics it's about basic human
respect for one another respect
from officers to the people they
serve and respect for officers
from the communities they
protect if we have that we can
move forward uniformed in our
desire to clean up the streets
of the state to keep violent
criminals behind bars and we
sure every day justice is done
equally under the law we all
want safe communities we all
want healthy communities this
administration has made
important strides we've cap
costs for life saving
medications we protected
safeguards for those with
preexisting conditions we've
invested in affordable care for
thousands of lower income
families we've eliminated co
pays for behavioral health
services and we've begun the
great task of rebuilding a
mental health care
infrastructure that was
decimated.
It's still too many people
especially people in the rural
areas of our state don't have
timely access to the health care
they need for access at all
every community deserves high
quality care I propose a new
rural health care delivery fund
that will provide bridge
financing to communities that
have been waiting for assistance
to kickstart construction
without massive upfront costs
the state government can help
fill these gaps with
interventions like these
communities like those in
Valencia County are moving
toward securing a brand new
hospital after years of delays
and with investments like those
I have proposed to my executive
budget we will put tens of
millions of dollars into new
behavioural health services
expanding access to treatment
for substance abuse suicide
interventions and more.
Mexicans call me about this
issue more than almost any other
and we will answer that call.
We can and must ensure that kind
of service delivery is available
throughout the entire state we
have the resources to do so that
means in Dowling our medical
school with ten million dollars
ensuring that we keep our best
and brightest here to provide
care for New Mexicans after they
graduate that also means in
Dowling or nursing school with
the power of the state ensuring
more highly skilled
professionals enter this all
important fields and it means
once and for all delivering the
health care families in the
rural parts of our state still
desperately needs when I visited
Clayton last year I met Eloise
bald as ninety two years young
whose family cares for her
twenty four seven.
It's not easy thousands of New
Mexicans are living the same
story unable to pay for outside
help because it's too expensive
and it's not covered for the
care giver myself I know the
strength and resilience it takes
I know it can be physically and
mentally exhausting well I think
it's time we start saying thank
you and I propose a dramatic
expansion of the state program
that directly supports
caregivers what that means is
we're going to pay families who
were doing the work of taking
care of their elderly loved ones
regardless of Medicaid
eligibility was called in New
Mexico and let's make it a model
program for the rest of the
country this is an investment in
people that goes well beyond
politics for any one politician
this is the kind of investment
that can be and should be a
lasting service one that
reflects our shared values as a
state in this state we provide
for and care for our parents our
grandparents for disabled loved
ones the state government under
my leadership will help provide
for that care unequivocally
caregiving is a full time job I
know it firsthand.
We respect working people in New
Mexico so let's invest in the
dignity of our elders and of
their families by helping
caregivers and those they care
for stay in their homes with the
financial support they need.
On the same note it is time that
we build a new veterans home a
state of the art independent and
assisted living facility in
program for those who sacrificed
to protect our freedoms the
original building on the campus
in tier C. was built in nineteen
thirty six I think it's time for
an upgrade so I'm calling for
sixty million dollars which we
will leverage with an additional
sixty million from the federal
government to build the kind of
modern facility our veterans and
their families to serve we're
going to get it done because
when government has the right
tools and the right people
problems are solved we can dream
big and make bold plans doesn't
matter much for not solving
people's problems each and every
day and we are just a few months
ago veterans service officer
Dagmar yung Berg in Carlsbad
took a call from a veteran who
needed some help taking a fresh
look at an old benefits claim
the claim that had been denied
for decades the state employee
at the department of Veterans
Services did some digging I got
to work talking with the Feds
about what went wrong turns out
a lot went wrong in the end this
young bird hope this disabled
veteran get full back pay dating
back twenty years we're covering
seven hundred and thirty eight
thousand dollars in total that
was owed to this individual a
person who serve their state and
their country she helped this
veteran get off food stamps and
pay off their mom's mortgage
this is a government that is
solving problems and here's why
because it is filled with New
Mexicans and New Mexicans look
out for their neighbours we make
the extra effort to do what's
right we get up when we're not
down and we fight for each
other.
The state of our state is ready
to move forward ready to rise we
have all the tools we need my
vision is this communities all
across our state where families
are worried about the next bill
or their kids future for a job
market or health care system
that doesn't quite seem to work
for them my vision is in New
Mexico with the founding ideals
of this great country equal
opportunity and justice for all
are made real and meaningful way
the pursuit of happiness is more
than a phrase from a dusty piece
of paper something tangible
something everyone can actually
feel.
We can do it all we have the
finances we're going to fund an
unprecedented suite of new
affordable housing programs at
the state level we're going to
expand protections for voters
because we believe in democracy
in everyone's right to vote I
subscribe to an optimism that
says big things are within our
reach and blue skies are ahead
although in all seriousness I
would take some snow right about
now.
When my grandfather was a young
man he traveled across the state
across maces and over mountains
in a covered wagon he never
could have imagined by the time
he was an old man he would see
the Sandia's from thirty
thousand feet in an airplane he
never could have imagined his
granddaughter would watch a
rocket blast off and literally
reach space from New Mexico.
None of us can predict the
future it feels unsettled
especially these days when I
know for a certainty is that we
have the power to make that kind
of a boldly into the unknown
beyond together we have the
power to envision a break
tomorrow and execute that vision
about half of the people and we
must recommit ourselves to that
unifying purpose today.
So for the next thirty days
let's be aggressive on behalf of
the New Mexicans we're all here
to serve.
Let's remember who benefits from
good public service it's not
about politics it's about
community your community our
community the families and
workers and seniors and parents
who just want to live in peace
with dignity confident in the
promise of tomorrow and the
stability of today we have made
so much progress let's make sure
New Mexicans feel it let's go
above and beyond and embrace the
potential of this pivotal moment
in time.
Thank you.
God bless New Mexico and now
let's get ready to work.
Thank you governor.
Okay we are still announcements
and miscellaneous business we're
going to do a little bit the
bill introduction.
The gentle lady from Dona Ana.
Mr speaker for you go to
introduction of legislation no
objection it is so ordered.
Click to read.
Introduced by Representative
small and act relating to
climate and acting the clean
future.
Thank you Sir we're not doing
anything yes Sir.
Sorry never miss gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business rate of
sections order sorry folks I
didn't realize we'd already
introduced house bill one so we
will break from the floor and I
believe the gentle lady from
McKinley San Juan is announced
at appropriations and finance
will meet at two o'clock to
consider house bill one and then
I would like to we can be in the
house after the committee so
that we can send house bill one
to our colleagues in the Senate
and that will cost to do the
work I do have some committee
announcements but I also see the
gentle lady from Grant County
has a question or answer.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to announcer to signal
its the families with victims of
violent crimes have been in the
gallery in the standing in honor
of the of the level and that
they've lost it is great to see
people in the gallery thank you
thank you.
Welcome to the house.
Don't really.
Speaker I believe that today we
have a birthday.
Is that so.
Speaker I'd like to ask the
members to please join me in
singing Happy Birthday to our
esteemed how's Education
Committee chairman
Representative role metal.
The gentleman sitting.
The food the.
Um fever the.
The state dinner on that is.
The.
Okay.
So ever get your pencils and
paper ready just give me one
second.
Okay
I will start the appropriations
and finance committee.
To these are swabs and switches
membership and committees
From the chairs and the new
committees that have been
created season Herrera will no
longer serve on the
appropriations and finance
committee Representative Herrera
is departing appropriation
finance.
House rules in order of business
committee Representative Garrett
is added to the rules committee
and will serve as the vice chair
of the rules committee.
House acted and these next
committees I'm gonna say the
entire membership because we
just changed in rural and so
technically the old committees
have been replaced in some areas
the entire membership of each of
these committees so here we go
house agriculture is a key is
and water resources committee
they're going to use chair
Anthony Allison vice chair.
Catherine brown.
Representative Ezzell
Representative at a.
Representative Hochman the hill
Representative Matthews
Representative small and
Representative Zamora.
K. X. those agriculture sec
using water resources
Representative Aaron and is is
being added to the committee on
commerce and economic
development.
K..
House consumer and public
affairs committee
Representative Barreras.
In order to have the correct
number members of representative
but it just is departing the
consumer public affairs
committee and will be put on
another committee in just a
moment.
House government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee.
S. government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
formally state government
elections in in university
Representative Lewis is chair
representative
wanted Johnson as vice chair and
the other members are
Representative Chasey the lie K.
goes Nibert forterra's redeem
and somewhat a.
House Education Committee
Representative is beluga and
Lente are departing the
Education Committee
our new Representative Baca is
joining the Education Committee.
House Energy Environment and
natural resources.
Representative Chandler and
Ferrari are departing the Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee.
Representative Miguel Garcia and
but at us are joining Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee.
House health and Human Services
Committee representative Debbie
Armstrong is departing.
Representative Barreras is made
by chair of the health and Human
Services Committee.
And Representative boom guy is
being added to the health and
Human Services Committee.
House Judiciary Committee
Representative Chandler is
joining the committee and
representative Armstrong is
departing.
House labor.
Military and Veterans Affairs
Committee Representative Baca is
joining that committee
Representative Hernandez is
departing okay.
House rural development land
grants and cultural affairs
representative at at is chair.
Representative SAINATO will be
vice chair the other members are
representatives Black
Castellano cook Fajardo Lujan
and Roger Montoya.
Taxation revenue.
Percent of Herndon will serve as
vice chair.
Representative Lente is joining
the taxation and revenue
committee.
And for the is applies those
exciting announcement of all
printing supplies.
Representative small is doing
pretty and supplies.
Okay we during down in case
anybody didn't get it all the
first go around.
The gentle lady from us here.
Senator thank you Mr speaker
hopefully soon to be Sierra but
potentially Valencia captured in
Sapporo I just wanted to make an
announcement at all of you know
that I am a very proud
grandmother of eleven
grand children soon to be
twelve.
Congratulations are there other
announcements.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Speaker I move that the house
stand in recess subject to the
call of the chair and as we do
that I would imagine members
will be back in about an hour.
So these are go too far and
we'll see that here in about an
hour we're recessed subject to
call the chair.
