The clerk to call the members
without a recorded response.
Representative Alcon.
Representative bash.
The federal.
Sorry as can be had body odor
difficulties the clerk will
start the list again
Representative Alcon.
Representative bash.
Here Representative bash is here
Representative bone cough.
Here Representative bone because
here Representative Cadena.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Castellano is
here Representative Chasey.
Representative Cook.
Representative dela Cruz.
Representative dela Cruz is here
Representative Dow.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Here Representative Harry Garcia
is here Representative Harper.
Representative Lente.
Here Representative Lente is
here Representative Lord.
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Representative Roger Montoya is
here Representative Nibert.
Representative Nibert is here
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here Representative Rubio.
Representative small.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend is here
Representative Zamora.
Here
Representative Zamora is here.
Because
here please rise for today's
education offered to us by the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Every morning do me a favor and
other heads um we'll have a
conversation with my friend.
I again I think you thank you
for your son.
Thank you for the sacrifice made
on cross.
We have an opportunity.
For internet the mobile life
with you.
The other is as we continue
through the session appraise
your hands.
In protection over each and
every member.
Their families.
I pray the the work that we do
brings honor and glory to you.
But again I prefer the men and
women.
The protect and serve.
And respond to the needs of our
country.
As for your protection.
Blessings on them and their
family.
Once again I just.
Ask for your will to be done.
And I pray all these things the
other gun in your son's holy and
precious name amen.
The gentleman would the.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Hochman Vigil
please let us in the pledge of
allegiance.
And with the generous San Juan
Representative Strickler please
leave this in saluting New
Mexico's flag.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
good morning Mr speaker good
morning members I move that we
go to the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business interjections ordered.
Good morning everyone.
Gentlelady from Tallis for what
purpose do you rise Mr speaker I
ask unanimous consent that house
memorial ten be removed for the
speakers table and be made the
next order of business
interjection it is so ordered
let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House memorial ten on final
passage is been taken the
gentlelady to explain to the
memorial Mr speaker and body
house memorial ten declares the
second week of June as certified
anesthesiologist assistants week
and honors the men and women
could keep us relatively pain
free during medical procedures.
Mr speaker also temporarily.
Generally
Thank you for that.
would you like the clerk to read
the memorial perhaps.
Mr speaker click to read.
So that part click to read.
Mr speaker was a long night.
House memorial ten introduced by
representatives or tenants in
Dixon a memorial requesting the
governor to conclude to declare
the second week of June and
certified anesthesiologist
assistants week to recognize
certified anesthesiologist
assistants as highly skilled
health care professionals the
knowledge the educational and
professional training that
certified anesthesiologist
assistants are required to
obtain any knowledge the crucial
role of certified
anesthesiologist assistants in
the delivery of health care
services.
Whereas in the early nineteen
sixties leaders in the medical
specialty of anesthesiology.
Recognize staffing shortages.
And to meet growing demands and
accommodate the increasing
complexity of anesthesia and
surgery three anesthesiologists
propose the precursor to what is
now known as a certified
anesthesiologist assistant and.
Whereas certified
anesthesiologist assistants are
highly skilled healthcare
professionals who work under the
directions of licensed physician
anesthesiologists to implement
anesthesia care plans and work
exclusively within the NSC
should care team model as
described by the American
society of anesthesiologists.
And whereas all certified
anesthesiologist assistants
students must have earned of.
In order for it to grieve with
premedical coursework and
completed graduate level
comprehensive.
Hi acting clinical program and
where I certified
anesthesiologist assistants
training must include a minimum
of twenty four to twenty eight
months in a master's level
program accredited by the
commission on accreditation of
out of allied health education
programs.
And must be based ask or offered
in collaboration with the
university that has a medical
school and academic
anesthesiologists position
faculty.
And we're eyes an average of six
hundred hours of classroom and
laboratory education two
thousand six hundred hours of
clinical anesthesia education
and the administration of more
than six hundred and ascetics
for various types of surgeries
are typically required to
successfully complete certified
anesthesiologist assistant
training.
And whereas certified
anesthesiologist assistants are
trained extensively in delivery
and maintenance of qualities.
Anesthesia care as well as
advanced patient monitoring
techniques and certified
anesthesiologist assistants
perform such tasks as
administering drugs obtaining
vast fax Scheler access applying
and interpreting monitors
establishing and maintaining.
Patient Airways and assisting
with.
Pre operative assessments now
therefore be it resolved by the
house of representatives of the
state in New Mexico the governor
be requested to declare June
sixth through June twelfth
twenty twenty two a certified
anesthesiologist assistants week
in New Mexico and be it further
resolved the copies of speak
memorial be transmitted to the
members of the Legislative
Council and Human Services
Committee
and The New Mexico Academy of
anesthesiologists assistance.
House memorial ten introduced by
Representative Ortez index in.
Thank you.
Is there debate on the memorial.
I
see no debate.
The gentle lady to close thank
you Mr speaker I now move that
house memorial ten do now pass.
I will make the motion I'll
modify it so that it's a motion
for unanimous consent showing
all members present and voting
in the affirmative period no
objection it is so ordered the
vote is now open.
It is not close to seventy the
firm is zero to negative house
memorial tennis passed the
house.
The gentleman curry.
Thank you Mr speaker.
All of you should find a little
small sack on your desk in front
of you.
With a block of cheese from
southwest cheese and accept
Representative over here in the
corner with hers on top of her
head so.
Mr speaker I I know a lot of our
newer colleagues aren't aware of
the wonderful cheese plant that
is located in just south of
Clovis New Mexico.
For many years it was the
world's largest cheese plant.
Many still believe it is but
they won't let me say it anymore
because.
One may have been remodeled down
in New Zealand or somewhere and
make a little bit more cheese
than the one that we have here.
With just so you understand the
magnitude of of what goes on
here in Clovis in New Mexico
there's five point one billion
pounds of milk process a year.
Five hundred and eighty eight
million pounds of cheese comes
out of that plant per year.
Thirty six point eight million
pounds of way to come out of
that plan a year.
They process just under three
hundred tanker loads of milk a
day three hundred sixty five
days a year twenty four hours a
day.
They're actually and that water
producer of the core of our
colleagues mentioned that the
other day that they actually
produce more water than they use
they they take the myth the
water out of the milk.
And they clean it up the user
about five different times for
washing the plan for washing the
trucks for different processes
they recycle that water over and
over and over to go through
treatment plant and then they
take it out put it on the ground
and grow crops with.
So it's a very very efficient
process.
And we are glad that we have a
sample of what they make before
us today all of the cheese that
goes out it's a wholesale
manufacturing plant they put it
out and forty pound blocks and
six hundred and forty pound
blocks they have the special
make these just for us so.
What you don't know that it's a.
It's a huge asset to the state
of New Mexico and a couple of my
colleagues are going to speak a
little more but Mr speaker I
thank you for the opportunity to
the.
Be that gentleman is allowed to
provide the cheese it's a
blessing for me to get to do
that so thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen I will say
that with a couple years ago and
our jobs listening to our we
visited the plant we were with
the late chase gentry who passed
last year
in if anyone has opportunities
part of the interim experience
to go and visit the plan I would
highly highly recommended
they produce enough mozzarella
cheese there to cover
all of the pizza consumed in
North America according to the
folks that were there when I was
there and it's really incredible
all the varieties they make and
how the constant cycling of
of the machines it's really
incredible
the me we do have a and then
spend from the gentleman from
Colfax curry Harding quay
Roosevelt same yelling you.
Thank you Mr speaker just a
little bit more about the
southwest to choose the one of
the other products they produce
this protein powder for body
builders when they once they get
the cheese out of the mail can I
send it on down the line they
stripped away and and they make
protein powder but value added
that's that's something that
we're trying to bring into our
state in the beef industry with
our vegetables we like to see
the jobs that treat the savings
and create other drugs stay in
the state of New Mexico with
southwest cheese you not only
have the cheese factory in the
jobs that it creates but you
have the farms that create the
feed for the cows at the dairy
then you have the jobs it's a
very then you have the jobs that
the cheese plant.
Further down the line the
grocery store the truckers the
wholesalers the pizza places
enormous amount of jobs come out
of that cheese industry.
So
We'd like to grow our own food
keep in the state of New Mexico
and retain the jobs for that go
with that the value added
agriculture I think southwest
cheese is a good example of that
and I hope you all enjoy this
proxies thank you Mr the
gentleman.
There is no way.
Anyone can love south was
cheese.
The gentleman from.
a device that what Lupe
Roosevelt and send me go.
Thank you Mr speaker.
As many of you know here in this
chamber I worked for twenty two
and a half years on the dairy.
The dairy industry is very.
Important to me in my heart it
provided a good living for me
and and I raised a family with
it.
And I'd like to see if you want
to say a few words about
southwest cheese and and the
milk industry in eastern New
Mexico at in New Mexico.
The mid valley for New Mexico is
one point three billion.
Dollars.
Three hundred and thirty seven
thousand Derry cal's reside in
the state of New Mexico.
Southwest cheese takes around
three hundred twenty loads of
milk per day around six thousand
gallons per load.
Producing over one point five
million pounds of cheese per
day.
That's a lot of trees.
Five hundred five thousand five
hundred direct jobs.
Sixteen thousand five hundred
indirect jobs.
Coming in at a hundred and four
hundred and ninety four plus
million dollars paid in direct
wages.
That ought to raise anybody's
eyebrow in the state of New
Mexico.
A very important industry we're
glad to have them here in the
state of New Mexico we're glad
to have southwest cheese here.
Thank you to everybody.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentleman the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane you Mr Gramm
announcement that's okay is it
about southwest cheese no I will
wait is there anything more
about southwest cheese.
The gentle lady from grant
Hidalgo and Luna thank you Mr
speaker and I wanted to echo
what you said I did have a
chance to tour that facility a
couple of years ago and I don't
know if it's still true
gentleman from curry but at the
time all of the pepper Jack
cheese at subways was creating
was from that plant so since
learning that all a order is
pepper Jack cheese when I'm at a
subway but across the nation all
the pepper Jack cheese came from
that plant outside of Clovis so
thank you Mr chair Mister
speaker.
Thank you generating that's some
hard information.
Is there any more Messi was
cheese.
The gentleman from Lee.
One question for the gentleman
from current.
In order to change to the but
your breed if she's sharp trader
of mild cheddar the state did
you say was a breed of cheese.
That is affirmative Mr speaker
the veranda of changes.
Chavis to to check on the proper
usage of the of the word read as
relates to cheese I think we can
a ruling on that gentlelady from
Chavis.
Really thumbs up that's okay
okay we just a new president we
have breeds of cheese.
the generally what would.
What the reserve chief he's do
we have with is in the house
today thank you Mr speaker I I
wasn't there to see it happen so
I'm not sure what read it what
this but.
Does my point eight general
curry street that.
Mr speaker I believe that it's
mild cheddar.
Gentleman from curry and Mr
speaker and gentleman curry
would you do me a favor would
you explain to the gentleman
from Lee had she's made.
The federal having supply this
morning the the gentleman from
billion a grant and Sierra thank
you Mr speaker.
I just don't know what New
Mexico would look like without
cheese that would be does a
disaster.
Nonchalance.
No.
No okay so the test.
It's a terrible thing to think
of that so thank you southwest
cheese and till those jobs but I
just want to say I don't want my
wife and I don't know how many
blocks issues we might children
are family because we love all
those New Mexican plates and so
thank you to New Mexico to the
southwest cheese for what they
do.
Thank you gentlemen.
John did you know that a Mexico
City case of the is to not have
cheese.
I live in New Mexico Mr speaker
and I just I just it was just it
was just a fun fact about the
doctor Casey is the plan G.
thank you all Mr speaker they
still put the case of the cases
are still meet with cheese in
order to a case of the New
Mexico City and.
Was shocked that's how they do
thank you Mr chairman is there
anything more about southwest
cheese.
And we wanted to the gentle lady
from Chavis Representative these
are.
Mr speaker thank you very much
the gentleman does not have to
yield self was cheese is.
Into that area of the state just
like the pre notice down in our
part of the world because those
dairies that are located not
only around Clovis and Fratellis
but Rossell artesian and the
Hobbs area.
The jobs that they create the
economies that the help to
sustain them around those
particular areas are remarkable.
These dairyman always.
Pay it back over the.
For their kids go to school to
where their families live and to
the workers that they do have
some Mr speaker I think it's
very important and Los crucis I
should point that out for
Representative Smalls area in
the Albuquerque area.
We are known as the dairy
capital of the southwest Mr
speaker and that does give me
great pride and what does happen
in our agricultural communities
thank you.
Thank you generally.
We should start working on some
articles of the declaration of
war against Wisconsin.
Is there any more us of those
cheese.
The gentleman from San Juan with
a dairy related announcement.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm gonna
keep milk in the dairy theme so
with that.
It's.
Mr speaker this is the only
because you'll take in your
entire life that you there's no
wrong answer so all the members
including staff should have at
your table selection of ice
cream and I do know there are
two nondairy options for members
that are able to do during so if
you can make a selection and and
get that back to me I appreciate
that and I'm hoping to bring up
that I streams to their
Wednesday of next week so thank
you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen.
This is a very.
The end enticing breeds of ice
cream.
We'll go to the gym leader do we
are we gonna start using the the
breeds for ice cream also get
sick with flu versus Mr speaker
I noticed some of the ice creams
are of mixed heritage.
Yes.
Yes they are the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Santa Fe and
Santa Fe thank you Mr speaker I
just want to say thank you to
Cindy who is the founder and
owner of the lights on the vine
there are the ones that brought
with a little bit of a box on
here and the bank house off the
we out there in Albuquerque
they're the ones who brought all
of these in a very happy that
some of our low carb because
being here has a tendency to
make you one eight lower carbs
because yes we do a lot of city
but anyways we have some great
snacks never got orange bursts
with sentiment on it we got
oatmeal cookies and then of
course we have got pumpkin seeds
with green chili so thank you
very much of the big house and
to the left on the vine.
Thank you gentle lady and
gentleman from San Juan where do
we turn these forms and right at
the Mr speaker thank you members
can given to me directly or you
can text me for those members
that are online
I I realize now that probably
didn't receive because these are
at our actual table so if you're
online send me a text or send me
an email and I can shoot you
over the the order list so that
they can be taken care of thank
you.
And if folks don't have your
cell phone number or might not
feel membership if you're on
zoom feel free to the.
All my office and we'll get that
you Mr speaker.
Okay.
Is there any further
announcements.
The gentle lady from Dona Ana.
Thank you Mr speaker we go to
committee reports junctions
order to read.
Mr speaker your consumer Public
affairs committee to Missouri
for House memorial thirty eight
has had it under consideration
point M. as recommendation that
do pass respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrary chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we're
adoption of a favorable
committee report on house
memorial thirty eight all those
in favor please signify by
saying aye.
This was nay reports about that.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
and military affairs committee
to is been referred house bill
seventy three as amended has had
it under consideration point I
was recommendation that do pass
respectfully submitted Eliseo
Lee Alcon chair.
Six speaker move adoption of the
bill we are honored option a
favorable committee report on
house bill seventy three as
amended all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
All this post may.
Eighty four.
Mr Mr speaker your labor
veterans and military affairs
committee to is been referred
house bill one sixty eight has
had it under consideration for
some of the recommendation that
do pass an answer for to
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
sale the outgoing chair.
Speaker move adoption of the
report we are adoption a
favorable committee report on
house bill one sixty eight all
those in favor please signify by
saying hi.
This was may.
Forty point Dr.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to Mr
referred house bill sixty has
had it under consideration point
in with recommendation that a do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Patricia A. Lundstrom
chair unanimous consent of the
committee portrait together act
on a single voting reflected in
the journal so they're acted
upon individually hearing
objections ordered probe to
read.
House bill eighty seven as
amended.
Do passed as amended.
House bill ninety four.
Do pass as amended.
House commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill one thirty four
do path as amended.
House bill one fifty seven as
amended to pass as amended.
House bill one sixty to pass as
amended.
Respectfully submitted Patricia
A. Lundstrom chair.
Move adoption we are adoption of
favorable committee reports and
house built a sixty eighty seven
as amended ninety four consumer
economic development committee
substitute for one thirty four
house bill one fifty seven as
amended in house bill one sixty
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
This was a three point part
opted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is been referred house bill
one eighty four has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation of do pass an
answer for the appropriations
and finance committee
respectfully submitted G. Andrés
Romero chair unanimous consent
of the committee point for the
other act on a single vote
reflects in the journal so they
rectified individually you
objections order clerk to read.
House bill one ninety three do
pass and thence to the
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee.
House memorial thirty three to
pass respectfully submitted G.
Andrés Romero chair speaker move
adoption of the committee
reports we're induction a
favorable committee reports and
house bill's when eighty four
one ninety three and House
memorial thirty three all those
in favor please signify by
saying hi.
Also as a committee point
reductive.
Gentlelady from Dona Ana.
Thank you Mr speaker we go to
third reading of legislation.
Disorder.
You're gonna start this morning
with.
So this afternoon.
With item number six.
Two twenty two gentlelady from
Bernalillo Representative Roybal
Caballero are you on that item.
Speaker will you give me to that
point for the record reflect
election necessary for placing
House Bill twenty two is amended
on final passage is been taken
the gentlelady to explain the.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you to the members of the house
I'm here to introduce today
House Bill.
Twenty two as amended known as
the language access bill
would New Mexicans equal access
to state services.
Regardless of the language they
speak.
Mr speaker and colleagues house
bill twenty two as amended would
require state agencies to
language needs.
The resources needed to ensure
access to services.
Public benefits unemployment
insurance.
Mr speaker.
As we all know Mexico is home to
thousands of people.
We speak languages other than
English.
Including Spanish Vietnamese
may become also are the most
common.
However there are many New
Mexicans the barriers to
services when they did not speak
English because state agencies
do not always provide
interpreting for translation
when required.
Increase health and economic
disparities in our communities.
Mr speaker as a tireless
proponent and advocate for
language access.
admirable work as a community
organizer.
I am honored today now
recognized my colleague.
Co sponsor Representative.
One who will lead our debate on
house bill twenty two as
amended.
First bill.
You provided for now.
My colleague Representative a
phone call thank you Mr speaker.
There is debating from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
Mr speaker I believe sorry I
think yeah I'm sorry I apologize
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Buka.
Thank you Mr speaker and no
worries and thank you
Representative right they are
all I am is so honored to be
doing this I worked on it for a
number of years
and now doing it and the
legislature gives me honor and
pride as Representative Roybal
Caballero mentioned this bill
would do a lot for our
communities especially those who
don't speak English as their
primary language in twenty
eighteen and number of community
organizations to the level I I
Alexion set out to come see a
health impact assessment on the
page access we engaged a hundred
and thirty participants across
the state representing eleven
different countries in the world
take generational from years
three to seniors they all
participated in this health
impact assessment and what we
found was that language access
affects health of immigrants and
refugees increases stress
depression anxiety and fear
amongst families we also found
and I'm determined that language
nexus is a social determinants
of.
This bill has support it had
endorsement from the twenty
twenty one Legislative Health
and Human Services interim
committee it also had support
from sixty to organizations
across the state name all of
them but if you want to
highlight a few of them
including the ACLU of New
Mexico.
Eighties and Santa Fe New Mexico
Asian families and etcetera on
property The New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
programs you and then New Mexico
black leadership council voices
for children center for civic
policy coalition establishments
against native women equality
New Mexico as well as the New
Mexico coalition against
domestic violence this bill is
also supported by the New Mexico
administration shin Office of
the Courts HSD CYFD as well as
DFA and the City of Albuquerque
most recently through a
championship of then city
councilor land Senate passed a
resolution for the which access
for the City of Albuquerque and
to their office of equity
division they also have lent
their support if this does pass
to support the state and doing
our part in nation of language
access at the state level and
then I won and was just
introducing our expert witnesses
today and they are also be
assumed that during the same
period being no come I she's a
trainee with the New Mexico
Center online poverty as well as
sovereign Hager who is the legal
director New Mexico Center
online poverty and with that Mr
speaker we will stand for.
There is debate the
representative the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Montoya.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentle lady and I'm not sure
where you're from gentle lady
have Bernalillo I believe from
the accounting field.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and that's correct.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady
so I was noticing that there was
a general appropriation attached
to this bill when it was
introduced that appropriation
was stripped
Madam speaker and and gentle
lady it does appear as if the
appropriation
Should have remained with this
bill I mean there there is going
to be expense associated with
this bill and I'm trying to to
figure out how is the costs
going to be born you madam
speaker and gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that and that we were
very intentional and thoughtful
about this we entered into a
conversation with ESA with the
proposed agency to help us with
some of the state and nation and
while we wanted an allocation
and there we thought it was
smart for us allocate junior
bill dollars to it so we put in
an amendment that was that we
are now instead of the sixty day
that was originally appropriated
please
being able to set allocate a
hundred and ten thousand dollars
in junior bill dollars for this
initiative which DFA said was
plenty for them to do what this
bill is setting out to do the
state Mr speaker and gentleman.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady I I'm looking at
that and when I was looking at
what the bill is asking for that
and I I did see appropriation of
fifty thousand I'm glad that
money has been given to this
from junior money to and for
some of the expense but Madam
speaker and gentle lady we're
talking about this has to take
place within every department
madam speaker and gentle lady
hundred and ten thousand
dollars.
Doesn't seem like that would go
very far madam speaker and
gentle lady as matter of fact
that is Madam speaker.
The way I read this every
every single state agency would
likely have have to add FTE.
To be able to manage what's
being asked of here in this
legislation for us for complete.
Programs for each department.
To be
put together and then managed by
each department and I I don't
see how.
The hundred and ten thousand
dollars that you have raised out
of junior money would barely
cover one F. T. E. N. a single
department so.
so madam speaker jealous of this
appears to be a very very large
unfunded mandate for departments
so I'm how do you see.
A hundred and ten thousand
dollars being able to be spread
throughout every state agency
that every department.
To to manage this this.
Mandate.
Madam speaker sorry I can't see
the screen side I think it's a
fair but Maez and gentlemen
thank you for the relief that
question this Bill of really
focuses on coordination of
language access services it's
it's specifically the language
access plan for each state
agencies so while we understand
each state agency out of the and
that eight create from this bill
will have to figure out from
there and now this is how much
of the budget do they need to
implement their language access
plan for their state agency this
bill is really around planning
and coordination of DFA listy
agencies that have secretaries
tell look at language access
plans across the board and
supporting needs amongst them so
again additional has to do with
planning and coordination of the
language access plans for state
agencies to implement with sand
every single department that
they received thank you madam.
Thank you Mr gentle lady.
As I'm writing this there seems
to be more than seems there's at
least two parts to this bill
Madam speaker and gentle lady
one being.
Access for the public to
interact with the state agency
and madam speaker gentle lady I
would suggest the first thing
that could happen to help the
public access state agencies as
for state agencies to actually
work in their offices because at
this point Madam speaker and
gentle lady the biggest problem
that people have to access is
that they can call a state
agency today then call in
tomorrow and then call next week
and not get a call back for four
literally days if not weeks on
and so the access right now to
state agency is about as poor as
it's ever been in my lifetime
the madam speaker and gentle
lady
B. sides looking to see how
state agencies can provide
services to
To
non English speakers the second
part of this bill madam speaker
and gentle lady it appears as
if.
We're looking to be able to
hire.
For requiring people to hire.
Of people into the state
agencies that may not speak
English if I am I.
M. I. A. incorrect in that Madam
speaker and gentle lady.
Speaker and gentleman that
bill again only requires
planning from DFA with the state
agencies with secretaries each
state department each state
agency I'm sorry is responsible
for their analysis of how the
and implementing which access to
the best of their ability and
whatever is determined is needed
for that is up to them to to to
figure out.
Miss madam speaker engine.
Thank you madam speaker and.
Gentle lady it has been.
My.
Experience.
That.
For the most part state
agencies.
Are already doing this to some
degree
pre trial services the courts.
And state agencies already have
in place
The hiring practice of hiring
bilingual.
Of.
Employees to be able to handle
the language barriers so madam
speaker and gentle lady I'm
trying to figure out how would
this differ from the standpoint
of hiring.
Bilingual
staff Madam speaker gentle lady.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
currently some state agencies
provide interpretation and
translation
others do not and for example a
federal court ordered you just
need to collect data because
their current data was
insufficient around linguistic
analysis of the populations Acer
also New Mexico department of
workforce solutions is also
under a federal civil rights
settlement at this moment that
requires translation of the
unemployment application into
Spanish Vietnamese and other
languages after long standing
failure is there has also just
been a struggle and consistency
across all state agencies so
again we feel that this Madam
speaker and gentlemen will be a
way to have a more comprehensive
effort across the stage for a C.
agencies that model best
practices learn lessons learned
from agencies are doing this
really well and to share
resources so when the taxes
state agencies again including
HST CYFD as well as DFA the
welcome this bill because they
recognize that this is something
that's critically needed across
all state agencies Madam speaker
and gentleman.
Thank you madam speaker
gentlelady in once again as I'm
reading this you've you've
described this as being merely
the cost of putting together a
plan but
it does appear maybe to be
committing us to future
expenditures because the the
languages that they will put in
place a plan to meet the needs
identified in the assessment so
madam speaker and gentle lady
there's not appropriation here
to to necessarily needs.
The
employee future employee costs
and whatever else of what other
whatever what other expenses are
associated with this.
The.
Even though this talks about a
plan the plan is specifically.
To.
To identify and and meet the
needs not just identified but
meet the needs so madam speaker
and gentle lady it it appears to
me this is if there would be no
further
investment.
In future legislative sessions
to cover the cost of flight as
I.
Expressed earlier is going to be
a significant cost madam speaker
and gentle lady this appears to
be a large unfunded mandate is
there madam speaker is there
any.
way that if the department
cannot afford to hire the FTEs
identified in their plan that
they would not have to follow
through with the plan that
they've submitted Madam speaker
and gentle lady.
Madam speaker and gentlemen of
federal law already requires
reserve recipients of federal
funding like state agencies
provide language access in
employing language access plans
to do so so while we.
No that limitation needs to
occur again this bill Madam
speaker and gentlemen only has
to do with coordination that and
planning and I'll and new ten my
colleague Representative Roybal
Caballero to see if she has any.
Thank you representative madam
speaker and Representative I
just wanted to reminded the
representative on the body that
this is a plan as a
representative mentioned to
Have the state agencies
coordinate and plan and if the
administration's and we've
spoken to several administrative
bodies.
Excuse me that they will work
whatever they assess as being
the needs are the language needs
whatever they need in terms of
staffing in terms of
infrastructure whatever they
need in order to implement.
Part of this planning process
and then it will become Madam
speaker incumbent upon them to
work in those needs thank you
very administrative to annual
budgets so the anticipation is
that this bill will we've been
planning purposes of this bill
will then need to the
continuation of and increase
wherever they see it.
Wherever they see the need into
the administrator annual budget
I'm not help on this this bill
is strictly for on mining
purposes to access the plan
thank you madam speaker.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady I'm looking on page
four.
last line thirteen it says
that this assessment would
include cost which would be
including a competitive salary
structures for employees with
more multi cultural
proficiencies so madam speaker
and gentle lady if if you're.
If everything else in here is
already
discussing war determining that.
it's going to identify costs I
why is it necessary to put that
specific language in this in
this bill Madam speaker gently.
Madam speaker and gentlemen
again that is that is within
their assessment so I state each
state agency goes to and their
assessment of what is meaningful
access for services to their
for their programs he would do
an assessment to figure out
inclusive what are the resources
available to the end to do an
costs as part of their
assessment so madam speaker and
gentlemen this again all relates
back to the assessment that
again is supported at the
federal level of how do you do
an analysis spending which
access planning and and that
would come after and is also to
each agency.
Representative I call your
attention to these are standard
operating calculus is or
comments that go into the
planning process when
determining
All the factors based on your
analysis you needs assessments
self cost and everything is
delineated in the line of
inclusive why can't I I just
standard order of procedures
that are followed
administratively when you're
conducting planning needs
assessments for the purpose of
growth and expansion of your
department thank you madam
speaker.
Thank you madam speaker
Outside of the bill
I I guess I would like to see if
I can have a definition.
Of meaningful because a it's if
there is not meaningful access
is because I've been looking
through I I'm not seeing a
definition formed meaningful
access could you more clearly
define what meaningful access
would be Madam speaker.
Yes madam speaker and gentleman
and meaning for access looks and
follows four factor test to
ensure meaningful access to
services and so the first one is
they have to look at the number
or proportion of limited English
proficient individuals eligible
to be spared are likely to be
encountered in the eligible
service population number two a
look at the frequency with which
these limited English proficient
individuals coming in contact
with the entities program
activity or service number three
they have to assess the nature
and importance of the entity
entities program activity or
service and then finally for
number four they look at the
resources available to the
entity as well as the cost to
create a plan for that the
agency as well as
responding to it.
The lady where is that in the
the bill I'm I am looking for it
I this is the first time I've
had a chance to look over this
bill so it may be in here I am
just not finding that Madam
speaker and gentle you where is
that definition that you just
gave to me where is that in the
bill.
And madam speaker and gentlemen
and it is that federal guidance
from U. S. department of justice
who implements the federal
requirements for its state
agencies to follow that funders
this requirement and
It is not I don't believe that
provide in the bill and because
it is already defined federally
and I see that Roybal Caballero
came off
right.
Thank you thank you madam
speaker and then you did say it
Representative local areas in
federal law already it's under
forty five CFR ninety two and
all of the sections that
describe what meaningful fox is
and so because planning
processes will be aligned our
state funding process will be
aligned with federal law
that we will follow they will
follow exactly what meaningful
means as it relates to the
federal loss.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady ladies channel
gentle lady's
So the specific a federal
statute the the definition is
literally under meaningful
access it's not under access to
these I just want to make sure
that the word meaning full is
defined.
And madam speaker and gentle.
Efforts.
Just to make sure.
If.
Thank you Jim take Utah you're
referring to Madam speaker I I
believe
representative madam speaker
that the representative
again the for
Definitions for what the federal
government is
if elected as.
Well there were four point she
read out and that is because.
On state funding process will be
aligned with the the federal.
Alignment and those for that she
read out of our rural or.
Fact what will define meaningful
would you wish us to read those
to you again.
Madam speaker and gentle lady of
I would I was not questioning
the the four points I just want
to make sure that in the
definition of those four points
are under that the that the
actual languages meaningful
access not just access.
madam speaker I'm I'm
questioning whether or not the
word meaningful as in the
definition at the federal level.
you Mr Madam speaker and
Representative absolutely yes
yes those are those four factors
and other descriptions are
written with federal law.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady
I would also like to ask in a
different line of questioning
here
Does this apply to local
government agencies that.
provide services and either
there's a state appropriation or
federal appropriation tied to
that the services being provided
locally at a county or a local
city or town level.
Madam speaker.
And this applies specifically to
see agencies secretary.
Thank you miss madam speaker and
gentle lady so okay I believe I
have a little bit better idea of
what this bill is is seeking to
do M. but I'm still Madam
speaker and gentle lady of very
concerned about what.
Appears to me to be the
potential for
Committing our secretaries and
apartments to taking certain
actions whether or not a madam
speaker gentle lady there's an
appropriation that goes with
that in the future thank you
madam speaker there is further
debate the gentleman Colfax
curry Harding quay Roosevelt San
Miguel and you Representative
Chatfield thank you madam
speaker does the gentle lady
yield.
I can speak.
Thank you madam speaker madam
speaker there you know of the of
the main languages that I know
of in New Mexico that are spoken
is English Spanish and
Athabaskan ordinary others some
other native languages that are.
Fairly regularly spoke in a in
our state
The.
This this bill envision there's
many many other languages across
the United States and across the
world does this bill envision
that we would have someone.
Able to interpret it every
little language or a only the
main languages that are used in
our state.
Madam speaker gentle thank you
for that question as a reminder
spending estimate and then
Vietnamese and Mandarin Chinese
than this which is in the state
of New Mexico.
We would go each state agency
would do there for factor
analysis and that includes
looking at the number or
proportion of limited English
proficient individuals are
eligible to be spared are likely
to be encountered in their
service population as well as
the frequency in which state
would provide and access those
programs or services there are
phone that at lines so
interpretation lines that a
number of organizations already
use Albuquerque police
department does and so does
again now that City of
Albuquerque's implementing this
sh T. use that as well so
whereas there are and many many
languages spoken they would fall
under again that access may
figure out what are those
meaning which is that are coming
forth to their organizations and
then they could rely on aids on
interpretation line to cover
those languages so we would not
need a contractor for every
single language out there we
that they're already at
infrastructure pieces that are
set up across the nation for
thanks to access these these
services so again this is still
has to do with Brittany's.
That kind of gets into my my
next question is kind of
structure the you apparently do
not
Envision that each agency would
have someone appropriation in
every language your what is it
is it true that what you
envision is more State Bank of
interpreters that would serve
all the agencies in the state of
New Mexico.
Madam speaker and gentlemen
that's what we're hoping will
come out of this bill to
coordination with DSC S. it
would be to see who has what
contract already how can other
agencies utilize that we're into
it in a way that is cost
effective really this is for us
a week supported me the language
access services across state
agencies so that we can be the
most efficient and comprehensive
as possible madam speaker
engines and and one other thing
now and that again we
would rely on some things like
phone interpretation line that
set up I think there are things
like Pacific interpreters out
there where you you dial in you
ask them for what language in
the thank you madam interpreter
RBC thanks so it's it's quite a
simple thing that stands.
Madam speaker once this plan is
set forth are all our state
agencies bound by this plan or
do does the house get another
another go at it we get a look
at this plan decide if we're
going to fund implementation of
this plan the or does it just
move forward without our
preview.
Madam speaker and gentlemen
there is supposed to be an
annual report that is sent LFC a
believe that to report on all of
this that sound now including
the assessment of what's needed
to do this comprehensively and
effectively for the state of New
Mexico as well madam speaker and
gentlemen that
And
this is again already required
provide federal laws so this
needs to happen regardless of if
this bill goes or doesn't but
what does the law does is really
support back ordination and
planning legislative agencies
have asked for.
Madam speaker.
gentlemen also in the beauty of
the planning process is also
assessed what resources can be
shared so that we streamlined
the resources but we're also
accessing the latest state of
the art on medical devices and
other resources available to
increase plan would give access
to on public services and
and Madam speaker and gentleman
also remember that we do have
control of the budgets and we
ask hard questions during our on
administrative processes leading
up to when we speak to the
cabinet secretaries in
administrations so this is just
one other check that we have to
ensure that the legislative
intent in the final if the
current disassociated with this
bill and then of course that we
ensure that they have the
necessary on annual budget to be
able to carry out the
implementation when that occurs
thank you.
Madam speaker gentle lady that
that does come to go to to the
next question.
since the.
Since the legislature has
oversight of the budget
I wonder if it would not be wise
for us to have a look at the
plan that set forth see if it's
sufficient to meet the federal
guidelines see if we have the
funding available to fund it and
see if we simply would to be a
workable plan.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
is exactly what this bill does
Sam exactly for this purpose is
with an annual report to the
legislative body to check to see
how that actually looks in the
state of New Mexico and went to
state agencies need additionally
to support that mission Madam
speaker.
Madam speaker gentle lady with
the legislature first have the
ability to approve the plan
before we start receiving annual
report.
if I may Madam speaker and
gentleman on I just have you
recall that we will the plan.
Will be overseen by the cabinet
secretaries to their
administrative processes
is reported out
two the legislative finance
council as well as to DFA who
oversees all of these mechanisms
and it is at that time
and the executive is who runs
these agencies madam speaker and
gentleman not the legislature
but what are we coming in of
course is to a follower
reporting processes from which
you are correct we will receive
those reports but in the cabinet
secretaries and their
administration divisions that
are charged with
Planning processes and the
implementation so are not
directly and we don't sign off
on anything other than approving
and voting for this bill and
making sure the plans get
underway given thank you madam
speaker thank you.
Madam speaker gentle lady the
bill says that there will be a a
director that each agency will
put our appoint a director well
that directors only Joby to
oversee the plan set forth in
this bill or will it be someone
it's currently employed by that
agency how will that work.
Madam speaker and gentleman I'm
not familiar with point five if
you were referring to can you
tell us where that else Madam
speaker gentle lady per page for
last paragraph.
One
twenty nine.
Nine twenty and twenty one.
Madam speaker and
And the gentleman.
Is
Yes
that's already an existing law
that's already a function
functionality of existing long
what you see on madam speaker
and
gentleman are the sections that
we're.
This particular bill highlights
of those that are under lines so
the part that year of the
section that you're referring to
is already of the loft and that
requires that just of the state.
If there's a point within the
agency's Representative programs
and that they run the programs
accordingly so this is just
existing clients not what we're
proposing and house bill twenty
two as amended madam speaker and
gentleman.
Madam speaker gentle lady I'm
well aware of that but the
underlying sections of this bill
changes the duty of that person
or does not change the duties of
a person that I guess that's
where my questions going.
Madam speaker and gentleman
that's entirely up to the
administrative processes how
they speak with them there
administration how best to to
manage that directors are duties
and responsibilities so it's not
something that that that we
necessarily can answer at this
point because it is part of the
the current administrative
processes which requires
agencies to make these kinds of
determinations and then this
plan the beauty madam speaker in
this plan is that it will
highlight additional areas of
duties and responsibilities that
would add to the
it'll be a result of the
planning and assessment of this
bill but it will also shed light
on the administrative
processes that will need to
improve in order to increase
language access to these.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady for your
answers.
There is further debate the
gentleman surveillance here
Representative aka.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentle lady.
At minutes.
Thank you madam speaker
Thank you for the.
If for.
I thank you for the the gentle
lady yield.
I will madam speaker I will you
know if you.
The freshman here about the
process so thank you for your
understanding my questions are
we going to be on the fourth
point of the
The access okay as far as
resources so it's my
understanding is a.
This is going to pay for it
Hinch.
Department to basically the
analyze and examine its own
processes which are provide
access and opportunity it might
it might correct are gentle lady
and Madam speaker.
Yes the gentleman that's great.
Thank you gentlelady so.
madam speaker.
As far as what after identifying
these areas of need.
What types of supports maybe
made available because I
definitely support the
opportunity for access I
definitely see the need but I
won't know what will follow up
Faxes being taken once I areas
identified.
Madam speaker and gentlemen if I
am answering I am interpreting
your question correctly fasts
again up to the state agency to
decide current do we want to set
up a contract with then the page
access link can be as simple as
that and then the
with some money aside from that
the maybe decide that there's
somebody in the department will
just receive that in and maybe
I'll ask training in general for
folks said to figure out how do
I analyze language access plan
how does that work
it could be it could look thank
many things I'm Madam speaker
and gentleman.
Thank you generally thank you
madam speaker of my next
question about that is actually
once we identify this and I do
understand the fact about.
You know taking action there is
a type of certification that is
going to be needed or required
for anyone who will be providing
these services I think that
we're looking at this we're
looking at somebody who may just
be more than able to speak the
language.
Yes speaker and gentleman thank
you for that really important
question for interpretation as
well as translation depending on
what the services for so health
in the courts it was all require
a different kind of
certification process I I
believe that you utilize a
language access fine you can
also ask and didn't know what
kind of segregation.
Thank you madam.
Madam speaker and gentleman
that's a really good question
and I think that's the beauty
and and this planning process is
bad the administrative
our our public service they know
best what they are of the public
that they are serving and so
there are on the ground in the
understand how to tap into on a
proper needs assessment and
what's the set up for example
certification which is very
common in this area of language
access so they will know on how
to how best assessed that what
languages that are needed and
then what services complement
those languages that are needed
and then know how to execute
Searches for ways in which to
meet those goals.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady which again is
gonna bring me to my next point
about the shortage of such
individuals that have that
certification I know there's
various certifications and and
one of my concerns would be is
we can have enough interpreters
in the needed areas to provide
support for all the different
agencies I can tell you back in
my own district we lack of those
people that curry the Kerry that
correct certification to provide
interpretive services for even
the most basic languages of
Spanish and through as far as
other languages so Madam speaker
gentle it is do you know if are
we working with a hundred
programs or other programs to
get people certified for this
for this task.
Welcome to have
Currently and that's again the
beauty of the assessment is
because we also will look at
they will look at and we
anticipate they will look at the
resources that are available and
then access.
Find out what is necessary in
order to tap into those
resources so that they need to
share those.
Find that there is a shortage
and certification well that's
going to come out of the funding
process and they will also be in
the planning process and I think
what resources they can all
mutually and collectively and
collaboratively tapi into that
will I dressed if if there are
shortages we are not in the
position madam speaker make
those determinations because
this is part of the planning
process but should there be our
shortages that come out of this
planning process in assessment.
Part of this assessment will
also be a tap into what is
needed in order to address the
shortages so if it's shortages
of infrastructure amputation
devices and carpenters whatever
is needed will come out of this
planning process ended up to be
administrators and their
departments and whenever they
designated to address those ones
with that point House Bill
twenty two as amended nearly
instigating them going with
making worth planning and
assessment
Thank you generally thank you
madam speaker I have one final
questions
For the of gentle lady.
The timing once we've identified
that there is a need in the
certain department through that
needs assessment in service
specified time in which these it
does for the patients and be
addressed.
Madam speaker gentlemen again
this is already required by
federal law for state agencies
to receive federal dollars which
is pretty much all and so what
we're doing through this bill is
is almost thing we want more we
want to be in compliance with
one of the federally right in
compliance with the laws so that
we don't have any further losses
coming to our state agencies to
me and to advocate for them
working on this for so long she
does not only protects our
communities who are limited
English proficient they also
protect our state agencies and
they have a strong and they know
how to implement and they have
the resources to do so so while
I have to start to work out for
its school up budget for
implementation for expediency
based on their different
assessments which is I'll get
this to at least the funding
organization to make sure that
it's in the top of their minds
in there some priority towards
it Madam speaker.
The general idea thank you madam
speaker I don't believe I
communicated my question because
correctly or maybe gets
currently what I was saying is
what is the current time line
under the current standards to
get these extracted I I do
understand that this is getting
us into compliance which again
is saying it's long overdue my
question is how how long is the
timeline once this is compiled
once we have found out the
resources.
General gentlelady what is the
timeline in order for action to
be done in other words is it is
it six months is it three months
is it up to here because in
order for these departments we
need to cut and understand is
how long or how much time do I
have to resolve these issues
that may be brought up as a
result of this bill.
Madam speaker and gentlemen
thank you for clarifying and
again thank you for your the
questions I think timeline will
again come out for each state
agency and will come out of the
assessment and will ultimately
be reported in an annual report
to and yes A. as well as
currencies so if if those groups
don't necessarily provide is
after you're there needs to be
rushed that could be in
conversation I believe but Madam
speaker and gentleman again this
goes back to the state agencies
doing their for factor analysis
to understand what is needs
access for their programs and
services and what is that as
part of it was funding.
Madam speaker and gentleman the
bottom line is that that
administrative offices and
agencies all have the
flexibility to set those
timelines knowing that they must
be in compliance with state no
already with federal law and
knowing that this bill house
bill
thank you is a man that will
direct them to be even more
forthright.
Addressing
So that's entirely up to the
state agencies to build in their
own on time line.
And balance the needs and
resources process and set those
timeline thank you know madam
speaker and gentleman timelines
are
of federal part of planning
process you set your goals your
objectives objectives those at
the table and timelines timeline
page outcomes will be so it's
all part of that I thank you
madam speaker.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you generally these are just and
again I I support the Sox's the
my my my question is in terms of
just about.
You know that we are these
agencies that they have ample
opportunity and ample resources
to to carry out the
responsibilities outlined in
house bill twenty two as amended
thank you madam speaker thank
you inject it is I have no
further questions.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from I'm sorry the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Santa and Santa Fe
Representative Lord.
Thank you madam speaker will the
representative please yield.
Thank you madam speaker and I
yield to the gentle.
Thank you madam chair and
representative of I just have
some brief questions I was not
in any of these committees can
you tell me what languages are
just tell me how many different
languages
That you're talking about in
this bill.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
guess that will come out of the
assessment for each agency so
the losses Turman different data
sources such as the sun since
way thing which is I spoke in in
their service area as well as
the resources we have available
to serve that population.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
and then again on the for the
which is better than this coming
after inflation so in New Mexico
are Spanish Dinning yet and
needs and then during.
Speaker.
And gentle lady it's all going
to be determined by the planning
so it will come out in the
funding faculty what languages
are spoken by the population but
are we fighting Mexico and what
their needs are in order for us
of public our services to be
able to meet their needs.
Thank you madam madam speaker
and Representative will there be
any limitations like let's say
we look at all of New Mexico we
find there's a very very small
population of people because we
do have
A bit of Jewish people who have
moved to New Mexico or and have
been here very long time so
would that also include very
very small populations of people
to would there be an opportunity
to translate into cheaper.
Madam speaker gentle lady title
six of the Civil Rights Act and
the federal guidance requiring
interpretation of requests for
New Mexico New Mexicans need
access to state services but for
translation of documents for the
which is it's by one thousand
people who speak at or five
percent of the population
whichever is less so again that
will come out of the assessment
speech and.
Thank you madam speaker
Representative that's what I was
workers about because I was
trying to figure out where the
line is because everything has
got a line so it's it's people
who if there's a thousand people
or more that will be in the in
transit so how much my second
question is how much Madam
speaker and Representative how
much is going to cost for us to
hire all these translators.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
guess and that will come out of
yes and there are at models of
this already occurring the City
of Albuquerque has passed the
resolution for the right to
access across all city
departments if they have been
working
Diligently on this and has a
dedicated their support to the
state in implementing this
language access if it it is
passes on again hiring is not
required as part of this bill
and this is just for planning
purposes how agencies usually do
it is that they use contract for
language fine and this is an
opportunity because this deal so
she is we with ordination among
state agencies madam speaker and
gentle lady that if for example
Albuquerque has somebody on
contract already who can
translate Vietnamese that
contract can be shared with
another state agency in fact
meets so there are a lot of
opportunities for collaboration
and for resources to be shared
across the state of New Mexico.
Madam speaker Representative a
request on that too so on the
translators is I I know we're
looking at into the future but
would it the weather be
something in there to guarantee
that would be local New Mexicans
that would be hired for this or
with this could be something
that is out sourced outside of
our state for the translators.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
I think that's an excellent
question it could be wonderful
for a again that would be done
it will believe there is an
organization called the
committee interpreters state you
a number of interpretation
translation contracts for the
state of New Mexico I I think
our hope is that it was the
local while also understanding
some of there is is hired to
accessing regions may need to be
contracted out so again this
will come on and each in Alice
at each assessment from state
agencies and then they can
decide what already exists what
needs to what what else is
needed and then how do the teams
tracks with specific languages
and see.
Thank you madam speaker
Representative those are the
questions I have.
There's further debate the
gentleman from going on a grant
and Sierra the representative
that access.
Thank you madam speaker I gently
will you please feel.
Madam speaker I yield to the
engine.
I am trying to understand all
these things Madam speaker
gentle lady and I understand
that you're trying to create a
Basically a study or a how to
implement this and so.
My understanding is that the US
Department of Health already
requires this and so why do we
need to process to implement
something that's already a
requirement.
Madam speaker and gentlemen it
is federally required but not
all state agencies are following
this this requirements for us
this is of the state agencies
get more also and more
importantly it's around forty
nation of resources that we do
this issue the as cost
effectively as possible for the
state of New Mexico speaker.
Speaker gentle lady so does
would would the executive branch
for could of the executive
branch just sent on order for
them to follow that mandate.
Madam speaker and gentlemen
we've been working on language
access for ten plus years that
we know that depending on who's
in the administration different
things I are and I prioritize
for many communities through
this would impact are over the
is that Miss comes.
In statute so that we pass
Mexico who as as the legislative
body is really supportive of our
state agencies across the state
to be in compliance with federal
regulations.
Speaker gentle lady has the
executive branch sent out a
message to follow the US mandate
as a requirement of the
administration.
Madam speaker and gentlemen I
don't know that.
Madam speaker and and gentleman
gentleman if I may
I know that we referenced
several times that the federal
law already requires
We are in this bill into us the
various departments coordinate
in order to ensure that we are
meeting our state.
To the mall whatever number of
languages we need to be meeting
on in order to open access and
opportunity to those populations
that are speaking of languages
and so
Please also note madam speaker
and gentleman that we have
already several state agencies
that have indicated
that they are in support and as
you know these are the executive
branch agencies.
So they will special agencies
such as well there are several
agencies actually that because
they have a direct phone service
with the public they are
In support of doing whatever is
necessary in order to be able to
move on.
increase Spence services does
that there already
serving as a public.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady so my question is those
that are those departments are
already in support.
Are any of them implementing it.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
believe there is some agencies
to provide translation
interpretation.
As needed and the great part is
that through this bill does
Corey doing it already can help
other agencies that have not yet
implemented four agencies is
really really important because
what we're doing is setting have
some best practices for all
state agencies to follow as well
as for them to share their
different resources so that
across the board it'll be more
comprehensive housing which
access services I not only
provided that the quality of
which they are being provided
speaker.
Thank you madam speaker
generally so do you mind sharing
the agencies are already doing
this.
Madam speaker and gentlemen
currently as an example
department of workforce
solutions has a language access
plan and it's currently being
required to have hi is required
by federal.
No gentleman I believe also
CYFD I part of the department of
Human Services Human Services
and then just keep in mind that
we mentioned that the department
of finance administration.
I was.
Very those about having the
opportunity to this bill to be
able to oversee.
Collecting.
All of the resources and
ensuring that coordination of
services
would be on.
Hands to on her oversight
just wanted to share that.
Madam speaker.
Thank you madam speaker are
generally and and I know that we
just had a sense of so I would
imagine that you'd have some of
the information the the
statistical information on what
languages meet the criteria the
the threshold that you guys for
a question do you happen to know
what those are the figures only.
Madam speaker gentle lady and I
don't have those numbers in
front of me but again that will
come through the assessment and
it will be specific depending on
the service areas so if that
agency provide services and
programs for the entire state of
New Mexico it would more than
likely be and Spanish to Chinese
and Chinese Mandarin as well as
Vietnamese but it's in a
specific population area I just
thinking about my and district
nineteen in the international
district there's also when we
just I just like you the that
they need to account for so
again it's important to have
census data for each assessment
because it needs to be to if the
service area.
Speaker Madam speaker and
gentleman the beauty of having a
sense of the baby and cannot
find the data that we've and
relates directly to population
areas within our state so that
have for Latium will be
undertaken as well the census
date of it's pretty valuable if.
Unless we have a fund accounts
but we have the data is very
valuable to this process.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady so I wanted sure story I
mean I as a kid my first
language is Spanish so
when I went to school it going
to school and I could understand
but sometimes I've had trouble
expressing myself and sometimes
I didn't understand everything
and so I I do understand what
you're saying I I just wanted to
know the how far this would go
and how complex it could be how
far how complex it could become
and and fence with that I I mean
I hope these questions madam
speaker gentle lady
clarify that for me and and for
the body and soul each
department is required to.
and I wanna make sure I'm
understanding this right of be
able to.
Fix those language barriers for
those people that are.
Within that virtual that we just
discussed with are going on in
into that so does would that
include because it's supposed to
be for health purposes so my
question is does that affect the
D. O. T..
Speaker gentle lady.
And madam speaker and gentlemen
this bill affects all state
agencies if they have a state.
To madam speaker gentle lady I
was just thinking of the deal
the O. T. and then signed the
signage throughout the state.
And how many different languages
that would be
In.
Do you know what the impact is
that something that might and
then my misunderstanding this
Madam speaker gentle lady or is
that something that would be.
Impacted and something that
would have to be implemented.
Madam speaker and gentlemen
again this will come out of the
assessment I eat each state
agency with the secretary will
be conducting if this bill moves
forward safety T. for example
has a secretary and they are
needing to implement this cell
as asked and then they would do
their assessment see what
languages are necessary for them
to have signage and and then
what is this population as well
as those other whatever is in
the in the four factor analysis
such as resources and then they
would create a soft.
Thank you madam speaker gently
and so I just in my mind I was
just kinda.
Running a real of things that
that and and I'm just going to
give you let me of things that
just came to mind real quickly
hi I thought of you know the
state agencies when someone of a
language barrier has to sign up
for our state health insurance
or for in general purpose.
Employment applications and then
following up with those
applications when they're when
they're going to interview or so
or so forth.
the DMV.
Law enforcement Miranda rights.
I was talking I was thinking I
think the courts already do some
of this the I I mentioned the
DOT signage.
state and county hospitals are
health office and those just off
the top of my head what I was
thinking about and and with that
I was thinking will.
How much would that cost and has
that study even been done and
was intent and I don't know if
you know this madam speaker
gentle lady for the federal
government to place.
These unfunded mandates to this
to this magnitude and that's
really what I what what I'm
trying to understand Madam
speaker gentle lady do you have
any statement concerning the
kind of that.
This bill that I just gave you
madam speaker gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentle man
hopefully and and saying
everything that you're asking
and with the clarity that you're
hoping for action Madam speaker
gentleman there and to do that
already do this as you mentioned
the courts I know UNM hospital
is at one point student and they
needed to provide Vietnamese
actually now
ruling that was true and sedate
you and Spanish and Vietnamese
in some of their translation
documents at this is something
that again is federally required
as somebody who ran a non profit
myself before I came into this
whenever we receive funds funds
as a small nonprofit agency when
we receive federal dollars and
we also knew that we were
federally required to provide
bank which acted services we and
are planning to does dollars and
use some of that allocated some
of that for providing access so
as a stipulation of receiving
these federal dollars state
agencies should be I need
resources to to do what is
federally required Madam speaker
and gentlemen so there are
absolutely examples of how this
is already being conducted in
New Mexico and and as a reminder
the association and.
Of course the administrative
offices of the point for New
Mexico as well as the City of
Albuquerque those committed to
supporting the ski into one of
language access in each.
Ensuring what they've already
done.
So madam speaker gentle lady
from.
So the threshold that you you
have in your bill madam speaker
gentle lady is that a threshold
that you came up with orders at
the threshold or what is the
threshold that the federal
government mandated for states
to follow.
Madam speaker and gentlemen as a
reminder this threshold is in
the title is in title six of the
Civil Rights Act and it has
awarded you with translations so
for translation of documents is
required for the which is and by
one thousand people are five
percent of the population
whichever is less.
Thank you madam speaker the only
so it's in the federal mandate
that less over a thousand people
is required is that the
understand that right I'm sorry
speaker family and madam speaker
and gentleman it is required
that any translation of
documents happens for the page
languages spoken by one thousand
people or five percent of the
population whichever is.
Thank you madam cell in five
hundred and and.
Madam speaker sorry if if if
it's five hundred is at five
percent and.
Just confused I can't.
Senator.
You're doing a great job madam
speaker gentle lady I I I'm
sorry and I'm I'm just trying to
get it get a grasp of this and
so much I think my last question
is we we you you changed for
I should say you change but I
think in the bill there was a
change from citizenship and this
is goes back to the mandate does
a mandate.
Require citizenship or residence
because of this that's a big
difference Madam speaker gentle
lady because we just as as you
know we've had a huge influx of
refugees.
Speaker gentle lady in that that
includes people from the Middle
East and all over and so that
right there could be the rail
what fun less the federal
government intended to be for
residents or was it intended for
citizenship.
Madam speaker and gentle mention
my understanding this is this is
the best to be give and take
whoever is services in Chad may
or not may not be a artist Lynn
agency serves as part of their
qualifications so for many
agencies is just the server who
comes in and so sometimes they
would even ask for citizenship
so it's it's dependent on but it
is going to be sent.
Just a moment please know that
Who have access.
Public service.
Any of our public administrative
offices in the state of New
Mexico served by any of our
administrative agencies and so
on we no one is in the on
position in our administrative
offices or also in June
get into
I have questions on the question
it is nearly associated with the
services if someone comes in and
need the service and have
language involvement of of need
we have to address that language
needs that is what is language
access is an opportunity thank
you madam speaker.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady and and please don't
misunderstand me I just I'm just
trying understand because that
can dramatically change our
requirement so to clean that up
madam speaker gentle lady would
you mind reading the federal
mandate so that side at least
understand was it president for
citizenship.
Madam speaker gentlemen are you
asking around the language that
is under tight all six of the
Civil Rights Act.
Madam speaker you said that the
total six required us to do that
and I wanted to hear the
specificity of what that was was
it residency residency for.
Citizenship and that's as yes
Madam speaker and gentleman
title six of the Civil Rights
Act and federal guidance require
interpretation on request when
you Mexicans taxes state
services and require translation
of documents for the which is
that the FY one thousand people
or five percent of the
population whichever is.
Madam speaker gentle lady did
you just read that right of our
the bill or it was at this
actually the federal mandate.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
don't believe this is part of
the bill again this is something
that's already been done
elsewhere so we did not seek to
every decided again in our bill
and the specific language comes
from federal guidance from the
US department of justice.
Madam speaker and gentleman
please note the federal law
requires access to an
interpreter upon request federal
law requires translation of
vital documents used by the
agency on.
And again going back to the
numbers that we mentioned so the
federal law is very clear and
department of justice is very
clear and that is the person
comes in and there's a need and
of foreign language
Representative services or
whatever the language needs are
the federal law indicates that
those needs.
That is under the title that
Representative Sanchez.
Thank you so again federal law
is very clear about what we must
do and that
So I just want to add to that if
we're not attorneys neither one
of us I believe no can't readily
find but rest assured that it
has been
well protected the language of
well prepared under all of our
constitutional civil rights
after
that we have well on record in
the department of justice is the
body that oversees our.
Compliance staffs what we're
trying to do thank you.
This is the last is this more of
a statement madam speaker gently
please don't take it that I
don't want people to have access
I just wanted to understand
because it it just seems like
it's it could get.
To.
Further than what I think it was
intended to or whatever because
I mean we do have I figured
gentlelady as I said people from
the Middle East refugees coming
here and if they're considered
resident residents were reported
they have residency here because
of staying at.
In some of those languages could
be a multitude from all those
different tribes of their the
the belong to the same thing all
the refugees are coming up from
the from the south I know those
are different it's mostly
Latin American Latin or Spanish
bearing origin it and it's a
little bit different I can
communicate with a lot of them
very very easily but I know
there's a little bit of of
differences and so really Madam
speaker gentle lady I was just
trying to understand that in the
in the funeral home when I'm
making arrangements I've had
I've run into this before fans
with Vietnamese when I was out
of
of forty remains to Vietnam and
other.
Other times that we've come from
one country to another so I
understand and are requirements
to
Translate both the death
certificate and embalming report
and other the full steel the
death certificate all these
things that we have to do to
translate so I very much
understand that and most times
were were able to get someone
that can bring that speak
English for four and that we can
both communicate together and
work it out but thank you so
much for bringing this to the
station and thank you for taking
my let me of questions to
understand and we appreciated
that very much thank you madam
speaker gently.
There's further debate the
gentleman from of creative
office for live they Roosevelt
and San Miguel Representative
Zamora.
Thank you madam speaker and will
the gentle lady yield.
Hey yields.
I think most of my questions
have been answered on the debate
I do have one more.
For a couple more questions one
is.
Is it my understanding that.
Title six of the Civil Rights
Act.
Is is what we're talking about
through the debate whenever we
say federal law.
Madam speaker if I may and and
gentleman I think that
we're at you're absolutely
correct we have an obligation to
protection of cold
anti discrimination across the
board and on for ever
we.
Address that in the constitution
and in all our laws the answer
is yes we are.
Across the board is to
prevent discrimination of any
kind and this is.
Some of that
And madam speaker gentleman's
specifically as it relates
directly to national origin
discrimination which covers the.
And thank you madam speaker and
and thank you for that answer
and.
But if I understand it right now
we're we as this as a state of
New Mexico are not in compliance
with federal law today am I
right within that.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
Madam speaker and gentleman some
agencies are not.
Thank you for that and and madam
speaker and gentle lady.
If we got if we meet up to the
compliance of the federal
government.
Does that mean that they'll be
federal monies coming in to the
state for for meeting up to
that.
Madam speaker gentlemen if I'm
interpreting that correct the
state agencies are ready receive
federal dollars this is a
protection for us not he found
out of compliance and and taken
our money away from us so and as
we continue to receive federal
dollars and speaker and
gentlemen it is our hope that
federal aid C. agencies through
this bill will have a strong
language access plan which
includes and at allocation of
resources potentially those
federal dollars to pay for the
taxes are for their state
agencies.
Madam speaker and gentle lady so
let me reiterate must question
little bit than how much money
will it costs the state of New
Mexico.
From money that we would
generally receive from the
federal government.
If we don't comply with these
laws.
madam speaker and and gentlemen.
You know how
a lot of crazy and when we have
when we're faced with lawsuits
because could cost millions of
dollars it's no on what what
we're trying to do is prevent
bosses by not being in
compliance with the federal law
Madam speaker and gentleman this
is exactly what the bill is is
Encouraging in terms of
coordination site services and
making sure that we're
addressing all of the language
needs under the protections of
the law so that we avoid
lawsuits discrimination lawsuits
and costly settlement so there's
no way to say that the funding
of at risk if you don't comply
with the law Madam speaker
that's the bottom line and
losses in in very in amounts and
we want to stop losses as the
one that we just recently had to
settle with one of our
departments then
thank curry yes to comply with
federal law so that we continue
the flow of federal funding
because federal funding is but I
get ready
Madam speaker and gentleman when
you're not in compliance with
the law because if I ate as a
recipient of a public service
and my needs are not met because
all of the read any of the
reasons protected under the
letter of the law that I have
the right to sue for those
services because right now the
law says those services must be
rendered Committee and for the
languages for all of the bases
and protection for the I have
under the law so again Madam
speaker and gentleman the whole
objective is to avoid losing
federal funding streams that the
majority of our population
because we live in a constant
state of poverty in our state of
New Mexico are receiving
with leveraging from the federal
government of.
Thank you madam speaker.
And madam speaker and gentle
lady at thank you kind of went a
different direction than what I
was hoping you'd go and then my
my question is how much money.
For the federal government.
We received from the federal
government.
When we do comply with this law.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
The funding level or whatever
funding level that we received.
If we continue compliance we're
going to continue receiving
there's no way I mean that we
would need to have our every
single departments budget in
hand right now in order to be
able to give you a definitive
answer to how much of the answer
to your question Madam speaker
and gentleman is that in order
to live securing ensure that
that federal funding stream
continues and we need to ensure
that we're in compliance with
the law.
Okay thank you madam speaker and
thank you gentle lady for that
answer.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you members of the house
we thank you so much for
listening to us for hearing and
from at the needs of the
communities are way way
different committees have been
fighting for for over a decade
absolutely and throughout the
state of New Mexico we we want
to get to a place where our
State agencies are in compliance
or with federal law but more
than that we just want to ensure
that each individual each young
person each family member who is
leading services and resources
and deserve access to those
things is able to access a and
so with this language
accessibility we get a step
closer to really the state that
embraces multicultural
Cultural love and and make up
that is New Mexico so for that I
I thank you all very much for
considering it and and do do I
do now is however.
Yeah
and and with that madam speaker
I move that also twenty two as
amended do now pass.
We're now on final passage of
house bill twenty two as amended
the vote is now open.
Those close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash votes
yes Representative will come.
Yes Representative book of votes
yes Representative Benham.
Representative David of votes
yes Representative Dow.
No.
Representative Dow votes no.
Representative Harry Garcia.
This Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lewis.
One.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative Rubio
yes Representative Rubio votes
yes Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo
votes yes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of.
Yes I was trying to and mute to
get my yes vote in
Representative Lewis votes yes.
Thank you.
Thank you bye voted other vote
is now closed by a vote of forty
two in the affirmative twenty
three in the negative house bill
twenty two as amended has duly
passed the house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo are
you ready on item eleven.
Thank you madam speaker will you
give it to that point the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
eighty six as amended on final
passage has been taken that is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution gentlelady to
explain the thank you madam
speaker house bill sixty eight
creates the law enforcement
retention fund to provide
retention differential payments
to New Mexico law enforcement
officers stand for questions.
There is debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Montoya.
Our.
Please be sure to mute those
that are on zoom.
Thank you madam chair.
Madam speaker time.
Was looking for that to review
and I do not have this
Sixtyeight in my packet here
folks so I need to ask a couple
questions of sorry so does the
gentle lady.
Does the gentle lady revealed.
Madam speaker yes I will yield
and I will note that I said
Sixtyeight it's eighty six so I
apologize.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady so
Briefly explain how your bill
will.
Team help retain law enforcement
speaker and I was of specific
that is going to take place.
Thank you madam speaker and
Representative art gentleman the
bill sets up the law enforcement
retention fund which provides a
means for.
New Mexico and our law
enforcement agencies to
demonstrate the support of our
long serving law enforcement
officers by providing them with
a retention differential payment
upon the completion of that four
nine fourteen and nineteen
years.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady so when the.
A at nineteen when their lives
looking at opportunity to
retire.
this would give the potential.
Of offering something that they
could consider sticking around
so madam speaker and gentle lady
what is being offered and what
is the responsibility of the law
enforcement officer.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman we are the law
enforcement retention fund would
set a five percent
differential based on their base
salary at that here and if they
would be asked to continue to
serve for one more year at that
law enforcement agency.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady
I know the bigger problem has
been the idea that when law
enforcement is facing retirement
that they can retire and then
move to another agency or move
out of town out of state and go
to work there so I'm I'm trying
to figure out of it in the as
far as comparatively what.
What does this do or in your
mind is is this offering enough
for a for an officer to decide
to remain in place.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman yes this actually this
idea arose from a conversation
that I had directly with the
commander of the foot hills area
substation in Albuquerque and
one of the statistics that was
mentioned was that they
frequently lose law enforcement
officers to lateral transfers
between two and seven years and
so this specific piece of
legislation is designed to deal
with keeping our law enforcement
officers here in state at the
agencies.
Thank you madam speaker in.
Gentlelady so.
Once again the this I heard you
mention four different times.
That there was an offering made.
But you mentioned just one.
Little window as to where the
discussion took place what what
was the termination and adding
those other.
those other incentives along the
way.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman are you referring to
why we're doing four nine
fourteen and nineteen.
Yes ma'am speaker and gentle
lady I find nine and fourteen if
that.
What was the thinking behind
those.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman the thinking is that
we would like to retain our
Good high quality law
enforcement officers and provide
them with an incentive to
continue serving in our state
and local communities.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady
as I have talked to law
enforcement my area in
particular the town's.
The the bigger competition Madam
speaker and gentle lady is the
disparity between a smaller.
Law enforcement agency and the
larger agencies so you know such
as going from a small town that
has a small police force being
able to maybe transfer to
another town in the same
community four to a sheriff's
office.
And the the the the the real
issue is pay disparity so I'm I
appreciate what you're what
you're intending to do I just
don't know that that's is enough
of an incentive.
to keep that type of lateral
move and madam speaker and and
gentle lady
the state police it is really
been where you see
the local community law
enforcement agencies moved to.
and.
I'm I'm not really seeing that
this is is enough of an
incentive it seems to me like
you have to hit that specific
window and maybe at that time
decide what you're going to do
but throughout the entire time
that a law enforcement agent the
the police officers service.
Any time and there I mean you
could take it if you could take
this incentive at four years.
And on the sixty year you can
still transfer so I I I
appreciate the effort here I
just don't know that this
answers our overall problem
which is.
Disparity between agencies and I
believe we've if I'm not
mistaken
madam chair and and
Representative that
we are.
We have just done another
potential increase access to
state law enforcement so.
The the sheriff's office's the
city police departments are
there's gonna be that much more
of a problem to retain.
do you are you saying this is a
continual problem speaker
gently.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman I do think that that
is part of the problem however
it's outside of the scope of
this particular bill.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady I guess that's
really my point I I appreciate
the effort that we're trying to
do something.
But madam speaker and gentle
lady I think it falls.
Really short of what is the real
problem.
and madam speaker and gentle
lady I I part of this goes to
something completely unrelated
to what we're talking about
concerning pay but to.
What has become among law
enforcement a.
Greater dissatisfaction with
their job in the last several
years as I've talked with law
enforcement they feel like
because there are there have
been.
Some law enforcement the agents
officers who have been bad
actors that.
They threw in every department
and every agency have been
maligned and have been given a
bad name by the few.
And so madam speaker and gentle
lady I I.
I appreciate the idea of trying
to incentivize with pay but part
of this as has come with our.
Over securitization of maybe
those who.
especially in New Mexico where
where a great percentage of our
law enforcement agents
agencies.
Hi percentage are actually
minority.
Groups a large percentage where
I'm from of of Hispanic and
native American law enforcement
officers but just by putting on
the blue uniform have been
treated in a certain way.
I know that has nothing to do
with this bill I'm just saying
that.
In our effort to try and keep
law enforcement agencies in
place.
Police officers.
The biggest thing right now as
with as with nurses as with
doctors during the pandemic it
is a the job satisfaction says
fact that satisfaction level has
dropped.
Dramatically.
And when there are other
opportunities maybe in in other
states for two as with nurses to
be able to become a traveling
nurse and and and move around
and and the great disparity in
pay combined with the job
satisfaction dissatisfaction.
I think we need that we need to
look at several more of these
things I think madam speaker and
and gentle lady part of part of
what.
Had.
Police officers back home
feeling like maybe we're gonna
dress part of this problem.
Was.
Madam speaker the governor's
emphasis on maybe tilting things
back to where criminals were not
given such.
Consideration over and over but
that we were going to try and
and
do something during this
legislative session to.
The criminals in jail the catch
and release Madam speaker gentle
lady is is a huge problem for
law enforcement they really feel
like a whole almost what is the
point of putting that person in
jail one the judges have no
choice but to then put him right
back out on the street so from
that degree.
I'm a fisherman I catch and
release I hate going to a place
where I can truly say I really
like to catch and keep.
the madam speaker gentle lady I
I think I I do appreciate your
effort here I think you're doing
what you can.
And I do appreciate that but
madam speaker and and gentle
lady I think the body needs to.
Address the bigger issues.
In FY we see police officers
moving on from their posts and I
and I think it has a lot more to
do with the fact that they do
not feel as if
they have the theme that they
had in the past so anyhow I
appreciate this I will likely
vote for your bill today because
it is a token maybe that we can
offer but in general I don't
think it really takes care of
the real problem.
With retention especially madam
speaker gentle lady for talking
about retention at the end of a
career I think we may have to
address.
How we allow police officers to
retire and then potentially
return to work.
I think we have to deal with
that
And I a I would occur encourage
the body to take this.
Seriously take this problem head
on because.
Just like doing without nurses
each of our communities cannot
live without law enforcement.
the the feeling of.
Being able to live in your
neighborhood in your city on
your street and feel safe.
Is something that goes a long
ways for just for community.
Contentment so I appreciate once
again gentlelady what you're
trying to do here I I I do
believe it's.
Literally a.
The proverbial drop in the
bucket I'm not meaning to be in
your earlier legislation I'm
just saying it's not really
addressing the full problem so
thank you madam speaker thank
you gently.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative Nibert.
Thank you madam speaker the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county yield.
Thank you madam speaker I will
yield to the gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln County.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
the of bill was amended and we.
Briefly discussed service and
one of the committees are set on
I think prior to the amendments
and so my questions are.
Really dealing with the same
issue we discussed in committee
and that was maybe the the
desire to have some performance
standards so that this retention
bonus.
Go to those officers that are in
the meeting
expectations and and maybe not
going to some of the
officers of the the people have
pointed to as maybe
Using their power you so I'd
like you to comment on the
whether or not that was
discussed in terms of making the
amendments that we see before us
in this amended bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman yes actually we did
have extensive conversations
among the sponsors and
unfortunately one of my co
Sanchez who is directly
knowledgeable about this issue
Representative from San Juan is
not present to provide
elaboration but thought there
was good discussion about this
and ultimately we decided not to
include that and defer to local
law enforcement and also not
encourage
Perhaps object them to liability
issues thank you.
Madam speaker gentle lady will
thank you for at least
discussing their by I am a big
proponent of rewarding of.
Employees of modeling government
but in private industry of.
Performance based
Bonuses performance based
criteria that rewards them for
their real work and effort and
particularly recognizes those
that go be it beyond and above
maybe that that is the norm.
And so I Is I support this
legislation because I do think
that it's important for us to
retain officers.
having having been in the
position of of overseeing
budgets for the sheriff's
department there as a county
commissioner and being located
next to Eddy and Lea County I
can tell you that that's a
challenge so anytime we can put
some some incentives to retain
our of police officers and
sheriff's deputies and and other
law enforcement
I think it's a it's a good thing
but again of that one issue of
performance because we do have
officers that go well above and
beyond the call of duty and and
they won't be recognize them it
differently than the other
person that the has just put in
their time and on the other hand
you you may have officers who
have a.
pretty poor record of their.
Performance and yet they will
receive the same amount of money
as the exemplary officer as well
as the
officer that is reasonably
acting and we meant no
differentiation them so I'm glad
you discussed it I'm
disappointed that we don't see
the language on the page but I
do support the legislation thank
you madam speaker thank you
delivery for bringing us.
There is further debate the
gentleman from the anna grant
and Sierra Representative
process.
Thank you madam speaker I don't
leave my friend would you please
feel.
Yes madam speaker I will yield
to the gentleman from those
counties.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady I I really appreciate you
bringing this legislation hi
In our in in the small in the
area in the southwest from at
in our small communities were
having a lot of problems not
only retaining of law
enforcement but to hire law
enforcement and
if you've been on on my
committed on some of the
committees for explain this
I have I think Santa Clara Santa
Clara.
Aired in Hurley
hurry doesn't even have a single
officer the last time I knew in
the state just hired someone
recently shared to my knowledge
still didn't have a new chief
and Santa Clara also short
handed so they can't cover all
the chefs and therefore madam
speaker generally what they do
is a the rely heavily on the
sheriff's department who's
already spread thin.
And you know all these
departments have have all these
vacancies.
Last night Mr gently we heard
another bill on payroll and
trying to help.
law enforcement come back return
to work.
And
I heard the the state on on the
need for the state please
express ten ninety vacancies
house speaker gentle lady and so
I'm very very glad that you
bring in the side I think
anything that we can do to help
our law enforcement they've been
somewhat.
Feet up in the last few years
and we need to acknowledge that
you know we need them I I I
tease it by to those guys Madam
speaker gentle lady because I
Telemeds even the bad guys dial
nine one one when they get in
trouble.
So it's just a it doesn't matter
who you are we all the times
need need their health and
speaker gentle lady what you
what you're doing here is is a
good thing and and it's nice to
hear sometimes the good things
that we can do on on the floor
and support for New Mexico in a
positive way I am concerned a
little bit with some of my
smaller and municipalities not
having the funds and and so I
just wanted to understand a
little bit better not I'm going
to support your bill that is
want to understand a little bit
better
Madam speaker gentle lady.
So these these bonuses I'm gonna
components as of that's okay
during these time periods the
required to be paid by that
municipality to understand that
correct mental facility.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman the state law
enforcement retention fund
provides the funds for those
payments.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady so I and I'm sorry I didn't
know I was reading some of the
stuff on trying to kind of
educate might you know how it is
here there's a lot of phages to
read around here and so madam
speaker gentle lady so this
protection fund would have that
and then it would disperse it
amongst all fund for spent so
long as no matter what
municipality or what agency they
were affirmative speaker gentle
lady.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
is correct the agencies do need
to apply and provide information
to the department of public
safety.
Thanks Amanda figures only so I
would imagine that each agency
so I'm gonna use of some of the
small the disabilities the
responsibility would be on them
to report when that officer had
had served appropriate time to
to meet these these requirements
is that correct madam speaker
gentle lady.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
is correct.
Thank you very much and I can't
thank you enough for doing this
and so benefit group gentlelady
thank you for bringing this and
I I am very supportive of the
bill thank you.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
Yes madam speaker I will yield
to the gentleman from Lee
County.
Thank you
Occurred gentle lady.
I just have a few questions
Can we talk about the law
enforcement re retention Fund
and exactly where those funds
come from if you don't mind
please.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman the funds come from
the general fund and there isn't
a.
there is money in the budget for
this fund to be established.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
how much is in the the budget
for this.
Madam speaker gentleman five
million dollars.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady and so.
Do we have an idea Madam speaker
and gentle lady.
How many law enforcement
officers.
would qualify for this this year
and what the potential impact on
that five million would be.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman yes that information
is available in the FIR.
Speaker and gentle lady out of
all the stuff that I'm given
that's not one of them and I
haven't pulled up yet could you
give that to me please.
Madam speaker and gentleman at
the average according to the FIR
is about three point three
million dollars per year.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady so in the in house
bill two does that five million
set to be a reoccurring value.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman it is actually a
nonrecurring amount this year
unfortunately.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
What happens next year thank
you.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman if there are no
additional funds added to the
law enforcement retention funds
than
disbursements are reduced
accordingly.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady and I may have
missed it inside the bill.
So.
A little patience please what
would be the percentage of pay
for somebody going into their
fifth year.
Their tents here the fifteenth
and twentieth.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman it is five percent of
their base salary.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
It is a concern that I have with
this.
If if I am a law enforcement
officer.
And I'm told.
The Hey look we just passed a
bill to get a five percent
retention bonus at five years
ten years fifteen years and
twenty.
And then speaker gentle lady the
money is it is not there.
And so benefit kind gentle lady.
If we go off the number for the
issue we're talking three
something million dollars
and the money's not put back
more money is not put into the
account that drops down to one
point eight which if you think
about it intuitively that would
be somewhere around the two and
a half percent retention for
anybody the qualified in the
year twenty twenty three would
that be correct madam speaker
gentle lady.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
will go with your math on that I
would however note that H. B.
two is currently in the Senate
right now and so they have an
opportunity to add additional
funds as do we next year.
The madam speaker and gentle
lady I don't play crafts for
reasons for the I think you know
I think.
I don't place value and what can
happen we know what we know what
this bill says the figures only
we know what what was done on
house bill two that left here.
But we cannot rely on the
potential.
Of what somebody else is going
to do and the decisions that we
make on this for would you agree
with that madam speaker delay
Madam speaker and gentleman yes.
Thank you so
That concerns me a little bit.
a lot.
That would be to me.
Madam speaker gentle lady in the
business the.
That I'm an executive and.
We have very specific numbers
for retention.
Okay and so speaker gentle lady
other businesses may do things a
little differently for us as
retention increases because of
the longer they stay the more of
their the insurance package the
company pays for them as of as a
form of insurance so around four
years and then around eight
years.
They not only get a cost living
or a potential merit increase on
top of that the increase because
they're not paying as much on
their insurance the same thing
with some of the parts of our
profit sharing program so it
does concern me that when we we
tell people that you may.
This is the bill we're gonna get
there's a five percent retention
bonus retention payment in
there.
and.
When that year I compliance for
that person.
Thank they don't get a full five
percent.
Madam speaker gentle lady how do
you think that that's going to
affect the law enforcement
officers around the state.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman I would not want to
presume their feelings.
I'm sorry madam speaker gentle
lady at in here that.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman I would not want to
presume their feelings.
Madam speaker and only I
wouldn't either but I would not
going to be the one that tells
them that sorry five percent.
The legislative body didn't
really want to fund it and so
you're only going to get a two
percent merit increase I
wouldn't want to be the one
passing that message on if
specially to the gentleman up
there they're supposed to be
protecting us.
If you're gonna do only I think
that that that creates its own
problems A. and.
I'm Madam speaker gentle lady
I'm not a fan of kicking the can
down the road with him or we're
gonna be able to do this for we
not and it has a concern we know
madam speaker and gentle lady
that the third of budget money.
Out there that's going to get
this sort of twenty twenty
three.
We're not.
Hundred percent confident madam
speaker gentle lady with
projections for twenty twenty
four twenty twenty five we can
make some assumptions but when
deleting we've seen in the past
how how are budgetary
assumptions can.
Can go straight from time to
time with with with the market
and so it concerns me with that.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
last question I have for you.
If I'm in law enforcement I
receive my five percent.
Retention bonus does it commit
me to the certain time after
that receipt.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman yes in order to
Makes this retention
differential fall within the
allowable purposes we are on.
Law enforcement needs to commit
to serving for one additional
year with their law enforcement
agency.
The lady in the in in the
business world we tend to look
at things from a pro rated
standpoint is there any pro
rations with respect to that
three hundred sixty five days.
Madam speaker gentleman no.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady for taking the
time to answer some of my
questions I do stand in support.
Of the antenna.
The figure to lady I I I'm not
confused about.
Getting.
Well hopefully this this weekend
however people are supporting in
the in the Super Bowl thirteen
didn't keep getting to the one
yard line and not making it
across the finish the the goal
post go lines and so with that
madam speaker gentle lady are
you about.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Travis Lee and
Roosevelt Representative
Anderson.
Thank you madam speaker.
Well the gentle lady you.
Thank you madam speaker I will
yield to the gentleman from
Chavis
Lee and Roosevelt thank you of.
The lady at the presented this
bill in the Appropriations
Committee and
I was
police to support the efforts
there.
He is a correction lady that in
that committee we've seen more
than just this bill trying to
support the of.
Retention and recruitment of men
and women into the law
enforcement.
Employment.
Madam speaker and gentleman why
yes in fact there is a sizeable
amount of budget money in the
budget including eight million
dollars for law enforcement
recruitment.
Thank you very much for that
because it only confirms my
thinking that
this is.
This issue is receiving a great
deal of attention and funding
this year of I did want to of.
And that was my understanding
that the FIR had
Mr speaker lady a three point
three.
Was it three I may have missed
Sutton has hurt you but I
believe it was three point
three.
Thank you I see you shaking your
head.
I think the the.
The issue is that as we often
say it's we can't commit a
future legislature to.
Fund ahead of age let's just
whether it's recurring or
nonrecurring rarely.
But the is it fair to say that
In your opinion that a mission
madam speaker lady that.
This is a good use of the.
Then a nonrecurring dollars that
we're trying to deal with in
this session question.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman yes I think this is an
excellent use of our
nonrecurring surplus funds and I
certainly hope that
Members of of this body join
with me in recognizing that this
is an expression of our
appreciation for the service
that these wonderful folks are
providing excellent.
final question Madam speaker
gentle lady.
When we make adjustments and
compensation such as we're doing
now it does that not.
Affected in a positive way the
ultimate retirement benefit that
An individual in law enforcement
might work will receive not
might receive will receive
upon their retirement.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman and this is actually
been crafted in such a way so
that it falls outside of their
normal salary which is used to
calculate the retirement funds.
I see well that certainly
suggests to me that perhaps
we'll see before the end of the
session on efforts to address
perhaps on opportunity for I
guess that would be retention.
Addressing that issue as well.
Madam chair gentle lady thank
you.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo some
of violence on the Fe counties
Representative Lord thank you
madam speaker Billy gentle lady
from Bernalillo county please
yield.
Thank you madam speaker yes I
will yield to my neighbor to the
east thank you.
Madam speaker so whenever we
have built like this at a at
deal with law enforcement I
usually try to reach out to them
so I do have a few questions
based on stuff they brought up
but the main thing that I want
to tell you guys everybody.
Is the thing that I hear the
most from law enforcement is a
state Mustapha we lost another
one I cannot tell you how many
times that they have sent me a
text or call me to say it's like
a spaghetti strainer they're
losing law enforcement officers
all across the state.
And the main thing is that they
can go to another state there's
better money.
There's better conditions
there's better retirement.
Just overall it's a better
environment and they're leaving
here and droves I don't know
what we're going to do and the
couple years with nothing but
brand new people on there and
all our experience people are
gone so I I cannot express how
incredibly serious it is that we
are losing law enforcement
officers like crazy in the state
of New Mexico on every level on
top of that we're also having as
with their and I'm getting this
directly from them.
Nobody wants to come here it's a
huge problem they don't want to
come to New Mexico because it
goes back to the overall problem
your schools are bad your crime
is ridiculous we don't get
treated well here so until we
address those issues this is a
little bit of help and I thank
you for that but the bigger
overall picture is that nobody
wants to come here they don't
want to stay here and they're
leaving here I just had officer
tell me yesterday he was what
was good friends she does up and
moved his exam I got better
benefits in another state better
conditions better retirement I'm
treated better.
So in a very serious note I know
or really do here when women
along force officers that's a
very very very serious problem
and every law enforcement
officer I'm targeting who's
closer time is is I can't wait
to get out of here.
This is something that we have
got to address on both sides of
the aisle we have got to sit
down with all on four dot just
one select group but all of the
law enforcement officers we have
got to sit down with them and
say okay what exactly is that
why you leaving and addresses
real issues and I'm I'm not
knocking this bill I'm just
telling you.
That this is a small small small
small grain of sand in the
bigger issue of why we're losing
law enforcement officers why we
can't get them to come here why
they are bailing out of here.
I mean I I completely understand
if I could go somewhere they had
better conditions and better pay
and they're going to states
primarily that support and
frontier law enforcement
officers they don't have to sit
by and listen to.
A bill like last night to help
law enforcement.
To get some of our retired law
enforcement to come back to work
they don't have to listen to
constantly being berated in the
state of New Mexico because I'm
telling you they love the state
we all of the state but we have
a huge huge huge issue.
Law enforcement is leaving and
it is very real it's not
something made up it's not
anecdotal it's I could bring you
stats and facts.
And we cannot hire and we cannot
retain and this is a huge issue
on Sunday I'm hoping maybe next
session we can all sit down over
dinner and really talk about
these issues on both sides of
the aisle including all the law
enforcement officers and letting
them come here and have their
voices heard so that they're not
just they can't wait to get out
here.
So the question I did have
soared I was going to question
Madam speaker and representative
what what happens when there's
not extra money in the general
fund to fund this a longer that
was one of the questions that I
got from law enforcement.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady one of the you know
obviously we previously
discussed that the retention
differentials would be reduced
accordingly but one of the
things that's built into this
retention Fund is data
collection and so.
it is anticipated that we will
be reviewing data and making
future decisions based on their
collection of that data.
Thank you madam speaker
Representative the I'd I'd love
to see something to where they
don't have to worry about that
because it was a question I got
from them as okay well what
happens later we don't have the
funding and again it goes back
to making law enforcement a
priority in our state the other
question I had is I received a
question can you explain to me
about the hold on it was the
last year.
So can is going to be
Because what is semi was no
matter what you lose your last
year retention Hey can you
explain that to me or if that's
actually correct in the bill.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady I actually do not
understand the question okay
thank you I'll talk to you about
it afterwards I can get an
answer for that so that was the
main thing please and also sent
us on both sides of the aisle if
we don't address this issue
immediately we're literally
gonna have no long force and
that's going to want to stay
here and we will lose our
seniors with a senior members in
law enforcement that with all
the experience that we don't
want to do that we want to keep
our law enforcement here want to
support them and we want to fund
them thank you so much.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
Madam speaker yes I will yield
to the gentleman from Bernalillo
Madam speaker and gentle lady
from Bernalillo does this apply
to game and fish officers park
and rec officers who are sworn
police officers.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo yes
that is one of the amendments
that was made and HFC.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
from Bernalillo so how many
officers to think this will
apply to.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman based on the initial
FIR.
approximately four thousand
twenty law enforcement officers.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady from Bernalillo New
Mexico is the largest police
agency in the state.
Thank you madam speaker and
representative gentleman from
Bernalillo I do not know that
off the top of my head do you
have that answer.
Speaker and gentle lady it's a
PED so there are the largest one
the second is state police the
third is a Bernalillo county
sheriff's department let's go to
the amendment from the
Appropriations Committee.
And we're going to go to
paragraph D. of that amendment
from appropriations.
Madam speaker and gentle lady so
I see that you know what you're
basically saying is that five
years ten years fifteen and
twenty years we will give a
bonus of five percent of your
current salary that bonus is not
figured into your base so it
doesn't affect your retirement.
but why do we not do twenty five
or thirty years those are the
officers that we're trying to
keep.
Madam speaker gentleman's based
on the conversations that I was
having with APD and law
enforcement retaining some of
our earlier a law enforcement
officers was critical to the the
number of law enforcement in the
state there's nothing to
precludes precludes Hey this
body from reviewing the data and
making changes in the future.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
from Bernalillo one of the
things I'm very worried about
we've heard from several
legislators is that right now is
an election year.
This is a nice topic.
And when we come back next year
we go well we don't have any
more money.
And that's what I'm worried
about.
So madam speaker and gentle lady
from Bernalillo what longevity
bonus does the PED give
currently.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman my understanding is
that a P. D. does have a long to
have a program that is part of
the salary.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
from Bernalillo that is correct
so at ten years.
An officer is given a hundred
and fifty dollars per paycheck
there's twenty six paychecks in
a year.
That.
Fifteen year and if this is
monthly I want to I want to put
that out is monthly he will
receive this.
At fifteen years then it raises
incrementally based on years of
service at fifteen years and
tops out to six hundred and
thirty dollars per che paycheck
for twelve hundred and sixty
dollars per month.
Which goes into his base salary
and therefore increases his
retirement.
Since PED is going to be the
biggest of the line.
I almost think that what we
ought to think about is we take
care the APD officer who has
five years and give him the
bonus because are not doing
that.
But once their at ten years the
bonus they're receiving is far
greater than what we can.
And why I say that is when we
take these funds and we need to
structure moves far as we can
for as long as we can.
And I think you ought to
consider that as an amendment.
And I also think you need to
look at the twenty five thirty
year employee there's some
they'll work all the way to
thirty five.
And see if you can't do that.
Anyway madam speaker gentle lady
those remind suggestions.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Colfax curry
Harding quay Roosevelt semi on
you.
Thank you madam speaker does
gentle lady of madam speaker I
will yield to the gentleman from
all those counties Madam speaker
gentle lady I I thank you for
bringing this bill this is one
of the toughest jobs in our
state these guys they don't get
Christmas off they don't get
thanksgiving off their wife and
children or husband and children
don't know if they're coming
back from the leave every
morning.
I'm really.
Tired of the fund the police and
I think this is an effort to
reform the police would like to
see.
Recruitment retention and return
to work.
US between all of those actions
maybe we can cut down on some of
the.
Criminal activity I'd like to
get past the point where I get
out and give my car big code
when I walk into a grocery store
in Albuquerque how.
I would like to get past the
point four you that you don't
know if you take the wrong
street if you're gonna make it
out the other side I would like
to see law and order in our
state and I'd like to see the
people that bring it here well
rate in appreciated and not to
not let down and talk down to I
appreciate this bill because it
makes an attempt at that I think
we need to start early.
Thanks strongly next year.
About a recurring funding
streams for these agencies.
That will make it we're we're
not wondering what we're going
to do when the funding runs out
but make is to be able to plan
what we're going to do.
In the number of officers
increase in crime dies down.
And we have enough.
Funding to ensure that they have
a good life I thank you for
bringing this bill and I thank
you madam speaker for the time.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Valencia County
Representative Baca.
Thank you madam speaker this is
the gentlelady from Bernalillo
yield.
Thank you madam speaker yes I
will yield to the gentleman from
Valencia County.
First I also want to thank you
for bringing this bill
thanks to my colleagues I mean
this is not a Republican issue
this not a democratic issued
some in New Mexico issue and I
believe and I want to state that
in order for us to fully get the
support that we need out there
to our communities we need a
multi pronged approach the
retention bonuses good but
there's also build that
yesterday the kind of stalled in
the.
Better to labor that would also
allow people to return back to
work.
You know one of the things about
it.
Is what we're talking about a
continual and a recurring
funding stream I think that's
the problem because the
challenges that our law
enforcement our first responders
face in the field are not going
to go away after one year in
fact we understand being
understaffed working tons of
over time.
With doing the kinds of
situations that they're dealing
with the need for officers is
even greater in Seoul
Madam speaker gentlelady.
I would really just again as one
of my colleagues have said
really look at about how we can
record this because what I don't
want this to do is just to be
just giving lip service to this
bill not to say that we support
our law enforcement for one year
and then after that they go back
in the next year there for years
reflected because we're not out
of funds if we were truly doing
what we are charged to do which
is committed to serve the
community to serve the state
improperly funding give the
people the protection that they
need I think that we need to
make sure if the committee not
just in course with our actions
that we support law enforcement
today and every day from here
thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady thank you there
is further debate the gentleman
from curry county Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam speaker will
gentle lady please yield.
Madam speaker I will yield to my
co sponsor from curry county.
Thank you delayed generally I I
remember sitting on the line on
a spreadsheet and commenting on
it the next thing I know I had
an opportunity to be a sponsor
and I greatly appreciate that
opportunity but I understand
commend you for the stamina of
the tenacity that you showed in
getting from where you started
to today.
there was a flurry of emails
that was staggering.
Is this group in is that group
in what about us it was the
there was a flood.
And you dealt with it you fixed
it and I thank you for thank you
madam speaker.
There is for the debate the
gentleman from the county
Representative Scott.
Even the chamber.
Saying no further debate the
gentle lady to close.
Thank you madam speaker I would
move that house bill eighty six
as amended do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill eighty six as amended the
vote is now open.
That is about to close.
The vote is now closed though
notice using the clerk to call
the members without a recorder
that.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon both
yes Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative been caught.
Yes Representative Bogo both yes
representative Cadena.
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Dow.
Yes Representative Dow votes yes
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative lane.
Representative Lente.
Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis votes
yes Representative McQueen yes
Representative queen votes yes
Representative Rod Montoya.
Who is that.
Representative Ortez yes
Representative Ortez votes yes
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative Rubio.
No.
Representative Rubio votes no
representative Sarinana.
Yes Representative Sarinana
votes yes Representative Scott.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo
votes yes Representative Zamora.
Representative Zamora votes yes
now the vote is closed by a vote
of sixty one in the affirmative
and one of the negative.
House bill eighty six as amended
has duly passed the house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo are
you reading on item twelve.
Thank you madam speaker can you
get me to that point.
But the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill.
The ninety five amendment.
On final passage has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment for
substitution.
Gentlelady to explain the bill
thank you madam speaker.
This is a fairly simple bill
it's called the easy enrollment
bill and I will note that it
passed unanimously out of house
health and Human Services and
tax and the tax committee so
what this does Madam speaker and
members is it allows people who
do not have health insurance in
New Mexico to check a box when
they file their state taxes and
the box will be will indicate
that someone in the household
either the filer or a family
member does not have health
insurance and what this bill
will allow is it will allow the
tax department to send the
information of those New
Mexicans over to the Human
Services Department for them to
review the tax returns to
determine if the people the
person or persons are eligible
for Medicaid or for the New
Mexico health insurance
exchange.
And if if they are eligible for
Medicaid the Human Services
department will help them get
signed up for it if they are
eligible for the exchange they
will send the information to the
exchange and all of this is with
the affirmative consent of the
tax filer at every step if they
give their permission these
things will happen so it will be
sent to the health insurance
exchange will determine which
which programs they are eligible
for and then help people to get
signed up and the the reason
that this is important miss
madam speaker and body for ten
percent of New Mexico's
population around two hundred
fourteen thousand people is
uninsured and a hundred and
thirteen thousand uninsured
qualify for free or low health
lowcost coverage.
But they likely are aware of it.
Using easy enrollment to
leverage the income tax system
to meet people where they are
instead of keeping the burden on
them to seek it out and I don't
have any expert witnesses madam
speaker with me but I do have
them on a text thread and they
are secretary Schardin Clarke
Nicole Comeaux who is the
Medicaid director
Colin bio is with the office of
superintendent of insurance and
Gabby Rivera is with Health
Action New Mexico and having
people more people insured helps
all of us.
It decreases uncompensated care
and they have done this in
Maryland and what they found is
that a lot of the people who
sign up are just the people we
want in our health insurance
pools because they are young and
healthy so they kind of spread
the risk out so with that madam
chair I will stand for
questions.
There is debate on the bill the
gentleman from Santa
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield madam speaker I won't be
able to the gentleman from
Santa.
madam speaker and gentle lady
who we heard this bill and the
tax revenue committee and
procedurally you you did mention
that we did it unanimously vote
that bill out of committee Mr
chairman I just have a couple
questions just clarifying
questions and maybe a couple
comments us Mr gentle lady.
First if you've done your New
Mexico taxes lately you will
notice that there are a plethora
of check boxes and options Mr
generally we try hard and the
tax that and and and revenue
committee.
To not just every single one of
these that comes before a
committee allowed to be on the
form I think we have about a
dozen of these right now and and
if we what every single one
through we probably have just
one hole she those check boxes
speaker gentle lady.
so so that's certainly speaker
gentle lady I said you've laid
the groundwork for why this is
important when we feel like this
should be check box that's
included the Mr gently.
Remind me I believe when you
vote you said that there were
roughly two hundred thousand New
Mexicans without health
insurance right now could could
you.
Correct me that madam speaker
gentleman two hundred fourteen
thousand eight ball park and as
a hundred and thirteen thousand
of them qualify for free or low
cost.
Okay so Mister generally thank
you for that and and that's a
that's a pretty significant
number right we have you know
it's roughly technician percent
of of New Mexico's population is
not not insured in this body has
made several steps over the last
several years to try to Whittle
that number down and it was last
I heard was higher so that would
have in the right direction so
Mister gentle lady your efforts
and others should be applauded
for that.
Miss Vigil you say that of that
two hundred there's I think it's
a hundred thirteen thousand that
qualify for non insured.
The Mr gently.
can you talk about what are the
possible reasons why they're
they're not I slept with you
mentioned one which is maybe
they're just not aware but are
there others that as you've
pondered on this problem that
I've come to your mind other
ways we can address this
problem.
There are some and and this I I
don't have the data on this but
I have heard stories that
particularly young people don't
want to hassle with it you know
it seems like it's
insurmountable and they feel
like they're young and healthy
and they don't really need it
and sometimes that's a good bet
that and sometimes it's a really
bad that we don't want people to
have overwhelming medical debt
and we don't want our system to
be paying a lot of uncompensated
care when there are ways for
these people so I imagine it's a
combination of too busy not
knowing afraid of what they
might you know find out I mean
in terms of all my god I have to
do this this this this and this
and I just can't possibly do it
so this is one more way to try
and make it easier for people to
get coverage.
The amounts are generally yes
thank you for that and and
that's really what I kind of
wanted to go with us and is.
This is a bigger problem than
just the simple solution right
miss begrudgingly I see you're
nodding and I I agree with you
Mr jelly I think part of it is
yes we have a Senator.
A large portion of hundred
thirteen thousand are young
people who think they're gonna
live forever.
Usually this proportion that
that aren't aware that they
could qualify.
Mr usually and
There's probably a portion
that's also knows they qualified
but they have
you know their their feelings of
pride and so forth are based on
not needing assistance from
others
and so I can I can respect that
and I'm not sure we can get
those people to ever sign up yes
we are generally.
Senator there's some confusion
right runs really are have you
ever watch the show on parks and
rec.
Miss madam speaker and gentleman
I have not Mr really it's it's a
it's a hilarious show except
sometimes I don't cry because
they had the politics so spot on
that you know I'm I'm trying to
because I'm laughing because
it's true.
Mr Jones but they have a phone
number so for a couple a young
couple gets health insurance for
the first time and they go to
the dentist into the I drive
into the committed to go all
over and then at the end of the
show the realize that health
insurance doesn't mean it's all
free that they have to pay for
it and so they stand up and run
out of the hospital and you know
know running away and I think
she actually crashes into an
ambulance and you know gets
knocked out whatever it has to
get oil back in for treatment
for running into the ambulance
and it's it's a whole areas
then speaker gentle lady but I
don't think there is that kind
of confusion out there as well
so Mister internally the
particular problem you're trying
to address here.
Is
perhaps folks have a hard time.
Finding the data and entering
into the system to sign up for
health insurance agency bureau
is that correct Madam speaker
and gentleman yes that's that's
what I mean as you said there
are many different levels of
problems and issues but that's
one of them and that's what this
is really attempting to address
so much more generally I'm I
said that's right and and I'm
just thinking I don't have the
data here but I'm thinking folks
who are in that situation are
probably also not comfortable
for a filling in filing their
own taxes these are probably
people to go to you know H. and
R. block liberty or whatever and
and half those people fill out
their taxes for them Madam
speaker and gentle lady
Actor manual that is there gonna
be some outreach effort or or
hello this hello make sure that
these people.
Committee going to
you know
my private
Tax in the business to do their
taxes that they're half asked
that question and I did have the
opportunity to check the box
that they understand what this
means
madam speaker and gentleman I'm
not a hundred percent certain in
terms of you know what there had
there has been and will continue
to be outreach towards people
who are uninsured we spend some
dollars on getting the word out
and
having the backing of the tax
department and Human Services
Department makes me feel
confident that that they will
continue to work on getting the
word out.
The amounts are generally I I
think that's a great answer I I
really appreciate of tax
secretary seven for Clark she's
done an incredible job
and she has a great team and and
so I'm I'm I'm I'm certain that
they will do their best without
reach of the Mr gently I'm just
I just wanna bring this up
because you know of those one
hundred thirteen thousand who
are eligible
We would if we pass this bill
will see that number drop to
just thinking through you know
how many of those are fall into
this particular category and how
those were actually asked the
question and understand it.
I think they'll still be other
things that we need to do to
help that group out besides just
this but then speaker Julie I
appreciate ring this forward we
we think that this should be
another one of those doesn't
have check boxes on the form and
that's why we voted out so madam
speaker and gentle lady thank
you I I support your legislation
thank you madam speaker and
gentleman.
Saying no further debate the
gentle lady to close Madam
speaker I move that our house
bill ninety five as amended do
now pass we are on final passage
of house bill ninety five as
amended the vote is now open.
Food is about to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon both
yes.
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash votes
see is representative of tools
yes Representative bunga votes
yes representative Cadena.
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Dow.
Yes Representative Dow both yes
Representative Harry Garcia.
The English test.
Representative Harry Garcia both
yes Representative lane.
Representative Lane both yes
representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis both
yes Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya votes
yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Representative Robert Roybal
Caballero those yes
Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana.
Yes Representative Sarinana
votes yes Representative
Townsend.
Representative Townsend both yes
Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo
votes yes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of sixty six in the affirmative
and none of the negative house
bill ninety five as amended has
duly passed the house.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
ticket Bernalillo Santa Fe
Torrance and Valencia
Representative McQueen ready and
item number one is the madam
speaker really getting to the
point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill seventy one as
amended on final passage has
been taken and it is now subject
to debate amendment or
substitution.
Gentleman to explain the.
Thank you madam speaker Madam
speaker of the members of the
house bill seventy one might
seem familiar we've done with
work on this for a couple years
a version of this was included
in the tax package that pass off
the house floor and was
ultimately enacted last year
however this piece of it was
taken out in the Senate so we're
still working on this piece.
Chair members of the body about
twenty years ago.
The legislature passed and the
governor signed.
A three percent cap on
residential real property
meaning that your property taxes
for residential property
couldn't go up by more than
three percent a year.
In some areas of the state that
has meant that property state
what is called current and
correct value in other areas of
the state where the property
values have increased more
rapidly that's suppressed the
property value.
And madam speaker members of
body when we when the
legislature passed the he just
said residential.
It didn't define residential and
that the goal of this was to
protect homeowners from rising
property values we do want
people to get priced out of
their homes based on the Texas.
Madam speaker of members of all
the I think that's a worthy
goal.
What this bill does.
Is.
Some earnest back into the tax
system.
It relieves in place of the
three percent cap.
For residential properties for
someone lives.
In the previous version of this
bill the requirement was owner
occupied primary residence.
So the idea was if you lived in
the house.
You would be protected you all
that you live there you'd be
protected.
We have a lot of discussion
about that.
In in this bill we made a
change.
This bill would take out the
owner occupied requirement.
So if it's a rental.
If it's in the apartment.
If someone was there does not
have to be the owner.
Stays under the three percent
cap.
So what this bill would address
our own occupied second homes.
In short term rentals sister
like the Airbnb kind the rentals
if you own one of those
properties.
They would no longer be under
the three percent cap.
There is actually instead of the
three percent cap there's a ten
percent cap.
And that's not intended to
create a second tier.
What what the session for is
sort of a soft landing that if
your property is undervalued on
tax rules it will come back to
current and correct gradually
the only one here so that's why
we have that ten percent cap and
in there that was requested I
think the first American this
bill would carry that forward.
Madam speaker.
Members of the body I will point
out the in house taxation we
added an amendment to define
primary residence.
You know it's something that's
used other places in law you
know it's it's where you live
it's where probably you pay
taxes for you vote.
You know where your skin your
kids go to school that kind of
thing so it's it's a term that's
pretty common we actually add to
the definition so would be right
here in the statute and madam
speaker with that if I may I'd
like to defer to my a co sponsor
the gentleman from Santa for a
couple COVID.
Germany of for thank you madam
speaker
and it's a pleasure to work with
the gentleman from.
No Torrance Valencia Santa Fe
counties on another good piece
of tax legislation M. as bitter
and gentleman I won't go on if
folks have questions I'm happy
to explain the details of yield
control and but I don't want to
want to glaze over this moment
but Mr chairman I'll just say.
I had some people reach out to
me early on and say.
Why are you carrying this bill
you have a Republican.
and then speaker and gentleman
was a gentleman the Citrix is
this three percent cap that was
put in place some twenty years
ago I just had a terrible
unintended consequences
there are two of the most severe
our tax lightning.
And the the second is inability
to properly bonds to our real
values capacity and that hurts
our bond ratings are repayment
really hurts our ability to do
things.
And it really was not needed
just three percent cap because
yield control already took care
of the problem.
And so madam speaker ladies and
gentleman this bill yes will
allow for properties that are
not a primary residence.
To increase in in their value
because of yield control that
means everyone else.
Will actually get a slight tax
increase on their primary
residence and having explain
that further if folks are
interested but as usual and
Jarrell men and ladies of the
house this is such a few steps
in the right direction we need
to keep this going.
but I think the time is right to
do this and and I am pleased to.
Stand for any other questions
madam speaker.
There is debate on the bill the
gentle lady from hello federal
County Representative black.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentleman from San volume.
Madam speaker hi you.
Thank you gentleman
Gentleman from central could you
kind of go into some detail on
the yield control concept please
madam speaker and and gentle
lady.
From Otero I would I'd be happy
to I I love talking tax policy I
just didn't want to I people's
eyes to glaze over but I'm happy
to to go into it so massacre and
gentleman for Terrel.
Control was put into our
statutes in the seventies and we
had a lot of forward thinking
cutting edge tax policy in the
early fifties sixties and
seventies of the state and this
is one of them and it's actually
one of the only places are
statute that has an equation
built in so you know I like to
get out over that kind of stuff
right
but the real simple explanation
it's not it's really not that.
If you look at your question
maybe my glaze over but it's
really simple it's trying to do.
And madam speaker enjoy from
chair what happens is we all
over if you can wash my hands
all of teaching math with my
body motions.
we all the property values are
so late right but there are
governmental entities that rely
on that income home school board
or school districts counties
and and we didn't want to see
their budget cycle like that
that's hard to budget to.
And so in the seventies
legislature put.
In this equation called yield
control.
And really the the bottom line
the goal of your controls to
make sure that no matter what
happens the property values the
total amount of taxes paid stays
about the same.
they had an inflation factor and
maybe if there's a the
neighborhood that you know is
built a growth factor but
otherwise if values are going
up.
What it does with this question
does is it pushes the tax rate
down.
So you're paying about the same
amount of tax.
And conversely if the property
values go down the pushes the
tax rate ups you're paying about
the same amount of tax.
So that's really it and as we
had in that way and while the
state that.
We really don't need this three
percent cap is because your
controls order making sure that
we're paying about the same
amount of tax.
So now we put this three percent
cap on the valuation it it
doesn't play nicely with your
control it's messing it up and
causing these weird aberrations.
Mr jelly that's that's your
proof explanation of your
control and then why I say this
actually is a slight tax
increase is.
Because if we pass this
legislation some of the second
homes or or Airbnb their values
will start going up faster.
And everyone else's.
To keep the total tax the same
it's going to push the tax rate
down on everybody else and so
it'll be a little I mean it's
not going to be huge when I go
home and see you know two or
dollars of state tax but but
that's how it works speaker
gently hope that answers your
question.
And thank you madam speaker and
gentleman for that explanation
I'm I guess where I'm having a
hard time with that concept is.
Wouldn't it be logically
wouldn't that have to encompass.
Is the yield control encompass
everyone.
To to do exactly what you just
said so I guess that's where I'm
having a hard time how we're
picking out specific properties
and how that affects the yield
control gentleman.
Yes then speaker and relief from
all Terrel that's another great
question right and at all state
that we've had several times in
the past to just rip the bandaid
off and do everything at once.
And despite my my I can my
missing hand waving motions
people just are scared and they
don't get it that you'll
controls to protect them.
And and they oppose the bill.
And so Mister and and gentle
lady what we're trying to do
this time is.
Peel a couple years back of that
onion.
To get the ball going to go for.
Changes that could lead to
further steps down the road so
that we can slowly back out of
the problems that this three
percent cap of the valuation of
cost as a message early this is
in my view a couple steps in the
right direction early two more
steps if this was the the only
goal I would say why are we
treating Airbnb is different
than residential property I
think the right answer is we
passed the three percent cap was
really designed to help.
Folks who are on fixed incomes.
not be priced out of their homes
that was the goal it was not to
protect properties that generate
revenue from having their values
the current and correct.
Mr jelly also just add every
time you purchase a property
insurance up to the current
correct value this is what we
call tax lightning.
And so a lot of the folks who.
I have just purchased their
second home or they're Airbnb
this won't affect them at all
because they're already at
current correct.
Thank you for that gentleman and
madam speaker I'm.
Either of the gentleman can
answer this question I guess
I'd.
Is there.
So is it is.
Forgive me I did not have time
to read this thoroughly
Does it stop when it comes to
current and correct I guess is
my question.
Madam speaker gentle lady just.
Thank you for that gentleman and
the Madam speaker how long do we
do there I mean is there a.
Theory on how long amount of
time this would take for these
properties to get to current and
correct.
So masterfully for Terrel that's
a great question and I can give
you a ballpark because.
lots of properties that are
different
different places on the spectrum
of how far off they are from
current correct.
Mr Julie when I.
Looked into this a couple years
ago.
have and to the mass going to a
ten percent.
Would allow slowly it would take
around fifteen to twenty years
for all the all the properties
to see on line but but to to
directly answer question is
bigger gentle lady the average
over the last thirty years that
property has increased the
average percent is five percent.
So if you can imagine that if
you're thirty percent
undervalued every year you know
you're behind because we only go
up three percent but really it's
gone up I.
If you up to ten it's going to
take.
You know ten fifteen twenty
years to get to current correct.
Thank you for that gentleman the
madam speaker I I guess my
heartburn really hi logistics.
My mic you know I have heartburn
with logistics so I guess
gentleman.
Do we know how this is going to
be achieved that is the big
question in my mind.
Madam speaker of the gentle lady
that's a great question in I've
reached out to the assessors
affiliate of the association
counties we've had some
conversations of those bank
number stations as I would like
still working on that so so two
points on that one in order to
accommodate that discussion this
doesn't take effect till twenty
twenty four the the law takes
effect ninety days but the the
first change doesn't occur until
twenty twenty four so we have
some time to to work that out
and madam speaker gentle lady we
we we think it will probably end
up being like the Head of Family
exemption that you can I so
perhaps the assessors and now
the no this perhaps there's a
box on their form in Madam
speaker gentle lady the
gentleman from Santa was talking
about the boxes on the tax form
this is different because it's
property tax but you currently
can claim a small exemption for
being the head of the family not
everyone does it this one might
be more significant so so maybe
there's a question on your nose
value state that says here was
this property used as a primary
residence in the last year.
Something like that in it would
take some some time to to
process that and the association
counties is in conversation with
their software developer and so
the so there is some logistics
to figure out and we're working
on that.
Speaker Joe if I could add to
that it's a great question right
how do you implement any tax
policy Mr Chairman I think this
is another one of the unintended
consequences of this three
percent cap.
Was that now all of our county
assessors.
you know no fault of their own
they could just take their
spreadsheet with all the
property values and go plus
three percent and it's only had
to do.
Prior to this they actually had
to go out and evaluate the
properties and see you know
understand what happened you
know up or down.
In some as early I think.
Backing away from this is
actually gonna be a good thing
because I mean if you recall
just a few years ago we had a
downward cycle prevalence value
still up three percent.
what are some of those houses
are sold down value that they
really need to still go out
again price and our senses are
just got used to pushing the bad
three percent button for their
job.
And so Mister and and and
gentlelady I think we need to go
back to assessors actually going
out and assessing.
Thank you gentleman madam
speaker I think it is at the
nail on the head there
gentleman.
That seems to be the biggest
issue that I see in my daily
life
So the logistics of it you know
I I I do I do see there being a
problem.
and.
I guess is there a penalty
Madam.
For someone saying that it is
their primary residence when it.
Possibly is.
So madam speaker and gentle lady
yes and there's not a penalty
right and in this bill but for
any tax fraud
there are penalties that are
spelled out in our statutes I
think it's section seven dash
nine
but yet anytime someone
falsifies tax information there
is a penalty.
Thank you gentlemen I.
Cool let me ask you one more
question was and I'm sorry like
I said I haven't had time to
pers as with that with the
amendments in context gentleman
and madam speaker.
Solar energy system on page six
I guess that's the amendments
and contents can you guys
briefly talk about what are we
doing with solar.
Madam speaker gentle lady
nothing does existing law.
Thank you for that thank you
gentleman.
I guess I don't I just real I
just have a little bit of
heartburn on this gentleman and
I only the logistics of it and
unfortunately I have seen
County assessors in thirty three
different counties per trip.
Take a piece of.
Statute and.
Read it and separate in their
own way.
Which I think is is kind of
unfair for the citizens of New
Mexico if you live in one county
the county assessor says well
I'm gonna give you this in
another county but even though
the laws is strictly written
this piece of legislation
concerns me that it may end up
that same way.
So gentleman thank you so much
for answering my questions.
Thank you madam speaker
thank you there is a request for
members to move their jackets
see no objections so ordered.
There is further debate on the
bill the gentleman from San Juan
Representative Strickler.
Thank you madam chair will the
gentleman from Santa please
yield and from Santa Fe.
Madam speaker we will thank you
gentleman.
Thank you madam chair thank her
so we we heard this syntax and
and
I certainly understand the
objective is so narrowly focused
and.
Do you mentioned Rick Cooper
yield control which is a is a
good thing when properties go up
and down its stabilizers and
one not SO three percent cap.
That was implemented twenty
years ago really was not
necessary.
noted and then the.
Image I have a little trouble
with just because you're just
focusing on just a small
category of homes that are
vacation rules are hard to
identify
you know it it seems like it's
going to create a lot of
difficulty for the tax
assessor's to administer and
they have a tough enough job as
it is.
And so give me give me some more
thoughts on this I appreciate
the gentleman from from Santa Fe
explained this is there's going
to be a delay in this no a
perfect world and speaker and
gentleman.
The property would rather face
up to three percent cap you know
bump it up to five percent and
and and and see if we can get
caught up you know statewide
that that's probably the best
safest approach but I don't
think there's political will to
do that so.
Some ideas on half.
With the target is is going to
be you know thousand homes are
ten thousand homes a you know we
have quite a few homes in the
area in our state what are your
thoughts uh madam speaker and
gentleman.
Madam speaker German a couple
thoughts.
First of the as I mentioned I
think it's gonna have a
different impact in different
areas of the state.
Mentzer German I think there are
a lot of areas of the state
where the the assessed value if
the if the property values have
been going up to the currently
assessed values probably either
at or close to current and
correct.
So it it's not gonna have as the
big impact there it is it can
have a bigger impact in a place
like Santa Fe County where there
are a lot of second homes and
there are a lot of short term
vacation rentals in I think you
know that assessor is gonna have
more work to do but I also think
that this answer here in terms
of providing funding for the
county and the city and all the
things that that we Fund through
property taxes this is a way of
you in mind if you again
enhancing the fairness of the
people heard investing in the
family but don't necessarily
live here they're paying taxes
on overseas the really asking
them to pay more were asking
them to pay on current and
correct for these getting there
over time.
So some assessors are gonna have
more work to do than others but
I you know I think that's their
job I think the I think that's
whether they're here they're
trying to make sure those
property property values or
accurate so the taxes are fair
in this will help them.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan I I very much
appreciate your question if I
could add on
to the response from the the
gentleman.
I really like how we said we're
not asking them to pay more just
to eventually get to current and
correct.
And and Mr John and I I I I know
you know this but I'm the body I
want to understand this as well.
When you look at our tax code.
And how it's rated at how ranks
compared to lots of other states
we take out our property tax it
is rated by the tax foundation
every year as either number one
best or number two best in US.
And I think a lot of people know
that we have one of the best
property taxes systems in the
poll United States and and
there's two reasons why it's
ranked that high one is that our
property taxes are very low.
What is the lowest in the in the
US.
And also in our state
constitution we protect our
property tax there's a lot of
protections in the property tax
in our state constitution.
And and so that's why it's rated
so well and so I just want to
make Mr speaker and gentleman
We're asking them to pay.
to get to current correct and
the property tax in the state
are still very low right it's
when you look at the real impact
this is going to have on Airbnb
or a second home.
We're talking maybe a hundred
dollar tax increase.
A year.
For.
I don't know three four five six
seven years until it gets
current correct so that they can
pay what's our neighbor is
paying.
I just bought a home and have
their property taxes to jump up
to current correct I mean to me
this whole tax linings in just a
complete
fairness issue that you can have
someone living next door to
another person paying half the
tax that they are still doing
the exact same services.
Thank you thank you Mr Mr
speaker and gentle percent of
all and and then of Santa Fe
I wish the state New Mexico
would advertise that we have
fairly low property taxes to me
that is that is a big attraction
to our state and for example
Texas money you know where I'm
from of those property taxes or
your income tax and there there
are exorbitant I mean we're
talking about ten fifteen twenty
thousand dollars a home the
average you know the average
home and we're much less than
that so.
Since we do have a very
reasonable and low property tax.
They didn't have you run the
numbers to rise that calf from
three three percent to five
percent and just make it simple
on on everybody that you know
we're not trying to hurt anybody
and it I know you believe that
the proselyte of numbers Mr
speaker and and general from
Santa gentleman from Santa Fe
can you share some of that
theory there.
Mr speaker and and gentleman
from San Juan great question and
of course all if you have
anything to add okay so.
I mentioned earlier that the
average will increase in
property value across the state
is about five percent a year.
And and and it's different
depending on where you're at the
state but that's your rough
average five percent a year so
if we ranged from three percent
to five percent
if you brought home was
corrected that would keep the
word supposed to be but for
those who are maybe in their
homes five ten fifteen twenty
years you would never catch up
but we just got a whole the
words at.
As a much bigger and gentleman.
Looking at okay.
The need to be greater than I.
What's what's too much what kind
of a sweet spot and and that's
to me I think all of us to try
to have a different idea
advertising somewhere between
seven and ten percent was what
we would all agree to is kind of
the sweet spots it would it not
be
such a big sharp increase but
over time would get us to the
right number.
And and so Mister speaker and
gentleman someone at that ten
percent depending on where you
fall that would take somewhere
between five ten fifteen years
to get to current correct if you
have had that property for a
very long time.
Thank you madam thank you Mr
speaker and and and gentleman a
gentleman
I I think I would.
would rather.
I have across the board
increases and this cap to six
percent let's say this is a
pretty big bump that ten percent
we really don't know the target
how many homes are there in this
menu or in this population and
I have a little trouble so thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen thank you gentlemen
appreciate your answers thank
you very much gentleman from San
Juan listening the gentleman
from Lee.
Representative Scott.
Gentleman from Santa Fe and
Santa.
Mr speaker gentleman we have you
surrounded but yes we'll yield.
From Santa for could dress first
this Madam to you.
The traveler German Tax
committee of chrome.
Strong proponent.
Of tax rates of course lane as
possible.
Is broken.
As possible.
Mr chair could you describe to
the broader health express of
legislation would contribute to
that circumstance.
Speaker and and generally I I
appreciate that question because
it gives me an opportunity
explain why this doesn't violate
that principle in fact it it.
It exemplifies that principle so
Mister German firmly right now
because we have no control
conflicting with this three
percent cap we have developed
this hodgepodge of how the tax
code is being administered.
For someone could have a much
higher taxes than their neighbor
was essentially the exact same
home exact same benefits
services being offered.
also because of the conflict
between yield control this three
percent when someone looks at
the total value of the state
it is artificially low in the
bad way.
and this can determine vestment
it affects bonding capacity it
affects our bond rating.
And so I I really think the goal
the goal of the regional
legislation I think
had merit.
They were trying to make sure
that folks who are in their
family home or not priced out of
their homes via property tax.
But I think the solution that
came we came up was
was not the right solution was
overly broad and cause all kinds
of other ripple effect
challenges and so much bigger
gentleman to firmly to directly
answer your question.
I would love to remove the cap
and tirelessly but I don't see
come from experience we've seen
the political will to do that so
we're gonna take steps in the
right direction and this is
really a first step or two.
That will end up.
you know.
Everyone who has a personal
place of residence property tax
by a little bit.
but start moving part of our
residential properties.
The right direction to be
assessed at their current and
correct value Mr John and not
know if the.
Jim from Santa Fe would have
anything to add.
The Mr Chairman it was a great
answer thank you.
Actor to say.
The majority of New Mexicans.
Residents would see a small tax
increase as a consequence of
this legislation.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
you've had it right on the head
the way you'll control works is
when there is an increase in
value somewhere else.
To keep the tax being paid the
same it pushes the right down on
everything else so we will see a
slight decrease in.
Occupied residents of property
tax.
Thank you for that answer
speaker and gentleman.
The insurers of these revenue
streams.
In Herrell.
In the conversation the property
taxes for.
Most of the nation court
officials lower than they should
but so it is impacting revenue
streams to county and municipal
level could you describe.
Negative impacts thanks would
questions.
Serve to alleviate.
So
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee another great question and
and just for the the body this
is interesting.
The state of New Mexico the at
the state level.
Have almost no benefit from
property tax that is very
strange compared to other states
are only benefit is a bill that
will pass here
and then the next few days is
the general obligation bond the
statewide general obligation
bond that is the only the level
that the state budget for
property tax.
The property taxes that we paid
the vast majority goes to
counties school districts
hospitals whatever the different
mill rates are on your your
property tax form.
and and I think Mr speaker
German to dive further into your
question.
because our values are overall
values are artificially low.
We cannot bond as much because
you can only bond going to a
doctor percentage of the taxable
value.
And so by having again
unintended consequence happens
to percent cap the whole state
of New Mexico is undervalued.
And so we could potentially
Bond higher for for roads or for
our public schools or or or or
whatever the needs might be
if we were able to roll this.
This unfortunate
policy out.
Mr speaker gentleman one other
entity that might benefit which
I should I'd like to mention or
soil water conservation
districts if they have a mill
levy and all of them do some do
some don't but they also get a
share of those collected
property taxes so they would
potentially benefit from this.
Just last question.
A short term return.
Vacancy to Sentifi during the
legislative solutions will
serve.
A slightly positive or slightly
negative impact more rental
rates.
Mr speaker and gentleman you
know the impact on the renters
was the subject of a lot of
discussion and that's why we
took out the the you know the
people that live in the house
the the people who are making it
your family home you know that's
their home and there was concern
that the landlord to be able to
pass the some of the higher
taxes on to their their renters
and that those renters are
likely lower income and we
didn't want to do that.
Mr speaker German your short
term rentals probably not going
to qualify I mean it's possible
someone lives there as their
primary residence when they're
not leasing out sometimes people
they could rent their homes you
know the the question is because
basically market question can
the if the landowners paying
maybe a little more in taxes can
they pass it on to the pass it
on it's a possibility.
Thank you
very much for your answers.
We'll look forward to supporting
this legislation.
The gentleman from Lee there's
further debate the gentle lady
from Valencia Representative for
heart of.
Thank you Mr speaker well my two
colleagues I don't know to
address right now kindly yield.
This material.
Mr speaker and gentleman I have
a question on some of language.
I just don't understand it I
repeated over and over again I'm
not an attorney
thank god we have one on this
bill
regarding the new language as
principal place of residence
means of residential property
that is used as a residential
dwelling I understand that.
Whether the properties owned or
rented I think I understand not.
And include a single dwelling or
multi dwelling I understand that
so if you're living in a
property that it's it's a multi
dwelling like a multi family
home when you're ready one of
the units this doesn't apply.
does not included willing that
is rented and less than thirty
day increments over the resident
has not manifested an intent to
make the dwelling or residence
that's part I don't understand
so could one of you please
explain that to me Mr speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady
Hello that the refers in general
terms to the things that make
residents of all right so do you
get your mail there do you put
your school your kids in school
based on on that residents do
you registered to vote based on
that residents you know it's
it's not any one thing but it's
really is you know is that your
home are you gonna be there for
more than thirty days are you.
You know putting down roots
essentially even though you
don't own the property.
Mr speaker actually if I can add
that's exactly the big
difference between last year's
bill and this one is what was
done last year a rental even
though someone lived there.
Would have not
would have not had a three
percent cap protection remain in
place because it wasn't the
owner living in the property we
change the language here in the
part that you Rep Jeff questions
about specifically talks about.
Is it just a place of residence
it doesn't matter if it's an
owner who's living there or not
so so if you have a home
that you're renting out for more
than thirty days I think it's
more than three day increments
back that means someone is
living there less their
residents and so that keeps the
three percent protection.
Does that make sense.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
sorry it does.
So if I am home and I do I do I
owned several rental properties
and let's just assumed that I
may one of them my part time
residents.
Because I live in Valencia
County and I do have several
homes in Albuquerque.
And that's a wanted to to to
stay there part time would that
become a primary residence Mr
speaker kind gentleman's.
This is only the person has one
primary residence so if your
primary residence is in Valencia
County he would be able to make
another home also your primary
residence or there's there's
only one.
Okay Mister speaker gentle man I
think I understand that so that
if I do have a primary residence
so and like the one I do have I
have an eight eight County and I
vacate that for any amount of
time they rented out a day a
specialized in B. and B.'s.
I rented out for more than
thirty days but that would still
be my consider considered my
primary residence correct Mr
speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady you if
it's your primary residence for
six months a year or nine months
a year or eleven months a year
it's your primary residence that
would that would stand for the
cap.
Yeah and Mr in New Delhi all
add.
If you decide to rent out of
that residence and it is someone
else's primary residence it also
qualifies as a primary residence
to retain the three percent cap.
Okay that's complicated I don't
see how you make that happen
especially if you're.
You know like you know the the
nurses that come through I I
just I don't understand it and
So miss Bingley.
But.
All right so.
We want to make sure that you
don't have to be the owner to
qualify for a protection for the
three percent residency.
Mr speaker gentlemen so what I'm
hearing so you're trying to
protect the renters Mr speaker
kind element Mr speaker Julie
that's exactly right if you are
a renter and that is your
primary residence you still
qualify but if you are a part
time vacation renter for a few
days that does not qualify okay
Mister speaker kind and I think
I understand that and I actually
appreciate that because want one
of my and thank you for
clarifying that because as I
read the bill I didn't
comprehend that because I'm
always a I had a problem with in
our the bill that came through
about not being able to the
vixen body from your home and
being required to have to renew
the lease even though my
colleague said it wasn't in
there is actually black and
white in the bill
it's going to cause read.
It's mentality gone up almost
thirty percent in some areas and
we don't want to price people
out of homes and so I do
appreciate the fact that you are
worried that that's something
that you guys considered
because.
If I have to carry the burden of
additional attacks right I don't
have a choice I have to put that
burden back on on to the renter
so that's something that we
really need to avoid so thank
you the speaker thank you
gentlemen I understand
appreciate your thank you
generally there's further debate
the gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln Representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Santa the
gentleman from Santa Fe yield.
Miss hill.
Thank you gentlemen of.
Just a
couple maybe more comments and
questions but.
This issue as was pointed out
that I think in the overview by
the gentleman from Santa Fe was
Commenced many years ago by
this.
body and.
Well it worked for.
Maybe parts of the state where
you have.
Very rapid increases in the
values of residential property.
and there was a big cry.
Among the population to.
Limit the amount of tax that
could increase of anyone here it
really shows us.
How we can.
Skew reality through public
policy.
And now and I would argue for
for many years well over ten to
twelve years.
We have been wrestling with the.
Current inequities that resulted
from the perceived original
inequities.
And so.
At the end of the day.
The property throughout the
state should be taxed based on
its fair market value so that
all.
Property owners are treated
it's.
At least close to equal.
But things have gotten out of
kilter because there's people
like me.
I don't sell my residents live
there for a long time I think
most people
released the statistics which
show that most people change
their residents about every five
years or so.
And so you have people who are
fairly mobile they move from one
residence to another.
And they get stung by what you
classified or what I heard on
this floor Tax lightning.
I'm paying property tax based
on.
A hundred fifty dollar valued
house.
When I sell that residents to
someone.
Them long behold I sell of for
two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars.
Then they get their tax bill and
it shows that the property is
now valued at two hundred fifty
thousand dollars I was paying.
Two thirds of what they're going
to have to pay and and property
tax and so if that's the.
Routes we got to today.
The legislation years ago was
well intentioned but over time
it is created and inequity
months the property owners and
as you pointed out of.
Well like me get the benefit of
not paying my taxes based on
fair market value because I've
in the same house I was twenty
two two years ago.
People that have just bought a
house or paying for market value
on
their property so.
It's a it's an issue that the.
I wrestled with what the county
assessor when I was on the
county commission and it's an
issue that we're wrestling with
here today and I suspect.
We're going to wrestle with this
for some time to come as as as
well the population for so my
question to Mr speaker to either
the gentleman.
Is.
After this if this goes into
effect.
And I believe I heard the ten
years may be the time period
that gets us back to.
Parity if you will.
Are we going to see.
Are there other aspects of this
bill that are are going to.
Cause us to to over time be in
New.
Inequitable situation.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
from Chavis and Lincoln that is
a great question and and I
really wish the legislature two
decades ago would have asked
themselves that question when
they passed the three percent
cap.
Because I I completely agree
with you the the.
The problem they're trying to
solve was real.
And they were well intentioned.
But the level one.
Problem and one for the state
devoted to a solution that was
applied to the entire state.
The cost way more problems than
it solved.
And so.
Want to be careful here to make
sure that we're not falling into
that same trap door asking
ourselves what are the
unintended consequences is the
right move.
Speaker and and gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln I can say
with confidence.
That we have evaluated.
Whether there are unintended
consequences of this and I can
say.
There are not because really the
purpose of this bill is to start
rolling back the original.
The solution across all these
problems.
Is Mr chairman I I think we will
start seeing.
kind of the bringing back into
those ripples and and we we need
we need to keep going right this
this is in the the the entire
solution we're gonna start
moving in the right direction.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa
of their lives I see we give me
a few years the upside goes from
three percent to maybe just all
ten percent or something.
I think we need to be prepared.
For those of us in this in this
room that we're going to hear
probably a hue and cry from
people.
Saying I thought they could only
increase at three percent every
year or six percent every two
years and I just got my tax bill
and it's ten percent greater.
What happened and so I think
people in this body need to
recognize that we're going to
have to be firm in our resolve
the that we're trying to fix a
problem that was created but
recognize that there's going to
be a lot of people whose seller
homes in five or seven years.
well not solar homes are going
to be people who get their tax
bill and seven years down the
road that are going to be
knocking on our door saying how
can the assessor do this to us.
When there's a law out there
that serve three percent cemex
I've been doing three percent
for for twenty years and now
it's ten percent what happens
in their May point of us and so
I'm not sure I like that
situation but it's I just the
question is Mr speaker and
gentleman.
That's really the only method by
which we can get back to fair
market value yeah maybe a
reasonable period of time as of.
So Mister speaker and and
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln I've.
I am very much value the
question appreciate we're coming
from and how you sent me to be
firm in our resolve what we're
really doing here is paying for
the sins of the past legislators
and and I'm sure that the there
are things that I've done that
twenty years from now the
legislature's gonna go back and
say why did we do that
after all things back but here
is an opportunity Mr speaker and
gentleman from Lee to try to
correct and move something in
the right direction and we're
gonna have to just be firm in
our resolve.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
guess just one other point when
it comes to tax policy.
We need to be very careful do we
not.
To.
When we met carve outs when we
make exceptions that we really.
Really study.
To see what the long term
implications of that car about
four exception are to our
overall tax policy do we not.
Speaker and gentleman here
you're singing my song.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
figured the if you were the one
you would answer the amendment
in that fashion I I do think
this is one area of many areas
that I see in our tax code that
maybe could use some.
Tweaking to to get us back in
the parity and I would admonish
the body to be very careful.
Creating some of these tax
programs because they will have
long term implications and over
time.
They will create.
Tax policy that will be
perceived to be that may be
potentially be Sarah so with
that Mr speaker and gentleman
thank you.
Thank you John thank you
gentlemen next we're gonna go to
the gentle lady from Otero for
the second time.
For the second time
Representative I accidentally
from a to a.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
To yield again gentleman.
Mr real thank you gentlemen Mr
speaker I'm so in listening to
the debate I'm sorry I had asked
for a second time it in and
listen to some of the answers
to the questions that were
asked.
I just want clarification on.
The question of I believe.
German you stated that if a
renter lives in a home that it
is their primary residence so in
that particular case that they
would qualify for the three
percent cap is that correct.
Speaker and gentle lady from
Carol that is correct.
Thank you gentleman Mr speaker
so I guess.
Gentleman and Mr speaker that
brings me back to.
My fear my terrible fear of
county assessors across the
state.
Figuring out what is your
primary residence and what is
not your primary residence if in
fact a rancher.
Can get that the can you give me
some clarification on that
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady so to be
clear.
Property taxes are charged to
the regular.
Following the owner the owner is
responsible for the property
taxes whether they live in the
property or not.
So the what will likely happen
is.
owners of the they get their
either their tax bill or their
segment value there will be some
indication about whether someone
live there.
The chairman never sure about
any of this right there to just
pay rent maybe they pay
utilities this is a really you
know cross cross their desk it's
it's the owner in the likely
answer would be the assessor
asks the owner in some manner
does someone live there if the
answer is yes that's probably
the end of the discussion.
Mr speaker generally you did ask
about.
Yeah of course if someone says
some of their and they didn't
in.
I don't anticipate the assessors
do a lot of investigation but
you maybe someone in office
checks their B. and B. listings.
Right and if they see a
residence is advertised for sale
or advertise for short term
rental is being claimed as a
primary residence here maybe
that's worth the phone call or a
little investigation some of the
I mean that's how there's maybe
a check on that but I think for
the most part we're relying on
property owners to be honest
about whether or not the
properties occupied.
Mr usually if I can add is that
was a an excellent answer but
this isn't the first time we've
done something like this with
our property tax code right we
have a head of household
exemption we have Representative
disabled veteran exemption we
have
folks were senior citizens you
know caps that are you know
adjusted with inflation rate I
mean there's there's several of
these different things so this
would be simply another one.
Where is the and whether there's
a check box for our a male to be
similar goes out and just like
all these other ones and subject
to the same pros and cons of how
we've administer the other ones.
Thank you for that gentleman Mr
speaker
I am glad that you all have a a
phase.
In the system hi unfortunately
of course the system for
fourteen years and I've seen
some horrific things that have
transpired I will I would like
to share with you all Mr speaker
and gentleman just a brief thing
that happened in my own county
this year
so you all know that I'm the
chief deputy treasurer and
Carroll County.
And so.
When the assessors sends out
their notice of value they have
until April first to send out
the notice about you.
I would get into venture to
guess that.
Ninety percent of this body gets
that piece of paper in the mail.
And they open it up it says this
is not a tax bill.
And so they don't look at it
through it on their desk.
That's what everybody does not a
bill file that away.
Okay.
So this happens every year I law
by April first.
Well then lo and behold.
The FAA certifies a tax rates
the county commission approved
the tax rates were in October.
By November first the county
treasurer says after tax bill.
You get your tax bill and you
say.
What my property taxes doubled
from last year what happened.
So you get your card you got out
of the county treasurer's office
you raise holy heck to the
county treasurer.
K. treasurer says I have nothing
to do with that not my job all I
could do was collected.
So.
That being said actually had a
conversation with a resident
from Otero county got their
property tax bill this year.
And their property value.
Had increased.
So I investigated what it
happened I went to the assessors
office I said it was a piece of
property in the in the
Sacramento mountains beautiful
place and it was an elderly
gentleman and he says you know
I've I've worked I worked my
whole life to pay off its is
vacation home is a little tiny
tin tin shed of a cabin in a
terrible.
So the property taxes increased
so I went to the county assessor
I civil how is this possible
that this is an increase more
than three percent a year.
And gentleman the answer was
pretty shocking to me.
In that section of the woods.
There was actually a house one
house that sold for five hundred
thousand dollars.
So the county assessor decided.
That that must be a area.
We need to charge more taxes.
So I just my county assessor I
said.
You do that and his answer was
there's nothing in the law that
says I can't.
He justified raising property
taxes in amount community by
twenty percent in one year based
off one sale.
It was detrimental.
This gentleman the senior
citizen I spoke to he says I
can't afford this.
He just tax me out of my home I
worked all my life to be able to
have this little place to take
my kids and my grandkids to.
And it was heartbreaking.
So I want to caution the body I
understand were undervalued I
understand we're trying to feel
layers of the onion off to get
to current and correct I
understand that but I want you
all to realize there may be
unintended consequences so Mr
speaker and Julie Ferraro Herald
thank you for that story offered
similar did you help that
gentleman yield.
The valuation on his property.
At the time the tax bills come
out the appeal process is
already gone past the value is
set.
Once you receive your nose a
value from the county assessor.
By April first you have thirty
days to protest that value if
you do not protest that value is
assumed that you.
I agree with the value they've
given now.
So Mr joiner you're saying.
That there is no way to appeal
after those thirty days and just
a quick reminder to the body to
keep the discuss focus the
gentleman and gentle lady on the
bill.
Mr speaker John I'm sorry could
you repeat that.
Speaker and gentle lady my
question is.
Is there only one opportunity to
yield an evaluation for that
year and gentleman yes.
Mr generally for that year.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady there is a process I have
gone through this process and
and I would hope that if any of
us
approached by someone in that
very same circumstance which is
not right.
That would help them to yield.
and I know my professor was very
helpful.
and and I hope that you know as
servants of the people that we
could help them understand ways
to appeal that decision this
that's my one of my favorite
things to do is to constituents
are just work what other stuff
here is not as fun but helping
the people understand how they
can work with their government
for a better outcome I took a
lot of satisfaction in that.
And thank you Mr speaker and
thank you John.
Thank you very much gentle lady
there's further debate the
gentleman from Dona Ana grant
and zero represent us.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
two gentleman from Santa and
Santa Fe please are you.
Mister speaker you've.
You Mr speaker I am listening to
the undervaluation and and my
questions are disallowed kind of
understand this.
If the right now we're seeing
the market the for market value
increase dramatically would you
agree with that Mr speaker
gentle gentleman.
This is the chairman that's
that's my understanding.
Sir.
Mr speaker gentleman are.
So my understanding is when you.
Purchase a home.
That that automatically gets
reset.
When you purchase is that
correct Mr speaker the only this
is the chairman that is correct
and that's a really important
point the every time the the
property changes hands it it's
supposed to be brought to
current and correct thank you Mr
speaker German so we're seeing a
lot of sales of homes happening
right now in some of the reasons
that were behind a little bit I
would say and maybe you can help
me with this gentleman the
figure gentleman is we have some
people live here maybe all their
life and held on to that piece
of property and maybe it's been
it's been a family for thirty
forty years
would that be a fair assessment
of that Mr speaker Jim.
Mr speaker Dillman yes and I
think that's you know what that
was for the rationale.
In a quicker so I I apologize
gentleman gentleman.
We.
Will be a muted on them okay the
seizures and I apologize this is
examined you know I think that
was part of the ritual rationale
in what one of the things that
came up with the with the bill
as it was last year that it had
to be owner occupied primary
residence was the the pattern
of.
Google buys a house the reserve
family some point maybe they
moved to another house and their
kids live in the house.
And that would be owner occupied
primary residence and that
potentially goes up so under
this bill that would happen.
As long as it's someone's
primary residence and that could
be the result Google or could be
their kids who are still living
there.
And perhaps add Mr speaker and
and John from Dona Ana requests
here just
We have seen over the last
couple years a big real estate
bubble right is what's called
you know we're we had one of
these in the early two thousands
revenue alone right now we see
probably guys really going up.
But have we seen in our property
taxes skyrocket.
And the answer is no and it's
not because of this three
percent cap it's because of
yield control.
Because the values are going up
and and the generally for
Terrazas mention this every year
the commission has to go through
this process of approving the
range.
What's happening is yield
control is being calculated on
this rising value and a push the
right down.
Twenty value to keep the taxes
coming out the same.
That's what we're controlled us
when property values go down it
pushes the right up to the tax
the same for property values go
up it pushes the right down to
keep the taxes the same.
So that's why we haven't seen
increases in our property taxes
commensurate with this this
bubble.
Mr speaker gentleman would you
say that the Bible is started
simple user term.
Started just the last probably.
Twelve to eighteen months
figure.
Speaker and gentleman I I
haven't been watching it that
closely but I want to say it's
been a least a year.
Mr speaker gentleman you think
we're gonna see that the results
of that increase with all the
sales of homes probably maybe
into the next taxation and
valuation period.
I apologize Mister John can you
rephrase the question okay do
you think we're going to see the
effects of all these homes are
were purchased at this high
value.
In the next deal because we're
we're this happened within the
last twelve months all these
your time line Mr speaker German
so do you think we're gonna see
the valuation increase in and
and and funds come in because of
the recalculations being that
they're purchased now but a new
hi right it's been tremendous I
I would say and I'm gonna ask
you see if you think this is
correct specific speaker
gentleman how we seen a fifty
percent increase maybe of in in
the sale of it is in the in the
fair market value of homes.
Yes the speaker and and
gentleman I understand the
question how great questions
thank you for that and just
again to help people understand
how property taxes work here.
If in your county.
the average value of existing
property increased by.
Thirty percent this year.
Your property taxes don't
increase by thirty percent if
there wasn't this the percent
cap should resent happens
nothing to do with.
Because the yield control
calculations made every year by
DFA.
The look at that increase in the
value.
And they say okay what was the
taxes that you're County got
last year.
Add a little bit of information.
And then the rain calculated go
backwards and calculate what is
the tax rate of this new value.
That same dollar amount plus
inflation.
So that's why I'm if you could
if you put your property taxes
Mr speaker and gentleman laden
does if you pull your property
taxes for the last several years
Justin almost no movement in
them we've gone through two big
boom and bust cycles.
Mr chairman for my dad.
Yeah we we what we'll hear the
reports about the real estate
market thing I.
In Mr Chairman my impression is
when they talk about the hard
market they're talking about the
increase in valuation.
That doesn't necessarily mean
there are a lot of houses being
sold.
And I think the increase in
valuation is partly because
there are very few houses on the
market.
So.
Because of the limited supply
and greater demand the prices
are going up it's it's not the
same as like everyone so he
decided to sell their house
maybe there's some people that
think quality of the market's
really good right now I can make
a lot of money maybe that was
the time to move you know
whether it's locally or you know
across the state or of the state
that might be an incentive to
sell your house.
The the the upward price
pressure is is partly due to the
lack of supply the lack of
people selling their homes.
Thank you Mr chairman but and I
appreciate that because it is
supplying demand and I think
there was a lot of supply and I
know in Los crucis when I was
I go through there see I used to
see tons of real state funds of
but it's been gobbled up here in
the last year people are
probably jumping on on that
thinking Hey I can upgrade my
home will sell this home enter
on by another one course again I
would reset the valuation so the
the the other question it into
that I was just the reason I was
going I was asking that Mr
speaker gentleman because I
think we're going to have
this bubble Mr speaker German
eventually pop.
And we're gonna have that.
Valuations take a I think it's
going to be a dramatic
reverse.
In valuation and so Mister
speaker Jim and I I just haven't
seen this happen to me maybe I'm
not doing something right but
I've never seen my taxes go back
down could you explain that to
me Mr speaker element so Mister
speaker Joe that's a that's a
great question right we we
almost never see the taxes go
down that's a it's always a
great thing so
just following your your
example when when this bubble
pops Mr Jarman and the value
start coming down.
the yield control point is to be
turned again that year.
Enter to say what was the total
amount of the county or whatever
school district got that last
year.
Add a little bit inflation no
recalculate the right to give
that same amount plus a little
bit more so your exactly right
Mr John you're gonna pay a
little bit more in tax the last
time
accounting for that inflation
and so if you look your property
taxes over the last you know ten
fifteen years you'll see just
slight increases accounting
especially for inflation factor
but when property values go up
you don't pay more inflation and
we go down it'll pay more and
inflation because it's held
steady Mr speaker gentleman what
I'm understanding here's your
time in the no matter what
happens is is kind of great
increased by.
A net yield of what to a County
yes it was Mr Angelman when you
look at a property taxes there
are really two ways that they go
up the first is this inflation
factors and calculated every
year.
The second is if there is some
more levy you know that is
imposed in your area so I can
Rancho we have one for a while
for hospital we another one for
higher education those kinds of
things those are really the only
two ways they go up unless you
sell the house and you see a sky
rocket in the evaluation to
current correct the minutes
thank you pay that the tax on
the new amount Mr figure
gentleman are the third or
fourth one if you improve your
property right by adding
drudge's or remodel or addition
of our so Mister speaker German
I want to beat this horse to
death I just I think wipe my
point was I think there is
you're gonna have some
correction I think we will see
some
valuation correction over the
next period of time I think it
will start correcting for the
market goes up the goes down and
and the only other question I
had so so in that I'm just gonna
leave that at that
Mr speaker John in the second
the the second question I have
is your.
Your your deal for you said if
you live in the residence or if
there's some of the lives of the
residents for more than thirty
days is considered their
residence and are exempt from
this and my understanding right
Mr speaker Jim.
This gentleman that that's
basically right.
This is the chairman of the the
generally from the let's see
what was talking about tenants
and rentals if you for example
you read out the property and
maybe Representative enter into
a year long lease you know
that's clearly that's clearly
residential maybe it's a six
month lease renewable you know
on a month to month you know
that's probably residential
three month lease probably the
same result most people don't
want that much turnover and
their tenants because it's it's
a hassle and you to find someone
new but if you have a property
that you're really just renting
LA short term basis short term
rental
that it's it's going to be taxed
differently and that the one
thing I I don't know like you
know maybe some of the higher
end properties.
Could you run it out for a
month.
You know if you run out from of
the person clearly live
somewhere else like maybe they
want to spend the summer in New
Mexico right but they live in
maybe they wanna spend the
winter in New Mexico that's
better example raise number they
live in Chicago.
You that's probably not their
primary residence it still might
not be caught by this because of
the language with the thirty
days so there's some the is that
you know is Sir depends on the
circumstances of the individual
case.
Thank you Mr speaker German and
the reason I kind of bring that
office is two things that came
to mind one is we have full.
The people in our in in my town
and around.
From there that have their homes
and then they have a little
cabin up in in in the healer our
whatever and they enjoyed going
up there and and they stay there
for three months sometimes in
the summer during the summer or
maybe they're big hunters in the
state that during the hunting
season for two or three months
would they be exempt from that
Mr speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker German as as I
discussed with the jelly from
one to County.
Any individual will only have
one primary residence the might
change at some point in the year
but the idea that you spend nine
months in one house three in
another and that goes back and
forth probably solar only have
one primary residence.
Senator German Mr speaker German
but.
And then one more thing.
What if I had an L. L. C. now in
the second house soldiers rented
to myself for more than thirty
days what would happen then Mr
chairman.
Mr speaker and gentleman so this
this proposal is not based on
ownership.
Space on residency so it could
be owned by an LLC and it could
be renting it out to some of the
running up to you funds to
primary residences is still
under the cap.
Thank you Mr speaker Germanism
fun with this and we we have to
smile once in a while around
here thing I work in the
mortuary we'll get a lot of
smiles so I'm trying to get
someone out here Mr speaker
gentlemen so with that much of
that office.
Thank you.
Seeing no further debate the
gentleman close.
Mr speaker members of all the
thank you for the debate
I think they're really you know
questions we a sense of on those
bills that we all sort of a
personal relation to the because
we've all lived in the house on
the house for the house so so we
understand that Mr speaker
gentleman I like to think the
support and with some of my co
sponsor the gentleman from Santa
I really appreciate that and Mr
speaker I move that house bill
seventy one as amended to the
past.
Representative any closing
remarks to end this taxing
debate.
We're on final passage of house
bill seventy one is amended that
shows that money that was
representative of Smalls.
So if you love it gave him
credit if you hated you know or
verger complaints.
We're final passage of house
bill seventy one is amended the
vote is now open.
But members without a recorded
vote.
Sure.
I think that was the S..
Was wondering the same thing to
Mr speaker.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon is yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash yes
Representative muka.
Yes Representative yes
representative Cadena.
Yes Representative Cadena is yes
Representative Cook.
Representative guy Aigles.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
is yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
is a yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente is a
yes Representative Lewis.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio is yes
Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo is a
yes.
What is a close remote of thirty
eight in the affirmative.
Twenty three the negative house
bill seventy one as amended
acres the house Mr speaker.
Yeah that's fine we've done
this.
Before
I think you were called because
earmarking excuse to suggest the
folks know what was going on
Representative Powdell Culbert.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
votes now.
What is a close over thirty the
fermentative twenty for the
negative house bill seventy one
as amended has passed the house.
The gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business see no objections so
ordered.
Alright folks that we're going
to stop third reading at that
point today will pick up where
we left off because a late hour
we have very full agenda is in
committee meetings this
afternoon and I believe both
parties we are having a caucus
immediately after the floor
session so we need to stop here
so that we have time for
committees to meet we will pick
up in the morning
where we left actually tomorrow
we'll have a brief floor session
and then we'll come back to the
floor at eight PM tomorrow
night.
which we are planned for the
rest of the session.
Okay.
members
I could have the members
attention
a good friend of mine and a good
friend to many people in the
legislature and the City of
Santa Fe and into the entire
state of New Mexico the for more
Santa Fe have here Gonzalez lost
his battle with cancer today.
He's a great man and a good
friend and I would like to ask
the house to please stand in
the.
Offer for years of thoughts in
whatever's your tradition.
Thank you.
Before we go to other
announcements we have to generic
bills.
Everyone's favorite part of the
thirty day session.
Generic bills.
We have house bill two three
nine representative Thompson
house bill two three nine.
Higher would remove rules
committee printed and referred
to the health and Human Services
Committee.
House bill two three nine
removed from rules printed and
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee.
The two zero two number is
triple to triple four point one.
The two oh two number is triple
to triple four point one.
We have house bill two four
three.
House Bill to four three
Representative Alcon.
Or the bill removes the rules
committee printed and referred
to the labor veterans and
military affairs committee.
House bill two four three
Representative Alcon ordered
removed from the rules committee
printed and referred to the
labor veterans and military
affairs committee the two zero
two number.
Is triple two six one eight
point one.
Triple two six one eight point
one.
Are there announcements the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
house Judiciary Committee will
meet immediately after the
caucuses and we are not going to
have a lengthy meeting today
because they're Senator
almost half the committee has an
obligation a little bit at seven
o'clock.
So we've done a little juggling
the house joint resolution two
will be heard on Friday instead
of today.
we had already added to the
agenda House Bill five so we are
going to do House Bill five
house bill one ninty six and
hope we can at least get started
on if not finish house bill one
forty five so that's what we're
doing today.
Thank you Mr speaker members
take note are there other
announcements.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Dona
Ana chair one Rubio.
Morning there good afternoon
Mister speaker I just wanted to
let folks know that the
transportation committee will
not be meeting tomorrow morning
there are currently no bills
issued out to our committee so
stay tuned for maybe in the
future.
Members of the general from Rio
Arriba Sandoval and San Juan
chairman Lente.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
agriculture see is a water
resources committee will meet
tomorrow at eight AM note the
new time eight AM to go through
several bills thank you very
much have good afternoon.
Members of the general manager
woman Ferrari thank you Mr
speaker your house and consumers
and public affairs committee
will be meeting tomorrow it was
wrong on the
Platform I guess that we
announce it so if we will be
meeting tomorrow afternoon.
Members take note.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Santa Fe Torrance and Valencia
chairman McQueen thank you Mr
speaker the House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee will also
not to meet tomorrow thank you.
Usually there's a round of
pause after you make that
announcement.
Is the gentleman from Bernalillo
chairman my SS thank you very
much Mr speaker of the house
commerce committee will be
meeting this afternoon after the
respective caucuses Committee
following the caucuses a house
bill two hundred twenty eight
has a generic title but does was
published yesterday and made
available to.
All interested parties it will
be dealing with the ability
title hydrogen hub Development
Act thank you Mr
amber take note.
And I think it's of caucuses I
think it's called high.
Which will leave the members of
the legislature little **** eyed
for Committee.
Are there any further
announcements.
I have one more.
House bill two one three.
House bill two one of three.
Floor leader Martinez.
Order it removed from the rules
committee printed and referred
to the taxation and revenue
committee.
House bill two one three.
Floor leader Martinez for the
right removed from the rules
committee printed and referred
to the taxation and revenue
committee the two zero two
number is triple to.
Six one six point two.
Four two six one six point two.
Anything else going once.
Going twice.
The gentle lady from Olympia.
Mr speaker I know there's been a
lot of really cheesy jokes
today.
Because of our gift but it isn't
national pizza day.
So what I've been asked to do to
cheese jokes I just can't find
myself to do it so Mister
speaker what type of person
doesn't like pizza.
Originally what type.
We're down.
what was Janis Joplin's favorite
song gentle lady to sing on
national P. today.
Mr speaker what take another
little piece of my heart.
I just made that one of.
The general if you.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we as a adjourned until eleven
AM tomorrow morning this is
thank you members for today's
work
democratic and Republican
because I will convene
immediately.
Then there will be committees
this afternoon please be sure to
watch them on the webcast or in
person here in the building.
Again just remind folks will
come back in at eleven tomorrow
do some housekeeping recess the
house for committees and then
come back to the floor somewhere
around seven thirty eight
o'clock and that will be the
plan for the rest of the session
so we're into our late night
stretch.
Sure there's you day have a good
evening the house is in recess
until eleven AM tomorrow.
