The gentle lady from Rio Arriba
Santa Fe inTaos are you ready
and item number six.
Mr speaker give me to that point
the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House to one thirty two is
amended our final passage is
been taken the gentlelady to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker
thank you for this opportunity
both to you and to the members
of the House of.
Before we begin the bill I would
like to add amendments to H. B.
one thirty two and the members
have them on their desks the
number that I'm adding is a
point two two two five hundred
point one point.
Generally these move house floor
amendment number one has to one
thirty two is amended it has
been passed down the to a two
numbers triple two five double
zero point one gentlelady to
explain the amendment thank you
Mr speaker.
These amendments delete section
K. on page eighteen in section
two on page thirty nine to
address the following issues
some of the provisions in the
original bill we're in conflict
with other provisions in the law
and they were deleted to avoid
conflicts of.
Was to protect lenders ability
to collect on loans under the
new thirty six percent cap if
needed so that was added to
protect lenders on page eighteen
that's a language to clarify
that the evasion provisions
apply if the loan exceeds a the
thirty six percent right.
And then we followed the
suggestions or the the yeah this
suggestions from the financial
institution division and they
said and they asked us to no end
the reporting section of the law
to be effective as of January
first two thousand to three the
next in a report from lenders is
due in March twenty twenty two
for the calendar year of twenty
twenty one all this does really
is it aligns the date so that we
get the same data in the in the
same format at the same amount
of time and that pretty much a.
Explains of those amendments Mr
speaker.
Thank you gentle lady is there
debate on the amendment.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative Eli thank you Mr
speaker Mr speaker the generated
from wherever Rio Arriba Santa
Fe and Taos you'll.
Yes Mr speaker I kind I yield to
the kind gentleman thank you Mr
speaker thank you generally.
I just wanna make sure I just
got questions specifically
around page eight in the bill so
now if I may and the lender I
can charge late fees
insufficient bank fees
I can accrue interest after
ninety days assuming all those
are part of our loan agreement
but those are not prohibited now
is that correct.
It already exists in the law to
do that and that's for the
conflict was.
And gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Rio
Arriba so.
Are you saying that in another
section law it prohibits the
charging of late fees for
example.
No it allows system Mr speaker
kind gentleman know it allows
it.
Mr speaker generated from rural
so that's another trying to
clarify because that the
regional tax the bill I think.
for prohibited like for example
the charging late fees but now
you're striking that section so
now the lender can charge late
fees that's on trend understand.
The staff.
complex.
Under the under the original we
we amended the conflicts between
this bill and the original law
so that the so that we a line
those together so that you
wouldn't have that problem.
Mr speaker joined from river I'm
just trying to stand like to
calendar now charge a late fee
on can they continue to charge a
late fee on a on the Senator
loans yes Mr speaker kind
gentleman yes and Mr speaker
gentle lady from your and the
same thing about accruing
interest be on the ninety days
and and seeking a garnishment is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
that's true.
You Mr gonna refer the
questions.
seeing no further debate is
there objection to the
amendment.
Hearing none the house floor
amendment number one to house
bill one thirty two as amended
is adopted.
Generally you still have the
floor thank you Mr speaker and
again I would like to think this
body you for the opportunity to
place house bill one thirty two
before this body this bill
amends the small loan act of
nineteen fifty five and the bank
installment loan act of nineteen
fifty nine in the following
ways.
It reduces the maximum allowable
interest rates from a hundred
and seventy five percent to
thirty six percent and and
insurers that the APR is all
inclusive I E. all the fees that
they charge will be included in
this thirty six percent cap
rate.
indexes of thirty six cap to the
primate of interest meaning that
if the interest rate exceeds ten
percent for two months in a row
the maximum allowable interest
rate will increase by the amount
of the prime rate is over ten
percent.
Now this happened a lot in the
eighties and in really in the
seventies when interest rates
are going up really going they
were out of control and what
this what this provision of the
law does it really protects
lenders so if you have a wild
market all of a sudden interest
rates are really fluctuating it
will protect lenders.
The third thing this bill does
it increases the the size of the
loans covered in this law from
five thousand dollars to ten
thousand dollars.
It also includes language to for
that to prevent businesses from
circumventing the law.
So that's kind of the.
Kind of a capsule of what this
law does.
But I would like to tell this
body why changes to the small
loan act in the bank installment
loan that I really needed.
It's interesting when I first
came to this house as a freshman
I told a group of freshmen
legislators that I will I wanted
to change the installment of
loan act wanted to reduce it
from a hundred and seventy five
percent to thirty six percent
and they all said why so high.
Why not fifteen percent.
And what I told them what I what
I told him is the reason we're
recommending thirty six percent
is because that's the interest
rate that the department of
defense to the military lending
act allows smaller companies to
charge young men and women on
serving our country.
When people get trapped in these
loans they can be deployed so is
really it was really an issue of
the military readiness it was a
huge problem in two thousand
four in two thousand five so
what the department of defense
did is the embarked on a study
they did a long study and they
looked at these at these long
range issued by a small loan
companies in and they decided
that they could settle on a rate
of thirty six percent they
thought that would be fair to
the small loan industry and they
really really thought it would
be fair to military families
You see these these little small
loans companies lined up before
every military base there
actively recruiting loans from
our military personnel so if
you're an act
an active member of the Armed
Services in New Mexico if you
cannot get a loan higher than
thirty six percent so we have
sixteen thousand of those
members in in New Mexico and
they're protected they're
protected by the military
lending act so this was passed.
It was passed in two thousand
six under the administration of
George W. bush it was an
important piece of let
legislation that was passed
almost unanimously in both the
house and the Senate signed by
president.
Montoya if the if the if our
military leadership invested so
much time and and they solved a
huge problem to do this.
You know I think the Mexico
should do the same.
I trust I trust the military
when it comes to them protecting
our military families that I
think they have that I think
that is in their heart and
they're going to protect the
young men and women who serve
this nation and I think we need
to protect New Mexicans.
In two thousand nineteen
Representative J. D. Lewis
passed house bill one fifty
installment and small loan
changes section ten was a very
important part of this
legislation.
It required all licensees
operating and operating under
the New Mexico small loan act of
nineteen fifty five in the day
installment loan act of nineteen
fifty nine to file annual
reports with the financial
institution division of the.
Of the regulation and licensing
department of New Mexico.
They had to they have to now
provide detailed information
including each loan offered in
each loan product offered of the
dollar amount of that of the
interest and fees charged with
that loan they have to do the
number of loans repaid in full
they have to report how many
loans for charged a late payment
or defaulted on they have to
report on the number of
borrowers who source of income
with whose source of income is
the income from a public benefit
and they have to report on the
number of borrowers who are
sixty five years and older.
It's interesting but the first
step I do was reported out
Jess's last December I think it
was December twenty first two
thousand twenty one.
Can you have a summary of the
report before you because this
stuff can get pretty do very
fast so what I did in this
report that is on everybody's
desk is I gave you.
This is.
The
summer.
Summary of the entire if I do
report s'mores s'mores summaries
more information that you might
be interested in I also gave you
a look by county you know how
many borrowers do we have in
each of our counties as tip
o'neill said all politics are
local and the first thing I
think we always check is what
does this mean to my district so
I wanted you to have a look at
that I also I think this is a
really important chart.
The last chart because it really
shows the cost of these loans
it's you know.
If you're not in this field if
you don't do that you really
don't know what a hundred and
seventy five percent means so I
have broken out these loans by
loan amounts bye terms and
And by the dollar amounts for
different rates so that you can
kind of get a handle on what
people are paying at thirty six
and what people are paying at
forty five and sixty and ninety
nine and that one seventy I
remember one seventy five is the
highest rate people can charge
now.
When I first began to think
about introducing this bill it
really didn't seem like such a
heavy lift.
I must admit I was pretty naive
at that time
I thought well people here this
and they'll immediately say well
of course of course we should
reduce it to thirty six percent
thirty six percent of high.
Why can't we get it done you
know.
Why can't we do that.
And then as I got deeper and
deeper into this issue I I'm
kind of sad to say that I found
out that New Mexico has created
an entire sub industry
to counter the effects of these
small loans.
Our major cities are major
counties are colleges they've
all set up the loan companies
within their financial
departments to help people get
out of these the crippling
loans.
An organization called to
connect has helped over fifty
five thousand customers in the
state and they have refinance
these loans at affordable rates.
in doing so they to help save
their customers eighteen dollars
eighteen million dollars a year
in interest eighteen million
dollars here in Memphis.
And we're very fortunate the
data the data now collected from
fit now shows that over three
hundred ninety thousand loans
were made in twenty twenty the
total amount borrowed was.
Let me get this right.
Four million four hundred forty
five million nine hundred and
twenty five thousand fifty six
dollars that was the that was
the amount borrowed the interest
on that was a hundred and
seventy nine million.
As legislators.
We now have real data.
I I just want to say this isn't
a problem this isn't a problem
with the loan rates it's really
a financial pandemic it really
is.
It's important that this body
understand how many people
support this legislation.
during the COVID period in the
committees I must say it was it
was like all of New Mexico I
felt like was supporting this
legislation and the and the loan
industry the small loan industry
was opposing this the this
legislation.
But just let me give you.
A partial list of the people
that support this legislation.
The Navajo.
A nation they have the Navajo
nation's Council.
Gonna get my glasses back.
Lynsey County the town of
Bernalillo New Mexico
association of counties the
credit association of New Mexico
the native American voters
Alliance education project The
New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty thank New Mexico
prosperity works New Mexico
voices for children.
Of the center on responsible
lending New Mexico chamber of
commerce the Hispano chamber of
commerce New Mexico conference
of churches The New Mexico
conference of Catholic bishops
the Navajo nation's hole Human
Rights Commission.
Senator and advocacy commission.
We have the center for civic
policy we have a lay we have New
Mexico cafe we have the New
Mexico Asian families we have
New Mexico thrives we have a
quality New Mexico we have
retake our democracy we have the
A. R. P. have New Mexico we have
the American federation of
teachers and we have the
national education association.
This is a partial listing but it
really it really reflects.
It really reflects how deeply
these loan rates have affected
our communities.
This is the first item on the on
the New Mexico
trial lawyers association
surfers over one issue that they
would like to correct that they
were are supporting.
The reason you have people in
public policy and non profits
the reason you have people in
churches the reason you have
people
In counties in communities is.
It's because they're the closest
they're the closest to our
people.
They hear the stories these
stories are harrowing if they
hear the stories they they're
called in this trying to help
these families facing financial
hardships and because they have
to deal with these issues
they're supporting this
legislation.
Fifteen states and the district
of Columbia have set their rates
of the thirty six percent cap
marketers to the north Colorado
our neighbors to the west
Arizona have both said the rates
at thirty six percent it can be
done there why not New Mexico.
I'm gonna tell you have to
Mexico had a referendum this
would have been done a long time
ago seventy nine percent of the
citizens of New Mexico support
lowering this rate to seventy
nine percent.
Arizona and Colorado had
referendums in this state they
tried to raise these rates they
were defeated soundly by Senator
majorities people know how.
How far these problems are.
To compound the situation.
Level two literacy rate New
Mexico is forty six percent.
Almost one half of our
population is really unable to
do simple math.
This means that most a lot of
people assign these loans don't
even know what they're signing
it's it's really a huge problem
it's a perfect storm created by
out of state corporations.
You need to understand is that
eighty nine percent of these
companies are out of state
corporations only about ten
percent of our companies are
locally owned locally
controlled.
People say.
Well you don't want to you don't
want to get rid of businesses
you know want to getting rid of
good local businesses and I can
tell you frankly as a state
legislator and as a local
municipality there are some
businesses.
Other you really don't want to
encourage state law limits the
number of liquor license this is
that you combine a community.
municipalities
really discourage motels that
are operating at sex
trafficking.
everybody discourages strip
clubs I mean there are
businesses that harm families
and home communities and I would
add that these loans the small
installment loan companies harm
communities not all of them.
I want to be sure that everybody
stand understands I don't think
all of them are bad players but
a number of that more.
This is this is kind of an
amazing statistic for a state I
think I just want to tell you
this installment loan companies
we have an installment loan
company for every three thousand
eight hundred and nineteen
residents in our state it's
incredible.
Guess how many McDonald's we
have everybody knows where
McDonald is Donald says you
think they're all over the place
you know where they are in every
community and and listen to
this.
There's a McDonald's for every
twenty three thousand two
hundred ninety eight residents
in New Mexico again we have a
small loan company a storefront
operation for every thirty three
thousand eight hundred nineteen.
It's really important for
everybody to note here that I'm
not asking that we closed down
these come businesses these
businesses are allowed to stay
in New Mexico we would welcome
them if they if they just cap
their interest rate at thirty
six percent.
The state of Illinois was the
most recent state to cap
interest rates at thirty six
percent and they in fact sun
increase in businesses that
offered loans capped at thirty
six percent.
And it's true the loss they lost
some of those companies are
charging high interest rates
they did go away and I hope they
go away in New Mexico the
minsiter just try to exorbitant
rates but I can tell you for a
fact that sixty seven companies
came in and started up offering
that right at thirty six
percent.
The question the real question
is what we do as a legislature.
And the real question that
everybody worries about and I'll
be Frank about this is credit
access and availability.
The myth is that will just drive
credit in this state that
everybody will go away that no
one will stay and people can get
access to loans hi I think that
really is a question that we all
struggle with including.
This debate has been going on
for years.
I have to tell you I really
stand on the shoulders of many
members in this body.
Who have worked worked this
issue for over twenty years.
Rates for lowered if you can
believe this from four hundred
percent two hundred and seventy
five percent.
Payday loans were eliminated so
if you think this is about those
two weeks alone so what you know
those those have been eliminated
in the state we no longer have
payday loans.
And right now.
At this moment.
At this time.
We have the opportunity to lower
these rates to thirty six
percent.
I've always wanted to thirty six
percent cap on small loans and
and many in this body know that
into twenty twenty one I
attended in ninety nine percent
cap for loans under eleven
hundred and thirty six percent
cap on loans for over eleven
eleven hundred.
I did that frankly because it
was the best I could do I
started out at thirty six but
did I think that ninety nine was
better than one seventy five yes
I did.
And I'm old enough not to let
the perfect stand in way of the
possible but I think the time
now I think we can do thirty six
percent.
I'm going with thirty six
percent because as a nation as a
state we have much more
information on the effects of
lowering the percentage rate to
thirty six percent.
You now
We all get out of here late
sometimes it's going to be a
late night tonight.
And the.
You know I had to go home turn
on the TV just a kind of wind
down a little bit.
And the fruit of it and this
year we have the Olympics so you
know it's a great talent will
wind down with the Olympics and
I'm not I skated but for some
reason I turned on the TV and
that and the women's ice hockey
team is playing I don't know if
you saw that it was a five zero
it's a great game and I was
watching these women playing
hockey and I said if you know
being a state legislator is a
lot like playing ice hockey.
Sometimes you have to get up
against the wall and I over the
puck cried.
Sometimes everybody's worn out
after a big fight and trying to
take a long walk around the rink
you know you keep that tucked
inside but everybody's just
Chillin out a little bit but.
You really have to know I watch
these women and they hate you
it's like they have eyes at the
back of their head you have to
know what's going on behind it
and you have to know what's
going on in front of you you got
to know who to pass the puck to
who to make the past two but you
always always have to keep your
eyes on the prize how are you
going to make that goal that's
what I'm concerned about how am
I going to make that goal thirty
six percent with this body.
That's what I'm working toward
tonight.
You also have to be a bit of a
detective sometimes I'm gonna
tell you a story about a guy
named smiley court of that.
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Who really taught me so much in
my first year as a freshman.
Said that he had carried this
legislation for many years he
worked at thirty six percent who
tried to lower it he did
everything you could.
And then this guy named smiley
court of the.
Smiley court of a was a a loan
installment have you had a long
business in either the lan or.
Less luminous went one of those
cities.
Anynet smiley.
And said he was the nicest guy
I'd ever met in his life it was
a deacon at the Catholic Church
he ran the he was a you know the
president of the little league
or whatever you call it the guy
that runs you know twenty six
sixteens it was a he was the
president of the chamber of
commerce he said he wanted to
that community and start asking
everybody about smiley because
of the loan process and any said
Susan everybody love this guy.
He said he brought me to my
knees I I just stopped
introducing that legislation.
And that was my first year and I
said I was introducing this bill
is a bill what I'm not going to
do with that.
And then for some reason
Representative Joanne Ferrary
stop in Monday and said Susan I
I hear you're carrying this
loan.
I think you want to talk to this
woman named Pam court that she
has a long committee and of
course my ears perked up and I
said really and she said yes
like in Los Lunas Sir it's
around there so I got on the
phone I called
And I told her what I was doing.
And she said no Susan.
We took a long hard look at this
bill.
We looked at it very carefully
she says I'm so proud of my
business now because we we have
had to health insurance for
employees for about four years
but this year we were able to
give everybody a four oh one K.
so I'm really proud of what
we've done and what we do and
and how we treat our staff and
how we treat our let our our our
borrowers.
And she said we took a long hard
look at this building here so we
decided.
My son in laws now my CPA my
daughter's helping run the
business so now this is a third
generation family business and
then looked at those numbers and
they said you know.
We can do this here's what we
think's gonna happen we think
the the bad lenders are going to
go away and we think the market
will open up and I think that
business will come our way we
think our business will grow.
With the inaction of this
legislation.
So.
That I think gave me the courage
to go forward with this bill to
know that we have good local
lending companies who care about
their communities who are part
of their communities but we also
have this massive problem.
With these
companies these huge out of
state corporations and here's
what they do they look all over
the country and they look for
states who have high interest
rates for the third highest
interest rate in the country
just so you know that and then
they look for the poorest
populations they look they look
for that formula and is not
Mexico fit that of course it
does of course it does and so
that's why there that's why they
have invested in New Mexico.
I've got to tell you members of
this house.
My colleagues I never thought
this was a Republican or a
democratic bill I never thought
that I've always thought.
People on both sides of the
aisle understand the enormity of
this problem.
I think this has should pass
this bill with a thirty six
percent cap.
The house and my time is never
even had a chance to vote on a
thirty six percent cap.
For those reasons I hope you
will consider passing this bill.
My two expert witnesses that I
tend to do this today but I want
to introduce and now are tiered
Myers is Myers was a director of
the consumer protection division
of the attorney general's office
for eight years and then went on
to be the deputy director in the
office of enforcement at the
federal consumer.
Financial protection bureau.
She's now a consumer law lawyer.
One one Fernandes is the
president of the New Mexico
credit union association.
Mr speaker years ago years and
years ago I took a lot closer to
a law class and I'll never
forget this I walked into that
we're all sitting in the lock
class you're waiting for the
professor to the arriving she
walked in she didn't say
anything and she wrote something
on the blackboard she said.
I'll never forget this and I can
still see it today she wrote the
lan its majesty prevents the
rich and poor alike from
sleeping under a bridge or
stealing a loaf of bread.
I thought about that for a long
time it still stays with me and
I want to I just want to remind
these the members of this body.
That that New Mexico state law
in its majesty allows the rich
and poor alike to take out a
loan had a hundred and seventy
five percent interest rate.
And with that Mr speaker I stand
for debate.
Senior debate gentle lady to
close.
Thank.
There is debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Garrett.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Rio Arriba Rio.
Mr speaker yes I yield to my
dear friend and colleague from
Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative my introduction
to payday loan came through my
twenty year old son day Joe.
And the danger had just moved
out of our house he was making
loan payments on his first car
I'm very proud as many of our
children and our grandchildren
we ourselves are to be mitigated
on his own.
However he was struggling.
With his job and so as friends
said well go borrow two hundred
dollars I know a place where you
can.
easily borrow money so Mr
speaker Representative he would
to payday loan store well known
one Carlisle in Albuquerque more
two hundred dollars.
Well he was changing jobs trying
some classes at school.
He found he couldn't pay them
like many young people who are
too proud to sometimes share
their struggles he didn't tell
his parents my husband.
What he was going through.
Eventually several months later
he came and he finally confessed
that he had this.
Hey that this payment that he
had to me.
And together we navigated it in
the end it cost six hundred
dollars
And that was my introduction to
the world of.
That we have this out there that
praise often on young people in
experience people in New Mexico
often people that are in
poverty.
And.
Causes them to have this problem
Mr speaker Representative you
found that to be true.
Ross our state.
Mr speaker kind lady yes it is
it is really true it is it is.
They work with people in poverty
and these are people who need
money for really really basic
necessities I mean we found that
people need to make a car
payment or or an electric bill
goes at a cider or something you
know there's a funeral in the
family it's not like they're not
like they're borrowing money to
go to the races that they're
borrowing money for basic human
necessities.
Mr speaker Representative that
is so true because this was a
car loan and then I find out
friends who had very similar
situations Mr speaker
Representative I actually had to
look up the word and listen to
the pronunciation of usury.
According to my dictionary
online that's how you say it
it's a very old word and it
means the illegal action or
practice of lending money at
reasonably high rates of
interest Mr speaker
Representative did you know that
this problem goes back to your
four thousand years.
Mr speaker kind lady actually I
do.
Mr speaker Representative.
Received a letter signed by all
those
Faith communities.
Including
Leaders of everything from
Vangelis evangelical to liberal
congregations including the most
Reverend John Wester archbishop
of Santa Fe diocese members of
the in the church.
I'm not going to list them all
but probably most of you got
that letter.
And I was interested in I
couldn't believe it it goes back
to exodus the book of Moses
percent of the land money to my
people to the part among you you
shall not deal with them as a
creditor you should not exact
interest from.
And if your neighbor cries out
to me I will listen provide
compassionate.
Mr speaker and Representative do
you realize I mean who knows
exactly when this was written
some people say four thousand
three thousand twenty five
hundred years ago do you realize
how whole.
The problem of high interest
rates has been with us.
Mr speaker kind lady it's it's
staggering that this is been
with this almost almost from the
beginning and
And I think it takes thoughtful
people and good people to really
recognize this problem when it
becomes too large when people
become too desperate we we
really have the opportunity to
address that through this
legislation.
Mr speaker Representative I want
to really thank you for saying
that because I feel like there's
a time we have to take a moral
stand and I just really want to
thank you for putting this bill
forward and really.
Forcing us to really kind of
look at that in the sand and
think where we stand for our
fellow New Mexicans so in
closing I just want to really
thank you for having the courage
the commitment to bring this
fourth Mr speaker those are all
my remarks thank you
Madam representative.
The gentle lady.
Next we have.
The gentleman from Rio Arriba.
Colfax mora and San Miguel
Representative Roger Montoya.
Mr speaker thank you will the
lovely and kind gentle lady from
Rio Arriba and tells.
He's yield.
Speaker I'd gladly yield to my
neighbor Representative Montoya
from all those counties.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
I've been fielding numerous
calls for about six months.
About equal in support and
against.
It's been a deliberative process
of careful listening.
And I just want to spend a few
moments kind of talking about
separate several things some
high level and some more
grassroots stories.
My question to the body is have
we done enough to address the
systemic injustice with poverty
so huge question on the part of
this body so I'm part of the
question that myself.
I would venture to say that no
one in this body or perhaps
across New Mexico would argue
that the best remedy long term
is education.
Thankfully last week the house
passed the largest budget ever
with some she was amounts
dedicated toward improving
education not only in our tribal
communities but every community.
In the fall we will put before
the voters the land grant
permanent fund constitutional
amendment to bring even more
dollars.
That's the high low systemic
remedy for this symptomatic
moment that we are discussing
today with this.
Loan issue.
Recently was brought to my
attention that this last
December just last month.
Ago a statewide poll was taken a
one thousand is elected Latino
and immigrant families across
our state all thirty three
counties were engaged in a like
to share if you will Mr speaker
gentle lady six points.
Thirty percent of Hispanics in
New Mexico that have.
The difficulty paying their
bills or utilities in the last
year twenty six percent to spend
all of their savings or went
into debt this past year.
Twenty four percent have kept
their jobs.
Who have kept their jobs had
their work hours for their pay
cut by one half this past year.
Twenty three percent of
Hispanics in New Mexico have had
difficulty paying their rent or
mortgage.
Nineteen percent of his response
and Latinos in New Mexico have
lost their jobs.
Thirteen percent of his finals
in New Mexico has have not had
enough food to the.
We go on I just want to share a
story I worked for three decades
in the nonprofit world.
In the city on your lawn and
practicing on the travel
community okay winger.
Visible of the family that I
wanted testimonial as of right
here the I will use them
anonymously of course.
They were very very four three
children I'm a mother and a
father.
One of the parents from Mexico.
One of the parents lost a job.
The mother was left to really
try to cover the bills because.
When COVID hit seventeen members
of the family in Mexico be ill
with COVID.
The father left the country to
attend to those children.
Well he was there he contract
contracted COVID and passed
away.
The store is very David because
it's very real.
The mother left behind to care
for the three children went to a
payday loan in Espanola.
She got what she needed in the
short term fix for really
critical needs.
Couldn't a back this exorbitant
loans that just kept mounting.
Is now.
Really depressed.
To the children have gone to
live with family members because
the mother is in.
Incapacitated.
This is a family that was broken
by poverty this is what I typed
on the notion that we have to
think high level here this issue
is symptomatic it's something
that we need to address in a
higher with.
The question I that I have.
Mr speaker gentle lady is.
What are we doing thank.
Outside the box.
Where are.
Unions.
In this.
Where you are opportunities make
NMFA's for example putting for
the product that could look
similarly to the PPP loans that
we just experienced those under
five hundred dollars the
targeted the critical needs that
we have expert list rated so
clearly tonight.
I am the body.
How do we address this
systemically.
I also Mr speaker gentle lady
commend.
The sponsor of this bill for
your courage.
Particularly at this juncture.
It's really an important moment
for us.
After much deliberation thank
careful listening to people who
are opposed and for this I stand
in support of the bill.
We have much work to do.
I'm proud to be part of this
body because I can contribute.
Lovingly and intelligently to
solutions that would be lasting
to help the most vulnerable
citizens I yield back and thank
you for the time.
The gentleman there is further
debate the gentle lady from tell
us Representative Cortes.
Thank you Mr speaker will
gentlelady from Rio Arriba Santa
Fe and Taos yield Mister speaker
I I kindly yield to the lady
from yes my neighbor.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady
Some of you.
We're in Los crucis when we
talked about.
this issue in interim committee
and I was surprised to find
myself.
Talking about my own experience
my mother's experience.
And I asked her this morning if
if I could share her story with
the body.
And she said yeah I mean how of
course you know it was it was a
pretty messed up time for me.
So I I wanted I want to tell you
Mr speaker gentle lady about
about her experience my mother
still a.
Worked as a probation aid for.
Twenty five years or so she's a
public servant she work for the
county.
because you can go to college
she was appropriations aide and
not a probation officer so she
made probably that thirty
percent less.
she did everything that a
probation officer does but just
got paid a lot less for it.
She struggled she.
Raised me.
And my brother she sent us to
college by hook or by crook.
and.
Things just got.
Tough for her she was making.
Just way less money than
In her expenses.
And so when.
I don't know probably about
eight years before she retired
she she had to.
She had to the thing that she
didn't want to do right she had
to borrow some money.
She asks all of our family
members.
And you know we're we're all
pretty poor so if she did she
had to turn to another means and
she took out a payday loan Mr
speaker gentle lady do you know
how much that loan was for.
Mr speaker gentle lady now
please tell us.
For three hundred dollars it was
to pay.
For who knows and I think was
pretty new utility bills
whatever you know food she got
three hundred dollars.
Every month she tried to come up
with that three hundred dollars
to pay back.
and she couldn't so we rolled
over and rolled over and after
two years.
Two years she finally was able
to pay it back she paid so much
more than three hundred dollars
thousands and thousands of
dollars that she paid.
I don't know about any of this
my brother didn't know about any
of this because.
Of the shame that she felt for
having the.
Borrow three hundred dollars and
for the thousands of dollars
that she had to pay back.
To this company because she
couldn't get her money kind of
get it together so this morning
I talked to her a little bit
about like how how she felt
about it she said you know me I
just felt such shame I didn't
want to ask you guys for help
and this is a way I could get
something but it just it knocked
to route then and knocked her
out for all for more than two
years.
So when I think about what we're
trying to do here I think of
someone like my mom who worked
her whole life as a public
servant and had to pay thousands
of dollars because she.
Because she needed just a little
bit.
So I ask you Mr speaker.
Gentle lady.
How do you think this bill and
this cap will have an impact on
single moms like my mom.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
kind lady for your question.
I I think this is an opportunity
to really really helped really
the most needy in our state it's
as simple as that we want our
families to thrive.
When we when our families to be
strong and healthy what we have
I'm sorry to say what we have in
this state is a lot of a lot of
parents who'd lead quiet lives
of desperation not knowing where
to turn and the problem is that
the we've got to change this
culture we gotta help people
tell their stories it's it's a
real problem it's kind of like
gambling you know you always
hear when people Linda boy you
never hear when they lose and
and with and with this limiting
we are taught to be financially
independent we're told to be
able to manage everything to
hold it all together to and
everybody at some point in their
life usually unless you come
from wealth.
Usually choose some adversity in
a financial situation this you
know we're not drawing up these
loans we just want them to get
down to an affordable rate that
people can actually paid.
That's really all we're asking
and I think I think this there's
so many single mothers and I was
a single mom I know I know this
these situations and we all have
these stories we all have these
stories.
And yes I that I think this is
the time the time is now.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I am I'm grateful
for this bill I I want to do
everything we can to make sure
that this that this passes I
want this for my community.
Filled with single parents who
are struggling who.
I feel that same shame that my
mom did and who need a little
leg up but also to be they also
need the boost and the ability
to to pay back what they borrow
and you can't do it if you're in
that shame and death spiral so
thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you thank you gentle lady
for this legislation the
mentality next to the generally
from Los Alamos Representative
Chandler.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Rio Arriba you.
Mr speaker yes say I yield
gladly to the lady from Los
Alamos and Nibert.
And Nibert.
I'd like to direct the body
Mr speaker gentle lady to the
handout that you were referring
to I don't know if everyone
how's it but I'll talk about it
a little bit everyone has a okay
so on the second page of the
handout gentle lady there's
there's a there's a charts
pretty colors twenty twenty
small dollar loan report summary
and it's from the New Mexico
regulation and licensing Mr
speaker gentle lady you'll see a
column that is three fund
applications loans gentle lady
and.
So let's talk about what that's
all about.
A refund application loan is an
arrangement gentle lady is it
not.
Where.
zero the the contract provides
that the lender will get the
refund that the person is
entitled to it is that not right
from the lady Mr speaker kind
lady yes that's right these are
these income tax loans a lot of
these of these income tax loans
for people you know have there
have their statement and they
know how much they're going to
get back then they take it to
lending company and the and show
them that they're going to have
this money coming in.
And I think Santa Lacy lady for
those of you who may been
watching this horrendous
activity for so long they might
also be known as refund
application anticipation loan so
either way it there are a else
is that not right gentle lady Mr
speaker gentle lady that is
correct.
And you'll see here and this is
for New Mexico that there are
the number of people on public
benefits gentle lady for R. ales
thirty six percent of the loans
are for people on public
benefits.
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
correct.
And then you'll see again
eligible for earned income tax
credit Mr speaker and gentle
lady and that earned income tax
credit is the federal equivalent
of our working families tax
credit so I think it's fair Mr
speaker and gentle lady do not
still also put in the working
families tax credit that we've
worked so hard to provide for
our citizens is that not right
gentle lady.
Mr speaker kind lady
yes that's absolutely right.
And then there's a there's a.
reference to Bowers with one
with more than one loan in a
twelve month period and under
the R. LA fifty seven percent
more than one loan and a twelve
month period do I have that
right gentle lady Mr speaker
kind lady you have that right.
And this is an interesting
statistic gentlelady borrows who
repaid in full without refinance
now this may sound like a good
statistic but let's talk about
that ninety three percent
Burroughs who repaid in full
without refinance.
Why why do you think that is
gentle lady to do what's your
thoughts on that.
Mr speaker time later really
think that really stems from
income tax returns and you know
they you know you kind of get
those maybe at the end of
January pretty much know what
you're gonna get and then you go
to these loan companies and they
they look at that I think that's
why that's such a high turnover
there exactly Mr speaker and
gentle lady because the
arrangement is for the loan
company to grab the refund the
second you get it.
There's a high repayment what a
surprise so tying this all
together the gentle lady Mr
speaker to what we've been doing
in the state since for about the
last three or four years.
And how does that affect our
public policy gentle lady so you
were on tax with me and others
when we first came into the
house is that not right gentle
lady Mr speaker kind lady that
is correct.
And one of the great courses
that I'm very proud of having
worked with the two previous
years attacks and some great
individual serving on taxes
efforts to support our working
families are low income families
and how of we've done that the
lady through programs that
provide rebates refunds and the
like the working families tax
credit last year gentle lady we
passed the low income
comprehensive tax rebate program
we and what the excuse me we
enhanced it to make it more
generously updated for inflation
so while we on one hand over
here are providing all kinds of
ways gentle lady and
Mr speaker to support our
working families through the our
rebates rebate programs for
lower income people.
Over here we're supposed we had
been and I hopefully this will
come to an end and supporting a
policy that undermines the
public policy we are supporting
on with the other hand so.
I am so grateful to you gentle
lady and Mr speaker for bringing
this legislation forward because
it's one more elements in our
efforts to support our working
families to deny them.
As great and access to those
rebates they will still have
some at thirty six percent but
just imagine.
How much better it will be that
they will not have the access to
them at us a hundred and seventy
five percent interest rate this
is Fund cut the cuts the legs
out from all the support
programs that we have been
trying to advance Mr speaker and
gentle lady we do not agree with
that Mr speaker gentle lady yes
it's it's it's really a
conundrum I mean I I find that
we're we're penalizing people
more with these high interest
rates and at the same time
trying to reach out and and
provide our working families
with with with with the bare
necessities I mean it's it's
really what you know about the
US half of our people are on
Medicaid I mean it is they have
it is not an easy life for a lot
of people and those are the
people we're trying to protect
with this legislation.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
I urge the body to support this
legislation it advances many of
the programs that so many of us
have been trying to do to
implement for our working
families lower income people in
the state thank you very much
thank you generated this further
debate the gentleman from Chavis
Lee and Roosevelt leader
Anderson.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The gentle lady yield.
I would I will gladly yield to
the gentleman from Chavis.
Thank you gentle lady as we
spoke this afternoon I'm very
pleased to be a sponsor of house
bill one thirty two and I
appreciate you bringing it
again.
And your efforts being so
relentless
my my question is gentle lady
was rather simple one and that
is.
The.
The current prime rate.
In the United States is three
point two five percent question.
I think that's correct yes Mr
speaker and kind gentleman.
My question is when.
New Mexicans see.
Small loan is small installment
loans in New Mexico how many
times above the prime rate are
they looking at the charged for
the loan.
I I actually have already done
the calculation.
Well Mr speaker gentle gentlemen
thank you I I'd like to hear it
well if the rate is the legal
right top rated one hundred and
seventy five percent that's
fifty three times higher than
the prime rate.
Fifty three.
Fifty three times higher.
And I only point out that.
That differential.
Has.
It is obvious to me that if
you're borrowing money at fifty
three fifty three times more
than the prime lending rate.
The idea that you will be very
successful in meeting your
installments is.
Is unrealistic so.
I too supported you a year ago
when you tried to reduce New
Mexico's small loan installment
right below one hundred and
seventy five percent.
And it saddens me that we're
back here today trying to get
thank you.
Thank you gentleman there's
further debate the gentle lady
from Dona Ana Representative
Cadena.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Riady of us on
the fantail sealed.
Mr speaker time ADA gladly
yield.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
I appreciate that for so many of
us this is been an exhausting
day and exhausting session.
We come from such distinct lived
experiences.
And such the expertise we carry
to this body is immense.
Mr speaker gentle lady I believe
that.
In that intersection of who we
H. R. as a representative.
We've both demonstrated our
commitment to the women and
families and little ones of New
Mexico.
But also to each other in this
body to stand up every day.
And to debate and deliberate
with respect.
And to debate and deliberate
with the time and attention and
complexity it needs to do right
in crafting policies.
Mr speaker gentle lady as I came
into the session I knew this
bill is going to be a thing.
And I knew it have a lot of
sleepless nights and a lot
eighty moments trying to figure
out how I could show up in
service to the families that I'm
honored to represent.
Mr speaker gentle lady a couple
of nights ago last week one of
my dear friends she's my chosen
by media Adrienne.
Reminded me about how yes we
were.
When many many many many years
ago.
The compromise at a hundred and
seventy five percent was made.
And Mr speaker gentle lady my
different tells me.
And see you and I were throwing
a fit how dare they why did they
go lower who are these people
who are these monsters wired
they showing up for families one
seventy five is it is
unconscious and unconscious I
can never say that word excuse
me one seventy five is way too
high.
Mr speaker gentle lady she's
reminded me of the story last
week she said we were angry we
were beside ourselves.
And she said and then.
I began to do the work of my
year and she's such an
incredible community organizer
has done so much for families
over the years.
She says it happened I was
headed to do focus groups in
reality by county and we can we
can do and she said I thought
these families are gonna be
rising up with us go take down
these loans and instead they
talk to us about survival.
Instead they talk to us about
what it means to try to make
your way when there is never
enough to go around.
She said Mikayla we thought we
knew better and we were wrong.
Interested community organizers
I'd to women who have lived at
so many of the intersections in
which too many of our families
fall.
I want to turn to the people
that I trust to be my check and
be my balance and make sure that
when I show up here to take a
bow it's a vote I can stand by.
She reminded me that it's okay
to have come hard conversations
about what poverty and New
Mexico really looks like.
And the sometimes stand up and
say we can share our commitment
Mr speaker gentle lady as I know
you and I do we can agree today
that what's in place.
Is not what New Mexicans
deserve.
So today Mr speaker gentle lady
after many hours of
deliberation.
After such incredible spirit of
compromise and and.
Policy making I will stand
offered two amendments Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Well those are being passed out
I want to tell another story but
if I can get these to
affirmative passed out.
They're ready.
Mr speaker gentle lady I never
expected to be in the middle of
a debate like this.
And when a similar bill came to
House Judiciary last year.
Again to meet generally sounded
like a good idea.
Mr speaker gentle lady I got
very worried and I think.
Okay
Mister speaker gentle lady.
I started to worry when I begin
to ask questions about where our
New Mexican families were going
to turn.
If they lost access to credit.
And again Mr speaker gentle lady
I will say very clearly I don't
think anyone here in the body
today.
Is asking for the status quo I
haven't heard anyone say today
that the one seventy five right
as acceptable.
But Mr speaker gentle lady over
these last several months I've
had all sorts of people come out
of the woodwork to tell me.
That because I didn't support
this flat concept that I just
didn't understand the bill.
And Mr speaker gentle lady that
premise has been so offensive to
me.
Personally but also when I think
about The New Mexicans that we
show up for every day.
If New Mexicans had other
options of credit available to
them Mr speaker gentle lady I am
certain they would not be
signing up for these loans.
I am certain that these working
mom.
Excuse me Mr speaker gentle lady
I did not sign these.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
I trust that New Mexicans in
their resiliency as someone
said.
They move through their days
with quiet desperation I'd argue
they move through their days
with quiet dignity.
But I can't even count.
The mama's I know.
That are never paid enough for
their back breaking work that
know where every penny on their
budget goes every day every
minute every month every
paycheck.
So I do just want to name as we
get these amendments ready Mr
speaker gentle lady that we've
got to be creative we've cut to
invest other solutions we've got
to make sure that New Mexicans
have access to credit when they
need it emergency credit The New
Mexicans that are in bankable
The New Mexicans that are
potentially unemployed or
underemployed The New Mexicans
that have terrible credit they
also deserve a lifeline they
also deserve somewhere to turn
in the case that they needed.
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
I've learned from you that today
there's over four hundred
thousand of these loans out in
the hands of New Mexicans is
that accurate Mr speaker gentle
lady.
It's a Mr speaker gentle lady
it's close it's three hundred
ninety.
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
I've also learned from you that
one of the primary reasons are
maybe the top reason that people
go seek out these loans is car
repairs Mr speaker gentle lady
does that also accurate it's
it's really it it's it's the
necessities of life and a it's
car repairs it's and child
getting sick in a medical bill
it's a utility payments it's
it's really the the necessities
of life it's it's not just car
repairs but they're tough
they're one of the top items so
it's it's people trying to get
to work really that's what with
that it's people trying to live
everyday lives Mr speaker gentle
lady I so much appreciate that
and I they've named that's been
my concern all along not to
protect this industry or the
status quo but that question
what's going to happen to these
New Mexicans if what we do here
in this body eliminate some of
those loans that are currently
on the market today.
Stirs speaker gentle lady as we
headed into this the session
someone sent me an article in
the advocate was quoted in the
paper saying
well they should maybe take on
more chefs and Mr speaker gentle
lady I don't want to even leave
who said that and what paper but
I could not believe the audacity
of someone to imply that are
hard working New Mexicans
weren't already doing everything
they could to bring home those
dollars and that safety in the
stability for themselves and
their little ones and I thought
of the mama's I've known over
years who knows so intimately
there's hardly any evening day
care shifts in New Mexico it's
almost impossible to find an
overnight bed where your little
one can be safe potentially if
you take on a night shift.
Not even to consider how
expensive child care is in New
Mexico and should you even find
an extra shift and somewhere
safe to kids leave your kid.
You're probably spending half of
that half of that wage just to
pay for that what we also know
is real if you do what I know
many families have certainly
when I was growing up and your
little ones as some older
siblings next thing we know
you're potentially in the child
welfare situation so when I hear
some folks demonstrate just
being out of touch with the
tooth of New Mexican families
that's what makes the rice today
but I appreciate Mr speaker
gentle lady that you continue to
honor New Mexicans with the
dignity that they deserve you
know that New Mexicans are smart
our savvy are ready to hold and
make strong financial decisions
for themselves and that you're
ready to make sure they have an
equity.
We set up policies based and
equity
and Justice so that we do our
part to set up a lending
landscape for our families.
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
we're now ready to go to these
for maintenance.
Originally.
Mr speaker gentle lady I will
first move.
Floor amendment point two two
two five zero two point two.
Okay generally has been passed
out
the general it is it has not
been passed up to speak it's
right there.
The speaker just one and it's
not the one you mentioned I see.
And I think.
Everyone in the second as they
can get passed on.
So here we go here's a senator
for the second amendment our
with the amendment to the jobs
are not the second with the
general one that the gentle lady
is moving.
Okay.
Okay.
So just for those who are
following at home.
The two over to number the of
the moment that the gentle lady
is moved is triple to I'm sorry.
Table two five zero two point
two.
As a passed out gentlelady to
explain the amendment thank you
Mr speaker so yes I'm moving
house floor amendment to a house
bill one thirty two yes thank
you thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
As a body we also have to be
pragmatic and in the spirit of
collaboration and continuity and
access to credit that our
families certainly are relying
on today what this ammendment
does is allow for
charge of up to five percent on
any loan of five hundred dollars
a less so that the lender if
they choose to do so can assess
this fee that may help cover
their costs for bringing this
loan to the market and
potentially the high risk
associated with this loan off so
basically there could be up to a
twenty five dollar fee on every
loan of five hundred dollars or
less.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
gentle lady gentle lady from Rio
Arriba said if inTaos is this a
friendly amendment Mr speaker
yes just as a friendly
amendment.
Is there debate on the amendment
gentleman for San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from doing and I
yield.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker gently so
as I read this ammendment.
Essentially what we what a
A payday loan
location could.
Essentially a go from a thirty
six percent.
Yes
interest rate to
a total.
A total of
forty one percent with the five
percent.
C..
Is that correct Mr speaker
jealousy of it would not read
as forty one percent it would be
to thirty six percent.
interest rate but an up front
five percent.
Filing fee or something like
that.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman yes it would be a
separate fee so not calculated
into the right in the same way
but something like a filing
feared origination fee but yes
they would have room to collect
that as part of an accounting
for their for let their level of
risk involved.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
So with this.
if you don't mind me asking you.
You you bring this forward.
Essentially I heard starting to
tell a story there.
Of folks who are coming to you
and.
Stating.
That they needed these type of
loans is that correct the
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
it's my understanding today that
if New Mexicans didn't
absolutely need this access to
credit we wouldn't have almost
four hundred thousand loans out
on these markets today and my
concern is that if we move in a
direction that would undermine
the capacity of lenders or other
partners to keep these loans on
the market that we would be
undermining the capacity of New
Mexicans to access emergency
resources so as such I've
offered this amendment in the
hopes that it takes us in the
right direction so that those
with the good faith good
intentions to keep in this
business in New Mexico have more
pragmatic opportunity to do so.
Thank you Mr chairman and ladies
If these laws don't exist.
Where.
What are the what are the
options speaker gentle lady for
those folks for where would they
go get a cash as needed.
For an emergency Mr speaker and
gentle lady Mr speaker gentleman
I'm not sure and that thought
certainly terrifies me that's
how I've somehow ended up in
this immense debate because I've
known and and my.
It helped I can quickly imagine
the terror and the desperation
and the urgency and the voices
and faces and moments of people
I've loved dearly that frankly
have not had anywhere to turn
and when I think about those
moments as we said today whether
it's somebody meeting of two new
tires in order to make it to
work the next day knowing that
they will be out significantly
if they don't show up for that
next shift or someone desperate
to get some care child care to
start a new job but having to
have a resource to pay for that
to show up at work when I think
about those families that's fine
in this debate today they may
certainly for so many real and
and and frankly transformational
opportunities or opportunities
that could sink them for a long
time in their lives they deserve
access to credit and frankly I
trust The New Mexicans if
there's other items on the
market that become more
favorable or advantageous The
New Mexicans have the insight
and intellect and smarts and
heart and hustle to go find a
product that's best for their
family but certainly Mr speaker
gentle lady I am worried that if
we don't create opportunity to
keep some products on the market
that they would just disappear
and our families would have
nowhere to turn.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
Does this in any way regulate.
Any other industry other than
the payday loan industry Mr
speaker and gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentleman not in
this ammendment I do have a
second amendment that's been
passed out that we'll get to in
a minute that has to do with
reporting for different products
that are in this market place
but for this ammendment it is
just allowing for the five
percent fee.
Some speaker gentle lady that
would not apply to credit unions
it would not apply to pawn shops
would not apply to title loan
companies is that correct Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
and gentleman
As far as I've understood this
is just in a straightforward way
allowing the person that the
company making the loan to
assess this five percent fee on
top of the thirty six percent.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
The folks who came last year if
you remember last year we
introduced an amendment what
late into the night and it
allowed for a ninety nine
percent C.
that was floods the speaker
gentle lady the folks who own
and operate these
payday loans said that they
could actually afford to stay
open under I I do appreciate.
The what what what your heart is
in this but I don't believe it's
going to get you where you're
wanting to be I don't believe
that these payday loans
facilities gonna stay open with
this it just they're unsecured
loans and miss speaker gentle
lady
the concern I have is it doesn't
regulate Mr speaker and gentle
lady the other potential
beneficiaries if these payday
loan
operations were to close
none of the others at this point
offer the speaker a.
That option of unsecured
completely unsecured loan except
for the credit unions Mr speaker
and and gentle lady and they're
not regulated.
as a matter of fact Mr speaker
and gentle lady I understand
that the credit unions have
similar loan programs that
they're fifty five percent at
least for more.
this is doesn't even get them
your amendment Mister speaker
July doesn't get even get them
equal to what a credit union is
doing as a matter of fact Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
That this gets to forty one
percent.
The fifty five percent is just
one option we've seen on.
We were able to pull it up on
advertisements at at a credit
union
I think represented by a
gentleman in this building in
this room today.
offers a fifty five percent.
Interest rate.
so Mister speaker gentle lady I
I I think what will happen is is
there's not gonna be able to
stay in business even with this.
And.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think.
The paan shops in particular are
going to be the beneficiaries
before the payday loans showed
up.
The.
A pawn shops were the ones who
are receiving the bulk of this
because you can bring an item in
and they can charge whatever fee
they want to.
and the ability to to
Thank even a the the title loan
company is able to take a title
for the vehicle so family I
think we'll be in a worse
position.
Because they'll have to be
giving up a piece of property
maybe something they need
something that in reality
they'll be they'll have to trade
in for much less than its value.
and and the speaker gentle lady
that you stated something
earlier that I completely agree
with.
And that is.
The way that certain members of
our society have been talked to.
As if.
We don't trust them to make
their own decisions it's been
something I've talked about
quite a bit.
During the last couple of
sessions which is the talking
down to certain members of our
society
and having to parent them.
Takeaway options from them that
Mr speaker gentle lady at this
point they have with their own
purchasing power have said we
need this.
And what we're Mr speaker gentle
lady I think the unintended
consequences if even if we pass
your amendment.
The unintended consequence is
going to be folks.
Who run into a.
Run into that real difficult
times.
I'm not going to have.
The ability to walk into a
payday loan location with or any
location without some sort of.
Item to trade in.
Taking something out of their
home that they need.
Or worse Mr speaker gentle lady
taking in from their neighbor.
And taking that to a pawn shop.
I think the real beneficiaries
of this unfortunately are going
to be those pawnshops and the
credit unions who are who we
cannot regulate in the same way.
I I appreciate what you do what
what you're trying to do here.
But Mr speaker gentle lady I
this this won't do it.
Forty one percent.
Will not do it.
On secured loans.
And and the M. and for for one
the credit unions are able to
besides a fifty five percent.
Plus interest rate they can
along with that have a fee.
An origination fee a filing fee
and application see whatever you
wanna call it they'll be able to
do it.
And
Once again this is this is a
tiny step in the right direction
Mr speaker gentle lady but it
doesn't get us there I and and
and I know that because once
again it was friendly.
Instead of the fight that took
place.
Last year and Mr speaker and
gently the fight that was taking
place on this floor earlier
today.
This doesn't get there.
This is not the answer I wish it
were I wish that an answer
Mr speaker gentle lady that that
said we trust people in our
communities to make their own
decisions.
I wish that was the answer but
Mr speaker gentle lady I I the
way I see this is we don't trust
we don't trust certain people we
believe certain people are too
unsophisticated someone able to
make their own decisions for
their own families and I and
that overall mentality is
something that is a that is a.
There I state and institutional
racism.
That exists.
Hey that that basically is is
looking at certain people and
saying you're you are not
sophisticated enough to make
your own decisions and the
speaker gentle lady I cannot I
cannot support this amendment
because it just doesn't get us
where we need to go.
Further debate the gentle thing
Rio Arriba Santa Fe and Taos
representative for thank you Mr
speaker
I had the.
The the the association
president here with me for the
credit union association of New
Mexico and they tap their rates
a twenty eight percent so I
don't know where that number
came from that it certainly
doesn't
Comply with the person who's
very knowledgeable in this area
and and I I just want to get
back to this thing about would
that we're.
Speaking down to people that
we're telling them what to do
that you know we are working we
are working with New Mexico
citizens who are asking us to
please lower these predatory
rates it's as simple as that
that's why this bill comes back
every single year Mr this bill
will this bill won't go away.
Generally I register there's
further debate in a bid to the
gentle lady from Rio Arriba not
just the gentle lady from you
it's all I'm very sorry for the
gentle lady from going and he'll
thank you Mr speaker yes I yield
to the gentle lady on the
amendment thank you excuse me
gentle lady.
The reason this bill keeps
coming back to this body every
year is because people are
coming to us and asking us for
help.
You know it's not these are
friends these are neighbors
we're not these are the people
we rely on for support we all
need each other in our
communities especially in the
small rural communities you are
part of a community here part of
the family.
And and to see to say that this
legislation is talking down to
people is is just absurd.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Things are for the debate
amendment the gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Dona ana county
yields.
Thank you Mr speaker yes I do
yield to the gentleman thank you
Mr speaker budget gentle lady
suggested couple questions
regarding the fees that would be
capable of being charged for
these loans of five hundred
dollars or less have you run the
calculations as to what those
fees in terms of dollars would
be for
various levels.
Mr speaker and gentleman I ran
the fee at the top level which
should be at the five hundred
dollars and that would be a
twenty five dollar fee.
Mr speaker gentle lady that
that's correct so for a five
hundred dollar loan they could
charge a fee of twenty five
dollars for that the five
hundred dollar loan and
recover the interest at thirty
six percent for the the loan.
Plus the twenty five dollar fee.
Mr speaker gentle lady of.
You know I am in business and
I'm paying somebody fifteen
dollars or more in our to
process these loans and things
of that processing fee.
Twenty five dollars.
On my make that five hundred
dollar loan.
But if you if you go down to two
hundred fifty dollars.
Representative fees only
thirteen dollars to go down to a
hundred dollars it's only five
dollars and so I Mr speaker
gentle lady
are likely ability to remove the
fees from the structure.
But five percent I don't think
allows the company to charge a
reasonable fee for the set up
and recover the their actual
costs for setting it up and.
Mr speaker gentle lady I heard
the testimony right a lot of
this may be loans for auto parts
or what have you and I assume
that those loans get paid off.
Maybe the next time that they
get paid or maybe a when they
sell the car something probably
less than a year.
If that hundred dollar loan is
paid off in a month.
The company makes one hundred
and eight dollars.
I'm not sure I risk a hundred
dollars to make state dollars
and so I'm concerned about
whether or not.
We still have the issue with
respect to this the lower in
loans even with this five
percent right and so with that I
I think maybe the five hundred
dollar right.
Twenty five dollars those loans
may get maybe maybe not but I
think under that level.
The loans given may so madam
speaker gentle lady if you have
anything to to comment on on
that I'd appreciate it but I
just don't think we get there.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
doing what I can to take us in
the right direction I just
appreciated chuckled at the
COVID that it indicates
something that these amendments
are friendly and I would just
offer after the state we've all
been part of together we may
have had our fights and caucus
self.
Here we are doing our best to do
our best together and work out
something that takes us in the
in the right direction.
Mr speaker gentle lady
I'm not meeting the goals on the
or anything else I I just I mean
you you've hit the nail on the
head where my concerns lie and
that is at the lower end of the
spectrum.
Whether or not these loans are
going to be available at all to
anyone because I think there's
members in each of our
communities that have of the
need obviously because of the
number of companies that exists
I mean the the the man's out
there.
But at the lower end and
certainly I would say under the
five hundred dollar level
I just don't see those loans be
made because the risk and the
of financial recruitment of not
only your investment the.
Interest above that.
And maybe the the little bit of
fee that's allowed.
Doesn't get me excited about
making an investment in that
arena so hi I would be concerned
about that thank you Mr speaker
and thank you gentle lady for
making the staff I just don't
think it goes far enough thank
you there's further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Santa Santa Fe Representative
Lord thank you Mr speaker will
the gentle lady from Dona Ana
County please yield.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Santa and Santa Fe thank thank
you for that Mr speaker
Representative I don't have
tricky questions at all I just
clarification because this is a
lot to learn about these loans
so Mister speaker Representative
so it and just walk me through
this I'll try to be as brief as
possible so there's five percent
charged on a five hundred dollar
loan is that correct is that
what this amendment the same.
Yes Mister Mister speaker gentle
lady this ammendment is saying
that on any loan up to five
hundred dollars the lender would
have the capacity to thirty to
charge a five percent fee on
that loan.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative so if they borrow
of five hundred and fifty
dollars what's the what's the
feet are what's a percentage on
that.
Mr speaker and gentle lady there
would not be S. C. as such that
we're introducing here on the
amendment on those loans above
five hundred dollars in the same
way that the amendment is
addressing okay thank you Mister
speaker of and that's what
that's what I was getting to so
because I am trying to learn and
what I found like in other
states what they seem to do is
they seem to do a tiered rate
they do fifteen percent most of
these charge fifteen percent for
up to a hundred or two fifty and
then they do thirteen percent
for two fifty and then they do
ten percent for four hundred I
was just wondering why it why
didn't you do and and this seems
to be what most other states are
doing and and charging at the
thirty six percent right so it
is a reason Mr speaker and
Representative why we didn't do
like what other states are doing
so that the company themselves
has less risk because they're
able to have this tiered rebate
right for the types of our
amount of loans are getting.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I would say this is politics at
its best and it's politics
politics ed in its most true
sense we've been in these
debates for a couple of years
now we've explored different
options and as it's been already
expressed tonight might
significant concern has always
been with the lowest dollar
amounts I've always been
concerns that if we eliminate
the small dollar amounts then
it's frankly possible that New
Mexicans are going to borrow
more that they actually didn't
need to because that's the only
credit available to them I
appreciate the spirit of what's
being done in other states but
what's in front of us today is
what we're able to negotiate as
we move through this process and
for me it's least a step in the
right direction and the starting
point as we move through this
legislative process to put
something on the table that a
knowledges the real
consideration and concern of
losing these load out dollar
amounts in New Mexico's market
place.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative I think I and I
understand now so I think I
would be more complex I'm trying
to find a balance right I don't
want to lose these Lente places.
Because I want people to be able
to get loans and need I'd also
don't want them to have very
high rates I get that as well
but it also would feel more
comfortable for long we have a
balance to where these companies
can still be in business they
can still find a need to the
people that need them and we're
doing what other states are
doing I feel a little bit more
comfortable to diss kind
arbitrary five percent if we're
doing what other states are
doing with the tiered rate and
that that's what I was trying to
figure out here so thank you Mr
speaker and representative I I
yield my time.
Thank you there is there's
further debate on the amendment
we.
Is anyone over here I feel like
I'm my I don't want to be
ignoring those okay the joint
check was it into terrorism
Townsend thank you Mr speaker
on.
I appreciate you look across
trying to be fair.
The gentle lady yield.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
leader from Chavis and you know
that a counties thank you so
much I appreciate your amendment
And.
And I appreciate what you're
trying to do I appreciate I.
The representative was trying to
do introducing this I I don't
have a problem with that.
But I want to make sure.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
what we're doing.
That is fair to all lenders.
Not just.
A lander.
I have on my phone.
An ad that was sent to me.
I think it's because we're
calling these things different
names and then sometimes we
column.
No small installment loans some
kind with Colin payday loans.
But to the the man or woman that
needs some money I don't care
what to call it.
It is needs money to get to the
next pay day or to fix what's
broke or whatever.
And.
I believe.
Are all lending institutions in
New Mexico covered by this bill
in your opinion.
Mr speaker gentle lady and
gentlemen
I rise to present this
ammendment but
you know and in my opinion it
looks like we are working and
and moving H. B. one thirty two
of that applies the small loan
act.
That.
Occur and gentle lady hot I have
been told and I believe I'm
looking at and at the time my
phone.
Maybe banks and credit unions
are not covered by the bill that
is being presented today and I
just want to make sure.
That you understand that.
This said that on my phone that
be happy to share with the body
shows.
They loan.
Advertised at fifty five percent
and it's called a payday loan.
I don't care what I mean call it
whatever you want to but.
I think what's important and
what we're trying to do is
protect people that are being.
Taken advantage of Mr speaker
and gentle lady and that's.
I think we have to be very
careful.
I think we're gonna harm more
than we help sometimes and I
think.
Gentle lady.
And I I look forward to the
debate on the bill.
But my only concern with your
amendment.
Is that in this does not cover
all lenders if it covered all
lenders.
I probably would support it but
it does.
And I've checked that and that I
feel comfortable with that.
Of.
Speaker and gentle lady.
You.
I think I know.
The sincerity in your voice and
I appreciate it.
But sending people from one.
One window to another.
And not taking care of the
problem.
This is not a responsible piece
of legislation so I would just
encourage you to make it all
encompassing can make all
landing institutions play on a
level playing field.
So that all of these customers.
Know what to expect today re
window that they come to.
It is.
Not fair.
To shut down one industry to
ingratiate another house thank
you Mr speaker.
I see no further debate on the
amendment all those in favor of
house floor amendment number two
please signify by saying aye.
This was named.
The eyes have it the amendment
is adopted generally if you are
you still have the full.
Thank you Mr speaker I'd now
like to move house floor
amendment number three to house
bill one the one thirty two.
That is number two two two.
Five nine two point one.
Chairman has removed it has been
passed on gentlelady to explain
the amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker the second
amendment I've offered house
floor amendment three actually I
I hope begins to address some of
the concerns as we debated over
the course of the night.
I to believe that if we are
crafting a new set of rules and
regulations or policies for one
set of actors that we should
think about the fairness and
making sure that those same
expectations are applied to
different sectors of the lenders
in New Mexico.
Mr speaker I would certainly in
consideration of of so much of
the federal jurisdiction that
comes to banking I would
certainly be open to exploring
the possibilities of bringing
more fairness into these lending
markets with with with leader
Townsend in coming years but for
now what this ammendment does.
Is require basically that credit
unions adhere to the same
reporting requirements that are
outlined in the small loan act.
Mr speaker
I also have been concerned that
the credit unions today do not
have these loans on the market.
Mr speaker I believe in credit
unions I have all my money and
credit unions whatever I've got
going on I've had my car loans
with credit unions I believe
credit you do so much to re
invest in our communities every
day.
But since I've gotten into this
issue over the last year to.
I continue to see that credit
unions have not yet come to the
table Mr speaker to to really
create opportunities that
they've spoken about as we've
been through this debate.
I am a researcher by trade I
believe in data and information
so with this ammendment I would
like for us as a body to be able
to keep track and watch the
trends that comes with our
policy decisions so that we can
both be supportive of the credit
unions but also be reflective
and if additional changes are
made if the credit unions do not
appear and offer you and and
lower rate products for our
families access in emergency and
urgent times then the tension
will come back to the table but
again this amendment is simply
requiring the credit unions to
report as those others parties
do under the small loan act
thank you Mr speaker thank you
generating I'll go to the gentle
lady from Rio Arriba Santa Fe
and Taos is this a friendly
amendment.
Mr speaker this is a friendly
amendment very good Is there
debate on it the gentleman from
Chavis eighty under terror.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady field.
Mr speaker I do yield to the
gentleman from Chavis and you
know that are counties thank
you.
Gentlelady.
This bill requires reporting for
this amendment required
reporting does it restrict the
loan activity of that loan that
lending institution to the same
rules that would be applied to
the.
Small and small installment
loans that the original bill is
directed that.
Mr speaker gentleman as of today
my amendment does not go that
far all it does is bring the
credit unions to the same
reporting standards and Michigan
gentle lady quite about the
banks.
Mr speaker gentleman I would
love to bring the banks into
this game as it's been explained
to me much of that regulation
and oversight lies with the
federal government.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think you and I have the ability
to help direct that in New
Mexico.
And I'm here to help.
Of.
Again.
I I honestly believe.
You know we all care about
follow the money and we'll find
out what's going on.
I honestly believe.
That
someone is looking at this bill
Original Bill and your amendment
sink in this is a pretty good
business development that.
And that bothers me.
I.
I think many of us have shared
concerns in the process used to
get this bill to the floor.
Many of us have.
Voiced that.
But it's here.
That we have to deal with the.
And I'll speak more to that.
Directly.
But.
Again.
The reporting requirement does
it have any penalties and that
Mr speaker and gentle lady for
failure to report.
Mr speaker gentlemen no I do not
think we've gentleman actually
yes the the penalty is on the
amendment it's item the C..
Thank you Mr speaker it's it's
section subsection C. not BC
just subsection C..
Thank you Mr speaker dental and
I was having this prepared when
we and House Judiciary a bit ago
so.
Still catching up.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady.
A twenty five dollar a day.
A penalty.
I think.
Hale's.
The income.
That may be on the flip side.
Gentle lady.
I'll just ask if I increase
that.
To two hundred and fifty dollars
would to see it being a friendly
amendment.
Mr speaker gentlemen are you
asking if on page one of this
amendment we changed only the
dollar amounts of the of the fee
levied per days should someone
be late on the reporting from
twenty five to two fifty.
That is correct.
Mr speaker yes I would take that
as a friendly amendment Mr
speaker leader I would also
offer.
That I'd say the bigger problem
facing credit unions would be
ourselves in this body as we
worked to receive this
information review this
information examine this
information and continued to
consider whether there were.
Points of credit and credit
access for New Mexico families
available to to all of our
communities.
Background gentle lady I am on.
I'm trying to catch a for the
Is the right.
Is the reporting.
Requirement.
Detailed in your bill.
That you believe will satisfy.
the oversight.
Mr speaker leader I will again
say that I am doing my best to
take us in the right direction I
appreciated the debate on the
previous amendment and
specifically I'm working to try
to bring some.
expectation of fairness among
multiple partners and lenders
that may get in on this industry
or particularly look to this
industry as we've changed the
policy landscape certainly this
is a step in the right direction
and I would hope that once we
establish reporting requirements
we could continue once we have
that data to look at other
policies as needed to make sure
New Mexicans continue to have
access to credit at these lower
dollar amounts and in these
emergency and urgent situations.
Thank you gentle lady.
Speaker
I want to make sure that what
we're doing is even.
Right is it possible for me to
offer an amendment to her
amendment.
Gentleman is.
So really that's so couple
points the gentleman the
language that you would be
amending is existing law.
So the penalty division is incur
is in statute currently
so.
One might wonder if there might
be other impacts or effects of
doing that I don't know
secondly you would not be proper
to amend an amendment.
So I think we have to come back
and have another amendment that
would change that section of
law.
We anticipate we House foreman
number four.
Mr speaker
we'll see how these amendments
go and if they're adopted then
we can do that in the debate
with the sponsor on the field we
can make sure that we're ready
for that at the proper time I
have again I appreciate Mr
speaker and gentle lady what
you're trying to the.
I think a level playing field
for industry is important.
I think level playing field for
those people because these
people they're going for these
loans.
They're gonna let alone tomorrow
or next day or six months from
now the coming their need for a
loan and going to go away.
So our job is to make sure that
those people that need to
hundred five hundred thousand
dollars for a loan for a short
period of time.
Have the ability to get so I
look forward to further debate
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
very much very good is there for
the debate on the amendment yes
Mr gentleman from Chavis the end
result Representative Anderson.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady yield.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Chavis Lee and
Roosevelt counties thank you
gentlelady is
the debate has gone along on
this ammendment.
Mr speaker I have grown a bit
confused about.
The debate about the purpose and
a couple of the.
Phrases that are being used so
gentle lady first of all.
Do I understand that the idea
of.
Raising a daily charge which is
already existing law from twenty
five dollars to.
Two hundred and fifty dollars
a day is not an issue before us
at this moment.
Mr speaker gentlemen it is not
if that were to be raised by
anyone they would have to offer
that as a house amendment flow
four two two house bill one
thirty two.
Thank you then it of.
Okay then I look to the new
language Mr speaker.
I believe that this section the.
And it starts with the word in
addition so
the gentle lady that means to me
that.
Credit unions are already
reporting pursuant to these
various requirements.
And this would be an additional
requirement is that correct lady
Mr speaker yes Mr speaker
gentlemen it is my understanding
that we are adding an additional
reporting requirements up to
credit unions so that we would
be requesting and they would
then be obligated to report the
data that otherwise is out
loaned outlined in the small
loan act should they be making
those on the similar loan
products.
Thank you
Mr speaker and that is certainly
the way I read it is well I
guess.
One concern I have is the term
similar loan products.
The credit unions will be
reporting on these similar loan
products.
and that purpose of that Mr
speaker gentle lady is to have
the credit unions come to the
table did the my tying that
correctly or not gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentleman as I
understand it those that are
offering loans pursuant to the
New Mexico small loan act
because of legislation passed in
previous sessions report now and
that's where we get some of this
data to FID of the financial
institutions division at
regulation and licensing and so
what we're doing is saying that
if the drugs are similar to
those that are offered through
this small loans act then the
reporting so much whether it's a
happening through those
under the small loan act or
operating as credit unions.
Thank you Mr speaker
Then gentle lady I think is a
final thought I'm trying to try.
examines.
The state credit unions in is
that the same authority that
examines the federal credit
unions question Mr speaker Mr
speaker and gentleman this is
not my area of expertise but as
it's been explained to me in New
Mexico there's forty credit you
introduce and to date about
twenty two of them are as I
understand twenty two are within
the federal oversight regulatory
system and eighteen are within
the F. ID system here at the
financial institution division
through the New Mexico regi New
Mexico RLD regulation and
licensing division.
Thanks so yes these that would
be pulled into reporting of
course are also reporting to the
FID.
Thank you then Mr speaker gentle
lady going around it off that
about half for state and have
for federal.
And the examiners when they
visit those banks according to
their rules and regulations.
What concerns me is whether or
not under.
The examination of New Mexicos
credit unions whether they are
already in some form or fashion
giving a report on similar loan
products and Mr speaker and
gentle lady I I'm concerned
about.
Duplicity and and I know with
other state and federal
regulations we occasionally have
a reporting requirement of the
very same data in a different
form.
Which would open someone up to a
I if they.
Misapplied if they miss.
reported.
The similar loan products of.
I see so the question is.
Do we have any sense that
through the examination of the
credit unions by state and
federal examination authorities
that they are in fact looking at
similar loan products question.
Mr speaker down some if I
understand the question those
within the federal system
already do have their own
reporting requirements that does
include information such as this
that now we'd be adding here but
it is my understanding that
those within the state system
are not currently reporting this
information so it would be a new
reporting.
A new a new set of data that
they were they were required to
report on to the FID.
And.
Mr speaker and gentle lady would
this similar loan products the
those drugs covered in the
previous then.
Question in they would be the
long drugs pursuant to the small
loans act Mr speaker gentleman
thank you and.
Mr speaker gentle lady I
appreciate very much your
question you're you're response
and I believe it has clarified
my confusion and I appreciate it
thank you Mr speaker.
The gentle lady is are for the
debate on the amendment
generated percent of a
Representative Serrato thank you
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
from going on a yield yes I
gladly yield to the gentle lady
from Santa Fe thank you Mr
speaker the gentle lady I I
wanted to stand because I was
questioning they showed in this
ammendment but what I appreciate
about it is is it more data on
because what we're doing at this
point is going to be a
tremendous impact on a lot of
our communities you know I I
speak about a lot my communities
are not new words anyone who
lives in house district forty
five but you know I'm first
generation to go to college and
the way my dad was able to pay
his mortgage very regularly was
through installment loans payday
lenders however he could get
money to keep our house he did
it and this was a very regular
occurrence in our house I was
used to going to these places
until my senior year in high
school when my father was
picking me up from school and he
was just so happy because he
finally paid off the house we
did it we don't go to worry
about this anymore that's what
come to this debate with really
mixed feelings as you bring up
with so many of the folks that
you work with gentle lady and
and the you know in the spoken
with putting conversations also
with my own community as well
one of the advocates reminded me
very eloquently that these
changes don't happen in a vacuum
and what we've seen with our
budget that will you know with
it allow payments of seven
hundred fifty to the lowest
earning New Mexicans with last
year's rate earned Lee Alcon
with economic security that
we're bringing to working
families these all help along
the way so what I appreciate
about this is that well I do
understand that credit unions
are doing a lot of work in these
communities if you drive in my
district you'll see credit
unions on the rodeo side he
won't see on the airport side
and I don't necessarily blame
credit unions for this but you
will see a lot of installment
lenders on that side and and
when you are caring gentle lady.
Is he likely no when it rains it
pours in difficulty and
sometimes you need a solution
quick and you need money in your
pocket now so that your kids can
keep going to school so that you
have a roof over your head and
so I I I mean I've been
concerned about this vote it's
weighed heavily on me the more
data we bring and I and I want
to understand do you feel that
this will bring more data that
we will have a better
understanding of how this
continues to affect our
communities Mr speaker gentle
lady absolutely Ag could not
have said it better myself
the more we know the more
responsive and reflective we can
be as policy makers and making
sure that we follow through on
these commitments to the longer
and New Mexicans need access to
credit they do whether they're
in between jobs or trying to pay
that mortgage or trying to fix
that car to get to that job or
the have a kid in some kind of
right in our situation we need
to make sure over the long run
we're we're keeping some
continuity in an ethical way to
to these low dollar loans and
certainly I believe the more
data we have the more
responsible we can be in
crofting policy solutions that
fit the needs of our New Mexican
families thank you gentle lady
and thank you Mr speaker I
appreciate those points and I
will happily support this
amendment thank you thank you.
Is there for the debate on the
amendment.
Generated relievers of Herndon.
Thank you Mr speaker with a
gentle lady please you yes Mr
speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you General with Mr
speaker gentle lady I'm most
concerned about the the
conversation regarding credit
unions in this case and I think
that they're being given a
budget a bad name and I will
tell you why I oppose this this
ammendment so first of all
gentle lady Mr speaker just to
have you ever done a lady Mr
speaker have you heard of a
program called a queue so.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm not
familiar with the program.
So the credit union service
organization Mr speaker gentle
lady that's what credit unions
can come together and they try
to help people of modest means
what they do is they work
together so that they spread out
risk among themselves so that
they can help people in any way
that they possibly can it's so
Mister speaker gentle lady I
wanted to have you heard of a
program called see you safe.
Mr speaker gentle lady I have
not.
So Mister speaker gentle lady's
safe is called credit union
survivor Alliance for financial
empowerment me tell you Mr
speaker gentle lady what that
program does is because Mexico
has one of the highest rates of
domestic violence in the entire
country what that program does
is allow a ten thousand dollar
line of credit for people who
are trying to leave a domestic
violence situation at a nine
point nine percent right they
building a good credit history
what they do is they try to make
sure that they're helping low
income they're trying to help
families to to make themselves
better so that's what a credit
union does.
The if we look at the amendment
here Mr speaker double lady this
is focusing on the on credit
unions and stuff focusing on
banks which I think is a
disservice to what's happening
and what credit unions really do
so Mister speaker gentle lady I
would oppose this amended for
that particular reason banks
have not come to the table we've
asked them to come to the table
and help families that need them
credit unions have Mr speaker
gentle lady also want to talk
more about that members of
modest means program that credit
unions have what they do is they
try to every single time try to
make sure that they can help
these families in Mr speaker
gentle lady I want to tell you
about following Institute so I
leave Institute is instituted
looks at how credit unions when
they're programs and then what
they've done is they've done the
study on how these programs
work.
They found out is that when we
give low income people access to
jobs with fair pay and equal pay
what we find is that they will
repay a loan and they will get
blown speech and every time
that's part of it members of
modest means so Mister speaker
gentle lady I would just say
that this is a disservice to
credit unions we cannot do this
to a credit union you must be
and do you must have a
requirement that no of the
financial institution must have
meant additional lady Mr
speaker.
A few years ago the majority of
the push to try to get credit
unions to be taxed and what they
do is they work really hard to
help families and so this is
putting on that same type of tax
on credit unions though Mr
speaker gentle lady I know
you're not doing it on purpose
and but what we cannot do as we
cannot hurt the very groups of
people that really are helping
the people that you want to help
I would choose that banks that
Mr speaker dental credit dental
lady said that that governed by
the federal government federal
credit unions are governed by
the and see you way so that is a
federal institution also so I'm
just saying to you Mr speaker
gentle lady did not pass this
amendment this is not a good
amendment.
I see what you're doing but we
cannot heard the very groups of
people that really are doing the
things that you want to see
happen.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
Asian latest all those in favor
of house floor amendment number
three please signify by saying
hi.
As opposed nay.
The eyes have it the amendment
is adopted gentlelady from you
know you still have the four Mr
speaker thank you all for the
thoughtful in vigorous
conversation tonight and always
thank you to Representative the
gentle lady from reality by
Santa Fe and house for her
leadership on this issue and I
look forward to seeing this bill
through the Senate thank you.
Representative Anderson you
debated the bills.
Yes okay sorry I just want to
make sure keeping track.
The gentle lady from McKinley
San Juan Representative Johnson.
Thank you Mr speaker does my
good friend the gentle lady from
Rio read the Santa Fe and Taos
yield.
Mr speaker I gladly yield to the
kind lady from McKinley and San
Juan County.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I'm gonna ask you a few
questions in a row and
I'm not going to ask you to
answer them but I'm going to ask
these questions so that we can.
have them in the back of our
minds as I continue to
talk about specifically my
native American Community and
McKinley County.
Mr speaker the kind gentle lady
how many of these loans
originate in McKinley county.
How many adults over eighteen
are there in McKinley county.
What is the ratio of loans to
people in McKinley county.
How many borrowers do we know
default on their loans.
And how many lenders are there
in McKinley county.
Mr speaker and representative
kind lady.
I specifically ask about
McKinley County and my native
American Community because I
have a letter from the Navajo
Nation.
The Navajo Nation pass the
resolution requesting the New
Mexico state legislature to
approve a thirty percent thirty
six percent interest rate cap.
As proposed.
Because a majority of our Navajo
consumers rely yes on small
loans however they are
negatively impacted by the
current rate.
As tribal leaders we write to
urge.
The body to pass house bill one
thirty two.
The number of small lenders
located in McKinley county and
San Juan county offer loans to
Navajo citizens in both Arizona
and New Mexico.
McKinley County accounts for the
second highest number of loans
issued to its citizens and San
Juan County comes in as the
third highest in the state of
New Mexico.
Mr speaker and Representative.
Kind lady many loan providers in
the towns of Gallup Farmington
and requests believe they are
assisting Navajo families.
However the high number of small
lenders allow for escalating
interest on their loans.
Thank you for letting me read
that letter from our Navajo
Nation president.
Mr speaker and kind gentle lady.
We are not asking as a Navajo
Nation too abruptly or
permanently stop these lending
opportunities.
We are merely asking to provide
affordable reasonable interest
lending opportunities to our
board our.
Dollars hours.
Followers.
Mr speaker.
Gentlelady.
Away at ogle a way to go.
Since goodness gracious in
McKinley county we have had
consumer relationships that have
gone hand in hand for
generations.
The purchasing capacity is not
going to be a limitation
eliminated any time soon or
probably ever by our community
members.
In my community.
Our great grandparents
grandparents our families have
been loyal customers and
consumers ever since I can
remember Mr speaker.
I can remember every store and
every store owner my
grandparents and Graham and
parents have had relationships
with over from western stores
furniture stores lumber stores
automobile dealers restaurants
and so much more.
Mr speaker and kind gentle lady
my point is we are loyal
customers and we will always
support the economy in McKinley
county.
However these high interest
lending practices have to be
addressed.
A way of go and see if the
then at the needs of any key to
I do needs and.
Ladies and gentlemen Mr speaker.
I want good things for my people
to.
I want good jobs and education
an opportunity for them to have
a good things a roof over their
head food on their table.
Our families have hope when they
get an initial loan for a dire
emergency.
But that loan then becomes a
burden.
And causes further problems and
risks.
And further debt.
Because then they have to get
another loan to pay that debt
and to pay their existing bills.
I see this first hand in my
community.
At the end of the day these
loans do not help make ends meet
instead they are used to pay
recurring financial shortfalls
due to those loans.
When they were instead met to
help with an emergency but then
they do not.
Mr speaker Representative kind
lady thank you for bringing this
bill forward these hi high
interest rate loans are traps
they were devastating and have
consequences.
I know first hand.
And another thing during the
pandemic many of our and our
community members received
stimulus tax.
To help do something good to
offer financial assistance
during hard times instead this
money was used to pay back high
interest loans.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you kind gentle lady for
bringing this bill forward.
Thank you thank you
Representative I would like to
respond to those questions that
you asked earlier because we do
have this information and I just
want to say in McKinley County.
Of the total population and
seventy one thousand four
hundred ninety two the
population over eighteen which
is really the population that
you have to look at is fifty
thousand nine hundred and
seventy four the number of loans
in one year in twenty.
In twenty twenty four sixty nine
thousand six hundred and
eighteen.
And yes that means that people
are barring over and over and
over again the percentage of
people that are are borrowing is
is a hundred and thirty six
percent it's a highest it's the
highest in our state and we've
known this for some time and at
and.
I I think the president said it
all I mean he knows two things
thirty six is too high but it's
certainly a lot better than a
hundred and seventy five and now
I'd like to go to the San Juan
County population is a hundred
and thirty thousand forty four
population over eighteen is
ninety five thousand seven
hundred and twelve the number of
loans taken out for ninety five
thousand people are forty nine
thousand three hundred and
ninety two they have a fifty one
percent long range for that
county
many of these counties but
certainly San Juan McKinley are
two of the highest we have known
that Dona Ana is very very high
and
I think that's what we have to
consider you know when we when
we think about this legislation
you know you're not asking that
these companies disappear you're
just asking for affordable lane
loan rates that people can
actually paid that.
And the thank you very much.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
There is further debate the
gentleman.
From San Juan County
representative Allison.
Thank you madam.
For generated from.
Santa Fe Rio Arriba and Taos
County L..
Mr speaker madam speaker I will
kindly yield to the gentleman
from San Juan.
Thank you madam speaker.
Or the district that I
represent.
It allows a lot of the.
Agencies.
The.
Districts the majority of my
district is at fifty percent
unemployment.
In our extended families.
On the one roof.
Sen.
A lot of.
Love style for the revenue.
X..
All of the livestock have to
resort to companies.
This is for the Navajo Nation.
This happens agencies.
This legislation covers some of
the.
It will consume some of that.
In the start playing a fair
game.
The
For those as collateral.
I just because in order to get a
loan you have to offer some kind
of collateral.
And at first it was the
livestock.
The last
two.
Some of those are very very old
where there are our loans but
they're still being used as
collateral for loans.
After.
All of a lot of stuff that they
have no.
And.
The staff for the rooms for the
coals in order to maintain their
loans for loans.
As soon
very sad situation for me to
observe the.
For the border towns like
Farmington and Gallup.
Thanks to the reservation line.
Sen service stations in the
trading posts.
In France the incomes of used
vehicles.
Livestock trailers.
Because
of the Fulton on the because of
the high interest rates.
Because they ran out of a lot of
stocks to pay their loans off.
We're putting a cap on interest
rates.
And.
The requests from the Navajo
Nation leadership that the
support this legislation for
that same reason.
The support your legislation
believe
that this.
Solution is long overdue thank
gentle lady from bringing this
forward thank you madam speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane.
Thank you madam speaker Madam
speaker religion lady from Rio
Arriba Santa Fe Intel's yield
Madam speaker kind gentleman I
gladly L..
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlelady from Rio Arriba.
Of Madam speaker the way I
understand the way this bill as
written is now loans up to ten
thousand dollars be capped at
thirty six percent is that
correct that is correct madam
speaker gentleman's minister
gentlelady from Rio ribbon
that's thirty six percent APR.
Yes madam speaker a kind
gentleman yes Madam speaker
gentle lady from Rio Arriba
continue to plan to the body
what is a P. R..
R. as annual percentage rate
madam speaker and gentleman.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
rear regard these loans
typically for a term of twelve
months.
Well madam speaker kind
gentleman that committee for six
months seconded for twelve
months secondly for twenty four
months a that's the that's how
they're given out sometimes they
can be for I don't know nine
months it really kind of depends
the the terms and the length of
the loan the pandemic contract
that they signed.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Rio Arriba what's the average
length of these type of loans.
Madam speaker and provide
gentleman the average the
average length of the loan in
New Mexico is twelve months.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
Can you can you share where that
statistic came from because the
information that I read is that
it's actually four months.
Madam speaker kind gentleman
we're checking right now.
May take a while leading answer
next question will come back to
Madam speaker gentle lady from
your infernal so what I'm
driving at is especially on
these the shorter loans if you
get a you know with a three
month long a four month loan a
six month loan
I think it's it's a bad.
discussion pointed to
characterize these in terms of
of APR I think if this any
disclosed that rate is
but I don't think it actually
describes what the actual cost
is the consumer I think that's
the better metric you know for
example if you if you take out
fifty dollars on your credit
card from an ATM machine you'll
get charged three or four
dollars as eighteen fifty we
don't think of that in terms of
any P. R. but if you look at a
few arts close to seven hundred
percent the the better metric I
I submit madam speaker is what's
the actual cost to the consumer
for taking out one of these loan
products so maybe maybe I can
ask the question this way Madam
speaker gentle lady from really
both if I take out a hundred
dollar loan
and I pay it back within six
months what's the cost to the
consumer on that hundred dollar
loan.
madam speaker and kind gentlemen
I'll get to that number we did
the calculations for three
hundred and five hundred on this
chart but I I'm that's a that's
a good question and and it's
really a misunderstanding I want
everybody to understand this if
you look at a single loan and a
single small loan you'll say to
yourself well people can't make
money at this rate you know it's
impossible you will say that but
this business is not based.
Based on one loan these
companies do this business on
volume you know you don't open a
coffee shop to sell one Cup of
coffee and you don't open a
storefront to make one loan and
and one small loan you are doing
this on volume and that's what
you need to understand that the
that the total loans in this
state where three hundred and
ninety thousand loans and that
the total amount.
Spend.
Was four hundred.
Forty five million and the total
interest rate paid on that four
hundred and forty five million
was a hundred and seventy nine
million so don't you know don't
say would need it's it's a
lender only makes a hundred
dollar loan for four months no
they're not going to make money
but they are making substantial
amounts of money and it's
because this business is based
on volume.
Additionally from Rio Arriba so
I I'm not suggesting in those
things side I heard earlier
debate but this was a moral
question and so what I'm
suggesting is if we're going to
talk about this in terms of
morality the better metric is to
talk about the costs the
consumer I'm not a hundred
seventy five percent interest
rate because there's there's a
lot of sticker shock that comes
with a hundred seventy five
percent and again you need to
disclose that that right but
it's not an actual metric of
what the cost is to the consumer
because most of these loans are
twelve month loans Madam speaker
gentle lady from Rio Arriba.
Will this bill preclude me from
taking out a loan on the
internet from a business located
another state that charges me
higher than thirty six percent
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
from the Aztec.
yes these at all at all of this
legislation also applies to
loans
done on the internet.
And madam speaker gentle lady
Can you consult with your expert
because I'm not sure that the
Commerce Clause allows us to
regulate companies in other
states.
madam speaker and a kind
gentleman I was pretty sure
about that if they are making a
loan to New Mexico red president
over the internet yes they're
subject to our laws.
And madam speaker gentle lady
from Rio Arriba.
I guess part of my concern was
with this.
this bill is I am fearful of the
store fronts that are going to
go away
and not so much.
you know the big corporation
shareholders but the the people
who are actually employed.
In the store fronts.
That's part of my concern I I
also have some concern about the
risks that worry we are.
Creating here and so.
In terms of
the risk of these loans are
these typically what would be
considered high risk loans.
I'm sorry could you repeat that
question kind gentleman Madam
speaker gentle lady from
reserves certainly's are these
considered high risk loans.
These are the people that can't
get loans ordinarily but the you
know it I don't think you should
assume that every person who
goes to one of these companies
gets alone they get turned down
at these places too I mean if
you don't have a pay stub it's
going to be a little tougher so
yes are you saying that people
who have bad credit they go to a
small yes they are high risk but
if the new with the alternatives
that existed they could also go
to other places in the minutes
is that all these companies are
gonna leave New Mexico and I do
I just think it's and it.
Mr regionally from Rio Arriba.
And are these typically on
secured loans.
madam speaker kind gentleman
somehow somehow some are and
some aren't.
And madam speaker gentle lady
duties borrowers typically have
good or excellent credit.
It depends you know it depends
what they want to do I have the
report that I
that I'm.
Frantically looking for pricing
to throw paper all over the
place
and I want to talk about the
secured in the and secured loan
and the percentages of those
loans
In secured loans now these for
installment loans the secured
loans the amount was.
Twenty eight percent of these
installment loans where secured
loans the total amount was a.
Five hundred and sixteen million
four hundred two thousand four
hundred and fourteen
the unsecured loans.
That total amount was three
hundred and four thousand five
hundred and four seven fifty one
so seventy two percent of those
loans by collateral the ones
that you're talking.
Seventy two were unsecured and
twenty eight percent were
secured.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Rio Arriba so seventy two
percent of these loans are
unsecured.
Madam speaker a kind gentleman
yes.
Minister gentlelady from Rio
Arriba so again them the vast
majority of these are on secure
loans there was there with
tenants that are verses in there
with the farmers that are most
likely high risk of medium to
low credit scores.
And there's a tremendous amount
of risk for whenever you loan
money without collateral in
exchange and I have a hard time
sitting in the roundhouse.
Telling what the consumer
pandemic lending company should
or should not charge in terms of
an interest rate.
When the borrower is going there
of their own free will.
And the lender is been lending
the money of their own free
will.
And my fear is if we drop this
down to thirty six percent.
That if the lenders cannot price
their own risks than they're
gonna either require collateral
on these loans and we've already
learned that the vast majority
of these are on collateralized
or they're going to be much more
strict on in terms of who they
provide credit to.
The under either scenario it's
the point The New Mexicans are
going to come out losing.
And the end result is is that
they're gonna lex less access to
credit or if they do get access
to print it's going to be on
worse terms.
And I think actually the gentle
lady from Santa Fe shared a
personal story that that a lot
of times these loans are used to
cover expenses and I think
actually madam speaker the
generated from recovery to touch
on this too
a lot of these monies are used
for things like car repairs or
you know covering expenses until
the next paycheck comes in.
And I'm fearful that I and I and
I do understand.
The the shock value of one
seventy five as an A. P. R. and
I understand the hard to want to
protect the most vulnerable in
New Mexico I really do get that
and I can understand a people's
land on both sides of this
issue.
But from my perspective my
understanding of of economics is
that these type of laws actually
end up having the opposite
effect.
And there there's a call by
Milton Friedman that I really
like and I think people should
have the ability to choose their
own destiny.
It says underlying most
arguments against the free
market is a lack of belief in
freedom itself.
And I think it's there's a
danger for us madam speaker
gentle lady whatever work we are
various lawmakers and we try to
set the rates for the consumer
instead of allowing this
consumer and the lender to set
those rates themselves.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Rio Arriba.
As I'm sure you remember from
the finance committee there was
over a hundred thousand jobs
that were lost during the
pandemic and the latest job
report shows that that only half
of those have not recovered yet
in New Mexico.
And unfortunately the vast
majority of those jobs for low
wage and minimum wage jobs that
haven't recovered.
And so you know our point they
have fewer job or job
opportunities as a result of
this pandemic.
And now if this legislation
passes they're gonna have a lot
more difficulties getting access
to capital to cover those in
need so for those reasons madam
speaker I I stand opposition
thank you madam speaker and kind
gentle and could I just respond
to.
madam speaker that's fine.
Certainly the go head.
Thank you madam speaker I I just
wanna
I just want to comment on the
those unsecured loans in a with
collateral.
Will they're they're not I mean
they're secured because what
those companies do is they ask
for the
dead dead authorization I E.
they get their bank accounts and
they draw down from their bank
accounts and that's how they and
that's how they collect on those
unsecured loan so people really
need to understand that most of
them have access to a bank
account and they don't give that
loan unless they have a bank
account and in a.
And that's the first they know
when that check kids it's
usually a either their paycheck
or pension checkers social
security check thing they get
the date when that hits the bank
and they were the first ones to
drive down that account so I
want everybody and to understand
in this body just because it
says it's funds secured
collateral doesn't they don't
have a card that the borrowing
on but they're certainly
borrowing on a paycheck that's
going to a bank and they have
that account number and they are
authorized to take from that
bank and
Thank I guess I just want to
make that clear.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
very much so that that's not
collateral the collateral is a
tangible asset and and yeah they
they made know what your bank
account number is and and you
probably signed authorization
give them the authority to
withdraw on that bank account if
you miss a monthly payment but
all I have to do is a consumers
going out of the bank account
and draw all those funds out of
that account and go open an
account elsewhere it's not
security like we think about
collateral those are tangible
assets other than than cash.
Madam speaker I you know I.
I think people understand that I
think they're very few people
that actually do that I think
that bank accounts are are
access easily by these companies
and and those accounts are drawn
down that's been my experience
in talking to people in my
community.
Been sicker budget only from but
thank you for the debate
appreciation thank you kind
gentleman there is for the
further debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
Thank you madam speaker will the
lady from your revert yield.
Adams madam chair hi lady I will
gladly you.
Thank you madam speaker and lady
from Rio Arriba I was kind of
chuckling to myself a little
when.
Somebody said gosh we've been
working on this for several
years.
It seems like interminable TV.
But hi actually carried this
bill one time it was so strange
because it was in twenty fifteen
and it was house bill thirty six
and I was thinking of thirty six
percent right.
Are caps I also
believed always that it wasn't a
democratic or Republican issue
I don't recall having heard the
bill but I was told the
representative of Herrell
introduced a bill once that was
thirty six or that she had
planned to do that.
But I wonder
Want to just say a few things
about what's changed since I
first started working on it and
one year Michael Sanchez who was
the Senate Majority Leader and I
we're thinking of doing a
constitutional amendment
because there are actually some
states that have a an anti user
re provision in our
constitution.
So
One of the things that's changed
is that the number of the
storefront lenders has
Burgeoned.
But the credit unions have also
grown in number and their
offerings of these kinds of
loans because we really could
not.
Seven eight years ago say that
the credit unions could pick up
the the slack.
But what's not changed.
Is that.
This is we have an economy right
now where millions and millions
and millions of dollars.
Are not being turned over
locally they're going to out of
state corporations big big
corporations who have a very
high profit margins.
But if the dollars stayed in New
Mexico and the loans were local.
The people.
Would not find themselves in
this trap of in their shame or
desperation that has been so
eloquently described by my
colleagues.
They could spend their money on
groceries.
And auto repairs and school
supplies.
And gasoline and the dollars
would turn over here in New
Mexico.
You know we used to have a
thirty six percent cap.
In fact it was in nineteen
eighty four that it was
repealed.
And that was during a time of
very very high inflation.
I really wish the legislature
hadn't done that because it has
just broadened is very.
I just want to share a couple of
the stories that we heard in the
house judiciary hearing this
year.
We had as
Very touching testimonies a
woman named Patricia who is a.
This paper.
For forty years about six
thousand dollars to buy a car.
And the loan was a hundred and
thirty percent.
It ended up costing her in the
and thirty four thousand dollars
to buy that car.
We all know that we know we buy
homes we pay.
Interested ends up at a much
higher in our final payment if
we don't pay it off early is
much higher than what we
originally borrowed.
But imagine if it were hundred
thirty percent.
There was a young man who was a
UNM law student.
Who described the fact that he
worked for one of these
providers the the small loan
companies that.
The installment loans and he
said the deceptive practices
were designed to inspire people
into taking on greater and
greater debt.
And what what they did is they
never use the word refinance
they just said there's more
money available.
And finally quit because he felt
like he was actually ruining
people's lives.
So.
I think now.
It's it's time to realize that
we probably have a very
credible.
Replacement.
For.
These predatory lenders.
But only tell you if you have
any doubt whatsoever.
About what to do I know people
we're always saying we want to
represent our communities me
just tell you what happens when
this question is put to the
people.
There are states that have
initiative and they have ballot
Referendum.
Have a in twenty ten.
That ballot measure for thirty
six percent interest rate.
Was approved by seventy three
percent of the voters.
Last I checked on Tanner wasn't
exactly a liberal bastion.
Never ask a in November of
twenty twenty.
Eighty two point eight percent
of those voting.
Voted in favor of an initiative
to create a thirty six percent
interest rate cap is about in
the brassica.
I have I have relatives from
Nebraska my grandmother was born
there.
It's not a liberal bastion
either.
In South Dakota.
In November of twenty sixteen of
successful ballot initiative
instituted at thirty six percent
right calf.
Seventy five point fifty eight
percent of those voting.
Removed that measure.
In Colorado in twenty eighteen.
Seventy seven point twenty five
percent.
And you've heard the polling
here in New Mexico.
So I don't think anybody's going
to be run out of town.
For supporting this measure.
And I just say that I I really
want to put this to rest.
We may need to conduct tweaks in
the future I just pray that this
passes and that we can get this
off our plates for good thank
you very much Madam speaker and
lady from your remote.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo and
Sandoval Representative Ely
thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Santa Fe Rio
Arriba and tell sealed.
Yes madam speaker and kind
gentleman I will gladly
Speaker and gentle lady are I'm
a little concerned because I
think you confuse the body and I
want to clear this up you had
talked about the hockey scores
and I thought you were talking
about tonight.
So I want the body to
understand.
The Canadians are had forty two
in women's hockey tonight I just
want to clear up any confusion
if there is right now with ten
minutes left to go stand I can
only think of one person that's
happy that happens to be a
Canadian citizen that said so
we're hoping in the last ten
minutes the Americans will come
back but you have not confuse
the body and I appreciate very
much the discussion on these
lending practices and I want to
spend a little time going
through that with you if you
don't mind madam speaker gentle
lady madam speaker at kind
gentleman of course.
All right so let's start with
I'm looking that.
and you had referenced in your
opening remarks.
So for the body we're talking
about the letter that you sent
to the body dated February
seventh twenty twenty two which
have the attachments I
appreciate the color.
so I want to look at I'm going
to the sheet that is marked
background notes to see that.
It starts with loans by a.
Madam speaker kind gentleman yes
I see that so the first
category.
If I'm reading this correctly is
the percentage of loans that are
done by percentage is that
correct that's correct madam
madam chair and kind gentleman
so you have five percent of
installment loans four APR rates
of less than or equal to thirty
six percent correct madam madam
chair a kind gentleman that is
correct Madam speaker gentle
lady and then you go through and
it looks like thirty five
percent of the installment loan
third APR range between thirty
seven and a hundred percent but
the thing that really jumps out
at least to me Madam speaker and
gentle lady.
Is that thirty four percent of
the installment loans were made
by lenders who are for loans
between a hundred and fifty
percent and a hundred and
seventy five percent is that a
correct figure.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
I'm madam chair and gentleman
that is correct these were the
the financial institute
institution division that
reported this this was a this
was a data from the year twenty
twenty and it was issued as in
December of twenty twenty one
this is the first report we had
from Representative Lewis is
that bill and it is it is
eliminating.
So if I understand this
correctly Madam speaker gentle
lady.
This comes from the right the
report that the legislation
sponsored by Representative
Lewis in two thousand I
sponsored the required this
reporting by what agency Madam
speaker gentle lady the
reporting is it's under their
regulation and licensing
department and the the bureau is
called the financial institution
division they oversee all the
banking practices in the state
and all the laws that pertain to
that.
And so madam speaker gentle lady
this information came from a
report issued in December of
twenty twenty one is that
correct that is correct madam
chair kind gentleman and this is
data that I assume includes up
to the end of twenty twenty
correct.
Madam chair and kind gentleman
yes it was for the year twenty
twenty the bill was passed in
two thousand nineteen they did
this they collected the data in
twenty twenty initiative reports
in December of twenty twenty
one.
So if I'm looking at this
correctly if we go to the number
of licenses there are five
hundred and twenty one lenders
license in the state of New
Mexico as of September twenty
twenty one is that correct madam
chair kind gentleman that is
correct ma'am Madam speaker
gentle lady when we're talking
about lenders we're talking
about installment loan lenders
correct the madam chair kind
gentleman yes we're talking
about the license lenders under
the small loan act and under the
bank installment loan act.
Madam speaker gentle lady how
many of these lenders are out of
state lenders these storefronts
that come from out of state as
opposed to businesses that are
New Mexico businesses.
Madam chair and kind gentleman
eighty nine percent of these a
storefront lenders are are out
of state corporations.
Madam speaker gentle lady and
and I don't know that you have
an answer to this but do you
have an expectation of what
would happen if this bill passed
with respect to its impact on
out of state lenders verses in
state lenders would have some
kind of disproportionate effect
on that.
madam chair kind gentleman.
No one can predict the future
that we think and what is
happened in other states is the
the the what a how do I put this
the lenders who charge high
interest rates will probably
leave the highest rates of the
one who carries the highest
insurance interest rates are
probably the state because they
won't be making that kind of
money they're used to they'll go
somewhere else we think we think
that the.
Locally owned businesses will
stay we saw on and I Illinois
where sixty seven new store
landers were opened up at a
thirty six percent cap rate
within a year after that law was
enacted and and and you know I
wish I could I wish I could tell
you exactly what will happen we
don't know exactly what will
happen on any bill that we
passed in this house and I think
the expectation that we should
have to know exactly what would
happen on this bill I think it
will make it better for families
and I think that is our first
priority how do we help New
Mexico families in with
financial hardships.
We do that by lowering the cap
to thirty six percent.
Madam speaker gentle lady I was
confused as I looked at this as
to how if at all the faults are
measured by this report that was
issued in December of twenty
twenty one and how can we
capture that kind of data as to
how many of the Stoneman loans
result in the faults.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman if
I do realize this one minute
doing when they were doing this
recording they realize that they
didn't have been information and
I and you should know that if I
do intends to revise the state
appointed in next year's report.
Figure I want to go to another
she did you have it doesn't have
a title on it but if it has a
charge the talks about loan
terms principal amount cross of
credit goes from thirty six
percent to one seventy five.
The C. that.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
it's a last page in this report
if anybody wants to check it
out.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
I'm sure everybody's gonna want
to check it out it's it's it's
been a scintillating debate I
and so I'm sure people are very
interested so I do want to look
at this because I do think it's
significant and I want to start
with kind of the the the first
numbers and if you would do for
me and for the body Madam
speaker gentle lady if you could
go through.
Just what this chart is intended
to show and then I'm going to go
through with some of these to
give some examples as to what
we're talking about.
Sure I I think this Mr speaker
kind gentleman.
I think most of us don't know
this I mean these are figures
that you can just you know side
off the top of your head most
people don't if you're not
dealing in finance and if you're
not dealing on in this area of
expertise you really don't know
and and I wanted to put together
chart so that people could
understand so the members of
this body could understand
exactly how much it costs for a
three hundred dollar loan is six
months at the at the interest
rate of thirty six percent or
forty five percent or fifty or
sixty or ninety nine or one
seventy five hi I thought we all
needed this information because
you know I don't know I didn't
know when I first started and
people would ask me will how
much would that loan be at one
seventy five so so you have a
pretty clear example on this
chart and I mean when people say
you can't make money at thirty
six you know I just want to say
if you look at the bottom of the
chart a twenty four month loan
of five thousand at a thirty six
percent right you get a you get
a return well the company gets a
return of two thousand eighty
five dollars if they take out a
one hundred and seventy five
percent loan
for twenty four months same
amount five thousand dollars
they're going to end up paying
thirteen thousand one hundred
ninety three dollars and forty
four cents that's what it means
for a two year.
Hundred and seventy five percent
loan.
Madam speaker gentle lady I'm a
caution you not to steal my
thunder.
all right so we got a man's arm
I'm I'm sorry Mr speaker and
gentle lady I I do want to look
at let's start with the first
line we won't go through all of
it but I do want to start with
the first line we've got the
principal amount.
Cost of credit it says thirty
two twenty eight.
What is a I understand the bill
as now amended it just so the
members the body understand it
let's make sure I've done my
math right the cost of credit
now would be to thirty six
percent which is thirty two
dollars and twenty eight cents
plus five percent of the loan
which would be additional
fifteen dollars have I done that
math right.
Mr speaker and gentleman you're
exactly right so the cost of
credit on the three hundred
dollar loan and it would be
forty seven dollars and twenty
eight cents concert I done my
math right yes you're right Mr
speaker and gentleman however
if that same loan was done that
five hundred seventy five
percent rather than the forty
seven dollars after six months
the bar were would have to pay
in addition to paying back the
principle of three hundred
dollars a hundred seventy
dollars and twenty eight cents
is that right Mr speaker and
gentleman yes plus the fifteen
dollar fee remember all that's
right that's assuming the bill
passes in which case they would
have to pay the one seventy five
is that right Mr speaker I kind
gentle lady.
Mr speaker here at.
All right so what I want to do
is is I would like because these
are the numbers that really
first on a thing to me is I'm
looking at the twelve month the
one your loans.
So if you borrow three hundred
dollars.
At the end of three hundred
dollars at the end of one year
on a hundred seventy five.
Percent.
Chang on just a minute.
Information here.
Which is thirty four percent of
the loans that are made or
between a hundred and fifty and
a hundred seventy five percent.
we are looking at.
We would have to pay back the
principal.
And then you would actually go
Weiss the principal plus fifty
two dollars and thirty two cents
is that right.
Mr speaker kind gentleman you're
absolutely right that's why we
put these together so people can
understand the enormity of this
problem.
So if I'm looking at each one of
these one your loans the three
hundred dollars the five hundred
dollars thousand to fifteen
hundred dollars in each one of
these cases you would have to
pay you do have to I see you
would have to but it's currently
happening in New Mexico for more
than a third of the loans that
are written.
Thank you have to pay the
principal amount.
Then you have to pay in effect
the principal amount again so
you have to pay it twice and you
still have to pay more money for
for you paid off the installment
loan is that correct Mr speaker
highlighting that's absolutely
correct.
So for example if you borrow
fifteen hundred dollars and you
have to pay
yeah that one seventy five a
hundred seventy five percent
you're paying seventeen hundred
sixty one dollars and eighty
four cents in interest after
here so you end up paying
fifteen hundred dollars plus
seventeen hundred sixty one
dollars and eighty four cents
that right Mr speaker kind
gentleman.
You're absolutely right it's
incredible.
Mr speaker gentle lady I think
we are going to be four or five
would be my expectation once we
get the information on the
amount of the faults that we're
going to see I would just gas Mr
speaker gentle lady given those
kinds of numbers.
Mr speaker gentle lady let me go
to the two years and I will
finish this page.
So at this point we're really
talking about if you borrow this
money for a couple of years it
looks like it's not quite but it
looks like on each one of these
you're paying about two and a
half times back in interest so
for example on a five hundred
dollar loan two and a half times
would be well actually three
times would be fifteen hundred
dollars you're paying just short
of that the one thousand three
hundred nineteen dollars and
forty four cents minimized
during that math right Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
kind gentleman you're doing the
math exactly right if you borrow
five thousand dollars and one of
these installment loans after
two years you're going over the
five thousand dollars back.
Last.
You're going to owe an
additional thirteen thousand.
One hundred ninety three dollars
and forty four cents find on
that math right.
Mr speaker kind gentleman you
have done that math right.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
I so appreciate this bill I I
have to tell you.
That of all the bills that are
the legislature.
That I think as I leave this
body I want to pass and have on
the governor's desk is this bill
this bill is a tax on the poor
and I am proud of you for
fighting for this bill and
bringing this bill to the floor
and I thank you for thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
the gentleman the gentleman from
Bernalillo thank you Mr speaker
is matter have been debated for
three hours I move to seize
debate.
I was very signify saying I.
All the supposedly.
To be descended gentle lady to
briefly close.
Plans are.
Mr speaker I move a do pass on
house bill one thirty two.
We are on final passage of house
bill one three two as queen
Topley amended.
The vote is now open.
This portion of the vote is
about to close.
The clerk to call members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon votes no
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong votes yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash votes
yes Representative will go.
Yes Representative bones are
yes Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes representative Lente
yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lujan.
Yes Representative Lujan votes
yes Representative Lundstrom.
Yes Representative Lundstrom
both yes Representative Roger
Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
votes yes Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero votes yes Representative
Harry Garcia.
The vote is now closed by voted
fifty in the affirmative
eighteen in the negative house
bill one thirty two is
quintuplets amended has passed
the house.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Members I've just received a
text message from Representative
Harry Garcia he was in the
building is internet was going
wacko and we've done this for
members of both parties to allow
a vote to be cast we've done in
the session is objection to
letting Representative Harry
Garcia record of of.
Hearing no objection I will
allow it Representative Harry
Garcia.
Votes yes that will be updated
on the official call thank you
for your courtesy members I'm
sure he appreciates that.
members we and that will be
updated on the official called
legislative coffee table for
leaders to see that it was
properly recorded.
members we have a generic bill
I'm going to announce this now
and I will announce it.
In the morning but we're doing
an analysis now so that the two
two number can be updated but
Reno said in the morning so
folks know what's happening.
House bill two to eight.
is being removed the rules
committee to to a two numbers to
triple to five forty eight point
two.
Triple two five four eight point
two.
Order printed and referred to
the commerce and economic
development committee house bill
two to eight from rules the two
two numbers two two two five
four eight point two for to
converse economic development as
I say this is a public private
partnership bill which is been
heard in the commerce and
economic development committee
on those topics and that's why
it's going to that committee
make another house and to this
effect in the morning.
Are there other.
The gentle lady from Rio Arriba
Santa Fe and Taos the rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee will
meet tomorrow morning at nine
thirty.
Members take note.
The generated in a
Representative Rubio madam chair
thank you Mr speaker tomorrow
house transportation will be
meeting at nine AM we have two
bills on the agenda so it should
be pretty chill.
Members take notes.
That's exactly what we need.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
senator is and once you would
you hold a microphone up a
little higher Sir.
Perfect.
This
speaker the House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee will not
meet tomorrow.
Members take note are there
other announcements.
The gentleman from Rio Arriba
Sandoval in San Juan chairman
Monday.
The members your house
agriculture cities and water
resources committee will meet
tomorrow at eight thirty
no chill likely involved thank
you.
The Kilner B. Mr chairman.
Is there any other
announcements.
Going once.
Going twice the generally from
Lynsey.
Mr speaker why did the bike fall
over.
The ability why it was tired.
Generally single again the
cigarettes and one influencia
did you mean to raise your hand
on the zoom.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker I just want
to double body thanks for all
the help you guys do for
veterans.
Thank you gentlemen.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr can move that we
adjourn the house adjourned
until eleven o'clock to four
thank you members as I take a
motion that we have looked at
some bills for consideration to
our will send this at an email
but for those of us who are
still.
Here tomorrow with looking to
consider the items that are
currently items one two three
and seven tomorrow.
So if you look at your yellow
calendar here we're looking to
consider items one two three and
seven.
They'll be different numbers
tomorrow at this number seven
will be but that's what they're
numbers right now okay we and we
will send this out surely in an
email I thank everyone for
today's work appreciate everyone
engaging a very thoughtful and
courteous debate this evening.
I enjoy the rest of the evening
what there is left of it.
House in recess until eleven AM
tomorrow.
