Just.
Okay.
Thank you.
The.
The critical members without a
recorded response.
Representative Alcon.
Here Representative Alcon is
here Representative Allison.
Representative Allison is here
Representative Anderson.
Representative Baca.
Representative bash.
Representative bash is here
Representative black.
Representative.
Representative will guys here
Representative Cadena.
Representative Castellano.
I'm sorry this.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Castellano is
here Representative Cook.
Representative Crowder.
Representative dela Cruz.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Figueroa.
Representative Figueroa is here
Representative.
I goes here Representative
Gallegos is here Representative
Harry Garcia.
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Representative Dale Garcia is
here Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Herndon.
Representative Herndon is here
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Lane
Representative Lane is here
Representative Lara.
Your Representative Lara is here
Representative Lente.
Your Representative Lente is
here Representative Lewis.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Lundstrom.
Here Representative Lundstrom is
here Representative Madrid.
Representative Maestas.
Here Representative my S. does
is here Representative Rod
Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya is
here Representative Roger
Montoya Cruz.
Representative Roger Montoya is
here Representative Ortez.
Here with dancing shoes on
Representative Ortez is here
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here Representative Rubio.
Here Representative Rubio is
here Representative Sarinana.
Here.
Representative Sarinana.
Okay.
Representative Sarinana is here
Representative Serrato.
Representative Thomson.
Representative Thomson is here
Representative Trujillo.
Representative Trujillo is here
Representative Zamora.
Representative Zamora is here
Representative Harper.
Representative Harper is here.
Representative Madrid here.
And Representative Madrid is
here.
There's lowcost close the forum.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker good
evening I move that we go to
make services announcements and
miscellaneous business.
No objections ordered members
the this list has been provided
to the floor leadership.
we'll take a built in the
following order.
We will begin with item number
five.
Item eight.
Item thirteen.
Item six.
Twelve.
Eleven eighteen.
Again item number I.
Then the.
Madam thirteen.
Then six.
Twelve eleven eighteen.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker we'll go to
the next order of business third
reading of legislation
projections order.
Gentlelady from Rio Arriba Santa
Fe inTaos are you ready on item
number five Mr speaker give me
to that point the record reflect
on necessary for example forty
two as amended with an emergency
clause as.
Gentlelady to explain.
Thank you Mr speaker.
House bill forty two is in New
Mexico finance authorities and
NMFA public project revolving
fund PPRF authorization bill I'm
caring this legislation on
behalf of the NMFA's legislative
oversight committee as amended
this bill authorizes it in the
NMFA to provide loans in excess
of one million dollars from the
PPRF two hundred ninety separate
US state and local government
entities included in the bill
based on terms and conditions
established by the NMFA current
legislation authorization
carries a three year
authorization period if the
PPRF enjoys a triple a rating
from the S. and P. as in hat and
has.
Glasses fundanalyst.
And has
and passes the benefit of that
rating along to the PPRF farmers
regardless of their underlying
credit from inception in
nineteen ninety four today the
NMFA has made over one thousand
nine hundred and ten PPRF loans
totaling more than four point
two four billion dollars
billion dollars NMFA is
currently servicing nine hundred
and fifty three PPRF loans
totaling approximately one point
five billion and the with that
Mr speaker I stand for questions
debate is almost percent of all.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentlelady yields.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
kind gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
we see this bill fairly often
can you remind us what frequency
this bill comes before the
legislature.
Mr speaker and gentleman we see
this bill every single year for
us since nineteen ninety four.
Thank you Mr and gentle lady I
appreciate that very much and Mr
speaker gentle lady you've given
us a great description of what
the bill does of Mr generally
just a couple quick questions
first the dollars and associated
with this bill are they.
Part of the General Fund or the
the budget process through our
these dollars considered.
Mr speaker and kind gentleman
there there that PPF dollars
that are held at the NMFA there
outside of the general fund the.
Yes Mr speaker generally that's
that's exactly right that's why
this is in part of house bill
two and was bigger and and
gentle lady can help you
understand a little bit about
where these funds than to come
from.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
seed money is
a gross receipts tax
governmental gross receipts tax
Mr jelly thank you for that
clarification because we we
always talk about G. R. T. the
gross receipts tax but there's
something else called the
governmental gross receipts the
G. R. T..
And and these taxes you
mentioned are a seed think it's
just the projects going.
And then what happens to keep it
perpetually going Mr speaker
agility.
Mr speaker and gentleman we
issue bonds about four times a
year to read replenish the funds
and what these projects to
really kind gentleman is these
are the hopes and dreams of all
of our governmental entities
from from the biggest cities
down to the small as the initial
domestic water systems they come
they come it's open all year
round they have a they have a
board of directors they oversee
this fun they come in they
present what that county or that
city wants to do and and then
this board oversees that and
then they put them in this pool
so that and then they we bring
this authorization to this body
every year we approve this
authorization and then they're
eligible for funding under the
NMFA.
Mr speaker and internally yes
the thank you for that but my I
guess my questions were
understanding is.
This and the dollars that go to
repay these loans actually then
go to fund new loans and so it's
it's a.
It's kind of a self feeding
process where you have a seed
funding that goes in and then
you have some perhaps other
dollars that go to help expand
capacity over time but really
for allowing folks to look to
borrow and then the dollars they
pay back in our use for
additional laws Mr speaker
gentle lady is that correct Mr
speaker kind gentleman that's
correct that's why they call it
the revolving loan fund speaker
gentle lady thank you and I
think that is structured
beautifully I really like how we
do that the state I I think we
could learn from that and do it
in other places well so Mister
speaker gentle lady why do we
need to come and.
every year.
I mean what more is there some
legislative authority that's
needed every year why we have to
hear this bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman just
allow requires that we get the
the authorization of this of
this body every year.
Especially my understanding is
it's projects that are over one
million dollars is that correct
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
correct.
So much spiritually
perhaps your expert knows what
percentage of our projects not
dollars but projects full bloom
the niece so one million dollar
threshold.
Mr speaker and gentleman
I forgot to introduce my expert
witness who is kind of a star in
New Mexico and it is Marquita
Russel who is the CEO of the
NMFA and about twenty five
percent of all of our projects
fall below that million dollar a
line that they are they too are
included in this pools just so
that you know that
Mr speaker and gentle lady thank
you for that
I'm I'm just.
Areas you know we're approving
projects that are million
dollars or more just kind of how
many projects essentially don't
require our approval that happen
every year
Speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
and kind gentleman
actually every single project
that mixes listed it's in here
these hundred ninety three
listen if you have a copy of the
amendment it just goes on and on
and on and on it's really kind
of a beautiful piece to read
because it includes almost every
corner of our state.
Mr speaker generally thank you
for that very much and I guess I
my last question is spirituality
is.
We have a you know a certain
capacity so many people apply
there are there's a selection
process and then we we end up
with this bill.
What percent or how many other
projects were not selected this
round.
And and how does that work or
these do they need to go through
a second round for approval and
put on a wait list or do they
just have to go look for my for
somewhere else Mr speaker and
gentleman what this this does is
it gives them authority to apply
they have they have put their
the ring and the hand on the put
the ring in the hat that means
they have now have the authority
to apply and then the NMFA works
with them over the course of the
year to help them you know put
that proposal together and make
it clear make bring it to the
body so that they can then get
it approved for funding okay
Mister join thank you for that I
thought I actually did not
understand to help me learn
something tonight so so this
list is authorization for them
to apply and go through the
process this doesn't necessarily
guarantee that they will be
awarded the funding they
requesting Mr speaker and
gentleman that's exactly right
okay thank you Mr delay so than
those who again going back to
the my my pro question those who
do not make it through the
process
are are there many that do not
to do the come back next year or
two we look for some rules for
the funding.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
have a three year authorization
with this list does is give the
three year authorization but
what you should know NMFA works
to help these people on these
entities these small it will
government entities they work
with them so that they they
mostly are funded timing they
find a way to help all of them.
Mr speaker and gentle lady thank
you I I really appreciate you
walking you through this process
just a little time tonight I'm
I'm definitely feel better
educated about this and and
spiritually it's a I measures in
order to be able to carry this
bill for the NMFA and I I just
want to thank you for your work
and for the great work of the
MFA in a way that helps so many
cities and towns and and you
know whatever entities in our
state thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentle lady comes in one.
Thank you Mr speaker is
generally you Mr speaker yes I
finally yield to the gentleman.
From San Juan thank you Mr
speaker and I I really just have
one question
that this house bill forty two
as you could you go and and pull
it up and look at there is a
major re writes of this that
takes place in appropriation
that happens every year as well
but could you explain that
really quick because as I'm
reading it it just seems to be
raised phrases that are changed
and could you explain that.
Mr speaker and gentleman what
happened is there was a hundred
you introduce a qualified this
is also normal in this process
they will put out an early list
and then by the time we get to
this body they they add another
a list of people so that they
can include as many governmental
entities that really need this
money throughout the year.
Thank you Mr chairman and
generally just reiterate what
the Representative Harper and
you were discussing.
People on this list it's not
guaranteed anything that but
just that they're able to apply
for the projects that they've
already pre submitted that are
on these lists correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct thank you Mr speaker
Tina further debate gentle lady
to close.
Mr speaker.
I move that house bill forty two
as amended do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill forty two as amended with
an emergency clause the vote is
now open.
This portion of the vote is
about to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Allison.
I'm sorry Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon is a
yes Representative Anderson.
Presented of Baca.
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash is a yes
Representative Lujan.
Yes Representative been guys yes
representative Cadena.
Yes Representative Cadena is yes
Representative Cook.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes.
Representative Fajardo is yes
one time generally.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
is yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
is yes Representative and non
this.
Yes Representative non this is
yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
yes Representative Johnson.
Representative Lara.
Yes Representative Lara is yes
Representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente is yes
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lundstrom.
Yes Representative Lundstrom is
yes Representative Madrid.
I'm sorry.
Yes Representative Madrid is a
yes Representative Maestas.
Yes Representative Maestas is
yes Representative Ortez.
yes Representative Ortez is yes
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes Representative Pettigrew yes
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio is yes
Representative Serrato.
Representative Serrato yes
representative Thompson
Yeah Representative Thomson is
yes Representative Baca this
Representative Baca is yes.
The vote is now closed revenue
sixty three in the affirmative
zero the negative house bill
forty two as amended has passed
the house with an emergency
clause.
Next we'll go to item eight
gentleman from Bernalillo Santa
are you ready on that item I am
Mr speaker you give me that
point let the record reflect
election necessary for placing
House Bill eighty four on final
passage has been taken the
gentleman to explain the bill Mr
speaker this is an extension of
the work that Representative
Nyberg and I did back in two
thousand nineteen on the crime
reduction requests to set up a
program to evaluate requests as
they go out to
different programs and with that
Mr speaker I will stand for
questions.
There's a gentleman from Chavis
and Lincoln representative
Nibert thank you Mr speaker will
the gentleman from Santa Fe
Bernalillo yield Mister speaker
with pleasure we yield to the
gentleman
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman the first couple
questions a.
I see that this bill expands the
types of things of the the the
requests can be applied for so
my first question would be.
Is a grant in its current form
being fully utilized and and or
is there a
Been a draw down on the on the
funds Mr speaker gentleman the
money has to come out of each
appropriation so this year for
example their appropriations to
a variety of grant
administration agencies in yes
the money is fully being
utilized.
But I'm glad to hear that
because there's you know as you
indicated we if we really
thought that this would enhance
some of the things that could be
done with respect to law
enforcement and trying to get
the some services that weren't
currently being funded
looking at the
The condition specifically on
page two lines nineteen through
twenty one I see their
recruitment and retention of law
enforcement officers and I
question Mr speaker and
gentleman we we've I always
heard other legislation coming
through this body and how would
these requests be associated
with say the the bill that
would.
Allow the departments to give
those I you're.
increases in pay or bonuses as I
would call and maybe some of the
other provisions that we've done
to enhance the.
Compensation of law enforcement
Mr speaker and gentleman there
are programs within the budget
to do this but it's very
specific it has to go through
the criminal justice
coordinating council some of the
local bodies that are retired
justice Knockmore set up some
years ago and so those have been
working around the state and if
they apply for the that's where
the money is coming from and
that's where it's more Mr
speaker and gentleman my last
question is regarding the
criminal justice coordinating
council that you just mentioned
that is an ongoing existing
council that that has been in
existence for some time and to
do try to explain what it does
and what its
Our view is Mr speaker and
gentleman these are thirteen
different coordinating councils
around the state that were set
up by the local communities to
have what they felt with the
necessary participants to the
criminal justice system so
they're different in every
county in the basically Strack
and not County they basically
track the thirteen judicial
districts and so it depends but
they basically track your
prosecutors courts public
defenders behavioral health
specialists correction officers
don't have to be that way but
every county gets to choose kind
of who they want on their
coordinating councils.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for answering those
questions I'm pleased to hear
that maybe something we've done
has been a success and that the
judicial districts are finding
this to be an asset that they
can utilize to provide these
expanded services and where as
we expanded further I hope they
continue to find that this is a
positive effect not only on the
judicial district but the entire
communities in which they
operate in thank you Mr speaker
thank the gentleman senior
further debate gentleman to
close I now move that house bill
eighty four do now pass we are
final passage of house bill
eighty four the vote is now
open.
This portion of it is about to
close.
The members without a recorded
vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon is yes
Representative Anderson.
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash is yes
Representative bone prop.
Yes Representative boom guys yes
representative Cadena.
Yes Representative Cadena is yes
Representative Cook.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Fajardo the yes
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
is yes Representative Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
is yes Representative on this.
Yes Representative are not this
is a yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
is yes Representative Johnson.
Representative Lane.
Yes Representative Johnson
Representative Johnson is yes
Representative lane.
Representative Lara.
Yes.
Representative Lara is a yes
representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente yes
Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis is yes
Representative Lundstrom yes
Representative Lundstrom is yes
Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Rod Montoya.
Yes Representative Rod Montoya
is yes Representative Ortez.
Yes Representative Ortez yes
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes Representative Pettigrew is
yes Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is yes.
Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative of you Rubio
is yes Representative Serrato.
Yes Representative Serrato is
yes Representative Thomson yes
Representative Thomson is yes
Representative lane
Representative lane is yes.
There is a closer to sixty four
in the affirmative zero in the
negative house bill eighty four
is passed the house.
Members this is this is offered
in the way of an announcement so
I'll take the privatization
error to do this during third
reading we're adding two items
to list this evening
at the request of.
The requested leader Townsend we
will add items twenty one.
And twenty five to the list this
evening items twenty one.
And twenty five.
I wanna make sure we're watching
home stays up to watch out of
twenty five because we'll get to
see a debate between the Natori
all.
D. B..
And the.
No tutorial G. A. N..
Mexico nine thirteen.
For the record reflect election
as a service has a fifty seven
as amended on final passage has
been taken.
I want to explain the thank
thank you Mr speaker so house
bill fifty seven as amended the
is the hold harmless for our
public schools and charter
schools transportation funding
so it'll take us back to the
ridership counts from pre
pandemic levels in order to make
sure that all our public schools
and charter schools are fully
funded for their transportation
needs in the upcoming school
year so with that Mr speaker
I'll stand for questions there
is debate the gentleman Clovis
critically results in the and
you.
Thank you Mr speaker
this bill I see the a few years
as the rest of us have would
comment struck we had a we had a
problem we need to figure out
about the school bus the cost of
transportation and from one year
to the next we kind of we don't
know if we're going to be going
on all school year have fiscal
year three quarters of a school
year but the payments on the
buses still keep on running on
and
So while back we agreed to take
the number from two thousand
twenty some of these buses are
owned by the school some of our
own by contractors but we agreed
to take those numbers and
continue to use them each year
until we find of till things
kind of settle down and find a
better method I think this is a
good bill and I stand in full
support of this bill thank you
Mr speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from alliance.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
Speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman.
I sat on the Education Committee
I I do want to highlight some of
the the barriers of that.
so
Mr speaker a gentleman.
so we can go gorgeously the case
highlights and what this is
trying to attempt or a it is a
good trying to address in the
you know as far as of the school
district budget.
Mr speaker and gentleman this is
been at the request of the
school districts that are really
looking for stability so if we
take the pre pandemic numbers we
have a better count in a better
certain count of the ridership
numbers of of students on the
school buses during that time so
it's really providing certainty
because we know what those
numbers are thanking carry them
over to the next school year.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen.
The things of.
Mr speaker gentleman we also
talk about growth because that's
one of the things as a although
that seems like the current
around the state.
Districts have seen an increase
in enrollment in ridership but
how will it be for those
districts who may see have seen
an increase will that be
factored into this this
consideration.
Mr gentleman know that will not
be considered into this.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman
Some of the district does see
increase ridership of bills that
would just basically and then
the from the hands before and
they will not see increased that
that membership of a hundred or
two hundred.
Speaker gentleman yes that's the
case.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman the other question
that I have is regarding on
field positions because one of
the challenges that many
districts have is that we have
not been able to find enough bus
drivers to run all buses which
again is because some of the the
rules to be adjusted until
position now knowing how schools
work on prior year funding.
We do anticipate hopefully that
we are able to fill those
positions how will this this
this bill addresses of Mr
speaker gentleman speaker and
gentleman this will not directly
address it but in house bill to
the base allocation for
transportation has been
increased where would address
these issues.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman I do have one final
questions and this is for some
districts that actually contract
services for the buses of some
districts that do employ their
own school bus drivers.
This have any impact on those
school districts that do not or
that the contract services for
transportation.
Mr speaker and and gentleman we
would treat those contractors as
before so it should stay the
same.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman I do support this bill
I do think that for school
districts that have seen as
decreased ridership the fact
that this bill provides
stability to the operational
budget understand full support.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman sitting there for the
debate gentleman that close
speaker I move that house the
fifty seven as amended do now
pass final passage of house bill
fifty seven as amended the vote
is now open.
This questions was about to
close in the members may remove
their jackets.
Representative Montoya did you
give your best to the same place
that Representative Cook at his.
London Paris Milan read also.
The clerk to call the members of
that are recorded response.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon is a
yes Representative Anderson.
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash yes
Representative bone Kauffman.
Yes Representative um guys yes
representative Cadena.
Yes Representative yes
Representative Cook.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
is yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
is yes Representative on this.
Representative Hernandez is a
yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
yes Representative Lara.
Yes Representative a lot of the
yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente is yes
Representative Lujan yes
Representative Lujan is yes
Representative Lundstrom yes
Representative Lundstrom yes
Representative Madrid.
Representative Ortez.
Yes Representative Ortez is yes
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes Representative Pettigrew the
yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio the yes
Representative Serrato.
Yes Representative Serrato yes
representative Thompson yes
Representative Thomson is yes.
There is a close rival to sixty
five in the affirmative zero
negative house bill fifty seven
as amended has passed the house.
Next we'll go to item six
gentlelady from Bernalillo are
you ready on that item.
Yes Mr speaker for the record
reflect all action necessary for
placing consumer public affairs
committee substitute for house
bill forty six on final passage
has been taken gentlelady to
explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I'm going to introduce a for
substitute but I want to explain
the bill just a little bit
before I do that because the
floor substitute has virtually
no changes in it I have with me
is my experts tonight Larry and
Shane was a consultant who
worked with the commission on
family representation which is a
part of the supreme one of the
supreme courts commissions and
on the phone we have justice
Supreme Court justice Brian is
in order to answer questions and
So what I this will be the first
time in the house as a body has
seen this legislation but it was
on the calendar the final
calendar last year but we just
ran out of time they had made it
through all of its committees
with the then it was votes but
it had a bipartisan but vote on
the Senate floor but it didn't
get to see the light of day here
so what we did this year and
move I will explain to build to.
Is that we had on and identical
bill introduced in the Senate
and the house and Senate bill
went to the Senate Judiciary
Committee and the house floor
substitute reflects the changes
that Senate Judiciary made to
the exact bill that they
produced last year so they
decide
wage and I just did that for
clarity I can explain the
difference between the two.
but I do have Mr speaker house
floor substitute for House
concerned public affairs
committee substitute for house
bill forty six very good has
been passed so would you please
read for us the two oh two
number.
Yes number is two two two five
six eight point one generally is
the substitute now the
gentlelady to explain.
Let me just point out very
quickly what the differences are
and I'll talk about the bill and
where we need it
what the Senate generally
doesn't live is to put the
purpose of legislation into the
bill so in the third section on
the office created in the duties
what they did was take out some
of the aspirational language
like we want to provide high
quality
legal representation they just
said provided legal
representation to develop and
continuously improve practice
models and standards based on
child welfare best practices
they struck all of the
aspirational language there and
then so we don't have that in
that section.
In.
On this section nine the
military L. on the families
representation at mystic
advocacy commission powers and
duties.
it struck out some of the
purposes of the commission and
the office too
We had protect positive outcomes
for families and so forth and
quite frankly those were not
entirely necessary so that's
what the differences between the
bill that came out of Judiciary
and the bill that you see on the
floor tonight.
So.
Let me tell you that in twenty
eighteen the children's court on
improvement commission.
In conjunction with the American
Bar Association.
And our AOC conducted an
assessment on the quality of
representation for children and
parents the assessment found
that we.
Have major challenges inadequate
funding in adequate oversight
and poor attorney retention so
that makes for worse outcomes
for children and families so in
twenty nineteen Senator Lopez
and Representative Jim Trujillo
had Senate Joint Memorial tend
to set up a task force to try to
figure out what to do so we've
been working since twenty
nineteen.
And this is the result.
It will create an office of
family representation advocacy
will strengthen legal
representation were statutorily
required in children's code to
provide children parents
custodians and guardians in
child abuse and neglect cases so
What we intended to ultimately
over time is to.
Have interdisciplinary to table
tables to help address the
conditions that brought the
families into the system.
Help to have social workers
navigators our.
The Supreme this is supported by
the Supreme Court the the
executive branch the troubles
have families department the
children's court improvement
Commission The New Mexico
behavioral health collective the
representative the organization
that is
Advocates for children in foster
care.
Sociais should try to children
in the law and many others so
with that Mr speaker I stand for
questions the gentle lady is the
debate on the floor substitute.
Is there objection to hearing on
house for substitute for House
consumer more public affairs
committee substitute for house
bill forty six is adopted.
Generated would you like for the
comment before we.
Mr speaker is not necessary and
explain the differences there's
debate the gentleman San Juan
Representative lane thank you Mr
speaker Mr speaker for the
record I am not a co sponsor of
this bill.
So just as there debate.
Mr speaker will the general Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo equal you'll.
I yield to the gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so I I I do support
the bill in the concepts.
Mr speaker I I want to ask a few
questions to highlight kind of
wide I see there's a need in our
state especially in rural areas
like where I come from I think
there's a need for for this kind
of a bill and so
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo can you just explain
the way I understand it if this
bill gets signed into law is if
I'm a child and I'm potentially
I'm going to go into the CYFD D.
Custer removal from the home
that this bill creates
essentially a new office that
has.
Professional lawyers that
represent the parents for the
custodians of the guardians.
And a professional lawyer who
also represents a child is that
right.
Mr speaker in the house.
Let me just tell you how it
works right now and then I will
get to that but the idea is that
everyone yes there will be an
office and everyone should get
competent counsel.
So right now the more populated
areas have regular practitioners
in this area I've been doing
this for about eight or nine
years in on.
The thirteenth judicial district
and Valencia County primarily
then Sandoval County and then it
wasn't Cibola county for a few
years as well.
The way the thirteenth does it
is that the attorneys who are in
court appointed program
Representative in one case a
parent responded in another case
a child under the age of
fourteen in another case a use
fourteen and over another case a
grandmother who's the custody
and so the attorneys and I think
it's a good model because you
learn what the perspectives are
of all of the people in the
system but what happens and I
know the gentleman from Chavis
will say
his office they don't maybe they
don't have enough attorneys so
his office so that call then
you'll be appointed as guardian
Adlai item and he said that's
not his area of expertise it
does another kind of law so they
hire someone to go do the job.
For the court but they just pick
attorneys and you can't turn him
down so that's what's happening
now the the thing that happens
now though is that the quality
isn't monitored the court can't
say the judge can't say to the
AOC you know this attorney is
not performing well in my
courtroom.
CYFD can't call out the state
this attorneys not representing
these children very well nobody
can.
Get rid of if you will.
So the idea is to have people
who specialize who works there
but they may not show us to
children or just students or
Chester respondents that's to be
determined.
Mr speaker generally that's it I
think that's helpful background
helpful explanation and so this
this model would then of prior
tries putting really what I
would call specialize Council of
people who have been in this
this space for number of years
because there are some
qualifications in the bills in
the bill for guarding your
experience before you can even
be hired here.
But specifically when
representing children I think
that's vital representing moms
and dads custodians guardians I
think that's vital when you're
looking at possibly being
separated from your kids so I
think it's a good change can you
speak to Mister speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo can you
speak to
if this is going to be house
didn't in one office
Just making sure how we handle
the conflicts of interest issue.
Mister speaker gentleman there's
gonna be more than one office
but there will be just like in a
law firm the the fire wall
between basis because you don't
necessarily have one family all
on the same page the there could
be a mom and a dad who are whose
interests are not aligned and
and the year with a fourteen
year old gets to start telling
his or her own internet here's
what I want and that the so you
could have different adverse
positions.
But it will definitely be
necessary for these offices much
like the law office of the
public defender to hire out
competent counsel to and again
competent counsel because if
they aren't they don't keep
hiring them out to if there's a
conflict that can't be resolved
within the office Mr speaker
gently formerly I appreciate
that I and I think sometimes of
course we understand this idea
of within a law firm economic
conflict in the far all firewall
off off a lawyer I think it's
good for the public to hear that
explanation understand that
there is a process for dealing
with potential conflicts of
interest and and I'll just say
you know I mean the eleventh we
have a lot of good lawyers but I
I don't practice in this area of
law
and I can time I can recall time
early in my career I was tab for
one of these cases and and I
spent a number of hours trying
to research and get up to speed
but I I didn't feel like I was a
good lawyer for that situation
and I understand if that's if we
have no other option is better
to give a child that the lawyer
the no longer at all that makes
sense to me but if we can create
a a model to where.
Moms and dads custodian
guardians and children have
professional experience
representation before we take
the step of trance them out of
custody and to see what I do I
think that's final and so I I
like the concept and I
appreciate that the debate thank
you generating thank you for the
right the gentleman from Chavis
and Lincoln.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county yield Mister speaker I
yield to my colleague.
Mr speaker and Madam chair of
the
I've been dragging my feet for
some time on this and then part
of it was I was initially
concerned that this legislation
did not recognize my overarching
concern which was.
One of the see the words best
centers of the child somewhere
in here and we've gone around
around we won't do that provide.
My my.
My thinking on this as it has
changed over the course of the
last couple days.
Because as I see it now we have
a couple pieces of legislation
before is dealing with abuse and
neglect issues of our children
and and this is one one piece of
legislation the other piece of
legislation is currently in the
judiciary and I think we'll be
heard tomorrow if so my question
is Mr speaker gentle lady.
This piece of legislation can go
hand in hand with that other
piece of legislation cannot.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis absolutely
I know that some folks some of
the comments made about.
The bill I'm caring is that will
it doesn't take care of CYFD.
It doesn't because that's not
its purpose its purpose is to
get high quality representation.
Part of the issues with CYFD is
CYFD really needs for there to
be good attorneys out in the
field so that they can be.
Pushed in the right direction
for the family.
For the best interests of the
child and and restoration of the
family as as often as possible
for placement of children in
safe homes otherwise so
there.
It's kind of I don't know if
it's quite like a three legged
stool like Justice Chavez wants
told us years ago with the
When you're looking at the
judiciary brands but you've got
CYFD.
Maybe it's we're more like for
like a few CYFD then you've got
to have a ray of behavioral
health services then you have to
have good attorneys and you have
to have oversight of CYFD
funding there has to be some
kind of independent oversight I
honestly think that will help
the new secretary this is on
another topic folks but that
will be at fault the new
secretary change the culture.
M. Mr speaker and and madam
chair the thrust of this
legislation is to provide an I'm
gonna use the wrong terminology
but it's the easiest way for me
to think about this this is
basically creating a public
defender's office can abuse and
neglect cases is my thinking on
this someone actors.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
that's a very good description I
think it would be helpful for
people to review it that way.
Mr speaker gentle lady of.
You may have mentioned this but
I'd like to highlight it Mr
speaker and madam chair the
courts not only the Supreme
Court but various courts around
the state are supportive of
this.
Ever because they see the.
Maybe lack of quality of the bar
in connection with these types
of cases and this would allow
people to lawyers to receive not
only training but would allow
them to become somewhat
specialized in these types of
cases what about.
I'm yes Mr speaker and gentleman
and they would be supervised to
and they they would be.
In toward along the way and if
it's just not their Cup of
change they would be.
That they would park from the
office or the budget sent on
their way I have to tell you I
you know I've had judges be.
Really concerned especially when
a guardian Adlai item is not
visiting the children I remember
judge Davis in Santa Fe County.
The much telling internet fear
bordering on malpractice here
this is you can not not go see
this child.
Mr speaker and and madam chair
of the use me as an example and
I'm certainly and one because
over the years.
I get appointed about one time
every nine months or so to
Representative either the child
for one of the parents and.
I have no expertise in this area
of the law I have no expertise
of appearing in front of a judge
so you don't want me in that
role so if like you said a lot
of forms.
In my area contract out with
individual attorneys who take
over that representation and and
they take those cases them and
we end up compensating them for
their work and effort so this
would probably eliminate most of
that activity and you would also
have higher quality
representation for Mr speaker
and gentle lady will the last
question I have is if the
representation of the trial.
The representation of the child
will still be through a contract
guardian Adlai item in most
cases what it not.
Mr speaker and gentleman now
there will be staff that the
office of Family representation
in service guardian Adlai item.
And there will be staff open
services attorneys but as I said
you're going to have to be
careful on your conflicts
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
guess I didn't the tumble to the
to and so within this office for
review it is.
Making those guardian Adlai item
so the children's attorney.
Under the purview of of this
overall scope and they would
receive the training they would
receive the over side and and
all the other things that come
with it yes yes and and Mr
speaker and gentleman I I once
had a client who
Told me that she did she was
long and she told me at one
point that she didn't think the
guardian of light and could pick
her children out of a lineup and
I think that actually turned out
to be true.
But she we did eventually get
them back but the children
wouldn't say a word about what
was going on where they replace
until they were removed from
that home in another foster home
and then she kind of cop to the
fact that the other foster
parents had deceived herself.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
apologize for for dragging my
feet so long but I've come
around and the believe that this
is a legislation with the buds
Fund legislation that we'll
probably see in the upcoming
days can go hand in hand I think
it's a step in the right
direction to try to.
Deal with a very
difficult subject none of us
want to see children abused or
neglected and I'm fortunately
we're having to deal with these
issues more often than we
realize but I think this is a
step in the right direction
thank you madam I thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Thank you.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Valencia.
Thank you Mr speaker whether
kind lady from Bernalillo county
please yield Mister speaker I
yield to the lady from Valencia
thank you Mr speaker thank you
kind lady I just want to rise up
I don't have any questions I
just want to rise up and and
just seven support of this piece
of legislation the somebody
myself who is been dealing with
a lot of these issues in my own
County you madam to madam chair
have had to be in my County
dealing with these issues I have
seen first hand how families who
do not have access to legal
representation sometimes get
left behind Mr speaker kind lady
that says you know there's so
many families that they kind of
lose their voice in the system.
Because of poverty
because of ignorance because
they just don't know how to
handle handle or make their way
through it
and I think this really really
that's going to help the entire
system Mr speaker kind lady so
like I said I don't have any
questions I just wanted wanted
to send support and thank you
for bringing this forward I
think this is going to be a huge
huge asset to the family as they
get stuck in the system and just
really don't know where to go so
thank you Mr speaker
highlighting.
Thank you is for the debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Santa and Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker the
representative please yield yes
Representative on December few
questions for you on page four
it's probably simplistic
question but can you explain to
be online twenty two three
members appointed by the
governor who demonstrated
commitment to high quality legal
representation want to working
with the advocating for the
population served by the office
what it can explain to me what
that means it's section for on
page four.
Section six section six section
six S. page four section six
line twenty two.
Yeah thank you.
I'm surprised Mr speaker and
gentleman that to Senate
Judiciary Committee to fix what.
So what what we have here that
what you would probably have is
individuals perhaps a retired
attorney or of retired appellate
internet or even a retired judge
who might be willing to serve on
the commission and when.
The for the advocates for
example you have folks who are
advocates for
families who
Provide foster care you have
advocates for the they were in
foster care and and those kinds
of individuals.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative just one more
question I know that there was
some I think it's seven point
one hold on one second.
I think it was seven point one
to seven point six million
dollars where is that where's
that money coming from.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
year we don't need an
appropriation there's a court
appointed attorney funded in
that office administrative
office of the courts budget so
this section is presently going
towards contracts with these
internet one second I can't hear
what you're saying.
Okay go ahead thank you I'm hard
of hearing so it's very very
hard when there's other noises
when there's other noises Mr
speaker gentle gentle lady so we
have we will have the money from
the court appointed attorneys
fund from AOC and there's also
funding through the federal
title for the.
Which is it's federal dollars
that goes to CYFD and there will
be a joint powers agreement and
then that's what funds it now
there will be a time in the
future that will probably need
to seek general fund dollars.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative that was the only
questions that had thank you.
Seeing no there's further
regeneration granted although in
Sierra.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentlelady yields Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker internally
in this bill is very familiar
from the last session and I
think yeah even the session
before and and I'm happy to see
the amended language and I think
that the amendments that were
made were appropriate to be made
and have been things that we've
discussed the pass I just stand
to rise and support of the bill
and and think that that this is
a great thing that we're doing
across the state and got the to
bring four thank you.
Say no further debate the gentle
lady to close thank you Mr
speaker with that Brian moves
that house bill let's go again
house for substitute for House
committee.
Public affairs committee
substitute for house bill forty
six do now pass on final passage
of house or substitute for
consumer Public Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill forty six the vote is now
open.
The.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative I'll point is
yes Representative Anderson.
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash is yes
Representative phone call.
Yes Representative Google yes
Representative Cadena.
Yes Representative Cadena is yes
Representative Cook.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
is yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
is yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
is yes Representative Lara.
Yes Representative Lara is a yes
representative Lente yes
Representative Lente yes
Representative Lujan.
Yes Representative Lujan is yes
Representative Lundstrom.
Yes Representative Lundstrom is
yes Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid is yes
Representative Ortez.
Yes Representative Ortez is yes
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes Representative Pettigrew
votes yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes Representative Serrato.
Yes Representative Serrato yes
Representative small.
Representative small both yes
representative Thompson yes
Representative Thomson both yes.
It is closer to sixty five in
the affirmative zero negative.
House for substitute for
consumer and public affairs
committee substitute for house
bill forty six has passed the
house.
Next year on to item number
five.
House joint resolution one who
has that item.
The gentleman from San Juan.
For the record reflect all
action necessary for placing
House joint resolution one as
amended on final passage is been
taken the gentleman to explain
it all.
Thank you Mr chair.
With the health joint resolution
one it proposes a constitutional
amendment allowing an exception
to the state's anti donation
clause for basic infrastructure
projects including internet
energy water waste water
services and other services.
Madam chair of this the COVID
pandemic highlighted the huge
gaps in basic health school
services in New Mexico
particularly in the rural areas
including our nation's tribal
lands in pueblos.
It's time to take action to fix
these inequities.
It
of families in New Mexico still
without basic utilities like in
in the water and electricity.
It is high time that we change
that.
Thanks to broadband internet
the virtual education hurts our
children.
Lack of adequate energy hurts
families trying to cook.
homes.
Lack of water and adequate
wastewater creates health issues
for low income families.
Communities are deprived of the
basic services much of urban and
suburban New Mexico takes for
granted.
Mexico cannot provide for
for federal funding funding four
million for structure projects.
As soon would violate the
state's constitution donation
provision.
This is a major obstacle for
infrastructure investment.
At this time I would like to.
This.
Spencer.
Also my.
This.
Senator thank you co sponsor
from San Juan and gentleman from
San Juan I just want to
underscore for the body that
this bill is a critical addition
to our anti donation clause
exceptions it's in line with
other exceptions that currently
exists in the constitution and
it's very important for the
state's ability to move forward
on ensuring that all of our
residents have essential
infrastructure including access
the heating electricity water
wastewater and internet.
The constitutional amendment
would require appropriate
implementing legislation that
would place safeguards on state
monies and set parameters and
with that I yield the floor back
to my colleague and co sponsor
the gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you madam co sponsor
senator.
The this password resolution
would affect almost everybody
that's going to affect the
majority of the people because I
believe the majority of our
counties have a lot of rural
areas so this would benefit more
than just a few people that's
going to benefit a lot of people
so with that we stand for
questions.
There is debate the gentleman
from Santa Fe County
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentleman from San Juan and the
gentle lady from Los Alamos Rio
Arriba Santa Fe.
In Santa sealed.
Thank you Mr Madam speaker and
had an Sanchez.
So
I.
Voted against this and and
committee and and I think there
are some.
Very serious unintended
consequences of this and speaker
and and Sanchez
I want to just talk through is a
little bit I don't want to
rehash everything that I brought
up in in our committee hearing
but I just want to.
Share with the body why someone
might I know this is a great
because.
Was to this particular solution.
so madam speaker and and
Sanchez.
first I just want to.
Again acknowledge.
That I understand this is a real
problem.
Right I have I have I mentioned
that we are very close from my
friends that live on the the
Alamo.
Preservation of we've been there
we've my my wife is shot a cow
there and been has been given a
Navajo name I mean there's we we
understand right I know that
there are significant needs.
And madam speaker and and and
John from San Juan and gentle
lady from Los Alamos I.
I'm grateful that you are
looking at addressing those
needs so I I just want to again
express my my sincere.
respect for what you are the
problem you're trying to solve.
the madam speaker and Sanchez I
am concerned about this
particular solution.
And the solution that we're
seeing here is going to our
state constitution and amending
the anti donation clause.
and.
Madam speaker and gentleman and
gentle gentle gentle lady.
Right now we have.
Essentially one.
Main.
area with anti donation clause
is an amendment a portion of our
constitution that allows for
investment and this is how we
pay for our local economic
development actor how we how we
constitutionally can have a
local Economic Development Act
we take state dollars.
And use them
for a private.
Your entity right not a state
entity and so
Speaker and gentleman gentle
lady.
We have many protections.
built into the enabling
legislation and I know that
we'll talk about that for a
and what will the be the
protections.
But in that particular instance
in general the state remains the
owner of I would say funds are
used to purchase up up I don't
think.
The state remains and the owner
of that building and then they
listed
there's usually some lease
agreements and all this is done
in contract and so I guess one
of my main questions here and
I'd love to hear your thoughts
madam speaker and and John and
Julie is.
If we are announcing.
With this proposed change for
constitution that the state is
not going to pay for.
Water lines and sewer lines and
broadband.
Who is going to all of those.
Are we giving money to eighteen
anti available and they own it.
Or are we going to own it and
have to maintain it.
And one of the unintended
consequences of that is are we
also need to be only a bunch of
water and sewer lines at the
state level.
Or it doesn't make any sense
that the state should be paying
for those things one this is
really usually the private.
Endeavor that
You know
Thanks for developing this
infrastructure may on and
maintain it that's my first
question.
Madam chairman of one of try
answering a question first and
then I'll refer to my of course
one third of.
By the voters the amendment
would require implement
legislation to ensure that tax
dollars and other public
resources are properly
safeguarded and that the
legislation has appropriate.
Oversight authority so if you'd
go your question of.
Oversight is going to be in the
implementing legislation
supporting whatever is best for.
Madam chair and representative
from San Juan.
I don't think it's necessarily a
fair approximation or comparison
to suggests that the leader
model will necessarily be
followed first second madam
chair and gentleman
there are many ways in which
lead to issues including the
provision of other
infrastructure besides buildings
including things like water
lines
in public rights of way and in
those cases the public entity
owns the water lines or
electrical lines I I've known
traffic lights to be part of a
arrangement as part of a lead
arrangement.
But that's not what we're
talking about necessarily here
this bill madam chair and
gentleman.
Is intended to allow a certain
amount of flexibility to the
state so that they can support.
Mostly individual homes that's
how we envision a.
So that those homes have access
to critical essential
infrastructure and services such
as of things that have been
enumerated.
And in cases where the hook up
is to an individual home in all
likelihood that hook up with if
on the individuals property
would likely be owned by that
individual homeowners.
just as those hook ups are now
owned by individual homeowners
the intent here if if please
from I think I think it's fair
to say that my co sponsoring on
just to focus on.
Disadvantaged areas and
individuals who currently madam
chair and gentleman do not have
access to those critical needs
and I think we all benefit the
entire state minimums speaker
and gentleman.
When everyone has access to
those critical needs and that I
think is the intent of me and my
co sponsor.
Senator and and generally thank
you for your answer and.
let me again say.
I applaud the effort to address
this problem.
My concern is in the solution
right I think there are other
ways that we can address this
problem besides going through
the entitlement shin Clause.
Mr enjoy enjoyment thank you for
that answer I'd hi I agree that
this will probably not be
structured likely to.
but we don't have the enabling
legislation in front of us right
now.
And if we did I think there'd be
lots of concerns because I can't
think of a way to draft the
enabling legislation that
doesn't want to.
I suggest.
Many unintended consequences and
challenges.
So what.
Back up maybe just letting go to
the thirty thousand foot view
just talk about the anti
donation clause in general
so madam speaker and gentleman
gentle lady.
See interrelations laws was put
into our constitution
I don't remember the exact
details
things in the nineteen thirties
or forties who
And many states that drafted
constitutions read
constitutional conventions at
that time and I may be wrong in
the state.
Included in the title nation
clause in their constitution.
And what I've heard is that in
and again I'm I wasn't there
right I heard was that there
were generally two reasons why
states adopted these anti
donation clause is the first.
Was to.
Safeguard the dollars that are
available to the state for the
state's important.
main functions like
K. through twelve education
roads in those things.
To ensure that they were not
used
it for non profits I mean just
what I heard was specifically
the the Catholic Church.
But I mean we've all run into
this we talk about you know
capital outlay or other request
that we do not give state
dollars to nonprofits
And and that makes that makes
sense because these these
dollars have a particular
purpose state government wise
the second I've heard had to do
was rail and making sure that
you know the the state was not
required or or or for being
forced to participate in other
kind of major private endeavors
for so we can press strong armor
or.
provide undue influence so.
Mr Jones only gentle lady I
obviously I don't know if this
is.
The real reason this is what
I've just heard but to me it
goes to again the thirty
thousand foot view why do we
have the on twenty that donation
Clause.
And.
I think there's wisdom in and
why we have it and that is we
know that the dollars that comes
here.
Are you in days of you know
raining dollars they're limited.
And we know that K. to twelve
education.
You know it is is maybe just
finally getting to the point
where it is at a good funding
level maybe but they could
always use more.
And and then higher education we
have those two together that's
two thirds of our state budget
is.
K. twelve and higher education.
And then read Medicaid.
That's about a six of our
budget.
And again a place we see a
significant pressure and needing
to increase the dollars going to
Medicaid the times to track out
education Medicaid or just a
sliver left that we do all the
other functions of government
with.
Is Mr speaker and gentleman
really I understand that.
Your your desire to solve this
problem but I'm just concerned I
mean the fire says this is it's
just a wild guess they're saying
this could be between ten
million two hundred million
dollar recurring annually right
I mean as soon as we start these
programs and you know who knows
who knows who knows what it'll
be but the truth the point is
and the proposed legislation is
that we will start using state
dollars.
For infrastructure projects
targeting residential purposes
and so that's going to take
money away.
That could be used for K.
through twelve the could be used
for Medicaid that could be used
for other state functions.
And so I'm just I have a concern
about that and and I.
No madam.
Speaker and gentleman and gentle
lady that you don't have
concerns that's why you're
carrying this legislation right
to the very Senator that's a
good thing I'm just saying I'm
I'm concerned about that.
In order to stop here.
I've been talking for a lot of
and would like to address that
if not that that's okay but I'll
call pause then Madam speaker
German
first of all Madam speaker and
I've done a fair amount of
reading on the where the anti
donation clause came from highly
recommend an article that was
prepared by a lawyer at the
realty firm that goes through
the history madam chair and and
the gentleman I've never heard
the Catholic Church
theory ever raised in any of the
readings
the madam chair and gentleman it
appears that it arose during the
time of the rear of that is true
in the rare wrote letters making
all kinds of deals with property
owners to gain access the
sentence and so on so forth and
it was a great deal of
corruption at that time.
That is my understanding of the
genesis of the anti donation
clause in an effort here and in
other jurisdictions
With regard to some wild
estimate it's very hard to know
since we have to have no
implementing legislation we as a
body have not developed that
implementing legislation and we
as a body has not have not
developed programs it is we as a
body who will be responsible for
ensuring that the monies are
well spent and will targeted and
wells accounted for and so on so
forth so although I appreciate
Madam said might and the speaker
and gentleman your concerns we
are the body responsible for
sure ensuring that those
concerns which are certainly
legitimate are addressed.
Madam chair.
And then one of.
The anti donation clause was
intended to protect the state
funds from fraud.
Not from legitimate public use.
In the state funds belong to the
residents of New Mexico.
So the public extend expenditure
would serve a public purpose in
the of amendment that we're
working on is the eighth
amendment since the calls since
then to New Mexico as well as of
right now and it will support
one of the most recent most
recent amendments and public
housing for a housing assistance
so this of.
Amendment would support and some
of the previous amendments that
were made.
Yes so
the speaker and and gentle lady
and gentleman thank thank you
for that for that answer I I
just want some notes down on to
contact to the phone to the
roadie Fuhrman and grab that
article so thank you for that
and I'm glad to hear at least
one of the.
The reasons that I've heard you
you you believe this is correct
according to this this article.
and.
Administrator and Angela thank
you for your answers well I
understand these these are
public funds I'm just.
That's why I'm so concerned I
really want to make sure that we
are.
You know all states are feeling
the pressure of K. through
twelve and of Medicaid.
And and if we keep creating more
funds and if we keep.
Setting a state dollars
elsewhere it's going to get even
that much harder to make sure
that we have teachers that are
paid but they should be paid and
the folks who are on Medicaid
that we're able to reimburse
their doctors for the service in
a way that the doctors are
losing money when they're
treating a patient so this is
this is where I'm coming from
we're so my concerns are.
As a leader gentleman gentlelady
the the last thing I'll just
raise the and we talked a little
bit about this during the the
committee hearing but I really
believe that there is another
way to do this.
We have lots of.
Sir Senator clause a
governmental engine agencies
that we've created we have
from like this whole broadband
authority hallways you know the
state you know it's a whole new
state agency essentially that's
been developed.
If we were still able to get
some smart people in rural in
person caps on I think we can
come up with a creative
solution.
Conservatively I think yes this
is a solution but it's it's
almost a solution that is the
most easy.
And it also I think could lead
to great unintended
consequences.
I really do worry that
folks ten fifteen years from now
in our seats will look back and
say dang it I wish we had not
done that for which they had had
done that look at the pickle
we're in right now.
and so
Mr speaker and and gentlemen
journalism obviously this is
going to pass a pass last time
brightest again raising my
concerns that I understand the
problem and I think there are
other solutions to that problem.
And this one I'm I'm very
concerned about but I for this
particular time.
Gentle lady and gentlemen and
and speaker.
There is further the debate the
gentleman from Lee County
Representative Scott.
Gentleman from San Juan.
Madam chair for native sure
rural communities pleasure.
Gentleman have you ever heard.
You for county commission.
The road to my house.
Is already paid for.
Gentleman of.
Madam speaker.
From where I come from no.
The majority of the roads are
still unpaved.
Hey.
What.
I think the whole story speaks
to the horror.
Of the concern that I have
developed trust during the
debate the system to the
gentleman from Santa.
What is.
To the public will for the
public.
And by the public.
To me.
Speaker John gentle lady.
What try to Hansel strollers.
For the greatest group of a
number of people.
First here's my impression was.
Just.
I would be looking at this for
for structure projects.
That would benefit you for
example a town or unnecessary.
Or send larger community and
now.
Our current.
Madam speaker and gentleman
gentle lady that this for
tonight for us to to support.
Infrastructures.
To the virtual House Bill.
But.
And the madam speaker.
I'm gonna answer in this way I
thank you for your question.
It would be individual
households that would receive
the direct benefits.
New Mexico would benefit the
faculty through better health
outcomes.
Education outcomes.
Economic opportunity.
Students would be able to do
research and participate in
remote learning.
Individuals could access
telehealth to be more likely to
get health care before it
becomes a crisis.
NASA costs and burdens on
emergency rooms.
Finally access to the internet
allows people to work from home
for start an online business so
I think that is a in the right
the answer to your question.
Mr speaker and gentleman of I
the supplement
miss madam speaker and gentleman
from Lee this this bill was
heard last year and I recall
this conversation last year and
I think it was very clear last
year what the intent of the bill
was in the bill continues to
have the intent and yes at that
time we indicated it could
programs could be developed to
ensure that those in need had
access to these critical
services and that continues to
be the purpose of this
amendment I would note also
Madam speaker and gentleman that
other states with similar anti
donation clause have had those
clauses interpreted to mean that
so long as
expenditure of state monies
serves a public purpose which
certainly this does in light of
the fact that we have so many
residents in need of these
services it would be
constitutional our courts have
chosen not to interpret it that
way there for the legislature
Madam speaker and gentleman must
intercede so that we can move
the state forward in the and the
ways I think we all share
everyone deserves a right to
water electricity and and now if
these days internet services.
German chancellor I appreciate
all.
Certainly appreciate the COVID.
And recognize the need to.
The state.
Madam speaker gentle lady
gentleman.
Does.
Project.
Well.
The state apparatus Madam
speaker gentle lady Joan is
designed to develop broad brush
policies provision implemented.
By agencies have a difficult to
move on monitoring.
Project.
I see.
This.
Significant risks
of politically directed.
To.
Will committed individuals.
I don't see the state having the
ability to appropriately
oversee.
Regardless of what the enabling
legislation we may be able to
come up with here.
Could you address those
concerns.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
We had the state has many first
of all
with that first of all the
implementing legislation will
structure the program I want to
ensure we all understand that I.
You have suggested that the
state would be.
Constructing.
The service these the
infrastructure to support the
services that I hear that
statement correctly and Madam
speaker and gentleman is that
what you're implying.
Madam speaker gentle lady no one
was small I just saw was more
concerned with the oversight
that would be associated with
granting money down to the
individual household level and
help clearly I believe the state
would be able to manage that.
Madam speaker and gentleman the
state implements all sorts of
programs that require oversight
and I suppose we could discuss
how well those programs work I
think many of them do Madam
speaker we have a number of of
programs to support housing and
other sorts of things and
certainly we would structure the
programs to ensure that there
are safeguards in place as the
constitutional amendment
requires.
Gentleman Jim lady with the.
The fundamental difference of
opinion here in the call for
those of being able to from the
state level manage these very
small infrastructure projects
and while I do appreciate the
intent I do think that this is
a misguided mechanism thank you
madam speaker thank you
gentlelady German for your
answers.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln Representative fiber.
Thank you madam chair our madam
speaker will the gentleman from
San Juan and the gentle lady
from Los Alamos field.
The gentleman.
Thank you
madam speaker and and gentleman
the.
I just wanna make sure we one
thing that this bills intended
the only pay for infrastructure
putting in the infrastructure
aspects is that it's a factor
read all my part.
Speaker I want to live by a co
sponsor answer that Madam
speaker and gentleman I think
that is the primary intent of of
the.
The proposed amendment and I
expect that the implementing
legislation will be focused
primarily on that purpose.
you madam speaker and gentle
lady the reason why I ask the
question is we see the word
essential services and services
usually connotes.
Ongoing expenses.
One would pay to a water utility
company or to an internet
provider or to other providers
of the very services that I
think you're intending to be
able to supply to the residents
and so a yes I was wanting to
make sure the when we see.
Services the.
We're not asking the state
taxpayers to pay for services
that other taxpayers are paying
themselves for monthly payments
for whatever services are are
provided so could you help me
with the the Madam speaker and
gentle lady.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
This proposed constitutional
amendment requires nothing other
than implementing legislation
designed to achieve the goals of
the proposal.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
the goals of the proposals to
provide essential services and I
just want to make sure that
services done.
Encompass those monthly.
Nearly whatever the the payment
the provisions are for the
actual subscriptions but that
we're really talking about the
infrastructure.
Madam speaker of German.
It's saying that that could be
spelled out in the employment in
this legislation.
So madam speaker and gentleman.
A guess what you're telling me
is that it's going to be flushed
out in the implementing
legislation and that this
authorizing legislation overcome
the anti donation clause could
be broader than maybe what I was
reading and so that answers my
question Madam speaker and
gentleman gentle lady
to have a difficult time with
this legislation thank you.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
county Representative dela Cruz.
Thank you madam speaker to the
gentleman from San Juan you.
I yield to my neighbor Madam
thank you madam speaker is a
former county commissioner and a
former director of parks
recreation unfortunately too too
often have to deal with the anti
donation clause.
And actually got to know more
about the anti donation clause
and ever wanted.
It was established to stop the
corrupt efforts of the railroad
it's as simple as that was as
simple as not giving away the
people's land for its resources
for business interests or worse
to bribe elected officials.
Well referenced affected over
the county commissioner abortion
recreation for reason because
ultimately almost everything and
anything can be construed as a
donation from the government to
some one.
Good morning the fact that it is
for the whole from reason.
The north end of fact that is
something to better the lives of
the citizenry.
Will benefit and by the way the
citizenry is often the most
needy.
So the district I served.
From the department that Iran
had some of the most.
And impoverished people that
absolutely benefited from the
fact.
The county government in my case
for city government was able to
help them and all this is going
to solve a little ridiculous but
it's a fact.
Elements of our community.
Government complaining because
we brought our kids a bag of
popcorn.
And that was a one time
donation.
More kid a slice of pizza for a
soda pop.
That could be construed as anti
donation so we have to be
careful when we talk about the
anti donation and forget.
The real intent was because if
you think about it.
Almost anything and everything
can be looked at through that
lens.
I will keep the short.
Gentleman.
And madam speaker.
But I asked the body to take
that into consideration.
That they understand the intent.
Of the original.
Laws inserted into the
constitution of New Mexico thank
you madam chair thank you John.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Rio Arriba
Santa Fe and Taos County.
Center.
Thank you Madam speaker will the
kind gentleman kind lady from
the San Juan Los Alamos here.
The gentle lady.
I thank you madam speaker
Most states don't have an anti
donation clause safe if you look
at the history with the state's
formed in the early nineteen
hundreds when the robber barons
really came through building
railroads that and that enacted
these because it because the
situation was just out of
control they would come into
communities they would buy up
all the land they'd come in and
they'd really kinda.
Right the right the community of
all their of all their positions
I mean it was a huge problem it
was a huge problem and and and I
have seen this body twist
themselves into pretzels over
this anti no donation because
time and time again I would go
much further I mean Chris I mean
Representative Chandler and I
have had long discussions about
this many states don't have an
anti donation clause at all and
they can be more creative really
in the funding they provide for
their citizens and the and we
ran again we ran into this when
we're all working on the
broadband legislation last year
Representative that with the
kind lady from our Alamos talk
about just that situation we're
working on broadband trying to
get it to the poorest
communities in our state and
this is what we ran into would
you explain that kind lady
madam chair and gentle lady from
Rio re but yes definitely I'm
I'm glad you asked that
question.
So while of the group of us
house representatives we're
working this issue the broadband
issue madam chair we would
frequently talk to the broadband
office in the department of do
it and we would say could you do
thus and such to support
children in need of internet
service during the COVID crisis
and they would say we have been
advised madam chair and and
gentle lady that we cannot
expend state monies to support
hook ups to internet hook ups to
help rural children have any who
need to because of the anti
donation clause so instead we
allowed our children to hang out
at McDonald's and outside a
Starbucks and in the public
libraries and in their cars
close to an internet service
area to get internet service
when had we not had the barrier
of the anti donation clause of
the state could have assisted
local governments and and
providing that service quickly
critically and I would point out
there's been discussion about
educate us our duty to provide a
strong education to our children
I think we all accept that as
our State studi well critical to
that these days madam speaker
and gentle lady is the provision
of internet service it's
critical you can't do to child
any longer without strong
internet service in the schools
as well as in their homes they
need to do their homework madam
chair and gentle lady so that
was one thing that we constantly
and regularly heard about from
the I. T. department of the
state.
We also heard that I'm full of
speaker and gentle lady from the
department of transportation.
there are large loss of area in
the state that have
for access to internet service
and the providers would lie to
be able to get access to DOT
rights of way.
poles towers and other things
and we were frequently told that
the department of transportation
had to pick to head the charge.
What turned out to be exorbitant
prices to have a to allow access
because of the anti donation
clause and we had many
discussions with of the
secretary of DOTD about how
first of all we felt that was an
appropriate interpretation
stand eve a and as a result we
felt we needs clarify for that
for him so there were a number
of instances where the state
itself was telling us the anti
donation clause prohibited them
doing more to support our
children and families and rural
communities Madam speaker and
gentle lady.
Madam speaker and kind gentleman
kind ladies so I see this as an
opportunity for the state to
really serve it's citizens and
and and really.
productive ways with
infrastructure that we so
desperately need in rural New
Mexico and we talk about this
rural urban divide it really how
do you create infrastructure.
Infrastructure when you're when
you're banging against the anti
donation clause all the time we
do talk about the fact that you
think this will have on water
and wastewater system.
Madam speaker gentleman
there are many communities and
many.
Households in the state.
In urban areas but in most
particularly in rural areas
where septic systems are
failing.
And the individuals involved
don't have the ability to afford
the hook ups to the public sewer
systems for example
I can think of an example where
a representative from Los crucis
not a rural area but nonetheless
contacted me and asked me about
how this would import explained
the problem that they had in
terms of transferring people who
are living with septic systems
and creating problems for their
groundwater you know and if you
know their system for failing
and creating issues for an
entire neighborhood and.
How could the city support them
getting connected to the to the
septic system in there the
wastewater system and as a
barrier there's a barrier in the
anti donation clause because it
exists from this for the city
providing direct support to
allow those hook ups to occur
and I think we can agree madam
speaker and gentle lady that
does not serve the community
this bill will less let allow us
not only to serve individuals of
course that will happen
individuals who need to but by
doing so it serves our larger
public goals and our larger
public policy Madam speaker and
gentle lady.
Speaker gentle lady gentleman
Armstrong and I stand in strong
support of this legislation
thank.
Madam speaker
I think the.
Revenues for speaking up and.
As Mexico we say that were.
Number very high number number
forty nine of fifty sometimes
in.
Talk about.
One of the.
To be number one.
With what we're asking here and
let's try.
From number one.
Ask Miss Vigil per year at
times.
The printer with let us walk in
the.
Representative implement this.
Resolution.
Sentence that for us.
Instance novel.
Individually.
What is working.
As a.
Mexico.
Thank you madam speaker.
The gentleman from Chavis Eddy
and Otero counties.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady and gentleman please
feel.
From.
This Is Terrel.
Thank you very much Sir
I was reading this and listening
to the debate and.
I was trying to decide in my.
Own mind interpretation what is
an essential service.
Do we have a definition that is.
Do we have a definition
gentleman gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentleman at the
yes indeed we do and it is in in
in the body of the proposed
amendment on lines page six of
line fourteen through seventeen.
Speaker German it reads
essential services means
infrastructure that allows
internet energy water waste
and other similar services as
provided by law.
The lady that made me start
thinking.
If our.
If I issue is.
To get to rural New Mexico.
And.
A lot of these services.
Internet for example may be
found.
Will not be fired line
connections.
They may be the most economical
way may be for example for a
satellite communication.
Which requires no capital or
very little capital.
But will require a monthly fee.
For the services.
Is it your.
The Tripoli for understanding
that these dollars would be used
for ongoing operational fees.
Madam speaker gentleman's.
At the moment I don't have an
expectation because I expect to
be working with colleagues such
as yourself as we develop that
policy and that will be
presented upon enactment of this
This ammendment Madam speaker
and gentleman I would point out
that there is actually hardware
that is associated with
satellite internet service and
certainly that is something I
hope we as a body would consider
supporting as well said the
satellite service type service
take off.
Madam speaker gentle lady and
gentleman
Another thought was will the
right of ways in easements be
held.
For example if that is on hello.
Property issues have described
would those be held in the name
of the state of New Mexico or
who would own the.
Are you thinking about who who
might own these right of ways
and these funds.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
Right now there are many rights
of ways and easements that are
accessible and they're owned by
the entity that their own by
their department of
transportation for example ma'am
Madam speaker and someone own a
tremendous number of rights of
ways
that this amendment would
facilitate access to.
So I think whoever owns the
easement would only easement and
they would be asked if they so
chose to provide access based on
on provisions that we ultimately
implement.
And that I guess is a better
word.
The lady a of the right of ways
and and issues associated with
that are typically defined in
the original documents many of
them are single is single use
documents and don't allow for
multiple uses downstream self I
would.
I would suspect that there's
quite a lot of work to be done
in some cases in order to
facilitate what you're talking
about.
I.
I completely understand and I've
told my colleagues many times
and I've told.
My constituents.
Many times of.
The statistics that
Representative Lundstrom shared
with me one time on her
district.
And it was it was disheartening.
That the lack of infrastructure
so was so widespread.
And it's troubling.
I.
I believe that.
This is so open ended I would
like I I I understand and and
applaud them and appreciate what
you're trying to do the.
The risks associated with.
Infrastructure.
The state might build.
And no.
Might have to maintain.
I half the insurer.
Might have to replace at some
point in time and the the level
of service.
I.
It just needs a lot more
definition I understand what
you're trying to do and I'm not
I'm not arguing that there's a
need out there.
I would tell you that.
I believe many people in
chambers to live have.
Address a concern.
With the.
Lack of specificity.
The the definition.
And I look forward to working.
To for a better product.
And to address the issue that
you're described.
It's troubling to me that.
It's not in this bill thank you
Sir thank you gentle lady.
Madam speaker may I offer you a
response.
Constitutional amendments and
provisions in the state
constitution should be flexible
and.
I well I don't want to say
should be flexible enough to
adjust for the for the changes
in times and needs of the
community and to have
constitutional provisions that
are overly specific madam chair
do not serve the public well
that is why we specify
implementing less legislation as
the key to ensuring that we can
serve our residents and citizens
adequately and I would pull
point out Madam speaker and
gentleman it's not on like the
way we chose to implement our
legal legislation or the
provision that relates to
economic development.
Thank you ladies thank you madam
speaker and gentleman.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Serrato.
Thank you madam speaker with the
gentleman gentlelady yields.
The lady.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you a gentle folks I'm curious
you had mentioned earlier that
you would work with the
department of transportation on
this issue for a bit whether any
other agencies or departments
that you work with on you know
finding solutions to these
issues.
Madam speaker gentleman well I
also mentioned the department of
I. T. it was in the state those
were the two major departments
but certainly cities and
counties are a bumping into
these these kinds of challenges
as well speaker gentle lady.
The gentle lady and it shows
that you work with with a few.
Very smart individuals that are
looking for solutions and I
think that's really important
because amending the
constitution is not a simple
task wrong but we have to pass
it here than get it through the
Senate and then bring it to the
voters for a vote and then go
through the process of
implementing legislation and
then rulemaking I guess not
rulemaking but is that is that
about right this lady.
Madam speaker gentle lady yes.
Thank you gentle lady thank you
madam speaker that in and it
seems like if we could find to a
faster solution or something
that would need to amend our
constitution you know it would
be who those departments to to
think of those things are give
them you know at least some
consideration so I I do I do
want to just acknowledge it
consonants are hard and I don't
think it's anyone's first choice
all when you're looking for
solutions to what's hurting our
communities and I think one
thing I do want to mention madam
speaker and gentle lady is that
many of us can think of
individual examples for we know
if if we could directly serve
our community whether it be in
better access to broadband would
have you would make a difference
any particular want to ask about
rural communities
how do you feel do you feel that
this amendment would make it
more.
Cost effective or more efficient
I guess I should say to bringing
the services to those
households.
Madam speaker gentle lady and
I'll defer to my colleague in a
moment but absolutely
At one of our colleagues from I
think it's Bernalillo county
mentioned how frequently he as a
county commissioner was bumping
into the anti donation clause at
every turn and it it will allow
greater flexibility and
therefore efficiency Madam
speaker.
If if this provision passes our
house the other chamber and then
the voters for sure.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
of.
My answer to that question would
be.
All my nation.
There are a lot of the mobile
homes.
That have been driven over rough
roads to get their to their
final destination.
The state they are still without
electricity or running water.
Just homes.
A sense of taxes in.
Taxes are imposed upon them that
the it's just that there's still
those as.
Roadrunner accommodations or
come.
Opponents.
How are trying to save up for
electricity and water lines so
so.
And so resolution that we're
working on would benefit them
somewhat.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen I I appreciate
that story because I I think we
can agree here madam speaker
there are districts are very
different looking and I
represent the south side of
Santa Fe we have a lot a number
of areas that are the next from
the county it can be axed and my
two years in office each year
I've been able to find some
capital outlay to the city to
provide sewer lines to these the
streets of the house of these
communities because they were
listening to County they didn't
have the city budget that
existed and we're able to make
those unfortunately I can not
help at all in the process of
connecting to the private homes
and the septic tanks are failing
as you mentioned a gentle lady
earlier on the Dona Ana so of
the entirety of the State we're
seeing this happen you know
where they're at where they are
failing and in those recent case
they are having they don't have
the leach fields or the space
for the chills to put a new
septic tanks other between note
all septic tanks were no or
those who relied and so now
we're we will be able to get the
sewer line put it after the
bonds after that whole process
and they'll still need to pay
for you know we were looking at
some numbers to ten thousand
dollars in some cases you know
for that additional connection
to their home to make sure that
they're able to utilize on this
investment in the community and
that's very and and still the
very hungry for because they're
having to you know plus other
septic tanks regularly you know
once a month at this point
because of the stakes are very
old so you know I've seen it in
my district and I did that a
seat that has seen them a bit of
a shift from from role to to
more more urban having that same
impact to you seen it in the
Navajo Nation gentleman madam
speaker yeah we're seeing it
across the state and I just want
to appreciate you guys for this
effort in the last thing I'll
just mention briefly is I've I
did take a peek at some of the
other exceptions to that
situation because we have care
six that shouldn't educational
loans.
We did we talk about a lot
affordable housing a lot of
these are very general and I
think you know what what we're
looking at at these fictional of
buildings that may take
advantage of the system we can
think of thousands of
individuals the use of properly
and that's why I do hope I
appreciate both sponsoring sport
thank you madam chair of speaker
for that's that's that are thank
you.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from grant it
although and Sierra counties
Representative Dow.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentleman yield.
The only.
Thank thank you Mr speaker I
mean Madam speaker and thank you
gentlemen and and it's it's it's
a pretty monumental task to do a
constitutional amendment is
something that we do with could
great consideration would you
agree madam speaker Mr
gentleman.
My co sponsoring through it.
Occur.
Madam speaker gentle lady it is
a difficult task to get a
constitutional amendment.
And and Madam speaker and gentle
lady gentleman who I don't have
my addressing.
Okay then and so at this column
the entire nation because of
something that's come up the six
years that I've been here and it
was a conversation and something
that was dealt with with non
profits across the state
providing services on behalf of
federal populations what's the
first graph defining described
as sick and indigent for for
very long time this is been a
discussion would you agree Madam
speaker and gentle lady.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
agree there is a specific an
indigent provision in the state
constitution.
Madam speaker gentle lady do you
agree that the anti donation
clause in the varies are creates
for the nonprofit serving
communities on behalf of our on
behalf of the state has been a
conversation for awhile.
Madam speaker generally I I
agree that there's been
conversation about.
Of not for profit profits
loaning
a mechanism to get direct
support.
I disagree Madam speaker gentle
lady that there are not
mechanisms for not for profits
to get
public monies.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you gentle lady my
colleague from any county was a
sponsor of bill long before I
came into the house that was
trying to help nonprofits that
provide legal services for
people in the state to to to
address the the anti donation
clause and who's a sponsor that
bill for quite awhile it caught
my attention because I know that
we were trying to build high
quality early childhood programs
of the state long before the
billion dollar investment and
there are states that a eight
non profits that serve a
majority of lowincome children
to have a major other funding
from the government and and who
serve the public without
discrimination to participate in
state benefits of buying into a
state insurance pool in order to
have Act affordable insurance
for these these workers and so
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
can tell you that for many years
year after year after year after
year there is some sort of
version of the bill trying to
address the entire nation
because that's just simply the
fact and so madam speaker
gentleman gentle lady whoever
wants to address it I'm just
wondering knowing the bills that
have been very very very well
bedded in this body and in the
time before why you chose if
we're gonna have a
constitutional limit to keep
that this narrow this is
something new that I haven't
seen before I am aware the DOT
issue and them wanting to charge
of fees for use of right away
for infrastructure so I I'm not
disagreeing that it needs the
address I I agree with you that
they're misinterpreting it but
I'm I'm wondering why we're
keeping it is narrow and not
adding the opportunity for
clarification on what.
Non profits in the state who are
providing services on behalf of
the state serving a majority of
the low income at risk what's
defined as eligible and who are
suppose you are doing this work
on government dollars and who
meets the definition every other
ways why we're not addressing
the barriers they face and help
with.
Purchasing vehicles are
purchasing properties that serve
that benefit the public good or
in accessing funding to provide
legal services or to be able to
buy group insurance why this
narrow.
Madam speaker gentle lady of
I'm a little perplexed because
I've been spending a lot of time
talking about how broad it is
so hi I'm happy to talk to you
about another constitutional
amendment but this is an insult
this is a constitutional
amendment that is focus on
infrastructure.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
it's focused on essential
household services.
In the infrastructure in this is
getting as I read it and then
once I missing something
internet energy water wastewater
and other services to I I'm I'm
in my mind and the like that
last mile or or so so to me it
looks like to residential.
Places is that correct Madam
speaker gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentle lady it has
the potential for doing that
when we as a body determine the
parameters of the purpose of the
state uses to utilize to speak
in support of their residents.
Madam speaker gentle lady so
you're saying that this is just
making the language available
and if we came back we could
appropriate funds are the nodes
no there would be no further
clarification needed on what is
and isn't attendance had
barrier for the entire nation
costs Madam speaker gentle lady
the provision itself says that
implementing legislation is
required before to affect the
purposes of this constitutional
amendment so gentlelady so madam
speaker and gentle lady we go
the constitutional and which
probably won't happen again for
awhile on the anti donation
clause could someone like
Pegasus law services with that
clear up any confusion on
whether they could participate
in in health insurance state
health insurance as a nonprofit
that serves the public good and
receives a majority there
funding from state funds.
Madam speaker gentle lady I will
say again this bill is focus is
focused on.
Essential services as defined in
the amendment so I'm a little
unclear why we're talking about
legal services to indigent since
side not contemplated within the
provision of this bill thank you
madam speaker thank you the lady
I guess my question is having
known and I know you've I have a
little one more term under my
belt and you but this has been
an ongoing issue
why this focus is so narrow and
only on essential highs
household services residential
purposes and creates the
opportunity for just the
internet energy water waste
water.
When the conversation prior to
this year has been around.
How do we give rents how do we
get vehicles how do we get
shared services to the committee
the nonprofit's that's where
that's and I think of the
gentleman from Bernalillo
alluded to this those people who
do governmental worker do
nonprofit work have been
wrestling with interpretation by
program managers and almost
every agency over what
constitutes as the intonation
Clause and they'll say okay well
that's federal dollars are isn't
that state dollars there is and
it's very ambiguous and often
changes based on the
interpretation of who's the
General Services and whose
issuing R. F. P. I'm just
wondering if there was
consideration on addressing the
entire you know once and for all
clarifying what the intended
issue because water would
include and I guess the answer
is no thank you madam speaker.
Seeing no further debate the
gentleman to close.
Thank you madam speaker.
And sure wouldn't want to make a
habit of getting that.
I am bored every time so I'm
hoping to get a green board as
well
Madam speaker I move that has
resolution one as amended now
pass.
We're on
final passage of the house joint
resolution one as amended the
vote is now open.
Electronic to questions about to
close.
The Act chronic portion of the
vote is close to the clerk to
call the members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon votes yes
Representative Anderson.
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative Boca.
Yes Representative will go votes
yes representative Cadena.
Yes Representative then a votes
yes Representative Cook.
Representative Cook votes no
Representative Harry Garcia.
Is.
Representative Harry Garcia both
yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Lara.
This Representative lot of those
yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lujan.
Representative Lujan votes yes
Representative Lundstrom.
As Representative Lundstrom both
yes Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid votes yes
Representative Ortez.
Yes Representative Ortez votes
yes Representative Pettigrew.
No.
Representative Pettigrew votes
no.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana.
Yes Representative Sarinana
votes rest yes Representative
Serrato.
Yes Representative Serrato votes
yes representative Ted off us.
Representative both know
representative Thompson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes.
By a vote of forty three in the
affirmative twenty three in the
negative house joint resolution
one as amended has duly passed.
Is the gentle lady from
Bernalillo county ready on item
number eleven madam chair and
ready will you give me to that
point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill one sixty seven on
final passage has been taken and
that it is now subject to debate
amendment for substitution
gentlelady to explain the bill
thank you madam chair this bill
simply follows in that well
established path by allowing
traps that are able to attract
motor vehicle dealers to the
lands to impose taxes on sales
of those vehicles then would be
credited against the state motor
vehicle excise tax.
Just as isn't done with vehicles
that are pictures out of state
and what that madam speaker I
stand for questions.
Seeing no debate the gentle lady
to close thank you madam chair I
now move that house bill one
sixty seven do now pass.
The question.
Okay.
My apologies the.
Representative from the
gentleman from civil and
McKinley County Representative
Alcon.
Speaker I know you didn't see my
hand in the in the air I'll.
Speaker of the the gentle lady
from Bernalillo you'll the.
Madam speaker I yield.
The.
You.
I'm really curious is this.
Is this legislation.
Forty basically to help Tesla
establish your dealership within
the state of New Mexico.
Madam speaker and gentleman
though it's actually to ensure
that the tribes have the same
advantage as those.
Folks as out of state.
Speaker gentle lady from.
Bernalillo.
Are there any other dealerships
on the liberals are
reservations.
But does a Ford dealership or
Chevrolet dealership anywhere in
the state of New Mexico.
Madam speaker and gentleman no
because right now there's a
double taxation standard that's
M. M. M. it's imposed upon them
but what this bill at all
actually allow them to have the
same advantage as those out of
state dealerships.
And so it's the economic booster
for our state.
So okay.
Sorry madam madam speaker and
gentle lady so you're saying
that.
The dealership remember is not
establishes a dealership in New
Mexico they don't have to pay
the New Mexico state statutes.
Now Mr speaker are seizing Madam
speaker and gentleman that's not
what I'm saying I'm saying that
folks that buy cars in other
states such as taxes get twelve
whereas if folks are to buy a
vehicle on our tribal
reservation they would not so
they would be subject to double
taxation.
Madam speaker and gentle lady if
I go to dances and buy a new car
or used car and I bring that the
New Mexico and Texas I will not
pay for a sales a adminstration.
But.
In New Mexico I will have to
obey the excise tax at motor
vehicle department that is
equivalent to the value of the
fire.
So are you telling me that if I
invite if the.
If I buy a car on the Pueblo
nagas used Land Rover J. or a or
under reservation I will have to
fade but low tax and state tax.
Madam madam speaker at this
point I like to defer to my co
sponsor Representative Harper.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Cibola you're you're asking the
right questions here.
So let me just give you a quick
example so hopefully this will
make it crystal but let me know
if.
This doesn't I'm happy to
elaborate more right now if I
bought a car.
In in the state Arizona.
And I paid I took delivery of
the car owner is on a so I have
to pay their state excise tax
and let's see the excise tax
there is five percent.
I then bring that card New
Mexico and register at.
I would have to if we don't have
this tax cut in place I would
have to pay the four percent
excise tax in New Mexico as well
so would be double taxation but
in the state of New Mexico we
have a credit.
For the motor vehicle excise tax
you've paid in a different state
and so I would not have to pay
that four percent in New Mexico
because I got a credit for the
five percent I rate in Arizona.
Now let's let's give a different
example let's say I bought it in
in a different state and and the
and the tax was three percent if
I took delivery in that state I
would have to pay the three
percent of their and I drove it
to New Mexico and register here
I would get a credit for the
three percent but I still have
to pay the extra one percent to
bring up to a total of four
percent here in New Mexico
that's how it works right now
Mr speaker and gentleman from
single of what this bill does is
it allows the problems in the
tribes to also have that same
benefit that we provide if you
buy a vehicle in another state
right now if we can pass this
legislation you have to pay the
motor vehicle excise tax on the
Pueblo and then when you
registered in New Mexico it also
additionally have to pay the
motor vehicle excise tax here so
the the double taxation.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman from.
Both the.
Sanchez I'm already here because
letter understanding.
Is that if.
You want to go here in New
Mexico.
And you live in Colorado.
You will not pay the tax on that
car unmet legal here in New
Mexico.
But you will be the tax would be
taken to Colorado or whatever
states that do.
That that that you register it
is so Mister speaker rob yes.
simple it depends we take
delivery and first to use of the
vehicle so what let's say I
purchase a vehicle from Florida
and it's shipped to me here.
Then the delivery is here in New
Mexico and my first use of it is
here in New Mexico so I only pay
New Mexico excise tax not
Florida excise tax depends on
where you take delivery and
first use.
Okay.
Thank you.
Thank you both Sanchez madam
speaker I am not happy I am
worried about this legislation I
just think it's civil war over
the can of worms that's going to
hurt our local dealerships they
lots of taxes here in the state
of New Mexico so it does worry
me thank you Tino gentle lady to
close.
Thank you Mr speaker I just want
to mention that the New Mexico
automotive dealers supports this
bill and with that I do I asked
that house bill one sixty seven
do now pass.
Let's revel in castor votes
there are final passage of house
bill one sixty seven the vote is
now open.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
So.
Representative Alcon votes no
Representative Anderson.
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative black.
Representative bunga.
Yes Representative been gobbled
yes Representative Cadena.
Yes Representative then a votes
yes Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook folks
yes Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Lara.
Yes Representative lot of votes
yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente both
yes Representative Lujan.
Yes Representative Lujan both
yes Representative Lundstrom.
Yes Representative Lundstrom
both yes Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid votes yes
Representative Ortez.
Yes Representative Ortez both
yes Representative Pettigrew.
Yes Representative Pettigrew
votes yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana.
Yes Representative Sarinana
votes yes Representative
Serrato.
Yes Representative Serrato votes
yes Representative cut off us.
Yes Representative also votes
yes Representative Thomson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes.
Was was very vote of sixty four
in the affirmative one in the
negative house bill one six
seven has passed the house.
another item eighteen and
gentleman from Bernalillo are
you ready on house bill one
twelve.
Items that are point.
But the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill one twelve as amended
with an emergency clause on
final passage has been taken the
gentleman to explain the bill.
Speaker house bill one twelve as
amended.
It's an appropriation of nine
hundred seventeen thousand eight
hundred dollars from the
attorney general's consumer
settlement fund to fund the
improvement and renovation of an
existing facility or the
expansion of an integrated
substance use disorder program
is the most Egolf for the last
two years I have coordinated
with the attorney general's
office unidentified quality
substance use disorder projects
for funding from the AG's
consumer settlement fund which
is starting to be enraged by
settlement monies from opioid
manufacturers for their over
perspiration of opioids in
particular phenomenon secon
these over prescription this
over prescription as that to
tens of thousands of overdose
deaths throughout the US see
more speaker the AGS focusing
the use of these funds to opioid
and substance use treatment
abatement and request and
recovery projects in our state
the AG is intending to
disseminate the settlement funds
for viable in quality projects
on a fifty fifty ratio fifty
percent going to local
governments and fifty percent
going to the legislature
smallest speaker house bill
twelve diverse consumer
settlement funds to a state of
the art integrated substance use
disorder program under the
auspices of in central family
health with the hub anchored in
the spending us and serving a
seven county region in northern
in northeast New Mexico
encompassing twenty community
health clinics speaker the
renovation of the M. D. facility
next to the existing that sense
of family health clinic.
House Bill unique trauma
informed in response of
substance abuse department of
the central providing an
integrative program allowing
behavioral health services care
coordination your support
specialist nursing pharmacy
medical providers and promote
thought us.
All under one roof.
It's not speaker the programming
for this and integrated system
is funded by the federal by a
federal grant with that I stand
for questions.
There is no debate the gentleman
to close yes.
Don't I have to sit down in
front of the church say it's
nice to be back to being us to
model.
Thank you.
As the chair of the land of land
didn't get debate estimates
speaker.
The amount of speaker I do now
move that house bill one twelve
as amended with the emergency
clause do not fancy are on final
passage of house or one twelve
as amended with an emergency
clause the vote is now open.
The clerk to call the members
who had a recorded vote
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative Anderson.
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative Buka.
Yes Representative will go vote
yes Representative Cadena.
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook votes
yes Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
both yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Lara.
Yes Representative a lot of
votes yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lujan.
Representative Lundstrom.
Yes Representative Lundstrom
both yes Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid votes yes
Representative Ortez.
Yes Representative Ortez votes
yes Representative Pettigrew.
Yes Representative Pettigrew
votes yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana.
Yes Representative Sarinana
votes yes Representative
Serrato.
Yes Representative Serrato votes
yes Representative off of.
Yes Representative office votes
yes representative Thompson.
S. Representative Thomson votes
yes.
Once both yes and Representative
Lujan votes yes.
Those are close by a vote of
sixty six in the affirmative
zero in the negative house bill
one twelve as amended has passed
the house with an emergency
clause.
Next we'll go to item eight
gently Committee are you ready
on that item.
Thank you Mr sorry I I wrote
eight I wrote eight next item
twenty one Z. eight item
apologize for more item twenty
one gentle lady are you ready
and I don't yes Mr speaker would
you give me to that point for
the record reflect all action
necessary for placing House Bill
one to four as amended on final
passage has been taken the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of the house this is I believe
the finale of the night it it
house of house floor amendment
which I believe has been passed
out the two oh two number is
point two two two two five nine
eight point one.
Has been passed out gentlelady
to move in explain the
amendment.
Mr speaker I I do move this
amendment what it does is kind
of a technical fix on an
imminent we did and house
appropriations and finance
committee
so step one of the amendment is
to strike of the house
Appropriations amendment.
and then to basically put it
back in with with more
technically accurate language so
it's for basically doing we
struck a section four of the
bill but we should've actually
cited the the line numbers so
that's what this ammendment does
okay Is there debate on the
amendment or objection to it
hearing on house floor amendment
number one to house bill one
fourteen is amended is adopted.
Thank you Mr speaker so no
debate.
Unless you like to.
Mr speaker I think I owe it to
the body into you to let you
know that house bill one twenty
four is amended would add one
additional district judge in the
fifth judicial district and one
additional judge in the
thirteenth this bill is endorsed
by the courts corrections and
justice committee.
Okay seeing no debate someone is
messing with us.
I'm looking at you generally for
Santa Fe okay seeing no debate
gentle lady to close thank you
Mr speaker I move that house
bill one twenty four is amended
do now pass the house we are
final passage of house bill one
two four as Thrace amended the
vote is now open.
This portion of the road is
about to close.
Members without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative Anderson.
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative Blanco.
Yes Representative will go both
yes representative Cadena.
Yes Representative then of votes
yes Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook both yes
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Lara.
Yes Representative a lot of
votes yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lujan.
Yes Representative Lujan both
yes Representative Lundstrom.
Yes Representative Lundstrom
votes yes Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid votes yes
Representative Maestas.
Yes Representative Maestas votes
yes Representative Ortez.
Yes Representative Ortez votes
yes Representative Pettigrew.
Yes Representative Pettigrew
both yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana.
Yes Representative Sarinana
votes yes Representative
Serrato.
Yes Representative Serrato votes
yes Representative small.
Representative small both yes
representative Thompson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes.
Representative close by a vote
of sixty six and affirmative
zero negative house bill one two
four as thrice amended has
passed the house.
Last one.
The night.
The gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln Representative need
more.
Mr speaker let the record
reflect that all action for
placing house bill one eighty on
final passage has been taken and
that it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
German to explain Mr speaker the
to line bill within an emergency
clause for your delete section
fourteen to fourteen may this
twenty nine from the statute I
now move that house bill one
eighty do now pass.
Say no debate.
Channeling to close.
You just did.
Well you have to like say
there's no debate first you
know.
And Rauner hurry.
generally viewed Jared sure you.
Okay we are final passage of
house bill one two six the vote
is now open.
If there's a problem with the
number it wasn't me.
The gentleman here the minutes
of the bill number.
Twenty
one.
That's what happens when I led
the Representative Chavis and
Lincoln do the procedural part.
Okay we are
this is the one eighty zero.
Okay.
Now.
Let the record reflect election
just a fancy house bill one
eighty with Edwards Clause on
final passage as we take a
gentleman's explained the bill
general's move force passage.
We are final passage has a one
eighty as amended with an
emergency clause the vote is now
open.
Representative Baca that way.
The other brand.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Was that a yes.
Yes Representative Alcon vote
yes Representative Anderson.
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative Buka.
Yes Representative will go both
yes Representative Cadena.
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Cook.
Is there.
Representative Cook votes yes
Representative Gallegos.
Representative Gallegos both yes
Representative Harry Garcia.
Is Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Lara.
Yes Representative a lot of
those yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente both
yes Representative Lujan.
Representative Lujan votes no
Representative Lundstrom.
Yes the Representative Lundstrom
both yes.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative Madrid votes yes
Representative Maestas yes
Representative Maestas votes yes
Representative Ortez.
Yes Representative of our yes
votes yes Representative
Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew votes
yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero.
Representative G. Andrés Romero
votes yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana.
Yes representative Sarinana
votes yes Representative
Serrato.
Yes Representative Serrato votes
yes representative Thompson yes
Representative Thomson votes yes
Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo
votes yes.
The vote is enclosed by a vote
of sixty five in the affirmative
one in the negative house bill
one eighty has passed the house
with an emergency clause
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move we
go to the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business hearing objections
order hi three bills with the at
the request of sponsor I am
removing from third reading and
placing them on the speakers
table.
House bill ninety two as amended
item fourteen Representative
Hochman Vigil.
House bill ninety two as
amended.
Hi order removed from third
reading and placed on the
speakers table hearing objection
it is so ordered.
House bill ninety four as
amended item twenty nine.
Has a ninety fourth amended item
twenty nine over removed from
third reading and placed on the
speakers table hearing
objections ordered.
Yes the one fifty seven removed
from the speakers from the third
meeting calendar and placed on
the speakers table hearing no
objection it is so ordered.
To just for the journal clerks
that were.
We had a house built.
Ninety two.
Ninety four and one five seven.
Are there announcements.
Really okay chairman Romero
thank you Mr career has occasion
committee will meet tomorrow
morning at eight thirty seven
eight thirty house education all
members there is a different
link for the zoom since for
having a Saturday session so
different link tomorrow the
committee assistance will be
sending out the link early in
the morning so use the link you
get your email tomorrow an hour
before our meeting so has
education eight thirty thank you
and for the public it's still
the link on the agenda chairman.
Mr speaker it will be on the
agenda the link for the public
will be correct it's just a
different link for panelists for
the members of the committee
thank you Mr thank you are there
further announcements the gentle
lady from Los Alamos our women
Chandler thank you Mr speaker
just a reminder that house
taxation revenue will meet at
eight thirty tomorrow and also
we will have a Saturday meeting
at ten A. M. to discuss the G.
O. O. bond bill.
Members take note are there
further ounces the gentle lady
from Bernalillo chairwoman Lewis
thank you Mr speaker of the
house governmental actions and
Indian Affairs Committee will
meet tomorrow at eight thirty AM
but we will not meet on
Saturday.
Members take note the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Are there other announcements
the speaker the gentleman
someone yes Mr speaker I was
just gonna say I notice the face
aware of the majority floor
leader and the quit but I just
wanted to compliment them on
their attire.
Gentleman you know this is Gerry
archives on the web.
Let's not make it that easy okay
on the generals were Leo
Representative Thomson.
Thank you Mr speaker will have
house health and Human Services
tomorrow's beginning at eight
thirty but we will not need to
meet on Saturday thank you.
Speaker.
Speaker I don't know a brand
benefited but he's got a
facemask.
Percent Baca be fair please.
Are there any other
announcements.
The gentleman from Bernalillo so
again these are the one of the
ones here Representative Harry
Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The representative of Gordon
myself had some conversation
today about the potato chips and
we decided we're gonna bring
jobs for the most important
people this house which is the
staff these people everybody in
this helpful get back up to the
jobs thank you Mr.
Right across.
The general areas of my
acceptance of a new position in
the house of a deputy
superintendent of maintenance.
You'll get two bags.
The is worth it the general for
the gentle lady from Rio Arriba
sentiment task chairwoman at at
us Mr speaker do you have an
idea that we can schedule at
this point.
We will have we will certainly
the meeting both days and
Committees will be meeting I I'm
I know we've got committees will
meet in the morning on Saturday
I don't know I committee's
meeting on Sunday I know it's
the Super Bowl but we have work
to do here so we will put the
game on a lounge the plan and
pleased to be here.
Until this hour or later and if
there's an update on for every
night for the rest the session.
Okay we have had some
conversations earlier today they
were productive between floor
leadership so that maybe repeat
I may not I just can't say if
it's it's safer for us all to
it's safer for all of us to plan
to be here and if we end up
having an early night is a
surprise and that'll be a
pleasant surprise.
Are there any other
announcements.
The gentle lady from Valencia.
Mr speaker if you realize we've
actually created quite a
following with our end of the
line jokes and so Mister speaker
this joke actually comes from a
daughter of one of the lobbyist.
Please share Mr speaker what do
you call a guy a with the rubber
total.
The original anyone Roberto.
That's pretty good.
Where gentlelady you should
renounce the body that we're
finalizing our schedules to for
first appearance on Fallon.
Is that secret still I thought
that was so secret Mr speaker
right the you as the leaders of
the point of order.
Who's speaking.
I think that I for for the.
We have repeated the generally
from Lansing I appeared to be
Fallin
Joel.
Gentlelady to review the job.
Mr speaker we all know it
doesn't work that way if you
miss it you miss.
The.
Okay members thank you for today
work will be back here tomorrow
tomorrow is our statutory day
African American day in the
state house so please be aware
of that.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
reassess until eleven o'clock
tomorrow morning thank you
everyone I'll see you back here
in eleven hours fifty nine
minutes thank you for your days
were enjoy the rest of the
evening be safe see you tomorrow
the house is in recess until
eleven AM.
