Madam chair for our present.
I have a five year performance.
Right she we go through and
introduced ourselves
representative Klay
Representative Thomson.
I'm sorry you're talking okay
madam chair and.
I'm Representative Liz Thomson
house district twenty four north
these types of Albuquerque and
now I have previously chaired
this committee it had that the
rings off to Representative
Ferrary so now I can just sit
back and listen thank you madam
chair.
Thank you I'm Representative
Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew from
house district sixty one which
is the southeast part of the
state Lea County Wellington
opportunists in jail.
Thank you Representative Lord.
Representative more here
district twenty two and my
computer right thank you.
I'm glad you were able to work
it out vice chair Romero.
Thank you madam chair I think
she said it hate Sir I hope that
that you get that for us
we don't like you know the
machinery hitting us I'm
Representative Andrea Romero
from northern Santa Fe County
from the City of Santa Fe
through the Pojoaque valley into
the city of Espanola thank you
madam chair.
Thank you and I'm House Joanne
Ferrary house district thirty
seven which is kind of the east
side of Los crucis Kevin or
these types of Los crucis so
glad to be here thank you and
we're going to start of with our
first bill
Representative outcome house
memorial twenty four.
Develop a plan optimal dogs and
cats.
Okay let's do this I was asked
by
Representative our house leader
Martinez if you could do house
bill fifty six so let's go ahead
and do you see him in the
audience.
Yes madam chair okay let's
elevate him and do house bill
fifty six temporary that Neri
permits.
Madam chair C. Representative
Anderson in the attendees I
don't know if he's the sponsor.
No he's for our house bill one
twenty three as far as I know.
Is this Representative Martinez
okay okay great.
Okay your wish has come true
Representative our house
majority Martinez we can provide
Representative outcomes so
you'll go ahead and present your
bill.
House bill fifty six thank you
madam chair I appreciate members
of the committee I do have an
expert I think in the audience
Dr Carol Bradford please if you
can and make them.
All right I think we're all set
madam chair and members of the
committee thank you all for the
time today.
House bill fifty six mins
veterinary practice act and
allows for the issuance of the
six month temporary permits to
non resident budget who are
employed or have a contract with
the state or municipality or a
county to provide veterinary
services at nationally
accredited zoos or creating
aquariums located in New Mexico.
This.
Permit me to only be issued.
Two times consecutively
under this proposal madam chair
members of the committee
currently the veterinary
practice act allows for the
issues in the sixty day
temporary permit to non
resident.
That's in the non resident that
may only be issued two
consecutive sixty day per.
as you know madam chair members
the committee we had to tragic
stories in Albuquerque my
hometown due of recent deaths of
elephants one of them is jasmine
an eight year old Asian elephant
that that a January second she
was the second vote to diet by
part complications of the virus
within a month.
These are the types of
investments that we make as the
Legislature at city county
government and it is incumbent
upon us to protect those
investments and so that's what
this bill seeks to do is allow
for more of these experts to be
able to come in and practice in
New Mexico for a limited amount
of time but it does give enough
time to address some of the
issues that we've seen and with
that madam chair I'll turn it
over to you all for questions
and my expert Dr Carol Bradford
will be assisting me and
answering any questions thank
you.
has he been brought to the
panel.
Yes she has been brought to the
panel Madam chair.
Okay and you want her to go
ahead and speak.
Chair Dr Rafferty P. like to but
briefly introduce yourself and
then we'll go to the committee
for questions.
Sure that would be great I'm Dr
Carol Bradford I'm the senior
veterinarian here in Albuquerque
file park and to give you a
little bit of background I've
been with the slide part three
eleven years and the by part
there's two full time
veterinarians here and we treat
over a thousand animals over
tens of thousands if you include
bench and it's very specialized
type of position we treat
everything from fresh talents
and everything in between so as
you can imagine it
Nationalized and it would be
very difficult for just a
regular small animal or large
animal veterinary practitioner
to assist us and certainly there
are times when either more than
two veterinarians is needed with
emergencies are one of us is out
on illness or vacation so what
we're asking is to allow
veterinarians to come from out
of state that are do
veterinarians that have the
specialized training and
background to be able to assist
the by part with these animals
as needed.
Okay thank you very much all
right we'll go to the audience
is there anyone here I will take
the survey first.
We'll put that up in just a
moment there you go those in
favor or opposed please signify.
Anyone responding.
Yes we have.
Twenty six in favor and one
person propose
so let's go to the
Audience and those who are in
opposition if you'd like to
speak please raise your hand.
The only hand raised is
Representative Anderson.
okay.
Representative Anderson did you
want to speak on this bill are
your hand is just up
accidentally madam chair I
simply wanted to urge the
committee so support is so we
can move forward with this and
that Representative.
Of Martinez I talked to before
so I think he did a great job
thank you madam chair.
Okay will continue with that
support by going to anyone is in
support of this bill
please raise your hand if you
like to.
Speak for one minute.
And Representative Anderson you
might want to mute yourself.
Thank you.
Scott Scanlon.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee good
afternoon my name is Scott
Scanlon registered lobbyists for
the Albuquerque bio parks
society and we stand in strong
support of this legislation I
want to send a shout out to
Representative Brittney Barreras
who over the summer really
brought this issue to the
forefront we visited with the
veterinary board we visited with
the association the veterinary
association they they both the
the indicated support or at
least not opposition to this
bill it's very narrow in scope
it'll allow these are highly
trained zoo veterinarians to
come into the school to into is
for up to six months moving up
from sixty days to six months so
we appreciate the committee we
urge your support thank you very
much.
Thank you.
Next yes Representative Johnson.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee and
this is Jessica Johnson and
chief government affairs officer
for animal protection voters and
animal protection New Mexico
thank you for the opportunity to
speak we appreciate that this
bill will give captive wildlife
in nationally accredited
facilities better access to
longer term out of state
veterinary care and consultation
which does benefit the welfare
of those animals so we stand and
support and take floor leader
Martinez for carrying this
forward thank you.
Thank you Mr on St next.
Raised in public comment madam
chair okay great
so of will go to the committee
And I'm not sure who is up first
I just I you both Representative
Thomson.
Thank you madam chair I don't
have many questions how many
nationally are accredited who's
at Koreans are there in New
Mexico.
Great thank you madam chair
representative Thompson when I
go to my experts on that
question.
I believe there are three so the
by part being the largest.
Thank you and in terms of
thinking about that that that
elephants so I'm guessing that
thank you maybe you can explain
to me that the need for going
from sixty days to six months I
mean I I I think there's
probably elephant specialist
that you brought in for those
cases then and I I doubt it took
sixty days I'm totally in favor
of this bill I'm just curious
what what white what the six
months is about.
Certainly so if we have a
veterinarian resign or have a
longer term illness or family
issue or whatever that leaves
one single person twenty four
seven as you can imagine there's
that Neri emergencies that come
up and it's way too much for one
person and it's certainly not
state are animals for that
individual
to do that.
Good thank you and and our our
veterinarians is hard to find at
in this is extremely specialized
Are the extremely hard to find
like I would imagine they are.
Yes so Moses only employed ones
that three veterinarians and you
know my colleagues across the
state the United States have
their full time job to finding a
relief but in Merion can be very
difficult especially on short
notice.
Okay thank you that's all I have
madam chair thank you for for
this bill.
Thank you Representative
pedigree did you take your hand
down.
Yes madam chair okay
Representative Representative
Romero Is Terrel Neeraj in
state.
Thank you madam chair I was just
first commanding the sponsor for
picking up the baton for this
for a beloved member pretty but
at us who was the original
sponsor on this this is an
awesome piece of legislation to
get through this session I so
appreciate you bringing it
forward for smarter policy to to
be able to do this great work
with that madam chair I move
into passed.
Thank you before we go to that I
just want to say I think this is
wonderful to that we have this
kind of measure you know to help
protect the animals at the zoos
and aquariums I wish we could
also and this is for the sixty
day have this for regular
veterinary service because as
we're gonna be talking about
other issues for
hats and.
Representative outcomes.
Bills anyway I'm Deborah digress
I'm sorry I have a little bit
also it thank you.
it's been dissected to
You for past the past four house
bill
thirty.
Fifty six I'm sorry and is are
there any objections.
Hearing none you have to do
passed by the zero four house
bill fifty six thank you
Representative Martinez.
Thank you madam chair and and I
also echo the committee said
comments about Representative
Barreras this this is her bill
she worked really hard on this
just stop honor to be able to
carry the baton and deliver
these went for her because she
she deserves it thank you thank
you for mentioning that that's
great okay have we been able to
reach Representative clone for
his our first bill.
I believe Representative Akan is
trying its own committee right
now.
And they get a message through
is committee chair madam chair.
Okay what we'll do is we'll just
keep going down the schedule and
then when it when he comes we'll
see we can do.
To work at his bill at.
Okay so next we have house bill
one twenty three.
facemask still gross receipts
for that Representative Dow in
Anderson.
I apologize madam chair I don't
see either of them and
attendees.
Representative Anderson was just
on did he leave accidentally.
I know his reasons for leaving
madam chair but I know he is no
longer.
Okay well we'll just keep going
down
house bill forty six family
representation advocacy act
Representative Chasey and
Senator Lopez are they anywhere
they might not have been
expecting this quick.
Madam chair I can also help with
contacting anyone do you want me
to contact her Chasey.
Yes that would be great and.
Let's see if we can contact
Anderson here I just texted
Representative Anderson great.
Effort around here yes thank
you.
Okay I'm.
Madam chair and just getting a
message that chairman Casey's
getting on now okay great forty
six.
And I just got notice that we're
going that Representative Dow
would like to roll house bill
one twenty three.
So we will take that
Our list for today.
One down.
Two down.
Okay is Representative Chasey.
I see one of her experts or
someone with their hand raised
really New Mexico but don't know
if she's meant to be advocating
for the bill as an expert all
try to find out madam chair okay
thank you.
I think she is.
House bill forty six that
everyone wants to get ready for.
To see is just getting the line
to log in now and
Do you know what bill you'd like
to hear next as well just so we
might be able to.
Help over the next bill sponsor
thank you it's already this bill
and then of Representative al
cone will come from his
committee after that and then
we'll do house bill one fifty
six and
the.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero is in committee but
will let her know just about did
when we start.
The last house House memorial
twenty four.
Madam chair I believe that she's
under Julian includes name right
now using her computer.
Okay.
Ramon Julian.
Okay.
Better known as Representative
Chasey.
Well.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you we.
I I don't I don't seem to have
gotten a lead from your
Committee assistant so I was
trying to get that done.
We have a number of of folks
today who wanted to speak with
you do you.
Have a list rob really has the
list of the people who will be
with me justice Briana Zamora
from the supreme court and judge
Jennifer to lady from through
was the chief judge.
Is damning and senator Linda
Lopez and I believe she's
presenting another bill right
now.
In.
House labor.
So
Okay we'll go ahead and.
And she's Alyssa Davis is also
one of our experts their issues
on ABC okay.
Okay.
Thank you.
I
think we have of the three.
Your.
And we have very and she knew
who drafted the who did the
draft of the legislation so let
us know when you're ready.
Hey I don't see there's Marian
all right the head
at chair casein are met
Representative Chasey.
Great.
After the other day yes.
So.
We are we have to date for you
house bill forty six and some of
you may find it somewhat
familiar with the Senate bill
one twenty seven last year that
made it all the way to the final
floor calendar and then just we
ran out of time at the end.
But several years ago probably
for at least four or five years
ago Senator Lopez and
representative Jim Trujillo had
a Joint Memorial to set up a
task force to study the quality
of representation.
For children and families who
are in the abuse and neglect
system in New Mexico and what
Senate Bill what what house bill
forty six and there is a
companion Senate bill does is it
creates an office that provides
for families involved with the
CYFD system guardians ad litem
for children under fourteen
years of age use attorneys for
children fortunate owner and the
attorneys for you through an
extended foster care from age
eighteen to twenty one and then
attorneys for parents guardians
or custodians and it's and
social workers for families in
need of support.
What the morale did years ago
was created working groups.
That is has just done a
remarkable job we have worked
with all of the players and
created what we believe would be
high quality system to ensure
the best possible representation
for families and children.
And.
So what the host of forty six
dollars is to set up this
And we have.
a lot of
Good information for you but we
don't want to make you listen to
everything I am going to call on
people in what order do I have
first is first I'm gonna have
Merion shading who was kind of
our
she did all of the work she
wrote down everything we said
and helped us figure out what we
were saying and what we wanted
so very in will be first to talk
with you first.
Good afternoon chairperson
Ferrari and members of the
committee my name is merry and
changing it and as a
representative just explained I
work with the administrative
office of the courts under
contract to facilitate the
family representation commission
that crafted the report that the
representative just referred to
which she ended up last year is
Senate bill one twenty seven
which is now in front of you
this year as age more.
Forty
supported I am here to answer
any questions you might and then
of course.
Okay thank you.
Okay maybe we have Alyssa Davis
speak and I was wrong judge
delays not with this and in the
panel today but Alyssa Davis
would like to present Hearst
perspective on this proposal.
Thanks.
Thank you madam chairman and
members of the committee I am
Alyssa Davis a youth advocate I
spent twelve years in foster
care as a child.
Again as a teenager after being
adopted.
I think I could have avoided so
many placements and school
changes and have a better
relationship or even stayed with
my biological mother and
sisters.
If we had all high where's that
where communicator and
consistent with the
representation.
I.
This bill will give most
families opportunity to stay
together while accessing stars
resources they need.
I ask you to passed house bill
forty six to prevent children
from staying here many years in
foster care and some not ever
finding permanency.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Share your story anything else
I'd like to come.
The justice amada.
Good afternoon chair Ferrary and
and members of the committee I'm
justice Brian S. someone and I'm
here on behalf of the New Mexico
Supreme Court as you know we
very rarely take positions on
legislation but we are standing
in support of this legislation
and strongly so.
and that's simply because
there's about nineteen hundred
children involved in abuse and
neglect cases last year some got
adequate representation and some
did not but most importantly so
many of them were in limbo for
much longer than needed to be
cases are simply taking too long
I am urging you to approve this
legislation because the status
quo simply will not work
we've made very minimal progress
in the last decade or two with
respect to child welfare but I'm
here in support and and and also
just know that the full Supreme
Court is in support of this
project Jan and I'm happy to
answer any questions so thank
you so much.
Thank you.
Madam chair will stand for
questions thank you we'll go to
the poll those in the audience
who are in favor or opposed to
kill
Mark your preference.
Okay we have in favor thirty
nine of the forty five and six
people in opposition so what
we'll do is we'll go to those in
opposition if they'd like to
speak please raise your hand
those in opposition.
Samuel.
Go ahead Mr studio.
Hi sorry sorry okay get
afternoon madam chair and
members the committee my name is
Samir trico.
While I was in foster care by
turning wasn't there for me when
I was going to court and then
then for my K. marketed
Development Act port.
Right now I think by allowing
this bill how about you families
to see the help they need.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Okay next person who is in
opposition to the bill and I'd
like to remind that I failed to
mention that this is
at the committee substitute for
house bill forty six.
Well as you.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is trailer let's see that and I
age out of the foster care
system a few years ago
while in foster care I was lucky
to have an amazing attorney that
advocated for my needs always
answering my questions provided
me with advice and always made
himself available responding to
my text within an hour to it's
important to have a lawyer who
cares and acts upon the use
needs and it's important that a
lawyer should treat their youth
as I I have been treated by
money I ask you to support this
bill because it will get us a
step closer to ensure children
youth and families are to
receive the legal representation
there.
Deserves.
Okay thank you for your support
in years and sharing your story
is there anyone in opposition to
this bill please raise your hand
if you're in opposition.
Erik Scott.
I am more have just a question
for the sorry madam chair
members the committee I more
have just a question for the
committee what will be the
financial effects on this and
will private people still be
able to get private
representation where the B.
subsidies for private rise
representation and further more
I'm just kind of more curious
about it and opposed to it.
I just worry about the opening
of government of more agencies
that's all my concerns thank
you.
Thank you.
Anyone else in opposition.
That was the final hand raised
in opposition I'm sure okay and
to those are I think we're in
support let's to go to those in
support of
Committee substitute for House
Bill forty six
please raise your hand.
And if you'd like to speak and
it.
Prices in your.
Madam chair members of the
committee breast injured the CEO
the behavioral health
collaborative I stand here today
in strong support of this bill
on behalf of that behavioral
health collaborative executive
departments thank you so much
for your time.
Thank you.
Next.
Sorry.
This is.
And the members of the committee
my name is Tina has and I am a
youth advocate as well as the
members that serves on the
juvenile justice advisory
committee in New Mexico.
I come today to show my support
for this bill as a former foster
youth and a former member of the
juvenile justice system.
I ask you to consider this bill
as it would provide adequate
attorney to client.
Thanks time as well as
interaction over the phone
however it can be done it would
just provide adequate.
Adequate attention to the
clients as well as the case.
Thank you.
Thank you next.
Barbara J. Vigil.
A good morning or good afternoon
madam chair members of the
committee my name is Barbara
Vigil and the cabinet secretary
of CYFD I stand in strong
support of this bill primarily
because it would strengthen and
I think an aspect of our child
welfare system that needs
attention and really hasn't
changed for decades and that is
the manner in which legal
representation is is structures
of for indigent parents and
guardians and use
who are brought within the child
welfare system this would allow
for
an office to be created whereby
attorneys both as employees of
the of the office but also
attorneys who might be retained
under contract it would enable
this office to further support
legal representation by
providing additional
compensation and training to
those attorneys that would
effectively allow for stronger
legal representation for kids
and families my time is up some
thank you madam chair and
members of the committee.
Thank you and congratulations
secretary Vigil.
Okay.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Felicia Care I was previous
foster care you as well as
current extended foster care
you.
Of all imposter Care I never had
contact with my attorney and if
I needed something I would reach
out to her at all but if you
call and text and then at times
wait more to get a response from
her I never had a chance to talk
to her before even after court
because she was always
unreachable if my attorney had
been available I might have been
able to get more things done I
needed before I ate out I ask
you to support this bill because
providing better legal
representation for the children
as well as the family but in the
system will ensure that everyone
has access to support resources
and advocacy that is needed to
ensure the best outcome for the
children thank you.
Thank you.
It seems.
Good afternoon chair members of
the committee my name is Mike at
city and I'm a policy political
futures we ask you to support XP
forty six.
Witness my mother struggle with
my sibling who later found
herself into our later comes up
with a protector and while
systems my mom was often
stressed and confused obligating
the legal system and accessing
affordable representation she
often turns other parents that
were in similar situations this
bill would provide support to
children and families and deeply
stressful times greater systems
of support families can overcome
temporary barriers and move
forward together I supporting
children families providing a
child with a team of experts
that have expressed interest in
supporting the child thereby
giving the trial opportunities
to provide as a former teacher
access so many positive results
when multiple staff members will
come together to holistically
support each child struggling
within the school system one
administration teachers school
counselors and parents came
together to create an
individualized plan for that
student it was a complete one
eighty the trial right and
always knew we had support
children almost all the child
welfare system to search
somewhere types of support thank
you for to respond Mr Pringle
special report we ask that you
support HD forty six.
Thank you.
Next.
And we may not.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I'm
interested in I'm the chief
judges in the trump judicial
district that that looking at
Otero County.
And I have presided over Senator
got cases for the last eighteen
eighteen and a half years I've
been on the bench and I am also
a member of the children's
court.
The commission and I'm the vice
chair of the tuna Justice
advisory committee and I'm sure
it is strong support this
legislation for all the reasons
that have been outlined today a
motion that the citizens deserve
the best representation possible
to ensure better outcomes and
the system can be better and
this this legislation densest
there and so I urge your your
support of this bill thank you.
Thank you next.
What.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Walker and I was in foster
care while in foster care I was
lucky enough to have an amazing
attorney that advocated for my
needs always answering my
questions legislative news
advice and always made herself
available responding to my text
within an hour or two it's
important to have a lawyer who
cares and acts upon the state
and it's important to all
lawyers should be treating the
as I have been treated by my
attorney I ask you to support
this bill because it will get us
a step closer to ensure children
youth and families receive the
legal representation they
deserve thank you.
Thank you next.
Yes.
Good afternoon.
Excuse me tear Ferrary and
members of the committee my name
is Erica Sanchez I am with New
Mexico can an organization that
partners with young people
impacted by foster care to
improve their transition to
adulthood we stand in support of
the committee substitute for
house bill forty six and our
work with young people coming
out of foster care we see the
impact of an adequate
representation including young
people remaining in foster care
for longer periods of time than
necessary having numerous
negative consequences for
children and their families I
families deserve to have highly
qualified attorneys who are
properly trained have support
staff and multi disciplinary
teams receive additional
compensation and are held
accountable for their work
please support this bill thank
you.
What are.
Thank you good afternoon
members of the committee my
name's Mimi labor and the
director of legal representation
at the American Bar Association
center on children and the law
and I also sit on the New Mexico
legal representation commission
I'm here in strong support of
house bill forty six we have
learned from across the country
that when children and parents
have high quality legal
representation outcomes for
their families are much improved
children remain home safely and
return home quicker when they
need to be separated from their
families they feel heard in
court and through the system the
office of Family representation
advocacy will certainly find
that high quality legal
representation that children and
parents need in New Mexico thank
you for considering this bill.
Okay.
Members of the committee thank
you for giving me the time to
speak today in support of house
bill forty six my name is Lydia
Pakistan and research and policy
analyst and StateTribal policy
and New Mexico voices for
children.
We see supports this bill
because.
In high quality legal
representation for youth and
families with CYFD basis is
vital to getting the support and
resources we need to ask you to
support house bill forty six
thank you Sanchez thank you
chairman committee for your
time.
Madam chair that was the final
public comment okay thank you
I'm.
Representative Chasey was there
anything else you'd like to add
before we go to questions from
the committee yes madam chair I
really should have properly
noted to the committee that we
have a committees and
the two oh two number is it's to
two two zero zero seven point
three.
Is that would have yes we have
madam chair I move the committee
support discussion second.
Thank you.
Is there any discussion.
Seeing none.
The option of the committee
sept.
Thank you.
And you have a second.
A second that madam chair thank
you.
There any opposition for a
committee substitute for house
bill forty six.
Okay we have that taking care
of and was there anything else
Representative Chasey.
No madam chair we're ready for
questions.
Thank you committee members
Representative Lord.
He's got their heads up yes I'm
just checking in here me madam
chair yes we can move into my
room there working on my
computer so
Okay the door connectivity here
myself in the other room which
is very strange.
Okay.
Madam chair representative of
what I have a question about was
we got this handout today.
And it says social workers for
families in need of support.
I'm.
Well hold on just one other
question background this from
second get my notes is there any
mention of the best interest of
the child mentioned anywhere in
the bill like those exact words.
Merry and shading answer that
but that's always the first
first order of business for
these cases I had.
I'm.
Hi chair chairperson Ferrary
members of the committee again
this is merry and chaining the
term best interest does not
appear in the legislation but it
does appear in the children's
code which is prevailing
legislation and it requires
guardians that lied who are
returning guardians at eight AM
in New Mexico to represent the
best interest of children under
fourteen there is nothing in
this bill that changes the
configuration so guardians that
lighter will continue under the
office of Family representation
and advocacy and will continue
to represent the best interest
of children the current
children's coat okay sorry I
just got thrown out of my room
so I'm now what another room
that I can have this discussion
and hold on one second okay.
I can't go in the committee room
as we get too much feedback okay
okay so the other question I
have Madam chair representative
which is on this flyer I saw
that said social workers for
families in need of support but
it's my understanding that not
all workers first UFC are
licensed social workers it is
not as one of that was a mistake
mistake or does the bill
Is there some sort of
requirements or anything on this
section because my concern is of
social workers
I'm sorry got distracted when I
was walking are new to support
and not all CYFD licensed social
workers our licensors where is
this going to be an issue thank
you.
Madam chair I can answer that
question we I've been practicing
law in this area since twenty
thirteen and we have been
fortunate for.
Will be the last
At least five years six years to
have a pilot program.
Where there are social workers
and this W. qualified
individuals who work for the
courts actually and.
They are appointed to cases and.
Help the families who are in the
system and the results are
showing that this leads to
quicker resolution of the cases
the social workers are really
amazing as all of these families
as you can imagine are in need
of some kind of assistance to be
to learn to be better parents or
just to be in the state for
placed and not be struggling
with addiction.
And not be is just really.
Paralyzed by poverty so that
they can really be better
parents so when the social
workers work with the parents
who are trying to reunify with
their families.
What results we're finding is
that there is a quicker
reunification of the family or
there is a quicker resolution
for perhaps an extended family
member to become a guardian for
the children.
While the parents work on their
issues and so what you find is
that you are.
Actually.
Finding a permanent solution for
these children that
Much quicker when there is a
qualified social worker so this
doesn't replace the staff at
CYFD.
Actually what I found over the
years is the CYFD staff and the
social workers are often working
together to try to.
Provide a richer array of
services or more appropriate
services it's it can just.
Is when I as an attorney had
one of the court appointed
social workers on my case it was
such a relief because the family
received.
So much more support than was
possible without the social
worker on the case so it's a
model that is that really pays
off for the children for CYFD
workers for the courts.
Okay thank you madam chair and
representative so that I still
have a little bit of confusion
on this so I see social worker
families in need of support but
my understanding is that not all
the workers to see last year
licensed social workers so it
this is bill add the much needed
requirement to ensure that all
the workers are licensed medical
or clinical social workers.
No I'm madam chair and and
Representative Lord these are
not CYFD employees this would be
employees of the office of
Family representation.
They would complement the
services available with CYFD.
Okay I'm thank you madam chair
representative.
I'm so I do have a question on
this so it's my understanding
with this bill that they will be
using joint computer systems and
attorneys are rips representing
both parents and the children
how we plan to ensure the
ability
gals to make independent
assessment jail just to make
independent assessments without
agency agenda overriding that
judgment much like what is
happening right now with CYFD
decision making.
Chair and representative I
don't.
I think you may be getting out
whether there's a conflict of
interest among the attorneys
yes yes Representative the issue
this would be in a law firm and
there would have to be an
ethical fire wall between the
you know what what we found and
this was true in all the cases
not all the cases but many of
the cases I had the parents were
necessarily aligned so the
attorney for the father and the
attorney for the mother we're
perhaps seeking different
solutions where is the guardian
Adlai item is seeking
to find out what's best for the
child and there may be a
fourteen year old in the program
who want something different
than what everyone else wants so
each person who has an internet
is represented by that attorney
and so that would be a case
where either in the office of
Family representation they would
have to have the fire wall
between the attorneys and not
share anything or they can
contract out just like the law
of office of the public defender
does now if there are clients
with conflicting interests and
the public defender has one case
and then there is that one
another client they would hire a
private attorney to handle that
particular case so this would
work exactly like another loss
for.
Okay thank you madam chair and
representative that's all the
questions that I have right now
and I apologize this is very
frustrating right now because
they go up to the room I can't
speak because it blurs back on
the speakers and trying to share
rural and I can't get in my room
right now because now somebody's
using my room so I'm trying to
desperately find a place to have
this meeting so thank you those
are good questions I I really
I'm glad you asked them thank
you.
Thank you next Representative
Pettigrew.
Madam chair representative
pedigrees on mute.
I love talking less well is yes.
The debate so much each year.
We will.
You know I only have like five
personality so it's okay.
Started thank you madam.
Thank you Representative for
your bills
as I try and look back at this
bill to what I see from Senate
bill one twenty seven I do see
changes to it one thing that I
and
Most interesting is is this bill
is a moving forward the the
Senate Judiciary sep from one
twenty seven.
That Burbage service added and
affects women nine zero did not.
Make it into this new bill Madam
specifically on online on page
three.
After after work best for you to
work best practices.
The.
Senate judiciary wants to ensure
the best interests of the
children.
Chairman.
Can you explain to me maybe why.
that language didn't make it
the.
I think we sure I'm not on mute
and I just want to say that
Representative Pettigrew I like
to talk to myself too because I
listen much better to myself.
Other people listen to me
so the reason what this is this
bill is really cleaned up and
streamlined because that is in
the law it's in the children's
code.
It's not.
It is not necessary to put that
in here it says based on child
welfare best practices that out
which so it's it's certainly not
going to change that standard.
And madam chair and
representative I appreciate that
so if you allow me a brief
changes
in this committee alone are
several bills this year where we
actually reach state law
especially when it deals
specifically with the gun.
In New.
And so and and and so I think it
is critical that we this is
because you know within the last
year we've that thirteen child
deaths the handle CYFD and and
that's my opinion not everybody
sees it the same way but
It is scary to me that the you
know our focus is on
reunification and not on the
child.
I look at this bill and and I I.
I have the pleasure of talking
to the nice lady in the hallway
outside of the house were
leading the.
The state.
Work and and it concerns me that
that as we go forward we're
we're this does focus on the
family as well and so you know
Reunifying is a great idea when
we re here I with with.
Family members said have
actually gone through change
management have actually moved
forward in their lives yeah
we're you know I had specific
dates and and and Madam chair
representative Devin Lee County
where we have a baby that was
this permanently.
The by now because this child is
reunified and
the last record for total we
don't have a membership ever
alert system more CYFD F. R.
automatic access to put an amber
alert out on on children inside
to wire the.
In inside their control and and
this is just really scare me in
on how we how we get here and
so.
I'm gonna go back to
Representative Lord school
question.
You may have answered this and I
may miss some key and the answer
so.
The social workers for the
office I am only
Those will be live licensed
social workers they won't be
just case workers that yes that
is correct yes that's right okay
perfect all right and.
Will any of these licensed
social workers have the medical
training the the that's needed
for some of these kids or is
that gonna be on a case by case
basis because right now we seem
to be with with with these kids
we talk about social workers but
really they're case workers and
and so want to make sure they
have a medical background
necessary as well and if if if
you were one of your
In your professional witnesses
to the stand on that that is a
concern with with how this thing
move forward that so we are
actually insuring that we put
the right people with the
children.
Madam chair representative
Pettigrew that clinical for a
masters in social work is
certain standard they're they're
trained to provide a certain
scope of services if they have
If the child is in need of
medical services it would be the
social workers.
To make sure that you got those
services not that the social
worker would provide that let me
just tell you that I had match.
With a group of folks
Haaseth bunch of folks in in
Ross one is meeting before the
session and we had a long
conversation about some
children.
in Russell who were.
With their parents against their
wishes and
I I told them that I believed
this bill was going to make a
difference because those
children's wishes would be
honored much more.
Faithfully if they had a higher
quality of representation so I
don't see the.
The tragedy to which they were
referring would have occurred
had they had better attorneys
In their cases so the social
worker though is not the one who
provides everything a child
needs you know I've had I have
had a number of children who had
to be sent out of state for
residential treatment and
Some of the.
One of them just I this is the
most wonderful success story one
of them was just adopted in on
November seventh and that's what
he always wanted was to be
wanted by a family and
You know I I think although I
didn't work for a family health
office of family representation
I worked really hard with my
kids and the use I
Representative I was just so
thrilled for him and.
Kids really you heard from a
number of children or youth I
should say they're young adults
now some of them who said in
their I had a really good
internet or I wish I had had a
really good attorney so
I thought maybe just a some more
might want to mention that
percentage will because I think
that's a legitimate concern and
I want to give her a chance to
give you the legal
picture on that.
Thank you
to be clear the courts would not
be taking any position of course
if the children's code was gonna
change in anywhere the standard
which applies in children's
court cases which is the best
interest of the child this bill
does nothing to that effect
the law as it exists stands all
this does is something that AOC
can't do right now this
representation of children and
families is housed in the.
administrative office of the
courts we cannot continue to we
cannot find the representation
needed to children and families
In a timely fashion if we
continue on this track so why
the Supreme Court but strongly
believes in this bill is so that
children and families can have
proper representation in and
that does not always mean that
its reunification proper
representation of children in
particular could mean adoption
could mean reunification comming
guardianship our goal is that
all parties involved
Representative well the judge
can make an informed decision
and that we do so in a timely
fashion so these children are in
limbo for any longer than they
need to be.
So madam chair I see that one of
my.
Experts Alyssa Davis has her
hands up and she's there with
her I'm not something awfully
cute in their hands someone
awfully cute in her arms and I
think she might like to address
this question.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee
I was.
And then just briefly
not only am I mentioned briefly
in mind just money.
I didn't want any of.
I was in foster care for so many
years over a decade.
being foster care
to where I. H. out eighteen are
having
Been in for so long and I think
this would have just.
Necessarily have been keeping
with my biological family but
I'm also it would have helped to
with not having to go to nine
different high schools maybe I
would have been able to have a
lawyer who would have been with
me
consistently with me because I
have had
my story is not unique with this
countless others that have been
to this that
Our.
There's so many different highs
schools and not been able to
graduate on time and not have
had any support after they
turned eighteen still in the
system
they did not have
lawyers that were I'm fighting
for them not having anyone
asking what they wanted
and what that could have been
benefited from I had gone
through so many different
lawyers I don't remember it
being having most of their
names.
and having to fight for myself
and making my case worker who
did not have the final stage she
had to go to her boss and have a
meeting and by that time I
already the decision was already
made to me schools are
How to be moved placements and I
had a new lawyer and just
continuing to get new ones
and not only in schools but
placements over thirty different
placements sometimes we moved
every three months when I was a
teenager just because there is
no place for me and no
I had no one to talk to about
that with
just because I had no access to
my social worker
no clear access because you
weren't allowed to have a phone
you weren't allowed to have
internet you weren't allowed to
be on the computer.
If you had it on the screen that
was your only access and if the
school provided it and it was
clearly for assignments so I
mean outside of school you
weren't able to complete
assignments so it was very
impossible to get a hold of
anybody I'm no lawyer I think
high consistent one with this
it would be so much easier to
express what is happening in my
home situations and in my school
situations.
To have thanks for.
Consistency and just.
Right.
We would be more questions I'm
here to help as a problem and
all other so I no more than.
Most that are actually doing
these jobs and have the degrees.
I probably do know a lot of
not that educated and lawyers
and.
Morning and things like that but
I do know quite a bit since I
have been through so many courts
and.
To navigate the system myself as
being a child and young adult.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr thank you madam
chair thank you.
Representative I. eight eight.
I actually think the the that
experience is probably more.
More critical that is then other
people are.
I am still very concerned as
well as I look at this.
Legislation I see nothing.
In may be madam chair maybe
Representative you can direct me
to worksite substitute.
worst the representation in
support of the foster parents in
this bill.
Madam chair Representative
Pettigrew this bill doesn't have
anything at all to do with
foster parents it's it's about
the legal system alright.
There are other bills that would
you know maybe addressed foster
parents and so forth but this
bill doesn't have anything to do
with foster parents.
Thank you madam chair thank you
representative that answers and
that's concerning to me because
as I go back through the
thirteen cases of where we've
lost children
just recent within the last
year.
Those foster parents are.
Because they didn't they said
the wrong things in the state
they spoke out loud
our institution against CYFD
right now and and it's it's
concerning for me I think your
bill and and so to be clear I
have no single out to you
because.
Yes I have I have no single
advocacy group in in in my
County that reached out to me
and said Hey we need to support
this bill matter of fact I got
the complete opposite from
everybody in and with that I do
appreciate the bill I appreciate
where you're tempting to do all
I think it only get you so far
and and
I wish you the best of luck the
this isn't the building back in
sport thank you.
It's interesting because
nobody's who publicly managed.
For our.
Madam chair still with us I
don't know.
We can't hear you madam chair.
Thank you I got bumped off.
I'm sorry as Representative.
You were finished.
Yes madam chair thank you.
Thank you okay
Madam chair.
Make a motion.
Okay.
I think you're going to pass on
this legislation as amended.
This.
Okay let section here madam
chair it's again not passed on
house bill forty six and they do
passed on commit Committee
substitute for House Bill Ford.
Thank you.
Okay.
Thank you.
Is there any opposition do you
ask andet kan many substitute
for House Bill forty six center
I am opposed and I do not I do
not pass on house bill forty six
and a do pass.
Okay we'll do roll call.
So we're voting on a do not pass
on house bill forty six and a do
pass on committee substitute for
house bill forty six.
Representative.
Thank.
Representative predator you.
Representative Thomson yes.
Representative Lord.
Vice chairman.
Yes.
madam chair for our.
Yes.
Back to Representative Lord
issued more.
Sure she's not in the office may
I do not know where she is.
Okay.
So we have.
I do pass on Committee
substitute for house bill forty
six
three two one thank you
Representative Chasey madam
chair.
Thank you very much I would
really like to thank ms Davis
for her bravery and her
willingness to help make the
system better for other.
Cheers to you miss Davis.
Participating with us all along
to so.
Thank you all.
Thank you and Justice some more
at and merry and.
Thank you thank you.
Thank you.
I'm Hey I'm do we have
Representative all cone.
Yes.
Thank you okay we'll go back to
house memorial twenty four.
Madam chair I am here believe it
or not.
I'm not here.
I am here.
You are here I thought you said
you are not.
Your final in yeah Hey.
Do you have any experts you like
to join you.
Madam chair I do not.
Okay.
So any anytime you're ready.
Thank you.
Madam chair I am sending them a
memorial today.
On that to develop a plan to
save adoptable dogs.
And yes and I'm sorry because
I'm trying to run between two
committees at the same time it
is a rough life is wonderful
that then spread all over the
map I'll we're going to do in
this in this is find a way get
how do managers another in the
parties together.
To convene a task force.
Do.
Develop a plan that we can save
just about every little.
Adoptable animals that is out
there in the world instead of
you the nice.
So it's a really simple process
madam chair with that that will
stand for questions.
Okay that was correct let's go
to the audience and seeing who
Take it they will take the call
see who's in support and
opposition.
The work.
Well.
Representative Alcon if you
could you to your
We come back to you.
Thank you.
All right we have out of forty
two people thirty one in favor
and eleven opposed so we will
start with those in opposition
if you are in opposition please
raise your hand and we'll call
you to speak you have one minute
and they'll be a timer you
should be able to see those in
opposition.
House bill twenty my house
memorial excuse me twenty four.
No hands are raised in
opposition under no hands are
raised.
Okay that's great those who are
in support of house memorial
twenty four please raise your
hand and we're calling you.
Derek Scott.
Madam chair and members of the
committee surprise on first
So on this bill the only I only
have a small issue with it is I
wish you could add ferrets I
have adopted ferrets and save
fair it's many times before I
just as asked that they add
ferrets that's all thank you.
Next.
Yes Representative Johnson.
Good afternoon or good evening
maybe madam chair and members of
the committee this is Jessica
Johnson again with animal
protection voters an animal
protection New Mexico our state
animal shelters have made great
strides in saving the lives of
homeless dogs and cats in the
past several years according to
our shelter surveys shelter
shelters have brought their
euthanasia rates from about
forty eight percent of their
intake in two thousand eleven
down to twenty one percent of
their intakes in two thousand
seventeen in that same period of
time the shelter intakes
decreased by twenty seven
percent but we know that more
work needs to be done and we
know spay neuter is the key to
this we support the proposed at
task force and having full
engagement from county managers
is absolutely important we also
believe that our organization as
well as the animal shelter in
committee of the vet board and
the New Mexico veterinary
medical association have a
wealth of data and expertise to
contribute to the task force and
we hope to have a roll of the
task force's work thank you.
Thank you so important that we
have your animal protection.
Involved it's great next.
Jennifer Rubin Owens.
Hi sorry can you hear me.
Yes we can go right sorry so I I
really do support this the house
memorial twenty four I think
it's a great opportunity to
begin are looking at developing
and I and efficient and
effective up practice framework.
in our state of and I think that
doing research looking at but is
effective in other states and
what is something that which is
practical and implementable here
us so it feels like just a
developing you know a more
efficient approach and I think
it's going to need the help of
of people at the local level so
I think it's good to get that
conversation started.
Thank you.
Thank you next.
Tracker.
Hi going back executive director
of the animal service center
receive value down in Dona ana
county I we favor of this bill
supported it because there is
communication needs to happen
between the counties.
I am the local animal shelters
however it is saying some of the
bill that there is there's gonna
be a lot of support with the the
passing of house bill one of the
fifty seven with the dog food
feet
We clear that feat was was no
where near where it was going
where they expected to be as far
as the available funds and I did
not receive any even though I
asked for it and I know that
others in the state the
requested and not receive any so
I just hope the best part of the
plan of getting the funds where
the need is the most and also I
worried that it might be hard
for other.
Areas that don't have the
resources like we do in Dona ana
to meet the demand of that the
counties may may employment so
but overall we are in favor
thank you.
Next.
Final public comment madam
chair.
Okay thank you
thank you everyone for your
comments we'll go to the
committee Representative
Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew are you
there.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Alcon for for
your memorial
actually clues to putting
together a task force to look at
this I am frustrated.
I believe very strongly that we
needed to.
Focus on the animals that we
that we have in state and
specially once our doctor for I
would just.
For personal.
Side I wish we would have the
same focus on unborn babies and
this this restaurant from that
standpoint I do have a question
for you Representative upcoming.
and madam chair.
Is coming together with this
memorial.
This.
We done research with other
states municipalities on on
where they've been successful in
what kind of programs that they
and initiatives they put
together only assists Task Force
coming together in in your eyes
in your mind if you pull this.
Legislation do you have a focus
and and you have a key starting
points of smart goals whatever
you want.
Everyone say it.
Representative Pettigrew but
There's a good chance to do
that.
It I don't have the if I had an
idea of where to go I would have
a memorial.
Because we need to start
somewhere we have started
anything like this in my life.
The people that came up to me to
request this basically our us we
the same thing we study
everything we've done everything
we can
I want to get rid get together
and see how we can come to some
kind of put something together
so we know what we're doing
we're basically that's working
to find out what we're doing
today but that we can find out
what will be better tomorrow.
That's all it is.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for for that
response I wish you luck with
your with your bills.
I
I share one of my many
frustrations on on.
And focusing in other areas as
well madam chair I yield back.
Thank you our representative at
by tera mera thank you madam
chair just like to move it to
pass.
Second.
Thank you before we go to that I
just wanted to clarify a few
things
the state neuter funds
distributed last year from the
state neuter license plates and
tax check off donations and SB
fifty seven funds are still held
up by the department of
agriculture agriculture
because of a lawsuit that was
the path the on
food and drugs that the
manufacturers we raise from
being twenty five dollars to
fifty
the first year which is should
and twenty twenty.
One I believe and then
from the fifty to seventy five
per label and then to a hundred
in the next year and already the
department of ag has collected I
think it should be over a
million dollars by now and the
lawsuit is keeping those funds
are being distributed
And we need to get that the
Attorney General or someone to
move on that because we really
need those funds and they should
work well with this bill and
having you know
they use the
Spay neuter license plate and
tax check donations as kind of a
dry run of how the funding would
be distributed once we started
getting the pet fee
as.
Increases into that and
evidently there wasn't very much
to get to some of the larger and
they must have focused on the
smaller shelters around the
state.
So
the shelter
Animal shelter board is to
distributes that and.
My question I guess is that this
animal welfare this board would
be under the animal shelter
board is that right or is that
just kind of bringing a group
together
outside to the animal shelter
board Representative outcome.
Pretty much madam chair what
we're asking for is going to
every county is a county
managers and other parties that
are in stood up people that you
are describing right there could
be what is the other parties
that are interested.
To to look into this project
thank you know they use that
money is definitely one of
those.
Okay that would be great because
the only way we're going to get
ahead of this is to increase
drastically the state and neuter
of dogs and cats in our state
and to help relieve so that
shelters can do a better job of
taking care of fewer animals
that might need more assistance
so it's really critical that we
get that funding released
We have a motion for a do pass
and the second.
Is there any objection.
Was that an objection.
No madam chair it was me
checking with Representative
ward shoes doubles.
I think that.
We're good.
Right so
You Representative about come
you have a do passed a unanimous
do pass on
on your house bill.
Twenty four.
House memorial I'm sorry house
memorial twenty four.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee.
Good luck thanks.
Okay now we come up to our final
bills shoot I didn't let
Representative do you see
Representative Patricia Roybal
Caballero.
I forgot to give her a heads up.
I do not madam chair.
Okay madam chair she also text
me earlier so I'm letting her
know that she's next as well.
Right.
she's trying to.
Yes on.
Okay any there she is.
Madam chair may I have just a
few minutes to just a couple of
minutes to transition from all
the other committee to this and
I need to visit the the ladies
room for just a minute we've
been straight I've been sharing
the other committee for that
Representative Alcon I just need
maybe three minutes maybe five
minutes at the most.
Representative do you have
people we can go ahead and find
as your experts and get them on
board while you take a.
And couple minutes.
How.
I have to remove my webcast
sorry hold on.
We're trading representatives.
Okay one I'm sorry I didn't hear
you I had to get off the webcast
sorry.
that's okay we appreciate your
hurry can you tell us to we need
to elevate as your experts while
you take a quick break.
I don't have anyone as an
expert.
And
Hello one second.
I need to
Change my screen real quick.
Okay and I'm having a lot of
difficulty with the transition
representative so if you bear
with me just a moment
So there are no expert witness
us and I will now on step out to
go to visit take a quick break
and I'll be right back.
Okay I think we should all just
And take a couple minutes and
because this could be a few
hours and so we'll we'll just
put our video and.
And my audio office using so
we'll just take to two or three
minutes and
because it could be a few hours
and just put on your mute.
Okay.
Do we have.
Representative.
Welcome to euro do we have our
other committee members joining
us please.
Okay Representative Thomson.
Representative Pettigrew.
and then I leave what happened.
Those ones.
Madam chair I will let you know
that we're getting a lot of.
committee that the feed from the
webcast is coming through very
poorly in most of what we're
saying people are saying is
guardedly to.
Sh sh.
Yeah once in a while it will
start like you were having and I
having a hard time hearing you
sometimes
Hi Representative Lord okay
we're all here.
I'm this is house bill one fifty
six
And Representative Roybal Kevin
here if you please introduce
your bill.
Thank you very much madam chair
and members of the committee and
members of the public so.
I'm introducing today house bill
one fifty six.
It is
Bills relating to crying.
And it is to create
creating then lawful possession
of a large capacity magazines.
And we did find for exceptions
within the bill and it is making
an appropriation madam chair
before I begin I want to make a
couple of introductory comments
pre introductory comments and
that is that I'm coming here
today as a mother as a
grandmother and a very concerned
community member and one that
has been increasingly concerned
over the past few years I number
of
Incidences
Mass shooting.
And
Yeah I get very part of me just
a moment I get a little bit
Taken aback by
the degree to which we've seen
our nation and families around
the country be impacted by the
use of what what I'm referring
to in the bill is large capacity
magazines guns.
And madam chair and
representative send the
committee I I point to some
research I was doing.
And and again I'm not an
attorney so I don't have all the
legal answers I do know that
where this committee is going on
as it progresses I'm sure things
will be answered more clearly
but for the purposes of this
committee it's important for me
to know several things.
New Mexico right now have no law
regulating large capacity
ammunition magazines.
And we see that the data has
shown that high capacity
magazines have repeatedly been
use to commit some of the worst
mass shootings in modern US
history.
That they've been used in all of
the can in the most deadliest
mass shootings in the last
decade.
For example madam chair and it's
hard for me to read through this
because I relate very much to
the victims and those that are
no longer with us.
In twenty twelve in July of
twenty twelve.
We saw a mass shooting of
seventy people.
Well.
On December fourteenth twenty
twelve in Newton Connecticut we
saw.
The shooting of twenty eight
people twenty six.
On June twelfth twenty sixteen
in Orlando Florida.
People hundred and two people
were shot forty nine fatal.
October twenty seventeen months
Vegas Nevada four hundred and
eighty people were shot fifty.
On November.
Day before my birthday on twenty
seventeen in Sutherland springs
Texas forty six people were
shot.
Twenty six.
Madam chair on February
fourteenth twenty eighteen in
parkland Florida thirty P.
thirty four people were shot
seventeen paneling.
And one means very close to my
home and heart and probably to
our memory.
because it happened in our
region on August third twenty
nineteen.
Now pass a Texas forty six
people were shot twenty two.
We know madam chair I know that
there are very many many
responsible gun owners.
My intent with this is that I
want to make sure that we
insure that.
are being just as
responsible and trustworthy.
And that we will not suffer from
any.
Fatal consequences.
To any kind of the
responsibility on the part of
gun owners.
And so I I brought this and
bringing this bill forward
because I'm just totally
dedicated
To.
Providing the.
The mechanisms that we need in
place madam chair.
To make the insurance and the
only way that I can see this was
my addressing large capacity
magazines which for me madam
chair members of the committee
are we do not need to be in the
hands of everyone.
and they do not need to be in
the hands as far as I'm
concerned
with anyone that's not.
In the call of duty as I
identified in the bill and we
can discuss that as I go along
and with the questions but I I
want to make sure that madam
chair and members of the
committee and the public that
are listening understand that.
This bill provides for many
exceptions and those exceptions
are clearly delineated on in in
throughout the bill starting on
page they just to and.
Two three and four and is not at
all attempting to
Kirthmon or curtail or remove
the rights of any citizens any
constitutional rights and I say
that madam chair because I am
the daughter of a three war
veterans am I a was raised
learning how to handle a gun and
in self defense and I was raised
around madam chair seeing my
father training the military
under his command on the proper
use of of and and how to use
guns and I learned not to fear
guns but I also learned.
In that experience growing up
where god guns belong.
And what types of guns belong
and in whose hands those guns
belong and that to me is
critically important in
addressing this piece of
legislation so again I I
practiced all of this because I
anticipate that there will be
quite a few individuals that may
not.
Have had the opportunity to
fully read the language in the
bill and I welcome the
opportunity to make those
to have that discussion but I
also understand that they are a
great deal of individuals that
are caught in to.
What I would think thank you
hysteria of misinformation and
the hysteria of making
assumptions on in in the arena
where they don't belong and this
is in the arena of wanting to.
In that are responsible
Ownership.
Use and to curtail and take
large magazine
capacity.
Away from the responsible users
and the best way to do so I
think that would be by enacting
house bill one fifty six and
again madam chair
I don't have any expert
witnesses this is myself who
have researched as much as I
could on this and feel a
tremendous.
And our responsibility to do
something.
To deter and reinvent to deter
and prevent the possibility of
New Mexico our anywhere in New
Mexico being faced with having
to deal with a mass shooting on
because of your responsible use
of a large capacity magazines.
And with that madam chair I
Will.
A question for.
Okay thank you Representative
will go to the audience with the
poll and you can indicate
whether here in opposition or in
support.
Okay.
Eighty eight people responding
eighty two are opposed and six
are in favor.
Okay we are going to have to
limit
This to thirty minutes in
opposition and thirty minutes in
favor and one minute per person
and we want to make sure that
everyone you know speak civilly
and in in their remarks.
Your order I don't recall in our
madam chair can you hear me.
I can hear order I don't recall
in our in our beginning meeting
setting guidelines on on
controlling Committee from the
public
is there a specific reason.
hi.
We are limiting comments thirty
minutes tonight madam chair.
Just because it's a gun bill
yes.
We've done that on the other
bills to.
We've we've been we have a lot
of people speaking
we we take the call we see how
that is and to hear from thirty
different people
should be plenty and then we'll
have time for you know of more
questions from the committee
madam chair.
You might as so yes we're
limiting it each side okay Madam
right to get us that when we
start our committee meetings
that.
You let people know that up
front so that they don't sit on
a committee for two hours
expecting to be able to talk
when there's eighty eight double
eighty two of them that may
potentially want to talk.
That means to that means that
there's.
If we're limited to thirty
minutes there's fifty people a
sense we're on this call the for
over two hours it may not get to
speak and they should have known
that up front madam chair.
I'm I'm sorry we do that for
each bill when it's you know has
a lot of people in the office
the ins and
Also they were able to take the
poll that gives us that and good
information of how they feel
about it.
So we are going to be.
Limit it to thirty thirty
minutes each side Representative
Thomson.
Thank you madam chair I was just
going to remind folks that it
the committee is run that the
prerogative of the chair that
here has has power and how to
run the committee and now.
I personally appreciate it with
the storm coming in I'm it may
get people.
And now than otherwise but that
it was up to the prerogative of
the chair thank you madam chair.
I'm sure I understand the with
the storm coming in but we are
paid actually for Dan to be in
Santa Fe so most of us could
Wachter are out to where we're
staying so it is it is what it
is I I disagree with that and
that's still in the house rules
to find where it says private of
the the chair.
That's what we're gonna do and I
appreciate everyone being able
to be here to take that poll and
and to know that at that there
is great opposition to this bill
that then there also are some in
favor so what we'll do is we'll
go ahead and hear from those in
favor of this bill if you'll
raise your hand and you will be
timed of for one minute each
person and so we will start.
If you if you want to speak in
support of this bill please
raise your hand.
More guy.
Martin guy goes.
This.
Go ahead.
My apologies madam chair Diane
McAfee.
Good evening I just want to say
that I really appreciate you
representative for bringing this
forward
there is a place for guns and
our lives I also come from a
family where a from a young age
I was taught to shoot but I do
not see any reason that any of
us needs a large capacity
magazines I mean you're not
going to go hunting help with it
you're not going to anything
you're not going to use it for
but they the potential for harm
is incredibly great and I don't
even know sure how used for
target practice maybe go out to
white mesa and shoot I know a
lot of people go out there we've
heard the gun so we go out there
but I don't believe that the
public really has any use for
these that is to our benefit and
I really hope that they get
banned thank you.
so that.
You
can't go ahead great thank you
firstly I'd like to mention is
that that last speaker was
against the bill and should not
count against our top on.
Any words or they were for the
bill rather hello madam chair
committee members one wait just
a moment Sir are you for the
bill are against the bill.
Against this bill.
Okay right now if you will
please lower your hand we're
only doing those who are in
support of the bill first.
Yes my.
Okay thank you yep.
Anyone else in support of the
bill would like to speak for one
minute.
Your Cashel.
Yes can you hear me yes we can
yes good afternoon to everyone
and thank you madam chair I
definitely appreciate the.
County and her passion and our
understanding in opposing this
bill.
But as I understand it this bill
is reactionary in nature and
only enforced after it has been
found the magazine is in
possession or in years.
As reactionary bill.
It does nothing to provide
safety
in pre pre and pre action or pre
event.
Richer's of cells
I am as a gun owner also
instructor also retired law
enforcement
from a different state I also
like to comment on New Mexico's
capacity for transparency as you
can see this in other states
very nice opportunity I am
against the balance out
I wouldn't mind seeing a larger
number of rounds up to twenty
which is pretty much standard.
Thank you next.
In support of the bill.
That was the final hand raised
madam okay now
we will go to those who are in
opposition to HB one fifty six
please raise your hand and we
will go for thirty minutes
starting at.
Now.
Under Rafa.
Over there and I apologize Ryan
Martinez.
Yes we can.
I just say the numbers are speak
for themselves eighty people of
all races squanders farmers like
Representative said mothers come
out of their time because they
don't want to do our our state
go to like in New York we've
actually done this before is a
yes or no in our in nineteen
ninety four to two thousand four
with the sunset clauses Bill
Clinton active seats up to ten
rounds over it were banned it's
a sunset clause so because the
crime it didn't stop crime it
didn't go through
it got overturned so it doesn't
work you do making thousands of
millions of our New Mexicans
overnight.
On top of that I think that the
representative saying he doesn't
spend all of our rights but she
wants it what would response to
do turn into the cost for us
all of us absolutely infringing
on our rights I talked about the
standard magazine capacity is
thirty would bite at fifty.
A standard gun under a Heller in
DC and that the second amendment
of the not for constitution they
are legal that would be illegal
of you guys thank you.
Okay I'm sorry your time is up.
Okay.
Thank you.
So madam chairman Representative
it's pretty clear all of this
year the same concern we want to
ensure that Mexicans are state
of this legislation doesn't do
that there's gonna be many ways
that we can address safety some
of those have been presented in
other legislation we have to
address the criminal.
The court issue our law
enforcement issue and make sure
those who are not legally
entitled that are don't have
capacity issues are going to be
circumvented like the other
spokespeople are mentioned
today.
These are standard capacity.
We have states around us that
don't have similar legislation
where people can import them or
travel across straight state
line to get them and while
simply do not stop criminal
activity.
So as the number shows eighty
eight percent of the people are
eighty eight people on the call
have voted against this bill in
your public call I urge you to
vote against it thank.
Thank you next.
Yes.
Yes can anyone hear me.
Yes.
I'm I just strongly opposes as a
simple analogy the grocery store
I'll call stores sells a thirty
pack of beer.
Yet we look let that go and
you're trying to regulate
magazine.
They're substantially more
deaths by do you why then there
are deaths by gun.
I thank you for your time and
hope we can continue to strike
this down thank you.
Thank you next.
For our.
Madam chair members of the
committee can you hear me OK.
Yes you can.
One machine Ferrari I'm San Juan
county sheriff the law
enforcement officer for twenty
five years and I'm opposed to
this legislation the sixty board
is not the issue here we once
again need to stop focusing on
the item and hold criminals
accountable although we were
told that the red flag on
universal background checks
we're going to quote on quote
unequivocally save New Mexicans
lives it has failed to do so New
Mexico sheriffs told legislation
it would not work nor will this
bill states with magazine limits
have seen no relief from crime
after enacting that we've seen
this in California Illinois is
in Washington DC are examples
this gun law focuses focus law
again will only of friends along
the biting citizens if passed
tens of thousands of New
Mexicans will be committing a
felony offense travelers from
Texas and Arizona what will also
be violation no one portion I
did read in the bill it talks
about exemptions it talks about
allowing an out of state
residents to transport high
capacity magazines if they're
using it in a shooting
competition but New Mexicans in
that same competition are not
allowed to because once again
this is a friend's gonna right
so we're we have the inability
to hold these magazines I know
I'm about out of time but I do
wanna let you know that I am
openly and and is of very
vocally opposed to this bill.
Thank you.
Next
David Collins.
David Collins.
Ramon diagnosed.
Thank you members of the
committee.
Thank you as a citizen of New
Mexico I find this bill in
violation of article two section
six of the state constitution
and a violation of U. S.
constitution second second
amendment I'm a law abiding
citizen I'm not a criminal I
have no intent of becoming one
with the stroke of a pen this
bill essentially charging is a
felon without the intent of
committing a crime literally
overnight hundreds if not
thousands of your constituents
will be felons overnight I feel
this type of legislation would
be more effective as an
enhancement charge for criminals
who use these types of items at
a crime in that way this would
not prevent me from enjoying my
freedoms and collect and really
deter anyone from using these
types of items in a crime there
are no provisions in this bill
for surrendering or destroying
these items without committing a
crime I find it disturbing that
a token one point five million
dollars appropriated or
appropriations in this bill only
to allow it to be considered
during the budget session it
hasn't been thought out it's
just another get it passed we'll
figure out how to pay for thank
you.
The land summer help.
You lane and summer help.
Hello can you hear me.
Yes we can please go ahead.
Thank you thank you for allowing
me to speak I am against this
bill for the following reasons.
Paragraph B. exceeds existing
federal law and it's my
understanding that state law
cannot exceed federal all that
state law can neither abolished
nor reduce rights afforded by
the constitution in addition
page three line Slevin thirteen
allows for non residents to have
more rights than law abiding
taxpayers tax paying residents
of the state it allows non
residents to have magazines with
fifteen rounds or more well
those of us who live in the
state and pay taxes are
considered felons at the stroke
of a pen for having this thank
thank.
Lastly in my opinion one million
five hundred thousand dollars
would be much better spent on
law enforcement rather than
making felons out of otherwise
law abiding residents and
taxpayers thank you.
Thank you.
The.
And the
Derek Scott.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name starts got
amended share Bernalillo county
I would like to echo the share
before who came and said the
same thing but Furthermore I
would like to remind the
committee that as a stroke as
the rest of the people said yes
with the stroke of a pen it
might be more in the millions
that would be or about one
million.
Gun owners that would be
instance Allen's under this law
there is no grandfather clause
there is no clause like they
said to surrender and I would
like to point out yes I agree
one point five million dollars
better spent to people with law
enforcement experience for task
force that would go after high
capacity magazines that are used
in criminal action there is
criminals that use high capacity
black magazines but not on the
epic scale that you're saying
it's actually a much smaller
area most of them use regular
things that everybody else does
the other thing that concerns me
is once again the government is
a medium to a law that the rest
of us have to abide by thank you
and have a great day I really
appreciate you guys take the
time.
Thank you next.
Just.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I personally find
it telling that moms demand
action amongst the usual firearm
rights restriction advocates
refused to show up to support
this bill Representative reeled
off a list of mass shootings
none state of New Mexico this
border bill banning standard
capacity magazines excluded
amongst others the shooting at
Virginia Tech in two thousand
seven which only magazines this
bill would permit were used.
House bill one fifty second
forced me personally choose
between destroying thousands of
dollars my lawfully purchased
property and being a felon.
I would encourage you members of
the committee to consider how
much restriction on your
religious practice you would be
inclined to tolerate or how many
soldiers you want the government
to be able to demand your house
and feeding peace talks.
Well personally invite
Representative Roybal Caballero
to the range at any point in
time to learn more about the
items each bill one and house
bill one fifty six proposes to
ban as well as their lawful uses
a representative for yes
Representative bash and her
office has my contact
information.
Thank you next.
Kerry **** Romero.
Good evening madam chair members
of the committee Kerry Romero on
behalf of the New Mexico council
of outfitters and guides we
advocate the hunting and fishing
industry in the state of New
Mexico.
We're opposed to this
legislation and at well we agree
with the other speakers that
this bill would do absolutely
nothing to solve our crime
issues our primary opposition
with the bill is actually with
the definition of large capacity
magazine the definition includes
the term box and other container
capable of holding more than
fifteen rounds.
This definition is confusing and
without a clear definition of
the following phrase which is.
Continuously and directly fed to
a semi automatic we feel that
this overly broad definition
could potentially apply apply to
any box of ammunition sold for
semi automatic firearm.
Additionally there is no
grandfather clause in this
legislation so anyone already
owning a magazine that contains
more than fifteen rounds would
be in violation how would that
be enforced this bill is poorly
written and we are opposed.
Cara mica.
Good evening madam chair
theremin to New Mexico state
director for the NRA testifying
in strong opposition to house
bill one fifty six some of the
other speakers have covered a
lot of the points that I would
have made I just want to draw
the committee's attention to
Colorado Colorado enacted such a
law in twenty thirteen and it is
not reduce crime or halted mass
shootings in that state
Colorado saw just four fewer
murders the first year the law
was in effect it then someone
increase of thirty five more
murders the next year and that
number continue to rise through
the rest of the last decade.
This proposal has been a failed
experiment at the federal level
and a failed experiment at the
state next door we strongly urge
the committee to defeat house
bill one fifty six thank you for
your time committee members.
Thank you.
Next.
For.
Members of the committee my name
is Zach point in the presence of
New Mexico shooting sports
association we represent down
under some across the state of
New Mexico we are strongly
opposed to house bill one fifty
six.
Magazine capacity limits of any
type of action to entirely
ineffective in stopping crime
everywhere it would be an act
both the state level and federal
level most gun owners own local
magazine three fire this means
there are hundreds of millions
of magazines United States that
hold more than fifteen rounds in
New Mexico we have hundreds of
thousands of not more than a
million of these magazines hold
work out in our state making it
a felony to own a few pieces of
plastic in the spring is I'm
going to do anything to fix the
deeply broken criminal justice
system and help people
entrenched in cycles of poverty
poverty and abuse in the Mexico
I encourage this committee to
reject the proposal and focus on
the real issues we face on this
as a state thank you for your
time.
Thank you next.
Yes good evening madam chair
committee members thank you for
hearing this evening I'm
speaking in opposition to house
bill one fifty six this bill
will do nothing to affect crime
has been shown in the state and
federal level this legislation
would create felons and the
numbers of hundreds of thousands
with the New Mexico overnight
because many handguns that are
full size come with standard
with seventeen eighteen nineteen
round magazines now and is does
this is not just targeting
owners of rifles but many
handgun owners who will carry
them lawfully and legally for
self defense the Columbine
school shooting in Colorado was
committed during the nineteen
ninety four so weapons ban with
ten round magazines and the
shooters just carried more
magazines this will do nothing
to affect crime and only limit
the citizens and what we can on.
I also want to address the one
and a half million dollars for
expenditure to to enforce this
bill as there is no way to to
look lawfully surrender these
items and it violates the fifth
amendment's taking class because
there is no due compensation for
surrender private property and
no grandfather clause within the
bill thank you for hearing me
and have a good evening.
The next.
Curtis Kurland.
Curtis program.
Don more.
Can you hear me.
Yes.
my name is don more and I would
like to state that I'm strongly
opposed to house bill one fifty
six I did reiterate several
points that have already been
made several times on this call
but the reality is we heard
about several mass shootings of
the one in Las Vegas Nevada for
example.
The fact is that the.
Reading a magazine.
Then this course capacity would
not have stopped the shooting
from occurring.
The evil person that committed
that act had multiple firearms
multiple magazines and they
would have just brought more the
reality is that this bill would
criminalize law abiding citizens
that daily purchase firearms
such as a nine millimeter that
is most common for an average so
difference Terry holder.
It would it would then that
because their soul was seventeen
rounds in the magazine it would
ban them and make that are
banned there fireman make them
out a criminal overnight and
that just flat is a very of the
numbers I would like to here are
the numbers that law abiding
citizens have been saved due to
possessing a firearm thank you
thank you.
Next.
Right here page.
Madam chair members committee.
I sent you guys an email earlier
in the week let me touch on a
bullet points criminals do not
obey the law we will have little
effect on the criminal you
should be providers many
handguns hasn't been stated come
standard with seventeen eighteen
or twenty round magazines and
the most commonly used semi
automatic rifle is standard we
equipped with a twenty or thirty
round magazine.
Factory magazines can cost
around forty dollars apiece if
you are a competitor or trained
people who shoot you probably
have dozens of magazines that
that the description that would
make us problems.
If we have to surrender them or
destroy them that's a taking
without due compensation.
Mass shootings are the exception
not the rule and fifteen round
magazines can be dropped from
the economic and we placed to
continue shooting all you need
to do is bring more magazines I
strongly urge you to vote no on
this unnecessary bill thank you
for your time.
Thank you next.
Hello Canary.
Yes we can R. so as of the
twenty five year law enforcement
I have yet to see one ever where
are high capacity that is as
stop crying.
The governor myself and a
competitor and it's already been
stated you would turn thousands
of New Mexicans and appellant
overnight but we.
Law abiding law abiding gun
owners are the problem is the
people breaking the law that are
the problem our laws are
currently broke it all those
problems go after the criminals
go after the people that are
breaking the law stop trying to
do little things like this that
turned law abiding people into
into criminals when they have
any amended the law thank you.
Herndon.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee for hearing us today I
am speaking
I may only have just to be clear
and I would like to draw the
committee's attention to the
fiscal impact reports physically
for this bill which states in
the second paragraph under the
heading a fiscal implications it
is not clear how the
appropriation is intended to be
spent or if any special
enforcement operations would be
necessary GPS notes the gun
magazine buy back programs
public service announcements and
destroying ammunition could
incur costs in addition to
regular enforcement operations
to confiscate illegal magazines
and weapons however creating new
crimes imposes costs on many
other government subsidies
including local police
departments county jails courts
prosecutors public defenders in
the corrections department if
the intended appropriation is
for GPS to reimburse or
otherwise support is entities
that should be clarified I'm not
alone I think you should oppose
this bill thank you.
Thank you next.
W. L. what.
Hi can you hear me.
Yes we can thank you thank you
for having me and I stand in
opposition to this bill and I
did submit a one page opposition
letter yesterday at five point
opposition letter but the main
point is that I oppose it
because at the that compels the
law abiding to surrender destroy
the property for the flood exist
of reasons to avoid becoming a
fell on and of.
You know what they've done
really nothing wrong to begin
with and the so in that sense
and back to Martin Luther king
he talks about I'm just laws and
under US laws is one that
doesn't square with morality and
because this seeks to punish as
its main thrust the law abiding
that is why I oppose that and I
would suggest that we re direct
efforts towards finding the bad
guys to do bad things with guns
and the that is the root cause
and that is the context of the
problem and the solution as well
thank you.
Thank you next.
Hello I am here to voice my
strong opposition to house bill
one fifty six.
The right to keep and bear arms
is enshrined in both the New
Mexico and U. S. constitutions.
Given that magazines holding
more than fifteen rounds are
standard in many pistols and
rifles this is a huge
infringement further this bill
would only limit how law abiding
citizens to protect themselves
as criminals intent on doing
harm it certainly will follow
this law.
Even worse there's no
grandfather clause many people
who own these items must give up
their property this is an
egregious example of government
overreach thank you for your
time.
Thank you next.
Can struggling.
Hello can you hear me all right
yes we can go ahead and thank
you as a resident of New Mexico
I am opposed to this bill for
multiple reasons that have been
stated previously and there has
been
very tragic stories to
demonstrate what happens when
homeowners run out of ammunition
because they were facing
multiple attackers
it not only that after
everything is said and done if
you if you make the citizens of
the state of New Mexico balance
instantly with this law there
will be litigation of they will
not stand for this and they will
but it will just cause more
IBM's it for you for you as
lawmakers because then you will
be litigated for these bad laws
these are just these are just
bad laws so if we are bad bill
excuse me so to be sure
criminals will not adhere to any
law that limits the magazine
capacity so doing so will put
citizens lives in danger please
oppose this bill.
Thank you next.
Hello madam chair members may
madam speaker No Representative
national shooting sports
foundation.
Where the national trade
organization for gun
manufacturers dealers and the
federal fire arms licensees in
the state.
S. is been mentioned several
times.
Ninety four to nineteen ninety
four to two thousand four
there's a nationwide ban on
large capacity magazines the
congressionally mandated study
at that time demonstrated that
there was no impact on crime on
violent crime in fact there are
other studies by the CDC and
other entities that that
demonstrated the same as an
organization we have supported
common sense laws that work to
prevent crime this is not one of
those laws in fact what it will
do is create criminals out of
normal citizens as you've heard
multiple times more guns does
not equal more violence just
like the magazine capacity does
not change that as well thank
you madam chair with ask you all
to vote no on this piece of
legislation.
Thank you next.
Taylor.
Good afternoon madam chairman
and members of the committee my
name is Taylor again that I
speak on behalf of the members
of New Mexico cattle growers
association in New Mexico
workers we respectfully oppose
house bill one fifty six due to
its infringement on our second
amendment rights under the
United States constitution we do
not believe in the extreme
measures set forth in the bill
making anyone who does not
comply with either turning into
destroying their large capacity
magazine a fourth degree felony.
Limiting magazine capacity by an
arbitrary number of rounds of
ammunition it can hold will not
reduce crime rate these
restrictive measures contained
no grandfather clause for
currently unlawfully on
magazines house bill one fifty
six will greatly diminish the
rights of law abiding gun owners
for these reasons were in
opposition thank you for your
time.
Thank you next.
Yes we can go ahead.
Okay good madam chair committee
propose in this bill just a just
looking at the numbers I should
mention with the the mass
shootings I'm looking up the
population in New Mexico saying
there's over two million ninety
six thousand people
that every hundred thousand
there's twenty point twenty
seven fatalities with vehicles
and I don't see S. Banthin the
vehicles so there's not only
that I'm I've been on the call
of duty and as the
representative of a science when
do we limit our citizens that
were fighting for being able to
defend themselves.
On top of that guns and
magazines are not restricted
just for hunting they're also
for personal defense.
I'm gonna read of the revolving
door for criminals.
and this also infringement by
New Mexico and US laws I
strongly urge to about now thank
you.
Thank you next.
Grover.
Hello there.
I strongly oppose the proposed
infringement on my rights as US
it is.
The motivation is to save lives
I suggest legislation be for
both proposed addresses the real
issues such as mental health and
our broken criminal justice
system.
If this bill is to be passed
because of the perceived lease
will end table large capacity
magazine where do you draw the
line should bills we put forward
and also limit the length of
nights because their potential
for deeper cut to the size of
the it will be limited because
some have chosen to use them
your responsibly I mean after
all bigger vehicles will be more
and therefore have the potential
for greater momentum to push
through a crowd of people right
this is not a hunting or
recreation each.
it it's been argued already the
stats do not show the negative
magazine capacity limit would
make any difference this
proposed bill is not motivated
backpacks were expendable to
districts and limits law abiding
gun owners and their resources
for recreation and self presents
thank you.
John next.
John.
Thank you madam chair I'm John
McDevitt from northeast
Albuquerque H. B. one fifty six
provides no justification for
restriction of firearm magazine
capacity and in particular why
it is considered reasonable for
public safety to do so the bill
arbitrarily defines a high
capacity magazine fifteen rounds
for both pistols and rifles but
makes no distinction between yes
on rifle magazines within the
bill wanting them both together
this is an obvious attempt to
limit A. R. fifteen magazines
which have standard capacities
of twenty thirty and forty
rounds there is no
grandfathering provision within
the bill as mentioned previously
and lastly this bill permits
agents of government to possess
greater capacity magazines but
not the people of New Mexico why
we need to use laws to prosecute
your responsible gun owners not
those that are law abiding thank
you so much for your time.
Thank you next.
Matt Duggan.
Thanks for your innocence
evening I'm here in opposition
to this like other people said
the numbers actually do not show
that this will make us safer our
neighbors to the north of us did
not see a decrease in crime
after they implemented their
band the city of Chicago as an
even tighter band of ten round
magazines and it's one of the
deadliest cities in the nation.
This also doesn't look at the
fact that sixty two percent of
homicides are committed with a
handgun and.
There are quite a few hand guns
that do all more than fifteen
around but there's also a lot
less than that.
So this bill will do nothing to
address any real crime problems
it's just an infringement on our
rights and limiting law abiding
citizens thank you.
Thank you next.
Alexander Rocco.
I am Alexander rocked I'm
opposed to this bill.
Half the population New Mexico
owns firearms many of them
multiples this spans.
But the majority of those
people.
Turn them into felons overnight
if you have a pistol which most
comment that those holding
fifteen rounds.
Up not only will be a grand on
the magazines but the pistols
can't accept the smaller
magazine and you'll be because
the people like me thousands of
dollars.
Tell us destroy our firearms.
And the criminals not care the
buy in from Arizona Boston Texas
this will do nothing to prevent
crime and increase it because
people will be less aren't to
stop criminals.
The staff.
Thank you next.
More for.
Are there scenic Jeannie.
David the mass.
Yesterday afternoon madam chair
filled with members well most
what are what I want to talk
about is to cover everybody but
just want to say briefly This
act does far second tell us no
program and its that restricted
the number of rounds will make a
difference.
And my point is just a process.
What happens if an individual is
in a life or death situation at
eight sixteen rounds of war to
save the life or the lives of
the family.
I think this restriction is
arbitrary and I strongly oppose
of this bill thank you.
Can you hear me.
Yes we can thank you good
evening I find it disturbing
that this bill's author chose
not to invoke the opinion of the
subject matter expert to support
her bill today rather this bill
was crafted on her own research
and personal opinion excuse me
let's be civil and not refer to
the sponsor in that way.
I understand you.
At the phrase I feel that should
never be the basis for
legislation let's be clear no
American should have to
demonstrate a need to exercise
any of our rights thank you.
Next.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee yes I'm here okay.
Yes we can.
Already so in opposition reach
you one fifty six just based off
the fact that I'm pretty sure
everyone opposition of this bill
all of these type of magazines
that are dropped in this
legislation I think just as a
regular person is just unfair to
us we've never broken any laws
we've never done anything wrong.
And Furthermore I think we
should allocate the money
dropped in this bill you know to
support our local law
enforcement and mental health
issues and the more tough on
crime and.
That's all I really have to see
it just it just feels unfair to
people never done nothing wrong
thank you guys for your time.
Thank you next.
Robert right.
I can hear me.
Yes we can go ahead good evening
I just wanted to say that New
Mexico doesn't have a gun
problem we have a repeat
offender problem there too many
loopholes for current offenders
to stand streets this will only
hurt law abiding citizens no one
here is using assault weapons to
cause mass shootings or damage
our communities it's not needed
we need better law enforcement
help and we need better laws to
stop repeat offenders from using
guns and properly that's all I
really have to St I'm in
opposition of the bill.
Thank you we're gonna go a few
more minutes since we had some
time in between the taken up our
time so we'll go for another I
people.
John Nelson.
Are you able to hear me.
Yes we can go ahead awesome all
right this bill starts with the
assumption that all New Mexico
gun owners are responsible to
examples would be no
consideration for existing done
orders and the exception for out
of state owners one viable use
of these as a knowledge by the
bill are shooting competitions
and the open language of the
bill could use work as noted
earlier with the use of box I
yield my time.
Thank you next.
Ryan.
Ryan the Burt.
Allen press.
Good evening my name is Alan
Pratt a little cells.
Madam chairman members of the
committee thank you for the
opportunity voiced by opposition
to house bill one fifty six.
Based on the facts and the
arguments already presented
house bill one fifty six is a
deeply flawed and unnecessary
piece of legislation.
I ask that you please vote no on
house bill one fifty six thank
you.
Thank you next.
Our rural area.
Arturo LSSU.
Yes we can.
Chair and committee members of
the city I strongly opposed to
this House Bill by its.
I'm a fire instructor.
And apart also.
The friends I'm also concerned
father must each.
I oppose this bill because it
will only affect law abiding
citizens.
By the commission.
Do not follow the law.
Therefore the only people that
will be affected will be people
that are in.
It will cost us tons of money to
invest in.
It will leave people vulnerable
to criminals there will not be
turning it or destroying their
estimates.
We are standard maintenance.
I urge you to consider.
To destroy this bill.
Constitution that you'll have
for so we're not too.
And listen to the people that
school guard is a big opposition
to this.
Thank you next.
Next.
Madam chairman can you hear me.
Yes we can go ahead.
Good evening madam chairman and
representative thank you for
giving this time to speak
a lot of the people that have
already spoken now the a lot of
the points that I wanted to
point out some of the more you
with that.
The other thing that I wanted to
point out was that I think as
Representative you guys
Representative voted in to
represent your citizens and the
people that voted for you and I
believe with the vote that
you've seen in a lot of people
they've heard speak that your
representative has spoken and I
would.
Likely strongly opposed house
bill one fifty six thank you.
Thank you and this will be our
last person.
Good evening.
I I'm a health care professional
in Albuquerque New Mexico and
I'm everybody else's made the
point that I felt needed being
made regarding the gun control
aspects but the money that our
state so desperately needs is
better put to use elsewhere
We see a huge number of people
that are struggling with mental
health issues.
And
A revolving door on crime in the
state I think that New Mexico
being ranked number fifty by
care QB in wallet hub is the
worst place to live in the
country we'll continue to get
worse as professionals continue
to leave the state in search of
better pastors where our rights
are not infringed and I don't
want to see that happen to New
Mexico.
Thank you okay will now go to
the committee did you have any
other words before we get to the
committee Representative Roybal
all.
No madam chair well All I think
question.
Okay we'll start Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for your
legislation passion towards.
What's important to you.
I think we heard the
The overwhelming majority.
Is.
Is against this legislation.
Madam chair the first thing that
I want to do this for any of the
people that are listening thank
them for their time.
Their patients.
We call your attention caller
madam chair article four section
one of our state constitution.
And remind our population out
there there is a process of the
way.
To disapprove suspended and all
any law enacted by the
legislature.
So we worship on your
constitution is this bill is
successful **** for Committee
and make sure to the governor
Stephens charter
there is a way to.
Deal with that.
Madam chair representative.
Make some very specific
statements this bill is not a
whole criminal criminals
accountable.
This does nothing to criminals.
We've heard statistics from.
Several different people tonight
so I'm not going to bore
everybody with the same
statistics but what I will say
that for the.
Whole time during the pandemic.
Chair and representative that
we've had leadership from the
governor's office in the house
and Senate.
Tell us is the residents that we
need to follow the science and
the data.
The science and the data in the
United States is very specific.
Magazine limitations bands do
not reduce crime.
Madam chair and representative
when the federal ban on magazine
sizes
Crime one that.
So from a leadership standpoint
I'm I am interested to see what
this bill does because for the
last two years almost now we've
been told to follow the science
and the data it will be
interesting madam chair and
representative on how well.
We could use all that data as we
continue along.
Madam chair representative this
is the true definition of a
criminal bill.
It helps the criminal not a law
abiding citizen.
This bill passes committee is
proof that we're ship has no
desire to stop crime only to
control gun ownership.
With that madam chair I yield my
time that.
Thank you Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative.
While I'm first of All I Want to
do a huge thank you to the
callers you guys they made all
of my points sh thank you to all
the people that email to me to
the people that taxed me and my
poor system that told me that
she got hundreds of calls about
absolutely no on this bill and
thank you to all the law
enforcement officers that it
reached out to me and thank you
so much to the law enforcement
officers at call two nine eight.
So madam chair representative I
would like to ask first all I'm
gun brands
And are sold with over fifteen
rounds.
madam chair and representative
I know I don't know that you
have the answer.
Yes
Representative what and madam
chair what I was trying to get
at in case you don't know are
there are numerous guns that
come with over fifteen rounds
there's a Glock seventeen
there's a six R. P. three twenty
there's a Smith and Wesson M. P.
two point no I and many many of
the nine millimeter guns that I
purchased come with over
seventeen rounds so basically if
we pass this bill first things
first I don't even know because
New Mexico I think it's like the
second or third highest gun
ownership in the United States.
Right off the bat we are making
now I would say at least a half
a million more people felons
right off the bat that's the
first thing so let's just say we
have million gun owners half of
those have those so there's half
a million people they're not
felons most rifles also come
with thirty rounds so we now add
are hunting rifles I think
pretty much for close to I don't
know a million people because we
have a very very high gun
ownership so we just made and
million people felons in New
Mexico.
So when I see this I see this as
the pipeline to prison.
We're gonna take a million
people.
A million people that are not
using their guns nefarious ways.
And we're gonna make them felons
overnight.
And there are some people who
don't want to give up their
rights and they shouldn't have
to because we're not doing
anything wrong.
What we're trying to do is we're
trying to target the people who
are criminals but instead we're
gonna have I don't know maybe
upward of a million people that
are felons overnight more may
not be that high but I'm just
saying we have.
The highest gun like third
highest gun ownership in New
Mexico.
So how much is it going to cost
us let's take a low estimate if
we have five hundred thousand
people.
That have a high capacity
magazine and they don't want to
turn the men and we have to go
out get the ball and arrest them
and and our agency felons how
much is that going to costs the
taxpayers chair representative.
Madam chair representative could
you please repeat the question.
Yes let's just take a low
estimate that that we're
probably going to make a million
people felons overnight because
there are a lot of people with
guns in New Mexico let's just
say half a million people say
I'm not going to surrender my
Magazine that came with fifteen
came seventeen as opposed to
fifteen rounds how much is going
to cost us to go out and arrest
these people or how much it's
going to cost us and the court
system
to process people missing a cost
us for all of these new felons
that we're gonna house.
Madam chair representative first
of all I don't think you become
a felon unless you commit a
crime so I am gonna have to be a
crime associated with
becoming a felon and so I'm you
know I I I guess I'm again you
know being
did not
Turning on and I see this from
The standpoint of how I I don't
understand how we're going to
turn all the half a million
people into criminals that's one
part of my answer the second
part of my answer to you madam
chair is that
R. I think that.
Should.
And hopefully you a lot of where
to pass
HB one fifty six with the past
then the expectation is that law
abiding citizens will remain law
abiding offense and do what they
need to do in order to stay
within the realm of not
following the law I don't have
any answer I can't do the math
for you or with you right now
but those are the only thing
that I can answer at this
particular point because
there's too many what ifs and I
don't know I can't afford madam
chair what you're saying and
your numbers to make the figures
but but if that madam chair and
representative of the does that
make
logical sense for me to go that
route right now because
again if you're a law abiding
citizen you're going to follow
the law then
and and if there is a lot of
placing a find a way to comply
with the law thank you madam
chair.
Madam chair and representative
and I'm very confused.
The bill so on page one that
that is appropriations that
means possession okay let's just
say I have a Glock seventeen has
seventeen rounds not fifteen.
I don't agree with your
infringement on the second
amendment so let's say the other
half million people in the state
that how.
Over fifteen rounds do not agree
with you they are now that date
this bill is passed that day
those half a million people are
felons because they're in
possession so I'm talking about
your bill that says prohibition
in possession no we're here does
it say that they do a crime it
just says.
They don't agree with you
because you made it this this
number fifteen and they don't
want to get rid of the Glock
seventeen and let's say there is
a half a million of those
people.
What how are we going to process
all these half million people
that have a Glock seventeen
understand for example it has
seventeen rounds and not fifteen
just for simple possession
that's my question.
Madam chair representative it's
not going to happen overnight I
think I look at the last page of
the bill there's an effective
date and I think that gives
ample time for individuals to do
the responsible for the loss
passed and that is that you have
until that date when the lobby
comes law when the bill becomes
law to comply with the law and
you can find just as you are
Madam chair representative on
knowledgeable on how to obtain a
gun and a gun with large
capacity magazines thank you
should be just as well apprised
of how you can
And so again bill about those
are my answers to your questions
thank you.
Okay madam chair and
Representative the the big issue
here because I have been a
second then a proponent for many
years I'm many many people the
vast majority of people in New
Mexico would disagree with your
terminology of large capacity
because you can go anywhere and
buy a Glock seventeen you can
buy a six hour piece three
twenty by Smith and Wesson MP I
two point now and most rifles I
mean you're literally telling
people.
Sorry hunting rifles with more
than X. amount of rounds are no
longer legal and there is going
to be.
People that do not agree with
you at all because you decided
that you this magical number
fifteen is a number that you
want to be at and there's plenty
people have a gun that seventeen
round.
So that leads me to the question
how much is it going to cost us
in gun buy back program to pay
the amount for the gun that you
want gone let's say it is a
Glock seventeen LFC that gun is
four six hundred dollars and
they don't want to go and buy in
the extensions to at they want
to buy anything to make the gun
have less rounds how are we
going to pay these people back
because you're taking their
property so we're eminent domain
thing we decided you can't have
that where we get all the money
to pay these people back or buy
their guns for full value Madam
chair representative.
Madam chair representative I
don't believe that house bill
one fifty six is the by that
bill.
Okay chair representative maybe
some you want to consider this
because
You're telling people.
Take anything you can't drive a
car anymore we're if you can't
drive this car well then you
have to pay them back for the
loss of their property because
you're doing this bill and
making anybody who has.
Anything over fifteen rounds
you're making them felons for
possession this is a this is
probably the most egregious I
planned present bill I think
I've ever seen because these
people are going straight to
prison.
Because they're not felons so.
Question on the appropriation.
You have one.
Point five million dollars of
tax dollars.
To fund the department of safety
eccentric etcetera but what else
is going to cost us for all of
the people that then to prisons
and all these people are gonna
end up in the courts how much is
this really going to cost us for
all of this to happen with let's
say half a million people now
being felons.
This.
Representative you know I
appreciate your your various
scenarios and I appreciate your
very best numbers however if we
look at the bill and what the
impact of the girl yes I think
it's pretty clear cut that if
you're in violation of the the
law the law as an act as our
house bill one fifty six then
that's when
well let our mechanisms and then
enforcement takes the actions
and so this is meant for public
safety department and law
enforcement to execute our
compliance with the law thank
you execute whatever else is
necessary and the
when there is a Act what's the
word my when the laws broken a
crime is committed and large
capacity magazines gun is used
in the commission of that and
there's a clear cut
Association to this bill and
that's when all of a law
enforcement kicks in and that's
where.
Is the appropriation was set up
so that we've been told over and
over again madam chair.
Excuse me that we're not
providing the adequate
Support.
Why are in ways to help and our
laws and in ways to help deter
or prevent and because I see
this as a deterrent Bill madam
chair and prevention bill
and I want to be able to also
are see if from that standpoint
then that.
The bill clearly delineate are
there to support the public
safety department and all of the
capacity as it relates to this
if this bill were enacted thank
you madam chair and
representative.
Madam chair representative
research a really good point I'm
just because somebody it
lawmakers usually when I try to
make a law I'm trying to think
what would be the best for New
Mexico New Mexicans without
infringing upon their rights and
I definitely see this is a
definite for insurance on their
lights and there was a time
where we thought that women
should vote that was at that
time they thought it was a good
intention and it wasn't so
sometimes laws aren't
necessarily good intent when you
talk about deterrent I start
thinking about things that
prohibition then prohibition was
best thing to ever happen
alcohol.
Colorado thought this is going
to be a prohibit guess what
happened if we're gonna follow
the science it didn't work it
didn't work at all and I wish
you would have to read some of
the statistics about Colorado
like a tar had brought up
earlier that it there's been
increases of shooting sensei
took away large capacity
requests so the science says it
doesn't work.
So let me move along.
I'm.
madam chair and representative
if this does pass just over to
Texas and Arizona and by a
extended magazine.
Somebody who wanted to.
If they just wanted Senate
banking they just go right over
to Texas and Arizona by one is
that correct.
I'm sorry Madam chair
representative.
I'm not quite sure I understand
your question can they go to
Texas and Colorado and by a
large.
No I'm just saying if we were to
pass this bill could somebody if
they wanted to and hold on my
phone's about to die so I gotta
move over to representative
creditors computer.
my point being if somebody was
if they if we pass this book and
they so we just go to Texas or
Arizona and just simply go and.
By a large capacity magazine.
Madam chair representative you
know I think.
Are any.
in the specifically the ones
that you.
We are referred to as we do
whatever they'd like and I
would have a great life if this
life path.
Be able to all.
The New Mexico with that law
with that the.
Owning.
I don't know.
To turn is brought out some of
our time here.
I guess my point screen.
This is.
You know this okay let me see if
I'm getting feedback now can you
hear me.
Yes we can okay there we go okay
madam chair and representative
of I guess my point is if we
pass this bill what stops
criminals from buying large
capacity what what what would
stop and went by and large
capacity magazines.
Madam chair and representative I
thank you for.
Madam chair representative I
think that's exactly why we have
a penalty if you break the law
there's a penalty and if they
are pointedly felon so from what
I understand of what degree
felon in the state of New Mexico
is if you break the law you face
up to eighteen months in prison
and a fine of the five thousand
dollars so.
That's what would happen thank
you Mr madam chair.
Thank you madam chair
representative for making my
point that's eighteen months in
prison and this is a pipeline
present bill in the state over
and over again because we're
going to punish so many people
were going to make them into
felons we're gonna put them in
prison for eighteen months we're
gonna charge them five thousand
dollars and I'm trying to think
of how hard that's going to be
on the families especially
people of color in our state and
especially people that are low
income who can't afford that so
now we're just taking these
people locking them up which
makes no sense what was the
point I'm trying to make with
you on this madam chair.
Is that this bill is not going
to go after the criminals the
criminals are going to get a
hold whatever they want to do
and this really possible to
assist with the tort shares are
trying to say earlier this year
to said numerous times that when
you guys started to the red flag
bill which I thought was dumb
spill over at has he been I
think music to time it didn't
work they would have laws on the
books in the laws on the books
that have been to take a person
who is committing a crime not
the gun in the background checks
and working this is going to be
another bill it doesn't work
that is going to go to a lawsuit
just like it did in California.
Sh my concern is I'm thinking
about all these people that are
going to become felons and I
can't wrap my head around why we
want to make people who don't
agree with your law and are like
this is not fair this is not
what we want.
And then suddenly we're gonna
say oh we made this a lot even
though in two thousand thirteen
Colorado enacted this law to and
and it didn't work we actually
went up so there there is no
scientific validity what so ever
to any of this I'm we have
taxpayers are gonna pay millions
of dollars to put all these
people in for eighteen months in
prison we have people who can't
afford to pay five thousand
dollars are going to be punished
for this and given more time
we're we're.
I I if this was ever a pipeline
to prison bill this is it right
here so here is what I meant
time.
I have been all over the state
of New Mexico like I said before
we are the third highest I
believe might be second highest
at this point of gun ownership.
I don't know if you've been to
my district but I have a lot of
hunters out there I have a lot
of people who love the second
amendment and they're just not
going to abide by this and I'm
sorry if you feel that it's
important to turn law abiding
citizens in the felons I
strongly disagree with you and I
don't know if you've been out to
rural New Mexico lately but
there are people out there that
love their guns and they don't
want this.
Hispanics in New Mexico because
I have because I I I am very
strong gun advocates and
Democrats a lot when I go to gun
shows I talked to Democrats more
than anything and they're tired
of the infringement on their gun
range so New Mexicans do not
want this.
And I can't imagine what it
would be like to be a single mom
in your house.
This is something they want to
really think about.
Single mom her house she's got a
gun that has a high capacity
rifle high capacity and four
guys break into our house and
they're all arms.
You're not telling her I don't
care about that you can not
defend yourself.
Sorry you're dead I'm sorry
because she doesn't have any
other way to defend herself and
some people are very good at re
loading and some people are not.
So I do not want to see a single
mom or can't even that's at home
is like a six year where that's
at home and she needs to defend
herself and all of the United
States.
Where people have used a fire
arm to protect themselves and
just save one life of somebody
who's home the door being kicked
in and for people with weapons
are there and they have no way
to defend themselves.
So this is a huge no not just
for me this is a no K. to notice
there was law enforcement called
then law enforcement has
contacted me moms dads Hispanics
Democrats they don't want to
this bill I am the
representative you are there
Representative and the fact is
we have to represent the people
the people do not want this this
is a pipeline to prison this is
going to cost us millions of
dollars and put people in jail
for eighteen months for an
object a piece of plastic is the
most.
Around eighteen months for piece
of plastic.
Five thousand dollar fine for
piece of plastic.
This is failed in Colorado.
And this is no different than
prohibition I mean we could ban
high level alcohol all day long
yes what people are still going
to get a hold of alcohol it has
been lower percentages they're
still going to get it doesn't
work this is a prohibition on
our gun rights and don't forget
this is a right not a want to
this is we have the right to do
this.
What is the most frustrating
thing about all of this madam
chair representative is this is
takes legal gun owners that
don't agree with you which is
the vast majority of people
don't want this bill.
Instead of focusing on the
criminals instead of looking
like here's one thing.
No bail here people commit
murder all the time and they're
just released people released
all the time.
We should reinstate or bail we
should give we should do more
things to prevent people from
getting to this point in their
lives we should be tougher on
criminals we should fix the
criminal problem we should fix a
mental health problem and this
bill is a pipeline to prison for
law abiding citizens and I
cannot tell you how much I
disagree with this bill along
with all the other people to
call and the hundreds of people
was sent me emails and that
thousands of people.
Hundreds of thousands of people
that own guns across New Mexico
and I just want to remind you
that were elected to represent
the people and the people don't
want this bill.
Thank you chair representative
yup my time.
Madam.
You.
Madam chair representative.
Excuse me.
If you can respond briefly to
one at getting ready to and
trying to clear my throat and.
Been having problems all day
long Madam chair representative
yes I would love to their
several things and I want to
make a strong point on that have
been brought up over and over
again so the house bill one
fifty six is not taking guns
away if limiting the capacity of
the guns and that's why it's
called the
The the if label the way areas
large capacity magazines and if
you're complying with the any
law and this law then you're
complaint and no one's going to
put you in jail for compliance
it just makes sense to look at
it that way but more importantly
madam chair and representative
and then Representative members
of the committee
I prefaced my introduction by
saying that I have done a great
deal of research and I've gone
to the site
many different sites that are
provided valuable data and and
information concerning gun
violence and the use of what
types of guns have been
confiscated or use are found to
have been used especially in
math killing and I want to point
out that this what I found madam
chair with the states with the
strictest gun violence have had.
The lowest number of gun
deaths related.
Related story.
And I'm gonna have to drink some
water how long Madam.
Excuse me and in particularly
I'm particularly I would mention
that California on is often
referred to as the state with
the strictest gun law but it
also has the seventh lowest rate
of deaths by gun violence in
general so strict gun laws have
not.
I have not
resultant in anything and then
controlling the deaths which is
what this particular bill is
going to do and then the other
point I wanted to make is that
my research and and you know
it really isn't necessary
to have.
Thank you know I traveled around
the state I sat on the courts
and corrections
interim committee sent I was
elected I was on the judiciary I
visited present I heard
communities around the state and
I've I've seen are gone to the
range of I've done all of
everything that all of us are
invited to do in my almost ten
years of the legislature for and
so I am fine myself madam chair
extremely informed and when I
wish can for myself more I found
out that assault weapons are
used in ten to thirty percent
off the talent needs and those
that are with large capacity
magazines.
All the research is showing that
twenty two to thirty six percent
of the firearms used in the in
with large capacity
magazines weren't.
Hi my name's and these were we
covered by law enforcement the
guns that were recovered by law
enforcement had large capacity
magazines and then large
capacity magazines have been
involved in twenty to sixty
seven percent of all fatal mass
shooting and those of the the
thing that I look at madam chair
and also another little bit of
data that I came across is that
from nineteen eighty five to two
thousand and seventeen we had
Excuse me two thousand nine
hundred and seventy six deaths
associated with four or more
victims are classified as mass
shootings and I think I think
all of us have our particular
fundamental viewpoint and I said
at the beginning in my opening
also with that this this is not
a
gun bill that attempting to
control any constitutional right
if anybody propose a
constitutional the constitution
as myself but I I because I was
raised that way and there's not
any way that I can address
fundamental differences in how
we approach madam chair the way
we look at bettering our
community and so I don't see
this as a pipeline to present I
see it I continue to see it
madam chair as at the end we
were in our in our discussions
in quite some corrections for
years and years and years we saw
all five of how best we could
come up with ways to determine
present and I maintain that that
what I found was that this was
one of the ways especially in
the last two years were you seen
an increase of MASTRIANO
associated with assault weapons
and large capacity magazines so
I've received I've received tons
of phone calls I've received
all my gosh I can't even count
the begin to count the number of
emails and phone calls that I've
received in support so the same
amount of support
is associated with whatever
everybody else was indicating
were levels of opposition so
this is this is all I can
address at this point madam
chair and I thank the
representatives for raising
those concerns and those
questions but ultimately we
fundamentally have different
ways of dealing and from my.
My vantage point if you commit a
crime using a high capacity
magazine then you're charged
with a violation in your chart
with up with felony and we
passed this law you having to go
on the job
I think it's hello hi to comply
I don't have the bill right at
my hand and I think that
ultimately are it's another way
Looking at.
I don't see the individuals that
are being responsible and that
are in our possession for safety
and security
I don't see how their rights are
in any way being friends I
simply see as I stated that this
is an absolute master necessary
bill because I don't see how
assault weapons on especially
large capacity assault weapons
have a place in our general
society
in.
In the hands of potentially a
responsible gun owners so madam
chair that that my response to
the representative thank you so
much.
Thank you.
You I'm seeing no further hands
what is the will of the
committee.
Madam chair I make a motion to
table.
Okay it's our
to table house bill one fifty
six are there any objections.
to table I'm sorry.
Yes thank you Representative
Pettigrew move to table and a
second by Representative Lord
are there any objections.
Representative Romero thank you
madam chair I
I I don't object to the motion I
would just like to explain my
vote that's okay.
Yes.
So I'm seeing no objections for
move to table
Representative Romero to
At nine your vote.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you to the sponsor I I I so
appreciate your attempt to.
What I think we all understand
is is trying to prevent.
mass shootings and gun violence
from persisting in our
communities
I I so appreciate the creativity
and and and looking at the
research and what you came up
with for this bill
my concerns I think men are have
been addressed by by many of the
questioners many of the
commenters and and certainly
from some of the analysis I know
that the representative was able
to see with the structure of the
bill and some of the concerns
that were brought up so I won't
believe believer that I just
feel that the way that the bills
drafted not probably needs just
a bit more time I think the
sixty day session and and the
interim will be helpful and and
looking at this bill and the
criticality of of some of the
concerns hopefully I've been
consistent and being able to
speak to this committee about
You know the pipeline to prison
I think which is brought up but
in general creating new crimes
that aren't don't have our hands
wrapped around what we would be
doing with that considering the
market of of what we were
discussing with bullets etcetera
you know this is new information
to me and I would just like
four you know there are the
representative to to be able to
take some of that information
and and inform the bill as to
what we would like to build up I
think in support from advocates
and others that I think we would
be interested in and seeing of a
bill that would help prevent
that violence that we're talking
about on that seven madam chair
I I don't have opposition to the
motion.
Thank you Representative Thomson
thank you doctor thank you madam
chair I'm I I I agree with the
intent of this to stop mass
shootings I mean I I don't think
there's anyone who is in
opposition to that I just
thought that the the lack of a
grandfather.
Laws
Makes me concerned and and the
fact that that this was kind of
a.
Madam chair I I would suggest
that to the sponsor that perhaps
work with other groups who are
working on this to tighten up
the language and to to get at
the heart of what it is that
you're trying to get at so thank
you madam chair.
Thank you and I'd also like to
explain my vote and thank the
sponsor for bringing this
forward it is something that we
all I do care about
Preventing of mass shootings in
the ability to having large
capacity
Magazines I think it's something
that we do need to address but
when there's so many
Of problems pointed out in this
bill such as a loophole with the
W. regarding
The laws and the definition of
capacity large capacity magazine
and
X. not including internal to
magazines would be a huge
Miss and also you know I'm
having more of the different
departments
Input and cooperation as well as
support from the other
organizations that are working
on reducing gun violence in our
state and country so with that
May I.
Something real quickly I wanted
to thank the committee for
taking a sharp and all of those
individuals looking forward and
please just note that I didn't
mention in the introduction back
of this bill has been introduced
much of my myself several years
in advance of prior
and it was through the
encouragement of the
continuation to rank you
introduce that are and simplify
it so I just wanted to say thank
you and thank you for taking the
time and all of the groups that
you mentioned have been involved
throughout the years and
continue to be involved with our
advocacy so I appreciate it and
I appreciate you for being not
present tonight thank you.
Thank you Representative
reduction euros so house bill
one and fifty six has been
tabled and we look forward to
perhaps working with you during
the inner on.
So and thank you of thank you
everyone for
at your public comment and input
and this will conclude our.
Our committee meeting tonight
thank you.
