Three.
Is.
There.
One one.
Do you think.
This.
The only other unmuted.
Hi this.
Hey Mara.
Morning madam chair lovestrong.
Good morning Representative
Garcia.
Here nice shiny faces warning.
There were also yeah nice.
That is your shining bright.
Yeah right it is but
Please listen to pledge
allegiance.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Figueroa there to
lead us in the.
Budget allegiance to Spanish.
Yes Mr speaker coral for the the
the and the Los estados Unidos
de medica the complete package
Representative the.
Johnbosco the others in the
ceiling use the staff but it
does.
And with the gentleman from
Colfax more a real Rita and send
Gail please the distance looting
New Mexico just like.
Jealousies you at good morning
Mr speaker we go to messages.
Interjections order clerk to
read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house.
That the Senate has passed house
bill one twenty nine as amended
by the house of further amended
by the Senate in requests the
concurrence of the house of the
Senate amendments respectfully
submitted Lenore and Lara host
Senate chief clerk.
This is really injured message
from the Senate Mr speaker I'm
directed to inform the house of
the Senate has concurred in
house amendments to Senate bill
three seventeen as amended
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
this is really enter.
Generally these million thank
you Mr speaker we go to
concurrence no objections order
gentility Phillis Alamos.
Mr speaker I move.
On behalf of my co sponsors
Representative Angelica Rubio
and Patricia Roybal Caballero I
heard the house to concur in
Senate amendments to House
Judiciary substitute for House
labor veterans and military
affairs committee substitute for
house bill twenty as amended
gentlelady to explain sentiment.
Gentlelady to explain the
sentence Mr speaker.
These are the significant
substantive amendments that were
placed on the bill in the
Senate.
First there's an EBT delayed
enactment The effective date and
implementation date is now July
one twenty twenty two.
The purpose clause was deleted
that section two.
Supplemental leave for health
emergency was removed that was
the eighty additional hours that
had been
Included in section five should
there be another pandemic or
similar type emergency.
Language protecting more
generous paid time off policies
were clarified to ensure that
employers that provided PTL
policies that were at least as
generous as those included in
the bill are the act.
Would be deemed in compliance
with the act.
Employers no longer need to pay
for employees sick leave
documentation.
And lastly Mr speaker up.
Employer non compliance fines
were reduced by fifty percent
and with that Mr speaker I'm.
Available for questions.
The generator's debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative lane thank you Mr
speaker will the gentle lady
from Los Alamos Rio Arriba
Sandoval in Santa Fe you.
Mr speaker I will gladly yield
to the gentleman from San Juan
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos thank you I I have to ask
a few questions because it after
I got earn that per diem today
right so I couldn't pass up the
the opportunity
so when I look at the the
amendments and context.
so I can see the changes that
the Senate made.
One of the first things that
stands out is the Senate struck
all of the purpose paragraphs it
appears.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos can just give me a little
bit of insight on that.
Mr speaker gentleman.
That amendment occurred in
Senate Judiciary.
It is not uncommon for Senate
judiciary to eliminate purpose
clauses as a number of the
members believe they're not
Appropriate in legislation Mr
speaker and gentleman from San
Juan.
Mr speaker generally from Los
Alamos.
I appreciate that and and I I I
guess I'm wondering.
Is is the the written the
rationale behind that is if the
court is reviewing state the
constitutionality of a
particular piece of legislation.
If we state what our purpose is
our intent is it may become too
narrowly defined on I'm just
trying to understand.
why that is a common practice
with with the Senate Judiciary
Mr speaker gentleman although I
frankly cannot speak for the
intent of other members of
another chamber I believe I have
heard the on the chair of the
committee and others state that
purpose clauses carry no weight
with the judiciary and
legislative tent is not
something that the courts will
look to when interpreting a
statute in New Mexico.
Mr speaker generated from also
almost thank you for that I
think that there's something a
little bit a gap there I do want
to ask a question on it it's the
new section to now was
previously section three sub
paragraph D. as in delta.
I noticed that we struck the
burden of proof language there
in paragraph do.
Given the gentle lady a moment
to to be there to look there.
Mr speaker and gentleman could
you refer me to a page I do have
the amendments and contacts in
front of me Mr speaker gentle
lady from also almost so I'm
looking at as you reference
sentencing context the bottom of
page three paragraph D. as in
delta started well I guess
there's not lines but it's the
last three sentences or three
lines are struck at the bottom
page three at the members we
could just pause for a moment
this more question did from
members to remove the jackets
this just fine if you'd like to.
Thank you Mr speaker and so
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos
I noticed that this burden of
proof language is here would you
mind just just updating the body
what what this does to the
billing and why
Well let me just are though one
of the students bill.
Mr speaker gentleman from San
Juan frankly I do that is simply
a cleanup technical amendment in
fact if someone were asserting
that the employee if the
employer was a serving at the
end.
Imputed employee was an
independent contractor it would
be on the employer anyway it's
just clean up language I think
in Mr speaker and gentleman that
was a floor amendment.
Mr speaker Joe if lost almost
thank you for that and I do
agree with your assessment and
think if if an employer trying
to claim that they just had a.
and an independent contractor
relationship and not a W. two
relationship I do think that
burned falls on them.
And then going through.
looking at paragraph I on that
that scene of independent
contractor.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos do you know where this
definition came from.
Mr speaker gentleman from San
Juan I do know that it was
amendment placed on the bill and
Senate Judiciary.
It was a friendly amendment I
don't know where specifically
the language came from Mr
speaker and gentleman but I
agree to the amendment as I
think it is consistent with New
Mexico common law Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos.
it and as I.
Remember from.
contract lawyers from some other
subsystem laws as well I think
it is consistent but can you
just give us a little bit of
insight for those that maybe
don't have legal training legal
background we talk about
directing the results but not
directing the manner can you
just maybe put into plain
language what that means.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I think an example would be I
just hired someone to maintain
my Mr.
Perhaps not aware that trim all
the places periodically just
have general up keep of the
yard.
That relationship unless I am
their specifically telling the
individual how they do perform
the work in some level of detail
that person would be considered
an independent contractor Mr
speaker and gentleman and I
think some of you will recall
that there were questions as we
proceeded down the long and
winding road of this bill about
of the difference between an
employee and an independent
contractor and the concern there
was lack of clarity was in the
bill on that particular point so
I believe it's this this
ammendment to the bill adds
additional clarity for employers
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker generated from Los
Alamos agreed as clarity I think
it also adds some protections
for employees because otherwise
there.
There may be at least a desire
if not a tendency for employers
to to want to change that
relationship from employer
employee to to that of
independent contractor so I
think having a very tight
definition of independent
contractor helps in in that
regard I do have a question next
I'm looking on page seven of the
minutes in context.
And Mr speaker gentle lady from
Los Alamos there's paragraph B.
as in Bravo subparagraph one and
I noticed that there's some
language building structure with
regard to some dates.
And.
And submitted language at on
that references a date so can
you just help the body
understand what is what is the
date that's being referenced
here
as it applies to this bill being
effective.
Mr speaker talent from San Juan
to the effective date of the
healthy workplaces Act has been
modified through the amendment
process to be July one twenty
twenty two so I think the answer
to that question is it's still I
one twenty twenty two.
And this too was in response to
questions and concerns expressed
by the business community about
the lack of clarity and there
was a concern of it frankly I
think it was an unfounded
concern that this somehow would
be retroactive and employees who
were
employed prior to the effective
date of the act would deem be
deemed to have accumulated sick
leave so this clarifies that
sick leave will be given to a
few more light.
Either on the date of employment
or the effective date of the act
which as I just said was July
one twenty twenty two whichever
date is later.
Mr speaker generated from Los
Alamos thank you for that
clarification and.
as I recall the the previous
version
The way that I had interpreted
it was I think there was always
in my mind some.
Representative directive pieces
with specifically with regard to
a public health emergency
and receiving credit for that
public health emergency but as I
understand the Senate's changes
all of that reference to
additional hours under a public
health order of been stricken is
that correct.
Mr speaker examine the provision
on emergency supplemental
emergency sick leave has been
completely stricken from the
bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady from also
almost thank you for that
clarification and then the I'd
like to look at the bottom of
page eight.
There's a new sub paragraphs
seven.
Mr speaker gentle lady
can you just give us a little
bit of a review about
how an employer chooses
witnesses in the context of a
twelve month time frame for
determining how this sick leave
is accrued so you can you just
walk us through the options that
an employer has for determine
those twelve months.
yes Mr speaker and and gentlemen
and again I would note that this
amendment was done after input
received from the business
community and it is intended to
be in conformance with the
federal family and medical leave
act provisions that addresses
twelve month periods and there
may be employers in the state
that who have chosen certain
methodologies under that act to
calculate
the twelve month period in which
employees would be accruing the
sixty four hours and so this
provision gives the employer the
flexibility six to apply any one
of these methodologies which
are.
The R. the most obvious one is
calendar year.
If if if the employer doesn't
use calendar year it could be a
fixed twelve months leave here
such as a fiscal year.
as required by other law for
example we have
for it for example national
laboratory which is operated by
a private employer.
Austin's follows the federal
fiscal year so that might be a
more appropriate year for that
employer said that employer to
use to use that methodology.
Again the third option is a
twelve month period measured
from the date the employee
begins to use earned sick leave.
Or there could be a rolling
twelve month period measured
from the date an employee uses
any earned sick backward from
the date any an employee uses
any on sick leave so again Mr
speaker gentleman this provision
was added at the request of from
input I guess is that a way to
put it from.
Business entities and
representatives and it's
designed to give the employer
the flexibility it wishes to
choose.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos and.
I do appreciate that you took
input from the business
community I think that's
important.
Now I I I want to also turn our
attention the bottom page
eleven.
And we had.
Just previously briefly
referenced this this section
being stricken out
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos at what stage through the
Senate process was this section
trucking now.
Mr speaker gentleman from San
Juan this provision was
eliminated and Senate Judiciary.
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos can you just give me a
little bit of context about the
the dialogue that happened in
the community the discussion in
and sort of the the rationale
behind striking this section.
Mr speaker and gentleman frankly
there is very little discussion
about the rationale for
eliminating this within the
committee certainly there have
been concerns expressed at
various points in the process
about this provision and I am
assuming it's in reaction to
input received by the committee
from the business community.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos as I recall.
On this bill and I on honestly
don't review and I debated this
bill or not we've we've had a
lot of fun on the house floor
and remember if this is one of
those times we had a lot of fun
or not.
but I one of the concerns are
member having at least reviewing
the original legislation that
passed out of this house.
Was the possibility that a
businesses closed due to a
health order
but yet they and so they're not
bringing in any income and yet
they would be required to still
pay out sick leave I know that
was a concern of the business
community and I gather from this
section being stricken that that
scenario is no longer in play is
that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos.
I'd like to look at the bottom
of page fifteen.
There's the there's some
material about more generous
earned sick leave policy can you
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos would you just kind of
give the body an overview of
what this paragraph does.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
this provision was amended.
To clarify.
And Rick react to concerns by
the business community that they
might be required under the bill
to add additional sick leave on
to what they consider to be.
Generous paid time off policies
and business paid time off
policies are policies that don't
designate house have time off
can be used and generally it can
be used for sick leave vacation
personal errands you know a
whole litany of things and they
are written differently for
different employers and so on.
And so what this provision does
is says if you're an employer
with a strong PTO policy that
allows employees to use it for
any reason under any conditions.
That are comport with this act.
That time will be considered
paid time off leaves and the
employer will not need to modify
their policies just and there
was concern from some employers
in the state who have what I
think would be fairly considered
generous policies of that they
might under this bill the
required to supplement those
policies or otherwise change
their policy so we work with
business leaders in Albuquerque
and
Provided this in language and it
was deem to be acceptable at
least to some employers I can't
speak for everyone there are
we've got a tremendous amount of
input but this provision will
allow an employer whose PTO
policy is in compliance with the
act to count that those PTO days
towards the sixty four hours
contained in the act.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos again I appreciate you
taking input from the business
community.
When we talk about this concept
of the a generous existing PGO
policy.
That at least matches what's in
this bill remind me again what
is the a cruel cruel amount in
the underlying bill for the sick
leave.
The a cruel amount is one hour
for every thirty hours worked by
the employee.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Los
Alamos so then if I'm
understanding this new language.
As long as if let's say I'm I'm
an employer as long as my my PTO
policy provides for at a minimum
you earn one hour of PTO for
every thirty hours worked I
could use that policy to satisfy
the requirements of this bill is
that right.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
partly right it would have to
comply with all other provisions
of the act as well.
Mr speaker Mr speaker generally
from Los Alamos.
Are there are there other parts
that would normally be covered
by a PTO on I'm just I'm not
sure what what is that I'm
missing Mr speaker and gentleman
I I would.
I'll give you an example and I
would not call it a generous
employer PTO policy and that's
what frankly this bill was
concerned about some employers
in the state for example grocery
stores.
They claim to have you know that
and they do have a PTO policy
but they have all kinds of
constraints on their employees
as to how they can use it how
much time how much notice they
have to give so those policies
might need to be modified to
make sure they're in compliance
with the law the the greater the
generous employers that you know
top notch employers in the state
shouldn't have any trouble
complying with this provision
and that was the input that I
was read receiving from
employers in the in the state
who you know I think
by any reasonable standard would
deem their policies to be very
generous to their employees.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Los Alamos.
just sort of back the envelope
math.
If you let's say you work an
average of forty hours a week
across fifty two weeks I think
the the one to thirty ratio
comes out to about eighteen two
thirds days
and I actually I I I am
encouraged to see this language
in the bill because my fear.
What the underlying bill that
I'm afraid some employers and
end up doing is they they would
tell their employees.
you you normally get ten days of
of PTO you normally get to those
ten days you can use it however
you want is is ordinarily how we
function in the past.
But now the state of New Mexico
is passed this bill that
mandates sick leave so we no
longer offer paid time off
instead you now get ten days of
sick leave that you can only use
when you're sick and and that
was one of my concerns about
what you know what where the
rubber meets the road in actual
workplace of what would have
happened to these PTO policies
but I think what this language
does is it it rewards employers
that are already offering
generous PTO.
offerings to their employees
without having to do any kind of
shenanigans or you know legalese
to to get around the bill and
switch that PTO and now called a
paid sick leave I so I think
this actually helps those
employers that are already
offering PTO without having to
do that run around so I
appreciate that change the bill
and again I I appreciate Mr
speaker the gentle lady from Los
Alamos taking some input from
the business business community
their valuable part of our state
and so I'm glad that she did so
and generally thank you for
answering my questions this
morning I know it's early we've
had a lot of late nights thank
you for your patience with me
this morning and throughout the
session with that Mr speaker I
yield back.
Thank you gentleman this further
debate the gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
from.
Los Alamos yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee I'd gladly yield.
Just going through the amended
bill this morning.
Couple of questions did arise
and the first one.
Being.
Is a state subject.
Of this legislation.
Mr speaker gentleman the bill
was not amended the original
bill provides that
public employees are not public
employers are not subject to the
act and I would underscore that
was not part of any amendment
that was adopted by the Senate.
You're gonna have to speak up
just this.
From.
Later.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee the original bill.
Passed by the house did not
include public employers and it
was not amended in the Senate to
include public employers.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
for calling.
From.
Sure.
My.
To make it back across the
reserve.
Mr speaker examine it was not
changed in the center.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
let me move down to section six
of the amended bill could you
explain to me what a significant
portion of that was struck
please.
Give me a moment Mr speaker
gentleman looking for section
six.
Gentleman are you referring to.
This section six that I'm
looking at Mr speaker and
gentleman and I would say there
has been some re numbering so
it's a little I'm not quite sure
which provision I'm looking at
the more generous on sick leave
policy is that the provision Mr
speaker and gentleman that
you're you're referring to
Stambaugh gentle lady I'm
working my way back up there.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes four
that is affirmative it is the
more generous arms sickly policy
please.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
What happens there is it was in
house and Senate health and
public affairs where the more
generous sick leave policy was
amended.
And I'm trying to sort this out
in my mind but I believe what
happened was it the original
language was completely strapped
and we placed it with the
language included on page
fifteen and sixteen that's in
blue on my
amendments and contacts Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Yes Mr speaker gentle lady can
you tell me what the reasoning
was behind of these changes
please.
Mr speaker happy to explain that
is again
the provision was done to
accommodate employers who have
reasonably generous paid time
off policies and as I stated
when I was speaking with the
gentleman from San Juan.
Those policies we want to get
out that change was done to
accommodate those employers who
are concerned that those PTO
policies as they're called
would be negatively impacted by
the language in our bill and
that was not ever the intent
that we would negatively impact
PTL policies in a way that
employers might have to
specifically designate
particular time off has earned
sick leave instead in working
with the business community we
modified the language so that
yes they had a P. T. O. policy
that was in conformance with the
act.
It that those policies would be
deemed compliant Mr speaker and
gentleman from way.
distinguished please between
PTO and sick leave that you just
referenced.
A substantial difference between
those two policies so was
addressed in the strangers.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee I'm not sure how to measure
what substantial is but I can
certainly explain what the
difference between a sick leave
policy is in a PTO policy a sick
leave policy as the name implies
is time provided to employees to
be used for their own illness
perhaps doctors appointments
often employers permit employees
to use the time that sick leave
to deal with the illness of a
child or spouse or family member
that depends frankly on the
employer of course but it's it's
a narrow use for sick leave
only.
Up up up paid time off policy is
one that generally is on
specific meaning the employee is
told they get X. number of hours
off per year and that those
hours can be used for any reason
that the employee chooses to use
them for example sickly sick
time if there's such a need
vacation
caring for a loved one and a
number of reasons why unemployed
might need to be out of the
workplace for some period of
time so one the PTO policy I
guess I would say has a broader
uses stand a sickly Policy.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
Would P. T. O..
Be considered sick claims with
the employees actually.
Six.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I think it would still be
considered PTO however the
employer would.
what.
I think it would still be
considered PTO but the fact that
the employer's time off policy
is conform and conformance with
the act would therefore mean the
employer would not need to would
be deemed compliant.
So.
Speaker gentle lady I guess what
I've done out of that is.
That if you're sick.
You.
That taking use PTO.
For the hours that you're going
to be away from your employment
is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
only I think that's
deprivations.
Speaker gentle lady would you
anticipate.
This PTO supplanting existing
sick leave policies.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee I can't anticipate what the
UNM players across the state are
going to do.
employers have many different
reasons for making certain
decisions and so I think that
would depend on the an
individual employer and and how
they choose to conduct their
business.
Thank you for that.
Speaker gentle lady all.
Is made to documentation
requirements or the left in.
Mr speaker there was one change
in the documentation
requirements there had been a
provision that required the
employer to
Pay any fees that an employee
might be charged by their
medical provider should the
employer choose to requests that
sort of proof from the employee.
Beyond that the remaining
provisions are still in the
bill.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
If it doesn't matter why you're
taking the time off.
You can have the time off
whether you're sick or not.
I suppose.
Question would be why are
doctors hello.
Excuse No would be required.
Mr speaker gentleman then I'm
just then the employer wouldn't
answer for what day Mr speaker
John from only.
Madam speaker gentle lady with
respect to of the record
keeping.
Missions for this documentation
also use.
Some changes were made there
also can you address those and
why they were may please.
Mr speaker John could you point
me to what you're referring to.
Madam speaker gentle lady just
one moment place of work at the
appropriate section on this
computer screen.
The.
I apologize I can't seem to
locate what I'm looking for in
this document if I.
Let me
Let me move on if I could.
To.
Enforcement.
Civil action and burden of proof
could you describe those changes
that were made.
In the Senate portion of the
bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman on the
the one that I that I am looking
at and I'm always happy to have
you point me to what you're
referring to but the one I am
looking at is on page twenty
three and this was a Senate
floor amendment and what it's
what we what was eliminated was
language that says when it is
established that the adverse
employment action was motivated
by a combination of both lawful
and unlawful reasons the
employer may have the burden to
demonstrate that the action
would have been taken even in
the absence of the unlawful
reason.
Ladies first you're gonna have
to give me an example of how
that money.
Play our work I'm not quite sure
I understand the the process for
the education of the process
could you enlighten the body
place.
Mr speaker and gentleman from we
are Madam speaker so sorry.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
only I guess in thinking about
an example an employer might
have an employee whom that
employer deems to have
performance issues or maybe had
engaged in misconduct but the
employee has also been
complaining perhaps about the
employer's unwillingness to
comply with the act or perhaps
even denied the employee access
to the six leave to which that
employee was due and that
employee
filed the complaint well under
the act it is improper and
illegal to retaliate against an
employee for reliant using the
provisions of the act and
expecting it's employer his
employer to offers sickly.
But it is lawful for an employer
to take action against an
employee for misconduct or
perhaps for performance and and
such and it is if there appears
to be a mixed motive for
possibility of a mixed motive
the employer would be the the
burden would have spent on the
employer to establish that even
in the absence of the lawful
reason the action would have
been taken.
And that provision was
eliminated on the Senate floor.
So madam speaker and gentle lady
how would these and I would
think this would be relatively
common disputes these.
Please.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
would be and judicata through
the litigation process.
Mr or madam speaker rather and
gentle lady through.
Okay so we're we're going to
court now could you.
Could you.
So.
It's.
It's process for.
Mr speaker gentleman if I may
I'd just I'd like to consultant
consultant I mean I'm an expert
that I have on the line his name
is Shane Utes I just want him
for me to to verify something
for me same as an attorney
saying it's as an attorney who
has worked very closely on this
bill and I I do want to make
sure Madam speaker and gentleman
that I give you an accurate
answer.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady taken time.
Mr Samantha speaker and
gentleman from we the M. the
employee would have two options
one is an administrative option
that would be going to the
department of workforce
solutions and there are
provisions within the bill that
authorized the department to
issue rules as to how they will
implement this provision in
terms of investigations and
potentially mediation or
arbitration the employee will
have that option the section the
second option that the employee
will have is to go directly to
court to file a lawsuit against
his employer.
Thank you.
Madam speaker thank you gentle
lady for that answer.
So the burden of proof in the
circumstance were there or.
Perhaps employee performance
issues coupled with the of
health and workforce issues the
burden of proof would fall on
the employer.
To substantiate any action taken
against employee of if both of
those issues or implied is that
correct Mr speaker gentleman
there is a shifting burden
provision within the bill
and I would say it's part of the
original provision but I'm happy
to do to the mining briefly on
that point and what it provides
madam speaker and gentleman is
the employer must Sir first
establish show the non illegal
Moquino reasons for the whatever
act adverse action was taken
against the employee and the
employee would be required to
establish that that reason is
for textual and then the burden
would go back to the employer to
establish its their non
and discriminatory or illegal
restore retaliatory reasons.
Madam speaker gentle lady that
will be by virtue of one of
those two mechanisms that you
just described.
Madam speaker gentle lady I see
that there were some of.
Some dollar numbers changed with
respect to
To use could you address those
please.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
Lee yes and at the back of the
bill in section.
Trying to understand the
sectioning number I think it's
section thirteen eleven excuse
me there's re numbering employer
liability and madams Madam
speaker and gentleman what the
amendments on the Senate floor
were essentially cutting in half
the various penalties that are
included in the back in the bill
and
That's the change.
Madam speaker gentle lady there
are no other penalties aside
from monetary penalties for the.
Breaching maze employment.
Agreements is that correct.
Madam speaker gentleman let me
check with my expert there maybe
injunctive relief available one
one moment please.
Thank you madam speaker and take
your time gentle lady.
Madam madam speaker and
gentleman
The the employee has acts in
addition to these monetary
panel teas and employer and
employee would have other
equitable and
Remedies such as reinstatement
for example if it were shown
that an employer fired an
employee for exercising their
rights under the act.
Madam speaker gentle lady
damages.
Miss madam speaker and
gentleman certainly the amount
of the sick leave that they were
entitled to could be
Of awarded to the employee in
the bill also provides provides
for treble damages of the amount
of
Sick leave that should have been
in school afforded the employee
or the penalty whichever is
greater.
Madam speaker gentle lady
attorney's fees.
Up.
That portion of the bill Madam
speaker and gentleman was not
changed.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
so.
Just.
Briefly or attorney's fees and
or out.
Madam speaker examine the
original bill was not changed
and and and under the original
bill an employee is entitled to
attorney's fees if they need to
engage an attorney to enforce
their rights under the act thank
you very much madam speaker and
gentle lady for that answer and
solve with class.
B. O. approach.
Madam speaker examine the issue
of class actions was not
addressed in any of the
amendments.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
didn't hear that would you
repeat it please.
Madam speaker gentleman from we
there was no amendment that
touched on the issue of class
actions.
Thank you very much Madam
speaker gentle lady.
So there was no change made to
is it sixty four hours per year
is of course that was the masses
I came up with is that correct.
Madam speaker gentleman from we
the bill provides that employees
may accrue up to sixty four
hours a year.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
has up to sixty four hours how
few hours may be approved.
Madam speaker and gentleman an
employee can accrue one hour for
every thirty hours worked up to
sixty four hours a year I'm not
sure Beyonce making that
statement I have how to answer
your question.
Thank you for that Madam speaker
gentle lady.
During the.
Debate was the gentleman from
San Juan.
That.
The work was top notch
employers would already be
perfect.
Employees as the.
This legislation would
be of consequence do you
remember saying that gentle
lady.
Madam speaker gentleman I don't
believe I've ever use the word
top notch.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
apologize agency that.
What I'm getting at.
This could be construed to.
As a three point two percent
increase in the cost of
businesses in New Mexico doing
business now.
And that is what virtue of up to
sixty four hours of PTO which
you would think.
We could be construed as
productive for the employer.
So.
Madam speaker.
Hi I have with this.
Piece of legislation is is it
coming at the right time.
Small businesses many.
With very low margins probably
or not one thing on much more
than a three to five percent
profit March.
So by virtue of us with this
legislation.
Increasing their operating
expenses by three percent.
Could be making the difference.
The twenty in surviving.
In the recovery period from this
pandemic and perhaps not
service.
The gentle lady.
The the employer employee
relationship.
In the workplace is perhaps.
The most important relationship
the.
The family relationship.
And this poses the state.
In that relationship.
I think.
Will create less flexibility
between employers and employees
as to how these matters are
handled.
Will increase the cost to
employers.
Particularly coming up.
Of the COVID endemic.
Yes perhaps.
The wrong.
Message at the wrong time thank
you madam speaker thank you
gentle lady for your answers
world they were very thorough.
Thank you very much gentleman
from Lee.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Rio Arriba
Santa Fe and yes Representative
at a.
There is.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from real reverse
Santa Fe and Taos Representative
eta.
We'll go to the next are there
is for the.
I mean Madam speaker madam
speaker I believe I hear the
lovely voice my dear friend
Representative thought it us
from Rio Arriba.
Thank you thank you kind lady I
am Madam speaker and kind lady I
I totally appreciate you caring
this legislation this is this
has been probably one of the
most difficult lifts of this
session and I think people all
over the state are indebted to
you.
Or for help being open to create
lives of people who just better
I mean I think that's what this
legislation sure meets to do
I was just looking at the facts.
As it relates to the amendment.
kind lady and madam speaker and
I realize that as of January
first this year.
we started paying and that we
started paying ten dollars and
fifty cents a minimum wage bill
started also started being.
Two dollars and fifty five cents
an hour into wages I am am I
correct on that kindly.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
think that is accurate.
So if we kind lady and madam
speaker so
a person on a tipped wage
salary.
would really bring in wages of
about a hundred and two dollars
a week if they worked a forty
hour week isn't it would you
concur with that and lady and
madam speaker.
Gentle lady in Madam speaker and
gentle lady I'm certainly did
the maths and I would agree with
your house.
That's correct and madam speaker
and kind lady of the over
achiever at the session I would
I would also like to say that of
people making that minimum wage
make of that.
Four hundred and twenty a week
so that's we're talking about
really is that correct would you
agree with that Madam speaker
and gentle lady Madam speaker
and gentle lady for me over the
but I agree that.
So could we just go over I I
know that I know that we kind of
get off in these conversations a
little bit and I know we're
supposed to stick to just the
amendments that we are
concurring with in the Senate so
could you once again just give
us a quick overview of the
amendment that we're talking.
Madam speaker gentle lady in the
truce there are no amendments
that addressed how the approval
would occur and how the
calculations would occur and and
so that I concluded that because
although certainly there are
many issues brought up about the
bill that we work very hard to
accommodate Madam speaker and
gentle lady I didn't hear a lot
of concern about the number of
hours or this cruel right Madam
speaker gentle lady and I think
that maybe reflected by the fact
that that provision was not
amended.
Well I'm I'm thank you madam
speaker and kind lady so we're
that that the amendment so we're
talking about that we're in the
concurrence recovered and
senator what what we're
concurring today what was that
that amendment can you remind me
just what it covered.
Absolutely
Madam speaker and gentle lady
and I want to reiterate again
thank you for the opportunity
that the enactment date the
effective date is not until July
one twenty twenty two and this
gentlelady and madam speaker was
done out of recognition that
there are businesses who are
working to get back into their
normal operating mode and profit
mode and hiring mode and as a
consequence of those in inputs
we delayed implementation of the
act by more than a year.
The as I said the purpose clause
was reviews removed Madam
speaker and gentle lady and that
was that's essentially just a
technical legal kind of fix that
Senate Judiciary often applies
to purpose clauses
again gentle lady of the
supplemental leave provision and
that was the provision intended
to give additional leave to
employee said a public emergency
be declared and the need for the
employee to to not be at work
that was removed in its entirety
again at the request and working
with the business community.
gentle lady and Madam speaker
the language relating to paid
time off was clarified to ensure
that employers who offered PTO
that complied with the terms of
the act would be deemed in
compliance and gentle lady and
madam speaker.
There was up a change in the
sick leave documentation so that
should an employer choose to
request sick leave documentation
like a not a doctor's note and
that Dr David charges the
employee that employer would not
be required to pay for that.
And lastly the the penalty
provision were reduced by fifty
percent Madam speaker and gentle
lady and thank you for that that
questions.
Thank you madam speaker at thank
you gentle lady from Los Alamos
I think the thank you for the
that I clarification and I think
that the body needs to to really
understand how important it is
that I think you worked with the
business community to extend
that date one year we all know
that we're in the process of
recovery from this pandemic of
that we're rebuilding jobs that
people are getting these
vaccinations that people are
slowly getting back to the
workforce all over this state
and I just I actually think that
this is a way to help employers
and I'm very grateful for you
for doing that I'm also grateful
that you are rewarded employers
who have you know
paid time off policies in their
workplace
at so that they can help
employees basically have a light
fulfillment and and that's what
happened it and any wage level
we have entry levels workers
coming in to work for us and
then we have people who've been
in in I would say low wage
positions for many years of
their life so how do we how we
equalize that for people I think
is also one of the most
important things that we can do
it this legislature signed I am
very very grateful for you free
for doing that
As again as we come out of the.
What no one knew what happened
this this terrible pandemic hi
and this workers come back to
the workplace and and as we help
people I I want to remind study
and and I I guess madam speaker
and gentle lady from Los Alamos
we did a lot to help the small
business community in the state
to help recover and help to find
this pandemic when you say
that's true madam
Madam speaker and gentle lady
Madam speaker and gentle lady
indeed I'm very proud of how
this body and the Senate have
really stepped up in working
with the governor to provide
mechanisms to provide additional
monetary support force
businesses impacted by the and
pandemic I know all of us here
in the chamber and our
colleagues in the Senate and our
governor recognize that there
are businesses who have been
hurt by the pandemic and we have
enacted legislation designed to
support those businesses for
example we have expanded and
renewed our small business loan
program that loans that are
offered on very favorable terms.
We have a grants program which
we enacted in in appropriated
two hundred.
Million dollars to support small
businesses in requests requests
up to a hundred thousand dollars
a year.
and I know the Senate has
enacted legislation to support
restaurants and restaurant
workers and there's probably one
more but it it the detail eludes
me at this point madam speaker
and gentle lady but you know I
think.
I think we should all recognize
that there are many components
to a business and we for
providing support to the
business but we're offering also
moving in the direction of.
Providing support to what I
think a lot of us of the bank is
the engine of a business and the
engine being the workers who
ensure that permit businesses
successful and provide the
customer service if it's of one
of those types of Business and
advances the interests of the
business and I think we need to
recognize of Madam speaker and
gentle lady that providing by
providing this sick leave to the
engine of the business we are
supporting businesses as well we
know and research shows that
employees who have access to
paid sick leave will be less
likely to come into work and
make those of their co workers
six are members of the public
sector and begin circulating
illness in the workplace we know
from research that employees are
more productive when they have
access to paid sick leave and we
know that morale at tends to be
higher when employees are
respected in such a way that
they are given benefits to which
they are due thank you very much
for that question Madam speaker
and gentle lady.
And madam speaker and gentle
lady yeah I was thinking the
same thing when you practice
bill I was thinking wait a
minute how much have we done for
businesses and rightfully so I
am not I voted for every single
one of those measures I really
did how can we help businesses
how can we improve their get you
know quality and that and that
is the leadership team that we
have to that we have to invest
in as a state as a state working
to to do the the hard job of the
economic development and
economic development in rural
counties I mean it is it is not
easy it is not easy to to to
start and sustain a business in
rural New Mexico and I worked
along with other colleagues and
you and and both the house and
the Senate to see how we were
going to help shore up
businesses in our state and I
think is a state we did a pretty
good job of that I mean a state
with really not a lot of money
to spare not a lot of money to
go around one of the poorest
states the countries I really
think we stepped up for the
business community in this
pandemic and I'm really proud of
that work and the Madam speaker
and and gentle lady now that we
have.
S. chance here you do something
for the people that make those
businesses thrive.
And
Make those businesses work on a
daily level
I think it's a small thing to to
to just help sustain people's
health if we don't have a
healthy workforce Madam speaker
and gentle lady I think I think
that's that's a huge problem for
business when you agree.
I completely agree Madam speaker
and gentle lady and again I
would reiterate by providing on
employees sick leave we are
supporting employers by it by
encouraging employees to stay
home when they're ill no
business is served to have
workers coming in sec they are
not productive and they are more
likely to infect others Madam
speaker and gentle lady.
And madam speaker and gentle
lady and and that's true I mean
it's it's interesting how every
every part of our our life is
kind of connected to your
building up we talking about the
health of an individual the
health of the
business the health of a worker
we're talking about an economic
development model that that
we're trying to support and
build in the state and we're
talking about giving I really
think lowest paid workers in the
state I an opportunity to
somehow to somehow have a better
life in this in this complex
of this complex so meeting of
our life that we call our New
Mexico life wouldn't you agree
with that settlement Madam
speaker and gentle lady from Los
Alamos I'm Madam speaker and
gentle lady from Rio Arriba I
completely agree this is a
quality of life issue and it's a
quality of family life issue and
I think the fact that there are
some fifty other states in the
country who offer who require
mandatory sick leave and close
to a hundred and fifty countries
across the world who require
mandatory sick leave I think
that's indicative of the value
and significance of having
employers find this this small
time a bus monitor on off for
employees who are ill Madam
speaker and gentle lady.
Speaker and gentle lady wouldn't
you say that kind of I I I don't
know how to state this exactly
kind of our high end
Businesses and our prosperous
businesses kind of lead the way
in providing significant
healthcare significant family
paid leave significant health
benefits don't you think that up
probably significant retirement
benefits don't you think that
that leading businesses in the
state aim to do that for their
employees and and try to find
the best quality of life they
can the people who really
contribute to that success of
that business through that
corporation would you say that
madam speaker and gentle lady.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
think.
Companies and businesses that
offer the types of benefit
packages that you described
recognize that they want to be
competitive and they want to
draw
High quality employees to their
business and madam speaker and
gentle lady.
By becoming a state that offers
all employees access to the
earned sick leave I believe our
state is becoming more
competitive we have spoken about
the need to try and pull that
draw employees to the state and
not all of them.
Would have the qualifications
necessarily over the ability to
obtain employment at these
businesses have that that who
are currently offering very
generous benefit packages and so
if one thinks about it we've
been looking to draw trades
people to the state skilled
labor to the state and others I
often hear in my community about
the inability to find workers to
work in restaurants and the like
and by becoming a state whose
employers are now recognized as
offering this kind of benefit we
have the opportunity to drop
people here as well on that
basis madam speaker and gentle
lady.
And madam speaker and gentle
lady I I think I think that's
absolutely true I think you just
but I just put thank you put the
finger on it I do not how do we
how do we as a state improve not
only the quality of life for all
our citizens but how do we make
it an equal business environment
where where all all people of
all walks of life are respected
and and people of all walks of
life.
Are are rewarded with a small
really a pretty small number of
hours that they can count on
to to you know take a child to a
doctor to go to the doctor
themselves to
get the health care that they
need I I think I think that is
one of the most important things
we could offer all the citizens
and I would say I would say that
during this pandemic again Madam
speaker and kind lady I think we
did everything we could a given
given the limitations of our
budget.
to put together.
Different different
different columns of money us so
that we could move that over to
support people in hard times and
and for that I'm very grateful
and I now I think it's our turn
to just do one thing that helps
I and I think this does affect
people in lower wage jobs more
than in you know businesses and
corporations that that can
attract a high quality high
highly educated workers I think
it's time that we really think
about protecting those with the
most need would you say that
gentlelady madam speaker.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
One of the reasons I ran for the
legislature was to work for
people who maybe have less in
damages than some of us and I
feel very blessed to have been
given the opportunity to
have access to a lot of these
benefits that we've been talking
about this morning and I think
it's critical for government to
be thinking about ways to
support the lower two years
employees of the state Madam
speaker and gentle lady.
Speaker and gentle lady I you
know I did I did run is just a
small nonprofit it was that was
the foundation it was at a loss
Alamos national foundation and
we had about twenty employees
when I left and I always.
I always worried about
you know I I had a lot a lot of
background didn't early
childhood and early childhood
needs St and the impact of
parents of babies and all those
things and I really worked hard
to come up with a policy Madam
speaker and and kind lady yeah
we're really we're trying to
come up with the policy over the
years that would help protect
them see you know how if you
don't have a workforce that can
walk in in the morning and and
know that their families are
safe you don't really have a
very good work for people coming
in in the morning who were ready
to work aren't worried about
things at home weren't worried
about that's that's the kind and
the workers July you and happy
people walking into work every
day and I very carefully crafted
with my board of policy where we
could
Where we could put together
No just sick leave of people
could build up over the course
of years of work to actually it
was it would if they could build
up to
thirty days of sick leave if
they were there long enough and
they and they could get their
vacation up to thirty days a
safe and then I was you know
there was a user list of policy
and and that's to keep your your
books clear and that you know
not have a huge balance in
either one of those things I
mean so so I worked really hard
to do that because I always
wanted if we have.
Lot of young women in our in our
workforce and well certainly
women
childbearing age I should say it
that way and I always wanted
them to at least be able to work
up to have three months of the
sick leave and vacation so that
they could be home that first
three months with that baby you
I I I know you're so this policy
comes far from that but
ultimately I and I think in the
end kind of high wage companies
and
in those kind of environments
and used in the background of
the early childhood care and
what it takes for every human to
fulfill their potential don't
you think that's that's kind of
necessary Madam speaker and
finally.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
think you hit the nail on the
head and I think that's why when
studies are done that look at
mandatory sick leave policies
across the state and in states
that have them in countries that
have them you see that
productivity increases because
as we said Madam speaker and
gentle lady.
Please who are coming in you use
the term happy or at least not
stressed which is you know
concerns about a sick child that
they're worried about or
concerns about the husband's
needs addressing some elements
it lightens the load set so that
the employee can go to work and
focus on the work at hand and
not be distracted Madam speaker
and gentle lady was on some of
the stressors of their family
lives.
Sh thank you thank you kindly
for that answer and thank you
madam speaker and I you know I
did I was during some very quick
research on this and I I would
back to the workforce solutions
a data from and this is data but
it's that the most recent I
could find from two thousand
seventeen and we had fourteen
thousand minimum wage workers in
in New Mexico in that what was
yet two thousand seventeen so
that was that was said the
number of minimum wage workers
that we have and I think and I
could be wrong so I would like
you to tell me
Hi lady it I think this policy
that you've brought forward is
really to really help our our
minimum wage workers that are I
know the the least fortunate
workers I mean I'm that summer
you know summer entry level jobs
I get that and that's a always a
great place to start but don't
you think this legislation is
really aimed at impacting those
workers.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
I think that really is true
minimum wage or and low lower
wage workers you know their May
the person might be making
couple Bucks over that minimum
wage you know a manager of a
hamburger joint or something
along those lines where their
you know there may be paid a
little bit more than their
employees but still it's it's
it's they don't have the ability
to Ms or sick leave themselves
so that's I think those are the
true beneficiaries of of the
intent of this act the employers
with strong PTO policies they
they're not going to be impacted
we've we've made sure the bill
that employers with strong PTL
policies Madam speaker and those
tend to be you know the the
bakers you know more diverse
companies as they have the
ability and they are not
concerned about this this this
bill at all Madam speaker gentle
lady.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you general ladies so I just I
would just like for you to
remind me once again I know
we're in the amendment that you
go back and tell us how many
hours of paid sick leave that a
and minimum wage employee I
would be able to get on this
bill over the course of the
year.
Madam speaker gentle lady
employee under this bill would
accrue one hour for every thirty
hours up to sixty four hours a
year.
Sixty four hours here madam
speaker and kind lady so that
said that but we can two days
right we can two days seven days
is that we're talking about and
maybe and and Madam speaker
madam madam speaker gentle lady
I think that's about right you
of course it depends on
how what whether the person's a
thirty hour week person or a
forty hour week person our
pastime person and I point out
it's your halftime person you're
accruing hours at a slower rate
Madam speaker and gentle lady
there obviously some.
Who's working eight eight hours
a day.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you kind lady I I I just I it's
helpful to remember remember
those things in debate because
we can get down in the weeds so
much in a with a time off and in
these policies and how
businesses are recovering and
what the pandemic stewing in how
are you gonna get back into the
saddle again and so I think it's
just important to remember that
occurring one hour for thirty
hours week.
Worked for you know to have
sickly if the if the child gets
to the or if you get sick you
have that case the flu you're
probably just going to go down
for a week that's all there is
to it so so I guess with that
Madam speaker kind lady as much
as I enjoyed talking to you and
hearing about everything you're
doing.
I'm going to I'm going to yield
my time but not before I thank
you for this for this heavy lift
really this having left in and
if this has not been an easy
ride in this session and your
your amazing quality the to work
with the business community to
get people into the same on to
the same path for the benefit of
helping our New Mexico where
where site I am very grateful to
you hi lady and madam speaker
I'm very grateful to you are
bringing this legislation
forward for not giving up our
continuing down a long path in a
very difficult session and
It is not I thank you but this
probably people will never know
your name we'll never know that
you brought this forward we'll
never know why they got sixty
four hours of sick leave in one
years so on behalf of those
people.
Madam speaker
I thank you I thank you for
bringing this forward to this
house thank you.
I feel.
There's further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Strickler.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
shield.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
San Juan are you thank you thank
you gentlelady.
I guess where I want to kind of
touch on is this last year the
pandemic we really saw some
tough times and and I know you
recognize that and it and and
then maybe the maybe.
Right
will you need.
Excuse me thank you madam
speaker thank you gentle lady
and we suffered a great job loss
in our state.
we we had a yeah I'm I'm
referring to the LFC report that
just came out on February
seventeenth of this year and it
does go over the the
unemployment numbers that we
that we experienced.
The last year with a government
shutdown thank goodness things
are opening up now and we're
trying to recover but the Great
Recession I called the last
decade of unemployment it took
two years ten years the gentle
lady and madam speaker
two of the National that began
in January well H.
to January of nineteen
to recover lost jobs we had a
hundred fifty eight hundred
fifty thousand employed.
And it it it dropped down to
eight hundred thousand and then
it it popped back up to ten long
years.
it to regenerate hundred fifty
thousand and they were really
we're really going to positive
territory before the pandemic
and your guy or a year three
months ago.
And we reached a peak of eight
hundred sixty seven thousand
workers which is fantastic.
but unfortunately we we lost the
state lost eighty seven thousand
jobs and we hit a low point of
the seven hundred ninety five
thousand so I'm I'm just sharing
stories numbers way yet because
small businesses are struggling
and and this bill does not
protect small businesses doesn't
give him a tax credit to kind of
help pay for this
the.
the minimum wage went up to ten
fifty so that that added a
little more burden on the small
businesses and and I'm a small
business owner gentle lady I was
fortunate
that I work for large companies
billion dollar companies and
reason I went to work for them
gentle lady and and madam
speaker is because of the
benefits so these benefits will
real important may I have a
large family seven kids.
stay home a wife to take care of
all of us and kept things going.
In those benefits were so
important to me.
We had good health benefits we
had good retirement benefits we
have we had paid time off we had
vacation and we did have some
since we did have some certainly
than and and those are all
really important to me raising a
young family.
and I've reached out to the
small business community and
they're great people they they
love what they do they want to
get back to business and and I
have some numbers for you
those eighty seven thousand
jobs that we lost.
twenty nine thousand or thirty
four percent came from the food
services so the restaurant's
really took a beating we know
that there's
twenty thousand workers in that
industry and
they really took a beating of
the tribes lost ten thousand
jobs eleven apercent the mining
lost six and a half thousand
jobs
and the the employment is start
H. back up I think our current
employment right
from a low of four point eight
percent is eight point two
percent where the fate we had
the fifth highest unemployment
rate in the country.
So we've got we've got a long
held long hill to climb to
recover those lost jobs gentle
lady and this estimated corn the
LFC report they'll take is three
years to recover twenty twenty
three is one we hope to recover
those lost jobs I think it's
about thirty thousand people so
I just I just want to share with
the ladies and gentleman the
house.
That small businesses want to
want to take care of employees
you know we had but I've talked
to the chamber of commerce I
talked to the Hispanic chamber I
talked to the for us San Juan
County the Farmington chamber
and I just said was can we just
can we just costs a little bit
this is an extra burden and a
lot of at the wrong time to the
wrong place and maybe we can
work something out in terms of
maybe a small exemption for
employers that have ten or less
people and then we we presented
amendment on this and to give a
tax credit to those that have
under a hundred people and we
talk about how we were trying to
help small businesses and we and
we are trying the feds have done
a great job and it provided
grants and loans to small
businesses they've really
stepped up the states trying to
do our part but this is kind of
going the opposite direction and
and I understand the goal is.
the companies I work for major
companies gentle lady for twenty
seven years
and they they provided some sick
you know sekali I was fortunate
that I didn't have to use it
and and I want to I want to ask
you gentle lady.
this question.
If if you build up a sick leave.
Under your bill you know you're
you're full time employee you
build up
you know the sixty four hours
away however many hours you get
per year and any change jobs
is that employer required to pay
you for that that paid sick late
like vacation for example.
Gentle lady madam speaker
gentleman's that
question does not touch on any
amendment that I'm aware of.
I'm sorry I'm sorry gentle lady
I I didn't.
I was distracted I apologize.
So what what what is your bill
do in that scenario Madam
speaker examined that was a
provision that was not amended
however I'm happy to answer the
question and the question is you
don't you are not paid out the
sick leave time is that was the
question Madam speaker and
gentleman from San so so in
other words gentle lady eat You
use it or lose it and is that
how it works.
Madam speaker gentleman I would
say a better way to describe it
is if you are sick and need to
use the sixty four hours you
should use it because will not
be able to carry it with you to
another employer members just
reminded to keep be durable the
debate related to their
amendments that were blocked
within the center.
I'm sorry madam speaker I may
have a hard time hearing what
which I'm sorry I just reminding
members to keep the debate
connected to the amendments in
the Senate thank you.
We're talking about the amended
bill so okay I think we're done
and all right members are just
to keep it to the amendments not
to the man.
Thank you.
State your point speaker work
debating a bill that has been
amended we can debate any
portion of that bill not yes the
amendment.
Thank you.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady.
Gentlelady I've you know I've
heard I I really
Want to kind of come up with the
kind of issue scenario I have a
lot of small I have a lot of
small business owner for
friends back in Farmington
mainly in the restaurant
industry industry one particular
gentleman has eight employees
history restaurants you have to
close down one respond
fortunately.
and so we stand one restaurant
and
In in in in this in this case he
would have to develop a program
for those employees and a lot of
work part time so.
In that situation Las Vegas Las
remedy does respond Sam Gonzalez
charity on these it's just a
great community
later these are a serves on the
hospital board and just just a
great American
in history and history for K.
the gentle lady the last six
months he said report co any
prides himself and to take care
of his employees and and there
most of our food servers so
there you know I'm sure you're
on the you know under that
minimum wage component they rely
heavily on chips
and then he has course she has a
good staff of corruption sort by
it is lack work this business as
well how's this going to affect
this gentleman if this bill
passes.
Madam speaker gentle lady I I I
I believe we are on the Senate
amendments and so I don't I'm
not aware of any Senator
amendment that would have any
different impact on the business
them the original bill Madam
speaker gentle lady other than
the elimination of the eighty
hour emergency prevention which
as I said earlier was a
provision that was eliminated
some Senator members.
The well you're you're you're
bill as amended it would affect
you know if it goes in it goes
into effect at it I believe what
July one twenty twenty two
should get rid got a a year and
a half before this comes into
effect and so is that right
gentle lady that that was in the
amended bill.
The amendments that I believe we
are speaking about today from
Senate Madam speaker and
gentleman there was a for an
amendment in the Senate that
change the implementation date
to July one twenty twenty two.
Thank you gentle lady seven so
this particular business owner
has eighteen months or or twenty
miles to get prepared for this
and how how will this affect GM
maintenance.
You know these it has a lot of
part time employees
how does that affect them in
preparing for this bill and make
sure you studies and compliance
and.
and whatnot I just I just want
to be able to explain to him how
this is going to affect him and
in twenty months so we can
prepare
and make sure he's you know he's
got to go.
Madam speaker and gentleman the
amendment that we're talking
about extends the effective date
to July one twenty twenty two.
So I think you can tell him that
that was done Madam speaker and
gentleman to give him an
opportunity to prepare and I
appreciate that I really liked
that amendment I think that
really helps gives everybody
time to prepare and in my in my
in my small business you know
I'm I'm at I'm self employed and
I have to use contract services
CPA I have to I have to use a
CPA I have to use a bookkeeper I
have it in administrative help
and and they're all they're all
conscious you know we're all.
Contractors that they wouldn't
they would be part of this bill
they're they're simple light.
Gentlelady.
Madam speaker gentleman there
was an amendment that described
independent crops on director in
more detail Madam speaker and
gentleman and that the intent
was to clarify that those
individuals would not fall
within the act and give a little
bit more certainty as to how an
employer madam speaker and
gentleman
may identify what independent
contractor is Madam speaker and
gentleman thank you madam
speaker thank you July that
really helps because there's a
lot of small business owners out
there they simply they they
can't afford staff and so they
have to form out those services
and I know in a course we pay
gross receipts tax on those
services
and and that and that's that's
that's a good thing that helps
lower the local
taxation for cities and counties
and
We gentle lady a pre shaped the
amendments to the I think it
makes makes the bill a lot
better especially the the delay
from you know from July one of
of twenty twenty one to July one
of twenty twenty two.
I know the local chamber of
commerce and in other business
groups.
We'll try to prepare for this.
And the and I hope that that we
can do some adjustments to the
US and provide some relief for
the small businesses
that are gonna be negatively
impacted by the answer they're
trying to make ends meet
General gentlelady and.
Madam speaker I think
Representative Scott pointed out
that the small businesses have a
very very small profit margin
and they want to take your
employees are good employees are
hard to find
in need if you if you got one
you want to take care of them in
every way you can sell
I wish I was being bigger than
than I wish my basis which was
more so I could hire some folks
but I'm I'm just very small and
and I have to rely on contracts
services so
with again I appreciate your
your responses and thank you
madam speaker thank you gentle
lady.
Thank you John.
There is for the debate the
crime rating from Travis county
representatives out.
Thank you madam speaker will the
lady from Los Alamos for your
right the Santa in Santa Fe
yield.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Travis county I will you don't.
Thank you very much madam
speaker and gentle lady hi I
have read the.
Many substitute for your house
bill twenty.
When my first question is.
After reading this side and
still not quite clear is there
any sort of Ag The Simpsons in
this bill.
Madam speaker gentle lady the
House substitute that you are
referring to was amended in the
Senate and as the amendments did
not address.
Adding please madam speaker
gentle lady and madam speaker
that is what I'm reading I'm
reading to send that person up
in context and I just wanted to
make sure because I was missing
that part of that Madam speaker
being a member of the ag
industry which I am very proud
of I know that
That exemption.
For those workers is in place
but the one thing that I did
find troubling.
And the reason I'm asking this
question up for an ag exemption
is talking about seasonal
employees.
In your particular bill can you
give me the reason why that was
added.
Madam speaker gentle lady that
was not added through any
amendments through the center.
Madam speaker I'll look through
chair provide but I I thought I
saw it in your budget market.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
Why is what a state government.
Not being included in this
because it seems to me like it's
saying do as I say not as I do
can you tell me why.
Madam speaker gentle lady up I
cannot tell you why the Senate
did not amend the bill to
include.
Public sector employees.
Miss madam speaker gentle lady
I.
Really have a problem with that
because.
Why are we just hitting the
small businesses in particular I
mean if there is a business
that's considering coming to New
Mexico why would they want to do
this why would they come to New
Mexico if this particular bill
was enacted.
Madam speaker gentle lady are
are you referring to any
particular amendment that would
cause
I'm this is not New York you not
come to New Mexico.
Madam speaker could you repeat
that you're talking so softly I
can't hear you.
Madam speaker gentle lady I'm
sorry my most voice must go down
because and rarely much use of
talking to softly but I I
apologize maybe it's the mask of
Madam speaker gentle lady what I
said was Madam speaker gentle
lady is that I'm not aware of
any Senate amendments that were
added to the bill that would
cause an employer to consider
New Mexico to be a place they
would not wish to locate and I
believe that your question has
to do with the impact on drawing
businesses to the state Madam
speaker gentle lady.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
this would be a new business
mandate.
Is that correct can you.
Their fire disqualified that
question.
You
speaker gentle lady the only
amendment that I'm aware of from
the Senate that
Was created actually is the
removal of the health emergency
provisions so that excluding I
guess what one might have called
a mandate had it been retained
in the bill.
The madam speaker gentle lady
this is a mandate business and.
I don't know how you can say no
it's not whenever you're saying
this is what you have to do
Madam speaker and gentle lady
this this employee does this
bill.
Is it applicable to an employee
that has just one employee.
Madam speaker gentle lady none
of the Senate amendments modify
the number of employees
employees of employers to Honus
Act applies.
I hope I got all the modifiers
correct madam speaker gentle
lady.
Madam speaker gentle lady didn't
answer my question does this
employed distance.
Particular bill that we are
discussing here today.
Is it one employee or is it
started I employees or ten
employees.
My question was does it is this
applicable to one employer that
has one employee.
Madam speaker my understanding
of the concurrence process is we
are focusing on the amendments
that were done in the Senate on
the house bill and as I said
Madam speaker gentle lady
nothing in the Senate amendments
impact on the number of
employees of the employer to
whom the bill applies.
So madam speaker gentle lady I'm
going to assume because of.
The convoluted answer I just got
that it does apply to an
employer that has one employee.
Madam speaker gentle lady on
page four of the Senate version
that I have been reading and
studying and more dollars.
It says under the employee means
an individual employed by an
employer including an individual
employed on a part time
seasonal or temporary basis so
Mister speaker Madam speaker and
gentle lady whenever we're
talking about a temporary basis
that could mean that there was.
Somebody that came in just to
the state at an office.
And did some temporary
stenography work.
They would have to rate that
particular employee.
What this bill is mandating is
that correct.
Madam speaker gentle lady out I
will say beyond that there is no
amendment from the Senate that
touches on this issue and madam
speaker gentle lady I'm not
intending to be
Difficult but I am trying to
honor the process that has been
described to me just how one
goes through the concurrence
process this bill was heavily
debated through to committee
House process sees and on the
floor of the house and my
understanding and I have not
been corrected yet is the focus
is the amendments from the
Senate.
The bill has been in heavily
debated and I am more than happy
to talk about amendments made
through the Senate amendment
process.
Okay that's perfect madam
speaker and gentle lady but if
we're talking about the Senate
amendments on page four of the
bill under just whenever it is
talking about it's the
definition of employer.
It looks like to me like.
The area that the Senate has
struck into saying
In order let's see in a lawyer
means an individual partnership
association corporation business
trust legal representative or
any organized group of persons
employing one or more employees
at a time acting and then the
Senate struck out directly or
indirectly.
In the interest of an employer
in relation to an employee that
shall not include the United
States.
Is struck out the Senate struck
out this state or any political
subdivision of the state then
they feel back in with the state
or any political subdivision of
the state explained that to me
please madam speaker and gentle
lady.
Madam speaker gentle lady with
regard to your
question we in terms of the
elimination of directly or
indirectly the prevention I I I
I can't speak for what the
Senate did that that was
obviously a floor amendment and
asked to use the remaining
prevention the Senate retains
the language that
That this bill applies only to
private employers.
So again one more time were
saying.
Do as I say but not as I do okay
Madam speaker.
On page five of your bill the
Senate struck out.
All of section five which stated
public health emergency means a
declaration or proclamation
issued pursuant to federal state
or local up emergency related to
risk or threat to public health
Madam speaker gentle lady.
In your Original Bill this
language was included in that
and now it has been struck can
you tell me why in the first
place it was included.
Madam speaker gentle lady I can
respond to the amendment process
and I can tell you that that
provision definitional provision
of public health emergency was
fixed was eliminated because
later on in the bill the section
that would have required
employees to provide additional
time off estate and regency is
declared was struck and was
struck and sorry about that
madam speaker gentle lady of was
was removed or eliminated from
the bill.
Okay madam speaker since all
you're going to talk about is
just the amendments that are in
here.
Madam speaker gentle lady on
page seven of your bill.
The Senate the words on page
seven under B. one earned sick
leave as provided in the healthy
workplaces Act shall begin to
accrue a bond.
The latter.
That's language that the Senate
added in there commencement of
the employee employees
employment or the effective date
of the healthy workplaces Act
which according to what this
bill says is July twenty twenty
two.
And may be used on the and then
stricken language.
Letter of those date states
stricken all the language that
was originally in there and
replaced it with the latter of
those states look courting to
what.
This language says in the bill
and in the amended bill.
Hold on I'm trying to get all
these pages turned.
The effective date of the
provisions of this act is July
the first twenty twenty two.
So madam speaker even though
that this bill will not take
effect until next year.
I guess my curiosity has me.
Kind of.
Upset over this because one more
time.
We are putting mandates on small
businesses the government will
not be affected this and one
more time it is that small
employer independent employer
the backbone of our state that
we are mandate this.
Madam speaker.
Many funds more this language
that I have problems with.
On page eight.
Of your bill of the Senate
version of this bill and your
number six.
I understand what you're saying
when it different employers
succeeds or takes the place of
an existing employer all
employees of the regional
employer who remain employed by
the successor employer are
entitled to all earned sick
leave accrued when employed by
the regional player and are
entitled to use all earned
sickly trade bill previously
accrued.
Madam speaker I I do need an
explanation here that's not very
much change language right here.
But let's say that a boy E.
wants to leave that particular.
Business whatever it may be.
And they make application to
start getting their sickly.
But in the mean time.
They have already.
Secured another job elsewhere
are they still untitled.
To draw that accrued sick leave
pay.
Madam speaker gentle lady the
amendments that was made by
to Senate you did not read and
that was as provided in this
section and the section that
describes the circumstances
under which an employee may
retain its spam gets accrued
sick leave and that is when
there is a successor
to the original business through
which the employee he accrued
sick leave.
And madam speaker one more time
I could not understand need to
repeat please.
Madam speaker gentle lady yes I
will repeat I'll try to speak
louder at the amendment to this
section is the language as
provided in this section and
since the other question is
focused M. as in provided by
this section I'm happy to
describe what the section says
which is the original language
of the bill and it says that
essentially that yes unemployed
accrued sick leave with one
employer and there is a
successor employer at to the
original employer the accrued
sick leave is assigned to the
original employee.
Not really doesn't make sense
madam speaker and gentle lady
from that we're making gone down
to section seven on page eight
this is language that the Senate
has put in there.
And just talking about the
purposes of this subsection.
An employer may choose any one
of the following methods for
determining the twelve month
period in which the earned sick
leave may be used it can be
according to this on page nine.
The calendar year B. is any
fixed twelve months leave here
such as a fiscal year a year
required by any other law or a
year starting on an employee's
anniversary date C. includes the
words the twelve month period
measured forward from the date
of an employee's first use of
six earned sick leave workers
for.
A rolling twelve month period Mr
backward from the date and
employee uses any earned six
point and that's the area I need
clarified for me Madam speaker
gentle lady under dean of page
nine determining the twelve
month period in which the earned
sick leave may be used could you
explain that please.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
apologize I was consulting with
my expert this particular set
do maybe to give you some
context this was added in the
Senate and it's modeled on paid
family and medical leave as I
described when discussing this
section with the gentleman from
San Juan and what this
particular sectors subsection is
a rolling twelve month period
measured backward from the date
an employee uses at any accrued
sick leave it allows the
employer to choose the date
To wit from which he the
employee is deemed to have
accrued sick leave.
Madam speaker what I'm trying to
do here gentle lady out trying
to figure out how all these
amendments that the Senate
committee and.
How they are working.
He simply with your original
bill and sometimes whatever all
you want to discuss with me is
just the changes that are put in
it is not really.
Going into my mind as how this
is working so this is why I'm
asking these questions.
Whenever you're following up on
that over the rolling twelve
month period if you will drop on
down to eight is yes for the
purposes of this subsection year
to year shall run concurrently
with the twelve month period
elected by the employer
explained that particular
section to meet there so I can
figure out how this.
Is being determined by the
employer.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
again this provision was added
by the Senate and it's modeled
on the S. family provisions and
it was intended to give the
employer flexibility.
And just to the specific I'm
here rescue referring paragraph
State.
Yes an employer for example
chose
shows at it's okay it's
discretion to have a year period
as Danny six twelve months eight
period year to year would be the
six twelve months you're period
to the next six twelve months
here.
Madam speaker and gentle lady so
madam speaker gentle lady what
I'm hearing you say.
Well let me in in the context
that you just described that as
Madam speaker gentle lady.
The employee can accrue all the
sickly as state at the end of
whenever they decide they no
longer want to work for this
employer think and actually use
every bit of that sick leave.
At one particular time is that
correct madam speaker and gentle
lady.
Madam speaker gentle lady this
provision.
Does not go to.
How and when the employee he may
use the sickly.
And the use of the sick leave
would be based on
the destinations for which sick
leave maybe years to.
So madam speaker gentle lady but
I am hearing you say because it
is not specific in your
specially with the changes that
the Senate made an employee and
let me tell you something that
do want to let people know that
most employers in the state of
New Mexico that are the backbone
of the State excluding state
government.
They do value their employees I
do want that pointed out so I
don't want any hate mail okay.
These employees of these
businesses are valued by their
employers.
What I am hearing you say is
that these employees can rack up
all these weeks.
Paid sick leave and they can use
them all at one time in the
panelists site that they decide
to take a year off if they have
to create that much sick leave
thank you possibly do that.
Mr speaker at I thought it was.
What is the difference between
good safe and reasonable effort.
On page two and down at the
bottom there was a change their
made by the Senate no I'm sorry
this is the house we can
disregard that because it is not
in reference to the Senate.
So madam speaker I am noticing
starting on page eleven at the
bottom.
That the Senate struck all
language starting at the bottom
of the page eleven all this page
twelve has been stricken all of
page thirteen has been stricken.
All of page fourteen has been
stricken.
And the majority as page fifteen
has been strict.
And then it starts out with the
new Senate amendments it's new
material.
And it's they heading given is
more generous earned sick leave
policy.
An employer with the paid time
off policy that makes available
and amount of earned sick leave
sufficient to meet the cruel
requirements of the healthy
workplaces Act that may be used
for at minimum the same purposes
and under the same terms and
conditions as the act is deemed
to be in compliance with that
act however on the expected date
of the healthy workplaces Act
the sick leave required by that
act shall be in addition to any
paid time off provided by an
employer pursuant to a
collective bargaining agreement
unless that pay time off
provided may be used for the
same purposes and under the same
terms and conditions as they
healthy workplaces Act.
Madam speaker gentle lady that's
a pretty sizeable amendment that
that the Senate took into
consideration and act on.
Madam speaker were you in
agreements with this because
this was your bill I think and
yours and Representative Rubio
is how comfortable were you.
With all of those pages all of
that language being deleted and
this holiday section put in here
starting on page fifteen.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
the of our amendment related to
emergency we which begins as
you've noticed on Kate's.
Eleven.
And then goes to page sixteen
year I don't have a line number
but just the four section six
was done at the request of the
Senate Judiciary Committee and
we acquiesce to that change we
we said it was acceptable to us
as for state arms second
amendment which was done and
Senate health and Public Affairs
we amended it with the section
that's right below the section
madam chair and I'm not on
speaker and gentle lady was the
provisions that is in blue on
the
the amendments in context
document that language that was
replacing the retired language
removed from section six with
the blue language was proposed
by us Madam speaker and gentle
lady and that proposal was done
after speaking with business
community members and their
representatives at the request
that we clarified that P. T. O.
policies that comport with the
requirements of the act would be
deemed compliant and that madam
speaker and gentle lady was
gonna are requests.
Okay thank you very much I did
read that wrong I do apologize
to the body that was done on the
house side my dad.
Just because my eyes are a
little bit tired right now madam
speaker just like everybody else
is here.
Madam speaker gentle lady on
page seventeen of your bill.
Can you tell me what the
sentence structure all sections
C..
And then they remember the
following sections.
Concurrently after that
particular section district in
that section talking about
states if an employer chooses to
require documentation for the
purpose of the use of arms sick
leave the employer shall pay the
cost of any verification by
health care professional that is
not covered by insurance or
other benefits plan can you tell
me what that language.
It.
I'm sorry madam chair sometimes
the Senate's.
Judiciary in the house Judiciary
this.
In just seven times hard to read
because I know there's a lot of
attorneys on both of those
committees and every one of them
usually has a different opinion
on something that in here.
No words can you tell me why
section C. was deleted from this
bill.
Madam speaker gentle lady that
was a floor amendment that was
done by the Senate I was not
present when it was done
I speculate Madam speaker gentle
lady and my speculation as as
with all bills that include
policy decisions there is some
balancing and of of who where
the burden should be put in in
this case the Senate concluded
that lawyer should not be asked
to okay pay for any fees charged
by medical providers when an
employee is seeking to verify
their use of sick leave.
So miss madam speaker gentle
lady what I'm reading here.
The Senate decided Hey let's
take one mandate office that
employee you're at that
business.
So the employer at with their
striking of that particular
language under sections see we
gave the employee or bright
what a concept we are trying to
help employers by doing that.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
On page eighteen of the bill.
I just want to make sure I have
this right before I go to
discuss that madam chair Madam
speaker and gentle lady on page
eighteen of the bill under
section Nancy.
Section voted what they tried to
section six.
Is new material is that all
material that the Senate put in
there Madam speaker gentle lady
Madam speaker gentle lady no the
only amendment it Senate put in
on page eighteen was are
remembering based on the fact
that they had eliminated the
emergency leave provisions and
of course that would then
require need remembering and re
lettering and madam speaker
gentle lady I do understand that
because it was a remembering
their that under that particular
sectional process name material
notice notice and posting
requirements which one more time
mandate what that employer has
to do so I do hope all the
members are aware of what.
Mandates have been put on this
employer who is now going to
have to pay.
This sickly okay.
So madam speaker on page
nineteen then we're still
following down where we are
remembering everything.
And again from page twenty.
The Senate has stricken the
words in good state.
And I'm cert there of
reasonably alleged violations of
the healthy workplace Act.
We still going down with
remembering part of it.
And madam speaker.
On page twenty two of bills this
is something that's kind of
trouble some to make nonstop
kind of troubles and it's very
troublesome.
Because we're talking about the
violations of this particular
act and what can be done to that
employee you're one more time
let's hit.
Our private enterprises right in
the guts okay listen let's add
some more rules to the Singapore
players Madam speaker gentle
lady on page twenty two the
Senate struck the works an
investigation by division shall
not be required to file a civil
action.
They struck all that language
out can you tell me the do you
have any clue why that
particular language was
stricken.
Whenever you are.
Still.
You know what madam chair the
way I'm reading it that is not
even a complete sentence.
The way they struck that
language out.
They forgot to capitalize that
letter right here and I I know
I'm reading distract madam
chair.
Gentlelady can't are you looking
at page twenty two.
Madam speaker gentle lady I am
looking at page twenty two.
Maybe that's just a type of
their madam speaker gentle lady
which you agree with that.
Madam speaker gentle lady I I do
not agree with that there is
stricken from from that
provision
the floor amendment and
investigation and etcetera
etcetera it shows as read online
version and then you will see
in blue and red for state struck
the lower case Hey and
capitalized the hi the eight
that's immediately preceding so
it reads a lack of an
investigation by the division
shall not act as a R. etcetera
etcetera Madam speaker gentle
lady.
Madam speaker I do see it it was
hidden in there because.
That blade I guess they were
running out of coloring in the
printer but it is yeah I do see
it would be held about this far
back in rated about hold it out
that far okay so madam speaker
what I'm seeing right here that
that a complaint still could be
settled in a court hearing it my
understanding that right madam
speaker gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentle lady yes.
Okay and I see the Senate added
under C. one after the fact the
date that the healthy workplaces
Act they have bad at that and.
And madam speaker.
Pages together sorry about that
on page twenty four whenever we
are talking about.
What.
Yes I did employees could be
compensated for.
Madam speaker of page twenty
four line at my this page is
numbered at all I apologize for
that but it's under the section
under one on page twenty four
you originally had in there that
and I will read this so it will
make sense to the body.
to an infected employee for
instance of sickly taken by an
employee but unlawfully not
compensated by an employee urge
in in and out the equal to three
times the wages that should have
been tight and then the language
the Senate struck on the floor
was one thousand dollars and
they added the words five
hundred dollars.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
I guess I'm kind of curious
where the one thousand dollar
figure came up with and what the
Senate made the decision to tax
cut that in half and make it
five hundred dollars.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
again that was a floor amendment
dropping the one thousand
dollars to the five hundred
dollars I was not present on the
floor when there was discussion
of that item
I think it's fair to assume they
preferred lower number Madam
speaker gentle lady.
That madam speaker if you will
finish reading that paragraph it
does save even that they struck
your language that said one
thousand dollars which is now.
Spies live five hundred dollars.
Four three times the wages
whichever is greater Madam
speaker and gentle lady to have
taken that language all the way
down into section two of that
they struck the one thousand
dollar language again.
And maybe replace it with five
hundred dollars in section three
they struck the five hundred
dollar language ands in place.
Inserted two hundred fifty
dollars in section four.
They struck your language is one
thousand dollars and made it
five hundred dollars.
And it is up with and
reinstatement or other equitable
relief as determined by a
quarter loss over one two three
four instances they changed the
language that you had inserted
and madam speaker I'm sure that
with great deliberation I'm
probably with help from your
expert witnesses those who help
to work on this.
Your particular language where
you were going to have the
employee your.
Rate this one thousand dollar
fines.
The Senate took it upon
themselves to cut everyone of
those figures and house.
So maybe it is the Senate that
realizes the importance of an
employer.
Madam speaker I'm sorry yes
dusted for instances and
actually there's six instances
because that language is
continued on page twenty five.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
I want every person out there
that does work for somebody
else.
To be paid their wages paid.
In a timely manner.
The madam speaker.
One more time in light of.
This emergency order that was in
place.
All last year.
The ones that suffered the
worst.
Where the small businesses.
Madam speaker I have been an
employer.
I am.
I guess maybe my has been
employs makers on the ranch and
now.
But I have a John Deere
dealership we have we have been
in business and agriculture with
many employees.
And madam speaker the changes
that were made here.
Are not beneficial to those
businesses that dudes the state
our state.
Madam speaker.
I'm not going to get into the
personal side at this yes if
you.
That are out there listening.
Do know that we are trying to
save our state but whenever we
continually make it harder.
For any business to come to the
state of New Mexico because of
the mandates.
That a put upon these businesses
why in the hell would any
business elect to move here and
why would any business that is
trying to make a living and
stated New Mexico.
Why are they.
Going to be faced with another
fund some mandate Madam speaker
gentle lady whenever those
particular businesses do value
the work of their employees
Madam speaker gentle lady that's
all I have thank you very much.
Discredited eight prime
gentlemen from done and wrapped
in Sierra representative
expressed.
Thank you madam speaker.
The kind of.
Lady puts you.
Madam speaker gentleman ideals.
Speaker a gentle lady.
We had a big debate about this
and.
Not labor.
And
It was a it was a.
Very strenuous debate because
people are.
Yeah on both sides are
concerned.
Would you say that.
Madam speaker gentleman the this
is a concurrence item and madam
speaker John and I believe it's
the items that we are discussing
are to be focused on the
sentiments.
Madam speaker of gentle lady I I
agree with you and I'm gonna
stick a hundred percent of the
amendments I just wanted to
express the the.
How you know things were on both
sides and I guess what I was
going with that Madam speaker
gentle lady is you know a lot of
us.
we see things and the
perspective that we are in so as
employers we see.
That perspective of how this
could affect our business and
how we can.
Not just the bottom line Madam
speaker gentle lady
in a session that we say can I
am I able to pay my way am I
able to keep my employees my
able to retain my employees am I
able to to fulfill my
obligations.
On the side of the employee
being that you know
well I'm almost go back general
us you madam speaker gentle
lady.
Being a a person that has worked
for minimum wage at three thirty
five and.
As up.
Been on both sides of the fence
starting out with the business
that with no employees and some
one employee and billing I'm up
to twenty two employees I I
understand the multiple
locations I understand.
Kind of on the.
Low end of of a smaller end of
business small business.
And so as an employee I I can
see how some of the stuff looks
appealing and and as important
because you want to make sure
that you can you can have the
time also if you are sick and
need that and so this this
battle.
Madam speaker gentle lady the
gentleman we are just trying to
find what actually balances.
And that's very important Madam
speaker gentle lady that we find
balance.
As much as we try and and and
and and we all see it from the
perspective that we all see it
from we we definitely need to
find balance so I wanted to
start with that because it's
just you know sometimes these
these these debates on get a
little.
Exciting.
I've learned that as as a
freshman in in this in this
house and my first session and
so but I appreciate all the the
the dialect and all the
conversations that we've had
back and forth I think everyone
is trying to do the best they
can to the perspectives of the
State things up.
Not gentlelady of excuse me Mr
stern Madam speaker gentle lady.
So.
Does your amendment and anyways
for the amendments have been
placed by the Senate student to
them anyway she performed
Mr delay time I guess for
starters I was wondering about
that.
Madam speaker gentleman of the
Senate amendment delays
implementation of the act to
delight one twenty twenty one
twenty twenty two excuse me.
Madam speaker gentle lady and
that and and I think that's good
being that we are in a in a
situation now that obviously the
pandemic we have some many
businesses that are suffering
Senator stressed out by that
But what we're all dealing with
or some of us and I think every
person has been up impacted by
that whether you're a business
or not would you agree with
that.
Mr speaker gentleman could you
repeat the question there's been
some distractions that I I can
hear you very well that's okay
would you agree that.
many of these these businesses
whether in business or not many
people have been impacted by the
pandemic the that is we have
recently seen.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
would agree that many businesses
and many employees have been
impacted and many
families have been impacted by
the devastating effects of the
COVID pandemic that has caused
us
to has to.
Care about our health and
welfare to a degree that I don't
think probably anyone in our in
the room just had the space in
our by Khan and Mr Stewart madam
speaker and gentleman this bill
is designed to address one small
part of that deficiency.
Madam speaker gentle lady thank
you very much right you know so
the on the delay right so I
appreciate by the way the delay
for for having that.
Having just started I was going
to was going to begin with the
start or finish up will not
finish up with talk about this a
little later but in on I'll just
jump to.
I guess page eleven.
where it into my computer just
timed out of the screen just
went blank I think it says there
madam speaker gentle lady that
That the merging sea Clause of
the additional eighty hours has
been stricken is that correct.
Madam speaker gentleman yes I
think that has come up in about
every discussion that we've had
thus far so I can confirm again
that the Senate removes the
emergency professions.
Madam speaker gentle lady I know
you've been asked so many times
I just wanted just to show and
and and.
Appreciate that being removed
and then why I'm I'm
appreciating that Madam speaker
gentle lady is because had that
been in force.
What has that been enforced what
would that have match if we if
we could go back in time we
started in this help ward began
in a restaurant.
Who was shut down.
Was implemented with this order
well whatever that have been.
Madam speaker gentleman
in fact it is my understanding
we cannot go back in time that
we are being presented with
amendments from the Senate and
that the two currents
discussions focused on them
those amendments so at present
Madam speaker and gentleman
there is no emergency provision
in the bill.
Okay madam speaker gentle lady
let me let me we raised that.
If and other emergency such as
the one that we just.
Experienced.
This legislation if this
legislation were state in
because I'm trying to appreciate
what you that by removing that
what you've done please so.
Again I'm gonna rephrase it if
I'm emergency health order was
to be enacted again.
Such as the one what we just
experienced if you're this part
of the legislation would still
be in in enacted.
What would that have meant.
Madam speaker gentleman again
the Senate bill removes this
provision and it's my
understanding that in this
concurrence process discussing
what was originally in the bill
is not part of the process Madam
speaker and some.
Speaker gentle lady I thought we
could talk about anything being
on the first one I thought we
could talk about anything that
was amended from the original
bills correct.
We Madam speaker and gentleman
the subject or object of the
secession our amendments that
were placed on the bill by the
Senate.
Not many other amendments.
Madam speaker gentle lady was it
was this language stricken by
the Senate so what would that be
considered an amendment.
The
original language was stricken
by Senate Judiciary Madam
speaker John okay so I'm just
gonna go ahead and and some what
what I what I saw and I I just
wanted to appreciate that that
language being removed.
Had that been in effect again
I'll just.
Set myself
we're actually had to have paid
or business will have to paid
eighty hours of sick leave at a
time when the up health order
was enacted of sick leave.
That would mean that every
employee that you have.
We're going to Janet was a
restaurant would have had to
rate every single one of their
employees eighty hours.
Now we just said that every
Employee was making minimum wage
and I'm just gonna round it down
to ten dollars an hour.
At eighty dollars.
That would have been eight
hundred dollars in the paper
here and I'm not including.
it is a payroll taxes or any of
the other things that go along
with.
With up they were all that's
that's just a questions payment
your employee also out there
will taxes which is you're sure
I got.
Medicare and social security
deductions thank you have to
match those factored.
Taxes which is seven and a half
percent total of fifty percent
so and a half by the employee
Senator half percent by the
employer many people don't
realize that but as part of it.
And of course is all the other
the things that are that are
that on importers
Yes with which is our
gentleman insurance and so
forth.
So but anyway we're just gonna
say that we're just paying
payroll to eighty eighty dollars
are to be in the hours of ten
dollars making it a hundred
dollars you know I in my
district.
I have many restaurants Madam
speaker gentle lady who had.
In restaurants on this gonna
stick with restaurants is a
simple everybody recognizes that
there was some some restaurants
are two employees.
There was some that had ten
employees those some that had
fifty employees yes some
restaurants that have a hundred
and twenty employees.
And has this been inactive.
This would have meant that
calculated the for the one that
is it's a nice restaurant that I
go to all the time and Misia I
don't see their name on the air
Madam speaker gentle lady but
that a hundred twenty employees
and they were that they were and
in dire straits to suffering
because they have all these
employees but anyway
and they're all trying to stay
in business but course with the
health workers at a closed
eighty hours hi at ten dollars
an hour is eight hundred
dollars.
At a hundred twenty employees
would be ninety six thousand
dollars at a employer would have
to pay in a two week period.
How what would happen madam
speaker gentle lady
because there's some there's so
I don't I guess there's some
there's some penalties if you're
not able to pay some of these
Provisions are in this bill
these mandates McCall mandates.
What are those what are
penalties that can explain as at
four for the people out there
that are watching madam speaker
gentle lady can you explain to
us what those.
What those penalties or will be
if up employer does not comply.
On because you made some changes
down to cut him in half so can
you explain that and what those
violations would be and how they
would work.
Madam speaker gentleman just to
clarify there you present us
with a long description of a
provision that is no longer in
the bill and I understand your
question to be now what are the
penalties well Madam speaker
gentleman there are no penalties
because the provision that you
described in the bill and the
lanky hypothetical Madam speaker
and gentleman that you find the
body does not relate to the bill
any longer as the that provision
was stricken from the bill I
sent.
Speaker gentle lady and for that
I thank you that makes it a
little bit more palatable and so
I wanted to congratulate you for
allowing that to happen but back
to my secretary my question what
are the penalties and can you
explain to me how those
penalties work in your bill.
Right.
Madam speaker gentleman's.
The enforcement provisions about
which to which you refer excuse
me.
Sign me find them at the back of
the bill
there on page twenty three and
twenty four and through
amendments in Senate Judiciary
the excuse me through amendments
on the floor chair of the body
the Senate chose to cut the
the specific penalty provisions
and passed in every instance and
I believe I had a discussion
with the gentle lady from Travis
on this provision.
Madam speaker gentle lady I'm
please bear with me I've I've
had five operations on my eyes
so I have to sit down so I can
read my my my
computer Hey I have difficulty
reading from a long distance and
my eyes just like others are
tired here because we've been
looking at that computer for
quite a few nights here so if
you'll just give me a second so
I can get to that page.
Madam speaker gentle lady you
have a map that you have a
number of.
Of the penalties here.
That were cut in half.
And so again my question is
explain how you can get
penalized five hundred dollars
Madam speaker gentleman I'm
happy to go through each
paragraph with you
for instance a sick leave taken
by an employee but not but
unlawfully not compensated for
the the penalty is a five
hundred dollar potentially five
hundred dollars yes five hundred
dollars is three times the wages
that should have been paid.
For instance a sick leave
requested by an employee but
unlawfully denied by the
employer and not taken by the
employee or on lost Lee
conditions on searching for
finding a replacement worker
it's an amount equal to actual
damages.
Or five hundred dollars
whichever is greater for
instance of retaliation the
penalty is equal to the actual
damages or two hundred fifty
dollars and recognizing it
excuse me number four for the
instance of prohibited
discharge the potential penalty
penalty is standard kind of
damages or five hundred dollars
or and reinstatement or other
release.
Eighty four each will full
notice or read recordkeeping
violations the amendment and can
licenses the employer by two
hundred fifty dollars and for
any agency classification of
employee as an independent
contractor actual damages or
five hundred dollars which is
ever greater whichever is
greater.
Madam speaker gentle lady two
things stood out to me one was
actual damages so I take that
Madam speaker gentle lady as
that that penalty would be a
minimum because it if it's
actual damages could it be
higher and.
How explain that to me how high
did that go.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
provision was not amended by the
Senate the only provision that
was amended by the Senate where
the actual specific dollar
penalties.
From us you madam speaker gentle
lady but you mentioned up actual
damages and I just want to
understand that.
Madam speaker down again that
was in the original bill I
mentioned it so that I would not
mislead the body by only snowed
in the on the two hundred fifty
or five hundred dollar penalty
but otherwise that was part of
the original bill Mr speaker
John Madam speaker gentle lady
there's another operation up all
by the way I'm gonna take that
is is it could be a lot higher
Kinsolving that means who knows
how.
Anyway Madam speaker gentle lady
might my question is reporting
you have a there's a penalty you
have a written up a reporting
entity or no a way of keeping
track of your hours and
documentation of some sort can
you explain.
How you can get a violation for
for that I think you said two
hundred fifty dollars Madam
speaker gentleman again that was
part of the original bill and
that was the enacted that was
passed by the house and just to
reiterate and I just want to
underscore why I am sticking to
the rules of the house and I'm
sticking to the rules of the
house because I think it's
incumbent on all of us to be
very mindful and respectful of
the rules of this body we often
talk about that and the court on
and so on Madam speaker and
gentleman and so in an effort to
ensure that I am respectful of
each and every member of this
body I am doing my very best
madam speaker and gentle
gentlemen to page here to the
rules of the body Madam speaker
gentle lady you know I
appreciate the the.
That dialect I'm always I always
try to be as respectful as I can
and I am trying to be respectful
before you don't you we've got
to keep in mind madam speaker
gentle lady I'm not going
outside of out of bounds I mean
we're talking about the it's a
penalty if the penalty of two
hundred fifty dollars we have
people are they're listening in
right now and they want to stamp
how am I going to get to the
change that point five hundred
two hundred fifty dollars.
What am I gonna get fined for
two hundred fifty dollars so
this and how can I get fined for
two hundred fifty dollars so I
am sticking to the rule madam
speaker gentle lady because I'm
wanting to understand for not
only only for myself or my
understanding but for those who
are listening and those are
looking in and taking the time
to be here on the Saturday
before noon instead of fishing
they're paying attention to us
to see how they gonna get
impacted which I don't blame of
it in a lot of emails and phone
calls and so I'd like to explain
to the not only the body but
those who are listening and we
are absolutely.
Obligated to explain this to as
as as an amended I'm out what
how can they get a penalty for
what I asked you earlier thank
you.
Madam speaker gentleman I'm
happy to review will down that
that provision which we went
through a minute ago and that is
on page twenty four for each
instance of retaliation
prohibited by the act.
The there is a potential for a
two hundred and fifty dollar
penalty.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady but those also penalty for
if I understand it correctly for
not
Keeping your records for
recordkeeping was second to
madam speakers only.
Madam speaker and gentleman for
any willful our record our
record keeping violations.
The penalty is two hundred fifty
dollars for any willful
violation Madam speaker and
gentleman your gentle lady so
what what that provide be.
Madam speaker gentleman I'll say
again maybe I'm speaking too
softly the penalty for that is
two hundred and fifty dollars
all right madam speaker I just
want to make sure I understood
that right so it was it was more
because I wanted to stay
understand still want to
understand okay will fully help
we will fully do that give me an
example of what we don't want
people to do so that they don't
get fined madam speaker gentle
lady.
Madam speaker gentleman again
that was part of the original
bill and it was discussed and at
length at various committee
hearings and the potential for
being discussed by the body.
When we debated this bill on the
floor I don't know feels like a
lifetime ago given all expensed
route but it has been thoroughly
discussed Madam speaker and
gentleman part of the original
language of the bill.
I am the speaker gentle lady I I
when I'm sorry New Mexico order
we can't talk about that and so
you have to figure it out I hope
you don't make the mistake so
Madam speaker gentle lady.
Is there anywhere on your
Sir and in these up amendments
because we talked about a delay
or it was delayed.
It was delayed.
The public.
Of emergency or Clause are
emergency clause was delayed
till July of twenty twenty two
is that correct.
Madam speaker gentleman
I think the question is not
quite Frank correctly the
emergency clause was eliminated
and remember Madam speaker and
gentleman emergency meet cost
means a bill would take effect
should that regency Crosby part
of the bill that was eliminated
and amended in the Senate to be
July one twenty twenty two.
So I'm sorry ma'am I I apologize
for me asking a question you
know.
I sometimes get ahead of myself
when I start.
Turning those things around
anyway so anywhere at Madam
speaker gentle lady is there
anywhere thank you for that
anyway so I guess what I was
going with that is there any
other delays because I I I
remember that was a sixty day
delay I think on page seven.
And that was removed can you
explain why that was removed and
what it was.
Madam speaker a gentleman there
was a provision that describes
when an employee may begin to
accrue the Senate amended at to
find that the a cruel employees
a cruel will start either on the
date of employment or
Astor the bill becomes effective
which we have said many times is
July one twenty twenty two.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady so that sixty day the so I
think we have that the lady
it was my understanding was.
Is that for a new your
employment that I that I
understand so if you I hired an
employee and they work with me
for the first sixty days there
was a there was a this this
sick leave Act wouldn't take
place till sixty days into them.
Being higher did I misunderstand
that ministry could generally.
Madam speaker a gentleman the
Senate chose to amend the bill
to eliminate and delay of sixty
days.
Madam speaker gentle lady okayed
so I'm gonna I'm gonna try one
of those.
So I can understand this
correctly Madam speaker
generally so if a new hire comes
into work.
Day one.
We have this happen a lot of.
Not all employers are good and I
don't all employees are good and
not all of them are bad either
way vice versa so but you know
we have those upon the cracks
and we have some issues there so
let's just say we have an
employee Madam speaker gentle
lady and I've seen this happen
I've seen this happen in in our
hometown to be hired at the
money
although to some that may be
like are you kidding working out
of money it's something that is
is is an accomplishment for some
and and I always I'm gonna tell
you something for my kids most
of my kids love.
Doesn't matter what you do.
As long as what you do is
honest.
Your kind and respectful.
A good living I respect that
very much.
To me Madam speaker gentle lady
one of these we can teach our
children is to be respectful and
earn a good living respectfully
to their employer and that and
if you're an employer you
spectacle to your employees
because they are your working
family.
We need each other vice versa.
In order for us to to live we
need our jobs and and R. as an
employer we need our employees
to make get get from point a to
point B. but every once in a
while we have an employee madam
speaker gentle lady comes to
work.
And just one quick paycheck
that's on fortunately come in on
the and they are.
We come to work in the the they
work only a couple weeks to
three weeks some of us in the
somebody works three weeks
ninety eight ninety hours and
then.
Calls in sick.
Now under the this bill and I
don't know that we can talk
about it again my computer shut
off so I can't timed out so I
can't see it on the amendment is
we talk about that and if I'm
going to something I should I
apologize but my question is
person comes to work ninety days
calls in sick
What are the what are the with
with this language what are the
privy to in sick leave time.
Madam speaker gentle man the
biggest year of my life is to be
mass but I will do my best first
Madam speaker and gentleman tell
me what the date of employment
was.
We're gonna say this I don't
know we're gonna say it was us
we're talking about the future
are now we could say it was
right now and three weeks from
now I hired somebody today and
in three weeks we're gonna just
say they work ninety hours what
are the privilege to.
Zero.
Zero paid sick leave time earned
sick leave time zero.
Madam speaker gentle lady don't
they get one hour for every
thirty hours worked.
Madam.
Madam speaker examined
they do once the act is
effective the act is not
effective until July one twenty
twenty two.
Madam speaker use the snake you
want out thank you very much
this this this mortician ordered
and then think of that that's
why I'm not an attorney.
So madam speaker gentle lady
we're gonna say is where we
raised this.
And we're gonna say it's July
first of twenty twenty two.
And three weeks after that
ninety days or student ID hours
of work what would they be
privileged to.
Madam speaker a gentleman with
an effective date of July one
twenty twenty two and the
employee begins working arms
alive one twenty twenty two.
And the acro weight is one hour
for every thirty hours worked I
believe the mask comes out to
and this is the big surprise
three hours of sickly Madam
speaker gentleman.
The gentle lady but we can't say
that for sure because of
government happy governor has
decided someone just play that
on you just for a little bit
just a this first miles.
Madam speaker gentle lady didn't
smile we got to have a little
fun this is our last day.
Madam speaker gentle lady so
could that employee technically
where.
Right after that.
Madam speaker of.
Gentleman.
As far as I know please and quit
when they wish to quit I don't
think we.
There's any law that prohibits
employees from leaving their
employment.
I'm sorry madam speaker gentle
lady I did you ask me a
question.
Madam speaker gentleman no I
actually was answering a
question Madam speaker gentle
lady I'm sorry you know let me
tell you something I told my
wife I admire her very much
because she raised our children
are five kids and she can listen
to me and the other five kids
and know what's going on I can't
do that madam speaker gentle
lady so as we talked over here
and I apologize I I thought I
heard someone say you've got to
answer that question so give me
a second I was just.
There were there show me
something I just want to get
give me one second Mr speaker
and gentleman I totally
understand that women can multi
task I get it.
I agree with that I will let me
use that word I think her.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
so we have we have a.
Is brought to my attention the
like I said madam madam speaker
gentle lady we have we have
Baxter's okay and and and there
was a class action lawsuit
against the.
A restaurant.
Who was having their employees
come in thirty minutes early to
clean and prep without any
benefits or compensation and so
you know there are those those
employees that are unemployed or
excuse me that are
That.
The ticket runs of the
importance.
And you know.
Sometimes madam speaker gentle
lady we get caught up in all
these things that it's
businesses against employees and
one party cares about
the employees and the other
business the the other one is
just business minded I don't
believe that madam speaker
gentle lady I'm gonna tell you
something
And I hope you know as a as a
freshman you know I I I might my
intent is to do the best I can
to work with one another and
help each other and protect
those everybody both employers
and employees.
And you know.
We have to make our state.
A place that is.
Palatable.
Two other industry coming in.
And it you know
Even though this legislation you
know it sounds very in some in
some ways sounds very good.
it also can can cause some
issues internally because there
are some small business
somewhere worried about the
start up businesses that are
going to be affected by this.
What about up the guy because I
remember starting my business.
And literally I want to tell you
I opened the car wash when I was
at when I was twenty seven years
old.
And I literally took all the
workers I made that day out of
the out of the bins.
Put him on a table and I counted
everything out to get an average
if I was going to be able to pay
my bills are not.
It's hard to be a business in
business.
And it's hard sometimes to be an
employee.
But I believe a Madam speaker
gentle lady if we if we work
together we can definitely
Make things better for New
Mexico.
But I feel it's so important
madam speaker gentle lady for us
to find ways to attract
businesses because right now
we're not doing a very good job
of that and speaker gentle lady.
We have a lot of we have a lot
of the businesses that are that
are struggling.
And the more we start piling on
their backs the more we're
a place that is like boiling
water to to employers.
And you know I would love to see
that we we we have policies that
we're we're encouraging this is
to show up to our state.
I have so many so many
businesses that have left my
little town.
So many businesses that that
that have been hurt I not only
this pandemic but by the rules
and regulations statutes that
have been passed.
That is stifled some of these
businesses.
And there's there's there's you
know unfortunately at when you
look at it you know from the
outside I remember having my
first business madam speaker
gentle lady I tell me why you
think you're you're a
millionaire just because a
because you own a business and
it was just a little car wash.
They do know is that I I'm
making I'm I'm just like
everywhere just like everybody
else we're just trying to work
I'm working ninety a hundred
dollars to try to make sure that
I stay in business and so
there's a lot of guys like that
out there a lot of issues we're
guys there's a lot of people out
there like that Madam speaker
gentle lady that are trying to
just survive and are literally
there are employers that.
I know a lot of employers that
make pay roll first.
And they put themselves last
they make sure that all the
employees are are paid they make
sure that their their employees.
Have what they need first and so
there's times that I know that
what when I run my business
there's been times that I.
I don't make any money but I
made sure that all my employees
got paid to the grace of god
I've been able to make payroll
never struggle to do that well
let me rephrase that not
struggle but I've been able to
accomplish here.
So madam speaker gentle lady
Again you know I know you've
been you've tried to do this to
to try to help people and and
and again it's a it's hard to do
the things that we're doing this
these are tough tough debates
top things that
We do in this house but.
At the end of the day R. I hope
to see us come together work
together and and try to find
ways that we can.
bristles gaps for for the second
the safety of all
businesses and employees and of
course for the betterment of New
Mexico.
Madam speaker gentle lady I'm
gonna touch on one more thing.
And that is the.
That every time that we had it's
funny I hear sometimes I've
heard people say you've got a
you know a little bit those guys
the business or the businesses
should be paying more than they
should be more than they should
and they should and should.
The important part is every time
that the people that that.
Businesses penalised the more
that they are.
The more the more regulation
that they put on a business the
more cost to stay in business.
In a business in order to stated
in business has to do one of two
things.
After it inked thank increase
their income.
Or they have to.
reduce our costs.
And there's times madam speaker
gentle lady that they've reduced
all the costs they can and
there's no other way but to
raise prices.
But I can assure you most times
when when regulation is piled on
on the backs of of of
The business's it definitely
means that.
Costs are going to go up to the
consumer.
So if we can always keep that in
mind that what we're doing has
to balance for.
Employers employees and the
consumer we have to keep them in
and in that in mind and would
you agree with that madam
speaker gentle lady.
I agree that Madam speaker and
gentleman that we have multiple
obligations and
responsibilities one is
absolutely certainly that we
support businesses in the state
and second we've gotten support
employees families.
Any number of some people in
this state and so to that extent
I definitely agree that madam
speaker and gentleman that we
need to be all doing all that we
can help businesses and to help
employees hello also banned
seriously impacted by the
disease of the pandemic in the
resulting.
Restrictions thank you very much
Madam speaker and gentleman
Madam speaker gentle lady thank
you for that needed a lot better
job of multi tasking and I did I
saw you talking toward three
people on something hear me.
Well madam speaker gentle lady
one of the things that we want
to make sure that we're doing is
that we treat teach our the the
are you.
I'd like to see this body take
the time to invest money in our
in our in our future by teaching
our our the use of of New Mexico
the importance of.
Of being a productive.
Do everything they can to be
productive in their jobs and
to better their education to
have a good work ethic.
And so that you know everyone
does their part not just not
just the business not just an
employee.
But everyone together mutually
do that together so with that
madam speaker gentle lady I
appreciate the the debate you've
been out of wonderful person and
I don't get to do this for at
least for a few we I don't I
understand a couple more weeks
and so but I've enjoyed our back
and forth Senator gentle lady
thank god bless you.
The committee from Bernalillo
Representative states and.
Madam speaker
this motion being debated for
three hours I move that the
debate sees.
All right.
eight this is may.
May.
Yeah I just have.
Generated because.
Madam speaker.
First I want to thank everyone
in the body for the important
debate on what I consider to be
an extremely important issue for
the state and that is how do we
care for our employees and I
would like to acknowledge and
recognize my co sponsors
Angelica Rubio and Patricia
Roybal Caballero who has been.
Key in our efforts to Pat get
this legislation through both
houses multiple committees
working and listening to both
employees and employers as to
how we can improve this bill and
I am pleased by the product that
we have produced and shared with
you today.
And was that Madam speaker I
move and urged the house to
conquer and Senate amendments to
House Judiciary substitute for
House labor veterans and
military substitutes.
For house bill twenty as
amended.
We have a motion to concur with
the Senate amendments to House
Judiciary Committee subjects for
House they reductions that's
ways after substitute for house
bill twenty five mins amended
without the emergency clause all
those in favor of the motion to
prepare hi I'm Cheryl call
please.
I thought you were gonna go by
voice vote madam chair.
Yes.
Point of order madam chair I
just want to make sure to of.
did a vote on this you're
welcome.
The vote is now open.
Is.
What what.
The first.
The end of the first one.
Twenty seconds remaining.
The clerk to call those data
recorded the.
Representative Anderson no
Representative Anderson is no.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Figueroa.
Representative Lord.
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya both
no.
The vote is now closed and
emotion of forty one in the
affirmative twenty six and a
negative house bill for twenty.
House as compared with hi
Senator amendment for House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House labor's veterans
military affairs at the house
bill twenty five times amended
without the birds.
Madam speaker.
Madam speaker.
Jeff personal correctly it's
place eighty point.
Madam speaker thank you very
much the four time does run out.
This is been a very hard session
for all of us whether you were
here on the house floor.
Or working remotely we had no
benefit of anybody being able to
come in to the people's house.
It was very hard because on
certain instances we did have to
shut down committees because
internet service is down Madam
speaker members of this body.
It's very.
Troublesome for me whenever we
have new members of on the other
side and I don't even know what
they look like I have never met
them in person Madam speaker.
I do want to take this time to
thank all of those people that
we have had working for us to be
able to help those and these are
the people that do make us look
group days are LA's these are
analyst these are the people
that are in the background that
don't often get this recognition
all of our sergeant at arms here
that have worked tirelessly all
of the people that set up there
on the podium we appreciate your
help very very much Mr speaker.
Members of the body.
Lee.
We New Mexico will be on the
then we need to have a I drove
workforce again in our state Mr
speaker.
During the second half of this
particular session that were in
whenever we meet again next
January.
Hope that we are all here in
person.
And having the people's house
open to the people of the state
of New Mexico where the thank
you come in and they can be part
of this procedure Mr speaker
thank you very much.
Next one item to other
concurrence calendar gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Lewis are you ready on
concurrence for House Bill to
thirty one.
Thank you Mr speaker I am the
gentle lady to make a motion.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
the house concur with the Senate
amendments to house bill two
thirty one we generated to
explain the amendment Mr speaker
the amendments were made to have
the text read and more in
context with what is currently
ran and the elections called and
I am agreeable to propose
amendments right.
Is there debate seen a general
reserves us curry Senator Venice
Bill two thirty one as amended
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
All those going all.
This is considered in the Senate
amendments to house bill two
thirty one as amended with an
emergency costs.
Gentleman from Santa are you
ready on item number three.
I am Mr speaker I move that the
house can occur to the Senate
amendments to house bill two
seventy eight.
Needs and how do you urged the
value of.
Mr speaker I urge for body to
vote yes the gentleman to
explain sentiment.
The speaker and I to be honest
this bill came out of the house
was to.
G. R. T. reform items on it but
when the Senate was done with
the budget there was only enough
funding for one of them so the
amendment removed the G. R. T.
exemption for business to
business accounting and
bookkeeping services but retains
the manufacturing equipment
production.
The seeing no debate the
gentleman is move that the house
concurred with the Senate
amendments jazz taxation revenue
committee substitute wrestle to
seventy eight all those in favor
please signify by saying Adios
parenting.
Spearmint.
No.
House has concurred to the
Senate amendments to house
taxation and revenue committee
substitute to hospital two seven
eight.
Thank you Mr speaker gentlelady
from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business bad
reading of legislation.
No objections so ordered.
Leisure and ask more of these
three items.
R. I nominate read out loud
because I want to make sure you
get the item numbers correct I
we're gonna start item fourteen.
Is item fourteen Haskell two or
two.
That I have.
I am thirty three.
Senate bill three twenty five.
Item thirty four Senate bill
three twenty eight.
And I have thirty six.
Okay was taken in reverse order
will be sold out at thirty six
thirty four.
Thirty three fourteen.
Generated really and you have
item thirty six.
Members who was the house
sponsor for Senate bill two
eighty five.
The record reflect election
necessary replacing Senate bill
two eighty five as amended on
final passage isn't taken.
The gentleman to explain it or
Mr speaker and members of the
house this allows a mentally ill
person to be transported to the
mental facility with by
ambulance and not require that a
police officer always start
transport with that stand for
questions senior debate
gentleman to close.
Mr speaker I now move that
Senate bill two eighty five as
amended to now us.
Folks are going to go back to
our thirty second clock last
night.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill two eighty five as
amended the vote is now.
What.
What is about to close.
The clerk to call the members
that are recorded.
Representative Anderson.
Representative bash.
Representative Dow.
Representative Lundstrom.
Yes Representative Lundstrom is
yes.
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya is a
yes Representative Roger
Montoya.
Representative Roger Montoya is
yes.
Representative Nibert
Representative Nibert is yes.
Representative Dan very.
Yes.
Representative Stansbury is yes
Representative closed the by a
vote of sixty six to zero Senate
bill two eighty five as amended
has passed the house.
Next that I'm thirty four.
This is the general idea.
Representative Madrid is your is
insurance.
Yes your work let the record
reflect all action necessary
placing Senate bill three to
eight on final passage has been
taken the gentleman to explain.
Thank you Mr speaker on the
bottom this is removing a six
year limitation on the is
imposition of a water and
sanitation gross receipts tax.
I stand for questions C. noted
made German closed.
Thank you Mr speaker by no.
Senate bill three twenty eight
do best.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill three twenty eight
the vote is now open.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Lujan both yes.
Representative Rod Montoya
Representative Rod Montoya both
yes Representative Pettigrew.
Representative had a group both
yes.
There is a close liability of
sixty four in the affirmative
three in the negative Senate
bill three twenty eight has
passed the house.
Can go to item thirty three is
gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Lewis.
with someone invite
Representative Lewis back to the
chamber and we're gonna go this
item fourteen Mr speaker.
Yes I think I was just going to
be thirty three armed I'm happy
to okay let the record reflect
election necessary place in
Sierra three twenty five on
final passage is uncertain the
general to explain about thank
you Mr speaker so this bill
allows the OAG to settle a claim
for damages because of the
highway shorter but addition
with that I stand for questions.
See no debate the gentleman
close Mr speaker do remove a do
pass for several three point
five.
You're on final passage of
Senate bill three to five the
vote is now open.
What part of the problem.
K. next resented item.
Are so the clerk called the
members that are recorded on.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Baldonado yes
Representative Baldonado votes
yes.
Representative Cook yes.
Representative yes
Representative Dow.
Representative Dow both yes.
Representative Maestas yes
Representative my act both yes
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya both
yes Representative bash most
folks yes.
We have you indicated that is
yes Representative bash thank
you Representative closed minded
sixty five any permitted to
negative Senate bill three to
five discussed house.
Next Rhode Island fourteen.
Let the record reflect alleging
necessary basically Energy
shurikens seventy percent option
which is intended on final
passage has been taken down to
explain it all.
Thank you Mr speaker honorable
members Senate bill two oh two
deals with the.
corporate statutes and what it
does is it combines the LLC
statute the nonprofit of the for
profit so that person so that
companies can have their name
and also doing business as and
what that'll stand for
questions.
I see no region I do notice is
this has a house amendment.
I'm not we were in the last few
minutes with the gentleman.
Wish to consider striking a
motion to strike assonance yes
Mr speaker we would we would
just ask that the house
amendment to be stronger John
it's very unique emotions that
affect.
Mr speaker I move that the house
of my Mr Senator to to be
struck.
The Germans made a motion.
Jennifer Lee US debate the
motion.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo
you'll.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman can you
explain the amendment and and
the intent of striking the house
amendment Mr speaker thank you
Mr speaker examined it what it
does it added the LLCs to the
list of the niche is required
for this to policy information.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John are you about.
German the clerk is informing me
that she wants to do a
handwritten Energy spying it
plenty of time so let's pause on
this and we'll come right back.
we'll go right back to will
stand third reading but if the
Germans very attention to work
and get the and return them for
will the standard reading will
deposit correct.
Okay members we have the floor
amendment has been turned in.
It simply strikes the commerce
and economic development
committee amendment you had
explained is there objections
adoption of house floor
amendment number one to Senate
Judiciary substitute presentable
to a two thousand ended.
Are you.
The house commerce and economic
development committee amendments
the house amendments to central
to its use in many have been
stricken by the doctor just one
minute everyone.
The Senate Judiciary Committee
subsidy percent or two or two as
minute.
Is there debate on the bill.
jobs.
Thank you Mr speaker our.
At.
I was reading it real quickly
and and the so all the changes
that were made and.
My question to that gentleman is
is whether or not with that
striking of the amendment
doesn't accomplish the purposes
for which were annunciation we
can do to ensure.
Sure thank you Mr speaker I
yield to the gentleman and the
answer is yes all it does it
does Mr speaker German.
Mr speaker I was admonished by
the parliamentarian I forgot the
yield so I apologize to the
gentleman from Bernalillo we're
not asking your deal but
appreciate I'm sorry your.
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen so there's not not
changing the purpose the the the
amended language does not the.
The minutes the purposes for
which you were speaking of the
original instances that I
understand thank you Mr speaker
gentleman from Chavis Lincoln
that's correct it it it where
ninety percent there in commerce
we added LLC's forgot to take
that out for this to become this
year we got out of next year but
the crux of the bill was for all
Of the for profit non profits to
to disclose all the names that
they do business so
so it does not I did jeopardize
the the intent of the bill or
the the meat of the bill.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you.
Seeing no further debate the
gentleman to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
the Senator two hundred and two
as amended or it was amended in
the Senate actually do not pass
we're on final passage of Senate
Judiciary processing percent of
bill two oh two the vote is now
open.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Baldonado.
Yes Representative Baldonado
votes yes.
Representative Dow.
Representative Dow votes yes.
Representative Lord.
Representative Lord votes yes.
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya both
yes.
What is a close relative sixty
seventy permit is your negative
Senate judiciary and substitute
Senator two oh two.
Has passed the house.
We gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objections order.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Eleven fifty nine AM I move we
adjourn until twelve OO one
Pierre also come to order.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and.
Show all those present in this
morning session.
In this afternoon session your
the judge's order.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the record
show that the judge has been
reading through subject to
approval of the rules of the
business committee no objections
order the gentle lady from
burning.
May I have a point of personal
privilege.
See your point.
We asked.
We ask for strength.
No.
We would basically no weaknesses
when these
these Mr speaker.
We saw.
Don't miss when we want
to use in all engagement I mean
no discord.
We
just respect we discuss which
and we.
We despair we
the words.
What we chose in.
Moments in not just call us back
full words can be but we also.
Is do.
Of all shared fate values of
love and respect.
Do we expand the beauty of the
tribe
of working together that made us
believe what is possible.
And memories to be cherished Mr
speaker we also experienced
quickly.
More Mr speaker each day however
we saw the extra
make sure.
Don't miss when we.
Right and wrong Mr speaker we
what
was your date.
We had the day before that.
Yes today we
blessed new day brought us
another chance to do our very
best we do Moscow's by our
failings Mr speaker we want to
remind you that what we say how
we say matters what what Mr
speaker what bring us great joy
what's gonna be very helpful
what's gonna be full Mr speaker
I take this opportunity this
very moment to.
Speaker thank you.
Representative Jim from Travis
county Representative Rod.
Mr speaker.
Thank you to them and.
On the other side of the island.
What Mr speaker what we shared
last night and coming together
to make sure that we represent
the people of New Mexico.
Mr speaker agreed with me.
Leave this.
And so I say thank you to
speaker what Mr speaker we all
know.
We.
During this time let us one
another before we.
Do not.
One of the Mr speaker.
The speaker thank you.
Members
of the representative
ball.
Democrats because I want you all
to know that.
Yes as we.
Sees his children we are here.
New Mexico so.
As we leave Mr speaker let this
session of the one that we
remember that we.
We sat together we did what.
So.
You Mr speaker I'm.
Members of.
Because.
I respect each one of you
because
the end.
That.
We did a job and a job.
Mr speaker.
Thank you generate the gentleman
from Chavis that in our job the
two thousand.
Well Mr speaker of the gentle
lady yep this.
Mr speaker I have become
accustomed to her hollering at
me.
Same.
I I
I do appreciate the majority
leader efforts last night I
appreciate the.
The ability to work across the
aisle and to do things that are
good for New Mexico I would have
to tell you Mr speaker and
gentle lady I think we missed
the mark on this issue.
I think we have.
Burdened middle class
With some some.
Taxes regulatory burdens in in
the time that the.
Many of more stressed.
But I know that young ladies
alright.
And I I sincerely appreciate her
words thank you.
The gentle lady from Santo all
this.
I would just like to say that I
extra apology.
The lady from Bernalillo and.
Leave on a high note thank you
Mr speaker.
For those watching at home
please understand the generation
Santa and the gentle lady from
early are very very good all
success trends the generator
earlier Representative Lewis
thank you Mr speaker I just want
to take a brief amount of time
to think all of the staff I and
my committee members from state
government elections in Indian
Affairs we had such a successful
session and I think everyone
worked really hard together in
the most professional an
amicable way and I just want to
thank my colleagues for that I
also want to thank our
incredible staff that has worked
hard every single day we got so
many bills out of that committee
and streets because Saddam
Mary Allen Maria you guys all
did such great work Howard so I
just wanted to take the time to
appreciate them as well as our
custodial staff because they
would be coming to my office at
late hours trying to clean her
still on the floors so thank you
all I really appreciate all the
work that you did and it just
makes our lives so much easier
especially during this hectic
time so thank you I appreciate
you.
Thank you generating the next
year the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Thomson.
Thank you Mr speaker I too would
like to thank all of the staff
I'm in the entire building or
offsite I would people ask me
when I first started serving
what what was the most
surprising thing at for you
there and what I said was that
we have the most amazing people
working for us I'm they they
treat us like like probably
better than we deserve to be
treated a lot of times but and I
especially want to thank the pax
staff Allison who became the
committee guesses that
Unbeknownst to her she was asked
to fill in and she did a great
job and my analyst do we have
Allen and Lee and did a
wonderful job and I I Mr speaker
I do want to say the house.
Really show this year how much
we could have the public at all
we had committees that had two
hundred three hundred people in
the audience and many of them
made made public comment we we
couldn't possibly have had that
if for no other reason than we
don't physically have the state
so there were bumps in the road
but I our staff did beautifully
and I think we have the house
really invited the public into
I'm during what are really hard
times thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you generally next year
the gentleman from Colfax more
of Rio Arriba and setting up.
Mr speaker and body thank you so
much right as a freshman I just
felt compelled to say.
What it was like you know when
when I ate side about running.
When I thought about running for
public office I was somewhat
afraid.
I didn't know what to expect.
And frankly last night's final
one and a half hours.
Was the proudest moment for me
because whatever negotiations
happen.
There was some real work that
came down for the people of New
Mexico.
One of the greatest second
greatest things that happened
for me was meeting my Republican
colleagues.
They were gracious open hearted.
We forged real relationships we
will absolutely not agree on
many issues maybe ever.
But there are so many more that
we find that road of comfort and
commonality I just want to say
thank you to everyone it was
just.
As a freshman people said oh it
was the most the worst time ever
that you could enter public
office.
But I have to say there were
many many beautiful gifts that
the COVID virus in this pandemic
actually bestowed on us.
Yet to be felt you know we had
to learn to communicate in ways
that.
Allowed our spirits to still
connect to be respectful and to
be yielding.
To the safety that we had to
bring to one another and I just
want to say I leave with the
really proud of our as a
freshman to be part of this
process is just a humbling and
one of the greatest experiences
of my life.
Most of us is that those.
Thank you John as we are about
to prepare I want to take a
moment I want to join in the
spirit of gratitude on it
saying.
Representative Williams
Stapleton Representative guy
goes Representative Townsend
Representative Montoya there's a
lot of great work done yesterday
and there was a reminder that
for the most part.
We agree much much more than we
disagree.
And I think we show the people
of our state that in
circumstances that are perhaps
the most trying in the
legislature has ever faced in
terms of.
Security in terms of public
health that we were able to.
Get the work of the people done
in spite of some very very
significant headwinds I'm very
proud of this house for setting
the example.
For this legislature for how to
disagree without being
disagreeable.
And setting the example for how
we can listen to one another
here one another and work
together on with common purpose
wherever possible you do so in a
way that is always respectful
respectful of one another
respectful of what we have in
common and respectful of what we
have is different.
And I want to thank each and
every member of this body.
For not showing each other as
you recall we started I'm
innocent images one request of
us which is that as we work
through the session together we
show each other and show the
staff.
Kindness that we are patient
with one another and that we
give each other the benefit of
the doubt because we all know
that we're here for what we
believe to be the right reasons
everyone is here because they
want to make New Mexico a better
place to live everyone is here
because they care about the
people that they represented the
districts they represent a
little bit of time just a little
bit of patience and a little bit
of giving each other the benefit
of the doubt we've done a really
good job we've done so in a way
that is shown to the people of
the state the best of their
state legislature I would like
to ask also.
Are we as we move we have two
minutes left let's all.
The money for of the I New
Mexicans who we have lost to the
pandemic.
The Mexican The New Mexicans who
are not with this this year who
were with us last year and let's
be grateful for our health.
Grateful for the health of our
friends and family and take a
moment to reflect upon those
whom we've lost and let's use
their memory to motivate our
continued service to the people
of our state agency that we can
make sure that.
At everything that we can do we
are doing to comfort those who
have suffered a lost and help
those left behind.
Grease and to recover.
Finally we have.
In in in this job I do get a
chance to really observe and see
the staff at various
legislatures around the country
the staff of the house of
representatives of New Mexico is
second to none from the
custodial staff to the analysts
agree LA's.
Everyone here.
Your chief clerk.
More staff to the sergeant at
arms and his staff.
They do a great job let's all
get in a big big Hartselle round
of applause.
Thank.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker.
Point the committee of three to
four.
The house is completed its work
and he's ready to adjourned sine
ADA.
In eight million I second that
motion.
Hi appoints Representative Eli.
Representative Roger Montoya and
representative Nibert.
To inform the Senate that the
work of the house is that.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo Mr
speaker
point the committee of three to.
that the house is completed its
work and he's ready to.
Sign again.
I appoint representatives of
generated million second that
motion I appoint Representative
better at us.
Representative Hochman Vigil and
Representative Lord.
To inform the governor the work
of the house is done.
Brilliant.
Action.
We all those remaining of the
speakers table I'm.
Committee.
The rules committee.
Mr speaker I second that motion.
no objections so ordered.
I will.
Saudi DA.
All those in favor signify by
saying aye.
His name.
