Scott.
Representative Strickler here.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Dixon.
Representative.
Representative Townsend.
Share Sarinana here.
Chairman.
Here.
Mr chair you have a quorum.
Okay thank you
I'm getting a message
Representative Townsend the
doesn't have a link.
I think you said that to him the
reason that to him right now.
Yes Sir.
So we're gonna wait for just a
moment our.
So we can get Representative
Townsend.
Senator Steinborn.
You who are your experts.
John Hancock Mr Chairman.
In did you it was a a.
Yes.
Four of them assume link in were
you expecting secretary Kenny or
press Rebekah Riess.
Mr chair I I do believe the
secretary hopefully will be will
be there.
In Santo income but my guess is
he will
Be on with the audience.
and then yeah I'm getting a
message right now from them
saying they are on with the
committee okay W. secretary
Russes here social be speaking
to the Department.
We also have your next State
Land Office.
I believe the Trujillo is there
for NM EMNRD.
Okay were mainly just waiting
for to council.
Okay well we we first
encountered a couple
announcements for all to
committee.
In the audience we will not each
hearing house bill one sixty
four today.
So we're just going here hustle
and by seven helpful one sixty
four
Will be heard on Saturday.
Which leads me to my second
element and that is we will be
meeting on Saturday we will hook
here Senator wheels I don't know
what time yet the.
I understand the house taxation
revenues are scheduled at nine
o'clock meeting several of our
members are also on house
taxation revenue.
so I don't know how that's gonna
play out and
In addition to the that the
speaker mentioned possibly doing
a four session on Saturday.
So that might we we of course
would have to schedule around
that so I will let you know but
do plan on meeting on Saturday
Representative Townsend has
joined us.
It's your name text.
Any any questions from the
committee.
Okay I think we're all here
the first bill is house bill one
twenty seven stories of certain
radioactive waste and senator
Steinborn who is a co sponsor of
this bill will be presenting to
that Senator Steinborn the floor
is yours.
Thank you very much Mr chairman.
Good morning Mr chair and
committee could to the Mr chair
Sam unit.
We can you can hear me I can
hear you okay I got a prompt on
my screen it said I was muted
okay
I am here today to put on this
bill which is a duplicate of the
bill that's introduced in the
Senate I appreciate everybody's
time.
Mr chair committee this is a
really important bill and I I
don't know how many of you all
have seen this movie don't look
up so forgive me if you haven't
but I I refer to this bill is
the don't look up bill of the
session because we have a very
profound.
A project heading towards New
Mexico that could be licensed in
the coming months and according
to the company spokesman in the
Albuquerque journal few days ago
said soon as we get a license
we're gonna start building and
this is a project it's going to
affect New Mexicans for
generations and possibly the
next hundred years in
potentially profound negative
ways and I'm talking about the
proposal to store all of the
nation's high level nuclear
waste in the state of New Mexico
there's a private company our
call Holtec international which
has an application before the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission to
receive what's called a
consolidated interim storage
license to store this high level
waste in New Mexico.
there is a similar proposal in
the state of Texas in Texas just
passed a ban on storage of this
material in their state in the
last year not exactly a liberal
state.
And they did so because of grave
concern primarily to the oil
industry we have people from our
oil industry there equally
concerned about disrupting what
is one of the hottest economic
drivers in the country and
certainly in that sector I'm
locating this facility right in
the middle of all that which is
proposed in New Mexico as well.
I'm it I want to differentiate
right off the bat Mr chair for
own listening that that what's
being proposed here is very
different than the economic
isolation planning Carlsbad and
it's easy to conflate the two
and they're very different in
this bill really isn't about
with at all which is the
nation's only government owned
low level nuclear waste
repository and they just they
store low level radioactive
material primarily defense
ancillary way slide gloves and.
You know items like that that
are used to stay handling these
materials and it's packed almost
a mile underground in salt
caverns and up they give the
state a lot of money to help do
emergency preparedness and it's
just very different proposals
what this is a private company
that wants to store something on
a quote interim basis but for
forty year license when there is
really no end in sight and this
is one of the biggest issues on
the talking about there is no
permanent repository that's been
designated in the nation a yucca
mountain had been that site
which was also a deep mountain
buried site federal and then
that's been stopped which is the
source of federal law that we
believe that the federal
government can't even designated
interim site without a permanent
site building doesn't it which
you have to admit it's a little
dumb if you know that it has to
be protected in that manner for
a very long time why on earth
would you grant a license to
start moving it
to store it in a way that by
definition isn't designed for
anything other than a very
interim basis without having an
end game in mind so we think
this is a this is very bad
policy number one nationally and
it and it's really not a
national policy it's a it's it's
a get back up policy being made
by a private company a few
politicians in southeastern New
Mexico the trigger this on us so
this law before us Mister chair
committees a chance for us to
inject our leverage in this
situation and say we do not
consent we do not support this
proposal I want to be clear and
say that you will hear about the
infallibility of this and
anybody that tells you that
storage of nuclear materials
infallible you should be
inherently skeptical of.
accidents happen in the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission says it's
on the website it's not a matter
of if and when it's the cost of
doing business storing this
material in the last year now
for those down on the chair of
the Legislative radioactive
hazardous materials committee to
your appointment bicameral
committee and it's the second
time I did sure so I spend a lot
of time looking at this issue
we've had a lot of hearings I
asked the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission for safety data on
try casts that are stored in the
country which I want to say
there's more cement us about a
thousand or last over the last
ten years there have been almost
a hundred safety violation
involving cast in the country
which they regulate we're
talking about here is to store
to possibly up to ten thousand
cast for a license to forty
years.
Okay so so accidents will happen
the the company itself Holtec
has had problems with its
canister design
that regulate the air flow and
manage the safety of that they
they have had accidents Justin
even loading cast into a into
their and placement in sent off
for a the last couple years a
one got dropped and almost you
know and so they had to stop the
process and.
So things things happen and then
of course rail accidents happen
every bit of this will be should
ship to rail through the state
of New Mexico and if you look at
a real map of New Mexico come to
through all parts of New Mexico
and according to the company any
accident involving rail the
emergency response
responsibility would be that for
local governments and the state
of New Mexico.
which is also different than
than web page you know when the
department of energy owns title
to the waste they have primary
responsibility so and rail
accidents happen in the and
there's a very nice guy who owns
the shipping company that they
said would be used to ship its
waste he hasn't done a whole lot
of relevance career hand I've
talked he had a rail accident it
happens it's the cost of doing
business and so from that
standpoint shipping this
material in by the way would be
of historic proportions the
shipping process a loan of ten
thousand canisters has never
been done in the history of this
country certainly with this
material and probably the world
and so they're going to have to
build rail it has you know you
get a lot of just numbers here
and Mr chair things will happen
and they're asking New Mexico to
be the Guinea pig of this
material for really a dumb of
federal policy so I want to it's
important now that communities
representing forty percent of
the state's population have
passed resolutions opposing this
waste being stored or going
through their community
including Albuquerque Santa Fe
County Los crucis all Indian
pueblo council governors I
believe McKinley County and then
including a small communities
near the site shall New Mexico.
So.
This is our opportunity to
As the movie don't look up where
you should to missile the
asteroid and try to change the
course of a this is a time where
we send the federal government
the message that no we don't
consent we want a thoughtful
policy and so I I urge urge your
your passage today and you know
three other states have this law
on the books you're gonna here
today was to to Mexico really
have the authority to discuss
with you three other states have
done this the FIR talks about
how there's multiple lanes of
which we have authority that the
the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission absolutely has
primacy over regulating spent
fuel what we're talking here is
about the sighting of this
material.
On and our concerns on multiple
grounds including social justice
economic health grounds and so
with that Mr chair I'm very
happy to stand for questions and
I have done hand caught with me
who's kind of a technical expert
who's worked on these issues for
decades study some very closely
you can probably answer more
technical questions that may
come up and up happy to to for
him if you'd like for an opening
statement.
Mr Hancock.
Restraint.
Mr Hancock you turn on your your
camera I'm sorry I'm sorry
chair.
Can you hear me now yes thank
you very much Mr chair and
members of the committee I am
done Handcock I work at
southwest research and
information center a nonprofit
organization based in
Albuquerque I wanted to just
amplifier couple of things that
Senator Steinborn said he
mention that this this.
Bill
is a band
of course New Mexico for more
than forty years has had a
provision in law that is also
recognized with the amendment
that says no person shall store
or dispose of radioactive waste
in a disposal facility until the
state of New Mexico has
concurred in the creation of the
disposal facility.
So that provision more than
forty years old was honored by
the federal government with the
website as Senator mentioned the
federal law that with land
withdrawal Act of nineteen
ninety two of section twelve
explicitly bans high level waste
or commercial spent fuel at
Representative so that that that
is that is well established that
that but what we're now doing
what this bill would now do is
to clarify that a disposal
facility Senator Steinborn says
also includes.
So as so called temporary
facility like Altec is proposing
so that's clearly something that
can be done as the senator said
as recently as September of last
year governor Abbott and Texas
signed a bill that states that
person may not dispose of or
store high level radioactive
waste in this state that being
Texas other other states that
have done the same thing the
Texas law also does a second
thing that this bill H. B. one
twenty seven would do which is
to prohibit state permitting.
For this kind of facility the
whole tech facility and if there
were others again that's
recognized by Holtec as the
state's legal rights and whole
tax on very mental report
application to the NRC their
table one point four point one
they were just nine state
permits that they recognize that
would be necessary to operate
the facility in addition to the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission
licensed the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission also agrees about the
state's authority there table
one point six dash one of their
draft environmental impact
statement as a similar list of
state permits that are allowed
and would be necessary for this
facility so
in so far as they're concerned
about is the state trying to do
something
that it can't do because it's
for a federally preempted that's
not true the federal governments
recognize that the inner cities
recognize that even Holtec.
As has recognized that.
So I I I think that's an
important.
Feature of the US we do have a
federal system the federal
government has some
responsibilities as you all well
know as lawmakers the state has
responsibilities so this bill
properly recognizes both the
authority of the federal
government for radiation safety
and the state for other kinds of
regulation to protect the public
the economy at center of the
state I'd be glad to answer
questions if there are many any
but I will stop for now thank
you very much Mr chair it's
thank you Mr Hancock Senator
Steinborn did you I have you.
Any of your other experts.
Speaking the the agency experts.
Well Mister chair that's a good
question I know that they're
they're all going to want to
speak in support of the bill for
that reason and so maybe it's
it's better to just stopped
there then and then give them
their.
Given their opportunity unless
you like to call upon you know.
NMED EMNRD and the State Land
Office at the outset I mean that
would not be an appropriate
either.
Yes I thank you from the
agencies as part of the
presentation of the bill will go
to the public comment later
perhaps we can start with W.
secretary roots.
This.
Thank you chairman clean and
thank you members of the
committee Senator Steinborn it's
a pleasure to be here with you
this morning my name is Rebecca
Reyes and the deputy cabinet
secretary of the environment
department and it's a pleasure
to be here on behalf of the
administration and make some
comments in support of this
important piece of legislation.
As you've heard I'm already in
the in that description of the
bill this bill is very timely a
federal license process is well
under way and the I knew there
Regulatory Commission and R. C.
is reaching the end of their
safety and environmental reviews
for the proposed toll tax
storage facility.
Well that facility is seeking a
forty year license given the
fact that there is no designated
a permanent repository for spent
nuclear fuel in the US we really
feel like that that the question
in front of New Mexico right now
is not just for an interim
storage facility but for a de
facto permanent storage facility
that once waste is disposed of
at a facility in New Mexico I'm.
Regardless of the title of an
interim storage facility it's
it's more likely to stay there
are the in our show will be to
keep it there as opposed to move
it someplace else permanent if
and when a permanent facility is
identified so this feels
premature and given the at
impacts on the state of New
Mexico over decades of us taking
a disproportionate burden of
waste disposal and contamination
associated with
our nuclear weapons at
industries we feel this is
really important I'm to be
having these conversations and
for this body to be considering
legislation that takes I'm very
important steps.
Throughout the environmental
review process the environment
department has been actively
involved and this is through the
federal need that process that
and R. C. as has been conducting
to ensure that any licenses they
issue would I'm not have
Environment negative
environmental impacts we have
even participated as a
cooperating agency with the NRC
providing additional groundwater
and surface water expertise and
throughout the process starting
in twenty nineteen when our
experts started reviewing the
details of this proposed
facility and the potential
impacts we've consistently and
repeatedly raised he
environmental concerns that have
yet to be addressed by an R. C.
through their environmental
review process or through
any changes from the whole tech
company as to how they would
address environmental concerns
for example and things we see
and not adequately addressed for
this facility that have really
significant impacts to get to
the heart of this legislation
involved in adequate waste
characterization and incomplete
hydrologic model of the site and
surrounding area inadequate
evaluation of potential human
and ecological exposure
pathways.
The impacts of seismicity of
putting this facility and the
largest oil producing region of
the world
where we have data and evidence
and experts studying changes and
what's happening in the
southwest corner of the state
and into taxes around to decide
seismicity and last but
certainly not least we found
environmental justice concerns
and considerations to be
inadequately addressed
throughout the process.
So that's with respect to the
part of the bill that proposes
to preclude these types of
facilities from from being built
and then permitted and the state
of New Mexico last I want to
just acknowledge that we thank
some of the other changes in the
bill are incredibly important to
the at several agencies to the
radioactive waste consultation
task force to Indian Affairs
Department represented the
department of homeland security
and emergency management and the
State Land Office we strongly
support those revisions to that
a lot in that are put forward in
this bill and Mr chair that
that's the end of my comments
for now I will stay with you
during the rest of that
committee hearing in case there
are questions for the department
thank you.
Thank you W. secretary Harris
Senator sunbird Steinborn should
we go to energy more also that's
resources yes Mr yes Mr chair
late that trio Mr you.
Morning Mr chair members of the
committee my name is deeply
Trujillo with energy minerals
and natural resources and we
support this bill I oversee the
with transportation program for
the state and provide staff
support to the task force so
I've been very involved in this
process
as it relates to spent nuclear
fuel and interim storage house
bill one twenty seven is
consistent with the Lujan
Grisham administration's
position regarding an upstart of
spent nuclear fuel and high
level waste in New Mexico there
as stated there is currently no
permanent disposal strategy for
spent nuclear fuel on high level
waste in place anywhere in the
country so interim storage would
be at the fact though permanent
storage also it makes sense to
expand the radioactive waste
task force EMNRD's what
transportation safety program
already coordinates with those
agencies so this makes it
official ring and then
specifically homeland security
and then including Indian
Affairs and the State Land
Office
and so we support house bill one
twenty seven thank you.
Thanks.
Sure maybe the last State Land
Office.
this next with State Land
Office.
It morning shared members I'm
excited to be back here talking
again about whole tech I won't
take a lot of times a second the
W. secretary and comments that
it happened and maybe today but
I will say that for those of you
who don't remember why the state
land office as part of this
drama at it is actually our
mineral state that sits under
the site where the as we're
whole tackle be storing the
nuclear fuel so the numerical so
why is that important.
Brought up today is that but San
Diego in New York in already
signaled they planned to send
but is there temporary storage
ways right now to New Mexico I
think we got lucky that taxes
with the side that was chosen
obviously taxes went ahead and
passed a law that made it to
where they wouldn't have to deal
with it so now it's back on our
doorstep I think this is a
urgency is still here I would
regardless of how you feel about
the second part of the bill the
first part about adding agencies
in the state land office is
absolutely vital so please for
me our office and the board for
the secretaries please pass this
bill today.
Thank you.
Senator or anyone else are you
ready to go to the public and I
think we're ready to go to the
public part of the state okay so
before we take public comment
you will do a whole other ball
courses not scientific but it
gives us a chance to gauge the
audience.
The poll will appear on your
screen for twenty seconds and
you can indicate you their
support for the bill or
opposition to the bill Augustine
when it if you're ready please
but all up for twenty seconds.
Mr chair I can note the
panelists is not allowed to
vote.
That's correct.
Okay so that's seventy percent
and support twenty two in
opposition and the numbers are
sixty eight in support in
nineteen in opposition.
I'm gonna
take public comment.
The first public comment we're
gonna do is.
Opposition to the bill so if you
support the bill and you want to
make public comment please put
your hand down because we're
doing opposition first but in
the interest of time we will do
fifteen minutes on each side.
I need Spiegel speaker will be
given the minutes to speak so
once again we're starting with
opposition.
Our first speaker in opposition
is Dale Chandler.
Okay.
Good morning Mr Chairman can you
hear me OK yes.
Okay what is Dale G. and we are
here to stay in opposition
or twenty seven as the mayor of
city of Carlsbad.
This is another attempt to stop
the proposed project for spent
fuel in southeastern New Mexico.
The local pols Carlsbad eighty
recounted by the New Mexico.
Yes licensed to operate because
we understand you need to
diversify our economy.
This project is very important
economic development in our area
it will create three hundred
jobs and reduce three billion
dollars in capital investments
in the area which includes
million Ms intact reserved for
the state.
The proposed project is the
safest and most secure garage
storage technology available in
the in our state is in the
process of a very technical
review.
also noted nuclear powers
absolutely central to tackling
COVID crashes.
This project is.
Sorry about the timer next up we
have Rod McCollum.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is for can
you hear me yes yeah my name is
rob Macomb the nuclear energy
institute the industry I
represent is the nation's
largest carbon free energy
source we oppose house bill one
twenty seven I was impressed
with this very same committee's
discussion envision on carbon
free energy when you were
debating H. B. for last week I
know that that did not pass
because concerns about fossil
fuels being used to generate
hydrogen nuclear energy is the
nation's largest source of
carbon free electricity and this
proposal tech facility is a key
part of the carbon free
infrastructure that that our
nation is trying to expand upon
nuclear energy produces a lot of
energy with little material it's
scattered around the country at
a cost to taxpayers of over a
million dollars a day including
the taxpayers of New Mexico we
safely lowered thirty five
hundred of the systems over
thirty five years and done
transportation thirteen hundred
times be part of the carbon free
energy conversation don't so you
know at the outset we oppose H.
B. one twenty seven thank you.
Thank you we have Susan
Crockett.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members.
I am a former county
commissioner and a vice
president of a local small
business here Carlsbad and I am
strongly opposed to HB one
twenty seven this bill calls for
the outright ban and wants to
stop a proposed project that has
been proven to be safe and
secure the local governments
have invited Holtec to New
Mexico to speak in in our state
license to operate this is
because while we enjoy a robust
oil and gas industry we also
understand the need to diversify
our economy as I stated we urge
this committee to not pass H. B.
one twenty seven the language is
very broad and we'll have too
many unintended consequences
that will do more harm to New
Mexico been good thank you Mr
chairman for my time.
Thank you next up we have the
any cross.
Mr chair members of the
committee I echo the previous
comments also want to let you
know as a long time citizen of
Carlsbad I've been very active
in the community and business
owners and I welcome hole tech
I've seen the cast I've seen the
rail cars I see them drop these
task from airplanes I've I think
they're virtually indestructible
nuclear energy is our way
forward for the only real
economically feasible source of
power for this country going
forward and we don't have a good
plan to deal with the waste
we're not gonna be very
successful at that and where the
waste is being stored right now
is way more dangers to a larger
population of people on the
planet that it would be at this
facility we welcome whole tech
I've studied this I feel like
it's a big economic boost as
well as a solution to a big
problem which is and I don't
care if they leave it here for
the rest of time I think that's
a safe place for to be thank you
for listening to my comments.
Thank you John thank you to.
Okay good morning Mr chairman
and committee my name is John
Heaton H. B. one twenty seven
four closes on New Mexico's
ability to get to zero emissions
all of the studies on and she
being zero emissions include
carbon free nuclear power you
can't get to zero nations with
only intermittent when and sub
wind solar PNM is now using Palo
Verde nuclear power and el Paso
electric which serves southwest
New Mexico uses twenty five
percent poverty of lectures
today the point here is if you
are using nuclear power and you
will in the future you have an
obligation to also support the
end of the nuclear cycle by
supporting used fuel storage
passing H. B. one twenty seven
would be very storage are short
sighted for New Mexico.
Thank you next up we have Jason
surely.
Mr chairman thank you so much
for the opportunity to speaking
estimate okay yes.
Okay great I'm a former two term
city councillor and a business
owner in Carlsbad
I strongly oppose HB one twenty
seven the reality is that the
transportation of spent fuel has
been going on in the United
States for forty years spent
over thirteen hundred shipments
with I'm sorry I think that
number was wrong there has sent
over.
Yeah thirteen hundred shipments
in the US without incident this
facility is very similar to
those that are that are
California Missouri and other
places that are in the country
we strongly support strongly
support the Holtec project not
only because we feel like it's
safe but also it's a huge
economic boost to Carlsbad only
ask you also consider that as
part of your decision I want to
thank you again for the
opportunity to speak to you
today in your consideration on
this bill.
Thank you we have Danny
Fletcher.
The any years chairman and
committee members can you hear
me now yes my name is Danny
Fletcher I'm a business owner
here in Carlsbad I'm also the
chairman of the Carlsbad mayor's
energy summit going on six years
now and recently our governor
attended the climate summit in
Scotland and one of the
headlines of the gathering was a
nuclear energy nuclear energy
essential in tackling the
climate crisis that's because
nuclear power is carbon free and
it's got to be a requirement in
the strategy to be a hundred
percent clean energy bills so
the proposed coverage storage
facility is needed and will be
needed and here's another fact
any Lee County Hamza grows ready
invited Holtec international to
build this facility that's
because it's safe they did their
due diligence I trust and
believe in our legislators here
in southeastern New Mexico the
business intelligence also
believes the bill is too broad
was gonna have unintended
negative impacts of your think
about to vote no on this bill
thank you chairman.
Thank you we have Sam top.
Good morning everyone hear me
okay yes.
I thank you I am Sam Cobb I am
the more pops the city of Hobbs
is firmly committed to this
project I think it's interesting
to note that the the previous
speakers have brought out some
very valid points about the fact
that we have to have a plan in
order to move toward a carbon
free economy in a carpentry
Environment nuclear energy has
got to be part of that you know
the city of Hobbs in Lea county
has been a leader along with
with project and now and also
with your raincoat the nuclear
enrichment facility we're very
well educated as relates to the
nuclear industry and the nuclear
cycle and if for us to have
nuclear energy is part of the
solution there needs to be a
well thought out well planned.
Plan for the waste the whole
tech project these are people
are are world leaders we pick
the right people it's the right
location let's not be short
sighted about what we need to do
to solve the nuclear energy
problem in the United States.
Thank you except we are John
Waters.
Good morning Mr chairman can
make.
Yes.
Hi my name's John Waters I am
the executive director for the
cross but part of the
development we're the EDC the
economic development corporation
for any county in in the city of
Carlsbad I hold degrees in
environmental biology probably
one of the only EDC directors in
the state that that does hold
investor in that and I have the
experience with the company and
more middle consulting company
that operated for ten years as
well as being on the water
quality control commission for
seven years under prior
administrations I'm firmly in
opposition to this bill HB one
twenty seven I think it is short
sighted I find it remarkably
rich that the you know that that
many of the folks that are
pushing for this bill our want
to partake of nuclear energy New
Mexico needs to be part of the
solution not part of the problem
there's a lot of states out
there that part of the problem
we're proud here in southeastern
New Mexico to host the website
we're proud to be part of the
solution and we ask you to vote
against HB one twenty seven
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you we have more leader
of.
I'm sorry I'm I'm in support of
the bill.
Okay we'll get back to you.
Okay Sir is there anyone else
from the public I would like to
speak in opposition.
Okay.
Someone just raise your hand.
Jerry golden here in opposition.
That's correct can you hear me
yes.
Yes understand that
you folks are kind of short
handed and you have difficulty
dealing with a lot of things
including this new project that
apparently seems overwhelming
I've helped to a plan we are all
the a lot of the programs
related to it that the star
transportation and all and I
just thought I would offer my
support you folks decide to do
something constructive and
instead of being Mr this hasty
solution.
Yes.
The Sanchez
and that goes for either people
in sport or people opposition.
Is there anyone else.
In opposition to this bill.
Okay.
If you would like to speak in
support please raise your hand
that.
And what I just said school
supplies so we're not we're not
attacking.
Members of the public are not
attacking Sanchez or not taking
members of the.
First we have Paul Gibson.
Thank you Mr chair and bill
Sanchez my name is Paul Gibson
on the co founder retake Our
Democracy two thousand four
thousand member advocacy group
hi I'm strongly in favor of this
bill it's it's inconceivable why
New Mexico has to be the dumping
ground and the our for our for
the nation's you'll find student
vestment in in nuclear energy
and nuclear weapons
even the state of Texas the
governor there is institute
you guys have a similar plan.
Similar disposal spot in Texas
we we don't do not need this
kind of industry in our state
the risk to our communities is
far greater than the benefit I
sympathize with the bill
components about needing jobs
but this is not the way to get
jobs thank you very much.
Thank you Mr Gibson next up will
be Joan brown.
Thank you chair committee in
bill Sanchez my name is Joan
brown a Franciscan sister and
with New Mexico interfaith power
and light and we support this
bill many of our faith community
members and leaders have been
working to stop this whole type
project for many years and
hearings including faith leaders
in the southeast part of the
state
this is a huge environmental
justice issue for us in the
state as well as the places that
the rail roads will go through
because those are usually low
income households or families
Pope Francis talks about the
throwaway culture and say it
says that we are in that kind of
a mindset in the state we are
not a throwaway people throw
away state or throw away place
so we strongly support this bill
thank you.
Thank you Mr.
Chairman committee members my
name is Jim Parsons from Rio
Rancho can you hear me.
Yes we can't I'm speaking
strongly in favor of H. B. one
twenty seven restricting storage
of high level nuclear waste in
New Mexico by prohibiting state
agencies from issuing permits
for nuclear waste facilities
they won't be temporary
facilities because of the high
risk of nuclear contamination
accidents such as training D. or
ailments during transport of
nuclear waste from other states
contaminating communities and
large areas of land
contaminating rivers along which
our trains run radiation leakage
into agricultural soil
contaminating it for hundreds of
years into rivers contaminating
drinking water and into the air
we must breathe causing health
impacts including cancer for
these and other significant
reasons I implore you to please
keep New Mexico clean and
protect New Mexicans by voting
in support of H. B. one twenty
seven thank you thank you Mr
president X. would be a thing
that has to do.
Good morning chair and committee
members manage that the
increased to do little I'm a
retired navy nuclear engineer
and environmental engineering
happened following full tech
for years now and make comments
in opposition to this my first
reason is our railway system
needs attention on January
second I received a message from
my friend a railway engineer
saying many developments last
year including one that caused
an evacuation ask Laguna pueblo
and second this is a matter of
not in my backyard nimby we need
to exert are states rights why
don't they keep it yes we are
going to have a national
transition to clean energy and
it's going to require carbon
free baseload like nuclear but
only until the transition to
renewables and storage is
underway that then it needs to
stop as well asked the Navajo to
who do not have clean water
because of uranium mining.
Past H. B. one twenty seven and
then the green of money meant to
keep it from being pulled at the
whim of another administration
remember governor Martinez
toxicity is not our destiny.
Thank you.
Is Pam are.
Good morning I'm Pamela Rogers
I'm a member of indivisible sos
Santa Fe and working families
parties and I am strongly in
support of this bill as I see it
the problem is is you know I
don't know why they're such a
fascination with transporting
radioactive waste back and forth
across the country the
transportation is really where
the risk is we've already seen
infants at with with low level
waste we don't need to risk a
mobile Chernobyl with high level
radioactive waste waste anywhere
in the country but certainly not
here in New Mexico and I believe
part of the reason that this is
happening here is because we are
you know we have a low
population and a lot of
a lot of people of color who
have less of of waste I want to
speak for people who don't want
This dangerous material in our
communities and risking
everybody's lives and the future
of New Mexico so please I do
support this bill.
Thank you ma'am next up is
Elizabeth Smith.
Hello I am a tribal member of
the Laguna pueblo and a UNM
senior Representative Mother
Earth and all baby creature
nations as well as a seven
generations.
Right now our local honey
contains radiation listen to the
bees I speak for those who
cannot speak for themselves this
bill is a beginning of a new New
Mexico and a new earth uranium
from the ground up is a troll of
too much nuclear waste as a so
called nuclear clean energy.
Jobs there is easily three
hundred years of nuclear cleanup
jobs statewide nationally and
globally.
To not pass H. B. one twenty
seven is short sightedness now
is the time thank you.
Thank you we have.
Me a month so if.
Thank you madam chair and
committee for the opportunity to
speak.
My name is mia Montoya
Hammersley and I'm a staff
attorney with the New Mexico
environmental law center.
I'm sorry other retirement time
and started at my family is from
LA Rosa down wonder community
impacted by the Trinity nuclear
test New Mexico has long served
as a sacrifice zone for the
development of our country's
nuclear arsenal from the ongoing
contamination and health affects
of uranium mining to our own
people being exposed to toxic
radiation from nuclear testing.
Instead of transporting more
nuclear waste New Mexico the Law
Center supports and dressing the
existing environmental
contamination in the state from
uranium mines and developing an
environmental remediation
industry that will bring
economic opportunities to impact
communities H. B. one twenty
seven represents an opportunity
for our state to begin to heal
and move forward for more
harmful nuclear legacy thank you
and please support H. B. one
twenty seven.
Thank you we have Kaylee shoot.
Hello my name is Kelly soup and
I'm a young woman living in
Carlsbad I'm here today to voice
my support for H. B. one twenty
seven those living in the
southeast region of the state
already live with
disproportionate impacts of
environmental pollution and this
would only add to that problem
in New in terrifying ways well I
understand the money city and
county think this would be a
good opportunity for economic
diversification that is simply
an antiquated way of thinking
that shackles my community it's
the status quo it will only
serve to further harm our
community and lost a lesson
opportunity it's diverse syfy
and be part of the solution in
more meaningful sustainable
cleaner and less harmful ways as
some of the worst environmental
advocacy it terrifies me the
Texas a state that has little
regard for the safety of its
residents has banned this waste
common sense logic tells me that
a Texas of all places is
concerned The New Mexico should
be as well comments and also
tells me that strong high level
nuclear waste in the middle of
the most actively up out of the
country is simply crazy and only
served to her New Mexicans my
community already suffers for
the sake of the state's budget
we don't need now suffer for the
sake of cutting emissions around
the country thank you for your
time.
Thank you next up we have lived
more.
When you're muted on here at.
Can you hear me now yes all
right thank you good morning I'm
winning more of Los crucis an
environmental attorney with
extensive experience in nuclear
waste issues who is testifying
in an individual capacity today
I support H. B. one twenty seven
because storage or disposal of
spent nuclear fuel or high level
radioactive waste is a hugely
dangerous enterprise with
potentially disastrous
consequences for New Mexico's
environment and economic
resources as a whole tech
attorney said during oral
arguments in one of the
proceedings before the in our
seat the whole tech facility in
New Mexico would be the most
radioactive place between the
earth and the sun this is what a
whole tech Representative
knowledge in the legal
proceeding.
This legislation does not
attempt to preempt federal
authority it is permissible
under the federal nuclear waste
policy act for a state to
withhold its consent for an
undesirable facility and fully
exhort exert its authority to
protect its resources.
Thank you Sir sorry about that
timer next we're gonna hear from
on the cap for all us.
Can you hear me yes thank you
I'm an attorney representing a
coalition of ranchers farmers
private and public oil and gas
companies and residents of New
Mexico we support H. B. one
twenty seven since twenty
eighteen we have retained
independent experts including
seismologists geologists
transportation experts and
experts from under the umbrella
of the United Nations Center
specialists on the way from
reactor storage they have all
found tremendous flaws with
whole tax plan but the federal
government is dismissing all
this evidence because a private
company has offered to step in
and assume the federal
government's burden.
So I asked that rather than
relying on unsubstantiated
opinions I ask you to please
look to independent data and
inform yourselves of the wrists
and please support H. B. one
twenty seven thank you.
Thank you thank you next week on
Jennings.
Can you hear me yes.
Tom Jennings and former mayor
problema twin brothers run for
mayor rolled out I'm in the oil
and gas business I have minerals
leases and wells in this area.
This area is cited in a low spot
or if.
Calder's ply is all around it
you look at a Google earth map
you can see these white because
it's salt salt is most growth of
Matter out there and it's it's
not order it will be a by pass
round robin was the only two
lane by by passing the country
ROZ was in southeast New Mexico
but we are not in support of
this site I I own property on
the real road.
You know right next my warehouse
I live within blocks my brother
lives with my in box this is not
a good thing for the oil
business because this is like a
strategic petroleum reserve for
our country and for our state we
should not which I am support of
it we should not allow.
Sorry about the timer next up we
had sure in that so C..
Can you hear me now yes.
My name is Karina Garcia I am
support of H. B. one two seven
New Mexico is a sacrifice zone
for the nation we have already
sacrificed our communities land
and water from the uranium mines
to Trinity yes to nuclear labs
and with radioactive waste or
Instagram and health of
communities nuclear power and
nuclear waste contribute to the
global climate crisis and cannot
be our future let's support
cleaning up uranium mines and
developing an environmental
remediation industry that will
bring jobs and economic
opportunities to rural areas New
Mexico needs to develop nuclear
waste policy that safe just and
equitable these prioritize New
Mexico community health and
protect our environment families
and futures support H. B. one
two seven thank you.
Thank you we have some the cut
Johnson.
Good morning chairman the clean
honorable members of the
committee my name is Johnson and
I'm here representing yet that
youth United climate crisis
action yes Representative
hundreds of you from across
northern and central New Mexico
and employees in Mecca stands in
strong support of HB one twenty
seven.
Yeah it's greatly concerned with
the generation and handling of
radioactive waste all kinds
whether from nuclear weapons
nuclear energy or from fracking
was strongly opposed to the idea
that New Mexico should be a
dumping ground for this waste
thanks so many members of the
community to have been impacted
by the legacy of nuclear
extraction and waste in our
state even calling for a ban on
the storage of high level
nuclear waste in New Mexico
we're grateful to the sponsor
for adding this protection to
the bills that we can support
this bill whole heartedly and
indigenous people this bill is
particularly important to us our
people and lands have
experienced the devastating
effects nuclear contamination
thank you for ending the
practice to sacrifice some.
Thank you R. Gardner.
Hey good morning chair and
committee members my name's rose
Gardner I support H. B. one
twenty seven and so should you.
Thank you to all the panelists
that are experts that have
already advocated for New Mexico
in the environment is shown is
what dangers lie in store.
I believe in protecting the
potash industry and the oil
industry they are our bread and
butter they are helping New
Mexico survive.
We are not the nation's
radioactive waste tort.
Debbie CS lies five miles from
where I live.
In unicity Mexico we have been
fighting that for a long time
thank you Texas first coming
through New Mexico please do
this thank.
Protect New Mexico let's not be
the nation's radioactive tonic
thank you so much.
Thank you we'll has two small.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee our
state and our communities
continue now to pay the price of
nuclear energy.
We don't want to be the nation's
Holtec nuclear waste trash site
passed H. B. one twenty seven
thank you.
Thank you we're just gonna do a
just give me one more staff will
back.
Can you hear me.
Yes okay thank you Mr chair and
members of the committee I'm
Scott Kovac with nuclear watch
New Mexico I stand in strong
support of HB one twenty seven
the plan to bring ten thousand
high level radiation ways cast
casks packed with of spent fuel
rods from commercial reactors
across the country is
predominantly regional economic
development plan and not a plan
to make the radio active nuclear
waste safer safer.
I'm all for economic
diversification but please
remember that the cost of
shipping the waste twice once in
New Mexico and a second time to
the a permanent disposal site if
one is ever built will be borne
by the taxpayers across the
country this plan would drain
funds for much needed projects
across the country in order to
buy it in order to provide a few
jobs in southeastern New Mexico
the plan would risk countless
communities across the country
with unnecessary transportation
of high level radioactive waste
the cast can safely be.
And Sir Senator so we still have
twenty four members of the
public who would like to speak
in opposition the realities of
our the time in this committee
we just you know I would love to
hear from you I thank you all
for being willing to speak your
participating in this Cherry we
just don't have time to hear
from everyone in order to
preserve time for a discussion.
In ultimately about so thank you
for attending I apologize for
not gonna get you I apologize
for the time restriction to is
just how we have to do.
with that I'd like to go back to
the sponsor Senator Steinborn do
you have anything to add before
I get committee.
Mr chairman I just want to say
that.
On top of everything I've
already said I think that we
ought to be troubled by the
company itself and the the
partner that would seek to.
The here to create this proposal
the NRC the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission has repeatedly asked
them for more technical
information on the proposal they
haven't gotten a response so I
think in our State just sent
like the third letter saying
we're.
We're moving back to the
timeline once again because we
haven't got the answers to our
questions.
I can go in the mall more issues
you know that the company has
repeatedly hire lobbyists to
propose legislation we've had to
have more transparency more
scrutiny it's not it doesn't
bring any measure of comfort
whatsoever that.
That that this is that this is a
company that we want undertaking
this endeavor here in New Mexico
are really concerned with our
safety so
but for all those reasons you
know again it is a fast moving
train I urge the committee's
action today and I urge the
federal government to get about
their work of the sabotaging a
permanent repository and figure
out what that what needs to
happen with this way so it only
gets moved once this is really a
terrible idea.
So with that I stand for
questions Mr.
Thank you center members of the
committee.
First up we have Representative
Scott.
Thank you Mr chair and.
Senator and presenters.
Senator I do have to add more
your tenacity on this issue.
If
you are a you're a bulldog.
When it comes to this particular
project up one quick question do
you have.
In front of you thank you madam
Tang.
Two thousand eighteen.
That are.
Tourney General.
Representative I do not Mr
Chairman.
Senator.
I think speaks very this letter
speaks very comprehensively.
To.
In page after page.
The letter speaks very
comprehensively.
To the fact that the regulation
of radioactive materials is best
left to the federal government
U. S. Congress.
If you allow one share in our
State has a statutory authority
to license and regulate
consolidated general nuclear
waste storage facilities.
And secondly that the
comprehensive.
Of that federal regulatory
scheme.
Pre helps truly.
State department now I'm looking
at your legislation which seems
to completely.
Contradict could you.
Could you explain how your
legislative.
March with this place I will
represented Mr chairman thank
you for thank you for the
bulldog reference I think that's
a I've come to realize one of my
better quality so you have to be
process that we all know this
things take time and so do you
think what's really important
here is we acknowledge
Representative Mr chair that the
federal government does have
primacy for regulating spent
fuel what we're talking about
here is the citing of a fuel and
up I know the word virtually
does not mean exclusively that
you quoted in that letter and
while it does give brought draft
for the technical aspects of.
A facility of past storage
things like that it does not you
know we have opportunities of of
weighing in on our voice of
permitting and some sighting of
this facility as evidenced by
the fact that we have three
states that have passed similar
legislation put in the state of
Texas which is was noted earlier
just received of company they're
just received a license there
consolidated arm storage
competing license you want to
call it that just got given one
in the state of Texas has not
been suit their law has not been
struck down nor has work in nor
has no to cut it that it passes
laws so
Yeah I think and I think also
that you know the the
environment apartment in the FY
are kind of speaks to the lanes
in which they believe we have
the authority to do this as well
I know that the general counsel
for the environment department
is on the phone Mr chair if
you'd like to hear from their
kind of legal analysis who's
probably involved in writing
that.
because I think this is a
central issue.
But that would be my answer.
Mr by cell.
Yeah I'm not sure I really
follow that but.
Do you want to hear from the
apparently we have access in
general can.
Council and then we in these
phone.
Mr chair actually are would
because this letter.
Yes.
Quickly.
In my opinion in the state.
The authority to regulate these
activities but.
I was willing to listen to.
This court please.
Okay.
That's general counsel yes okay
so we're permitting him to
cattle sell take just a moment.
I do it also noted the attorney
general's office is in support
of this legislation and yes I
the Senate conservation
committee in support of it so.
Can you hear me we can hear you
yes.
This is Basil I'm general
counsel for the garment
Department state of New Mexico I
was so.
Is suggested logged in the.
Department analysis of the bill.
With regard to the preemption
issue I would point to first to
there's language in the existing
statute which.
states that if.
If.
There are aspects of an
application for a facility like
this
that are explicitly preempted by
federal law then
are statute would not apply so
there's a there's sort of a.
It is safe off ramp if you will
for those areas where the
federal government has
Authority to regulate but I
think you need to be aware that
that the federal government's
authority is in the area of
safety Representative around the
design of the facility.
There is no preemption by the
federal government.
With regard to things such as
surface water groundwater
impacts off the site.
I'm and those are things that
are still within the state's
authority.
For a facility like this which
it will be similar to the
the whips with facility.
Flannel
we as a state still do have
regulatory authority on those
kinds of water and.
Surface water groundwater issues
so those are not preempted and
that would be the area where
this statute would say.
Our agency for example could not
issue a permit
to a facility like this for
those issues not on the new not
on the right the wreck that
nuclear radioactive safety
issues what on the surface and
groundwater where we have that
expertise and authority near
Garcia has agreed with us on
that.
On the
the draft EIS
up for some of these facilities
we have been given cooperating
agency status to comment
specifically on those kinds of
issues so there is a recognition
of our state authority in those
areas and that's what this
statute would make clear that
In those areas we would not be
allowed to issue a permit in
there for the facility would not
be able to operate.
Thank you Mr buy sell
Representative Scott.
Mr Chairman.
Senator certainly appreciate
states concern over.
Water resource each.
Where you're with the.
Surrounding area.
Around where this proposal is
supposed to be here.
This facility spokesman
established.
Very simply is.
While lakes area to surface.
And no.
Ground water resources which is
specifically.
One of the.
One of the three sixty
organization.
Has she
rural disposal facilities.
In the immediate vicinity let me
move on if I could.
To a question as to whether.
During the presenters.
Would.
Eight thirty here are C. would
this permit on an ad hoc basis.
And now I'm specifically
concerned with safety issues of
the storage.
And transportation of material
part testimony.
For several years now the this
material is.
Thanks we transported and safely
stored
in identically or several
hygienically designed facilities
with.
No issues with respect to human
safety or the environment could
you address any information that
you might otherwise.
Yes Mr chairman committee and
and Representative first what's
important up to the NRC license
doesn't deal with
transportation.
So you should not look at their
evaluation as including the
transportation aspect it does
not number two what you have to
consider here that the corollary
of well we we have a little bit
of dry cask storage in the
country total shipping we're
talking about a project here
number one of scale that doesn't
exist we're talking of literally
multiple times fold combined of
everything that exists including
any transportation and exists to
talking about what comes with
those numbers I detail to you
already the fact that the NRC
will has documented almost a
hundred cases of dry cask
storage safety instances over
the last ten years alone once
again scale this is a license
for forty years consider that
the entire experience of this
technology might be forty years
old very first cast ever
deployed we're look we're asked
to do the entire nation supplied
for forty years then plus
another four year extension on
the back end and so we were
pushing us into technological no
man's land into modeling
territory so it's just you know
what's being asked here is of
such scale when you look at the
safety issues that have happened
including with rail you have to
then play that out multiply that
out consider that there's
substantial risk of something
happening is not a matter of if
it's when same thing happened
with wet they had a they had a
They had a shipment given the
wrong kitties are what lead
Gosh that was supposed to be
given in organic Kitty litter
and it was given an organic year
over that the because the drum
to blow up billion dollar
estimate so so anyway stuff
happens in so when you say ad
hoc basis that you know I asked
the NRC date we actually got to
come to Hobbes we had here and
they insisted on this kind of
closed door briefing with the
committee and I ask them do you
consider whether or not it's
good policy to create an interim
facility when you don't have a
permanent facility do you
consider just even the merits of
the policy and they said we're
not allowed to that is not our
job allowed to do one thing and
that is look at this license
application.
So so outside of the fact that I
think there is a bias where they
are excited to do something
because that's what we're all
here to do is do things and
that's you know.
But anyway so hopefully that
kind of answers your question in
a variety of what's.
Mister chairman Senator did not
because I was asking for
specific yes.
Our.
Health.
The public or the environment as
a consequence of the activities
that have been ongoing with
respect to this material for
many years now and in the
storage facilities if I'm not
mistaken I don't believe we can
point to one.
Asked if I could now Mr chairman
and senator about the NRC
permit.
And the requirement in the
permit for there to be.
A decommissioning plan.
Along with the funding sources
to the fact that decommissioning
is that.
Part of the.
In our State approval process.
Mr Chairman representative yes.
Okay and then with respect to.
Recycling.
Mister chairman Senator is not
true.
Down the road with newer
technology nuclear reactors this
material could become eligible
for recycling as fuel for that
for that newer technology have
you heard anything like that.
Mr Chairman representative what
I've heard is that for such a
scenario to unfold literally
every single nuclear power plant
in our country would have to be
changed out with different
technologies if this country did
not.
Incorporate nuclear power plant
designs that allow for that so
so what you're talking about
here is is a complete.
Changeover of technology use in
this country so all kinds of
hypotheticals are true I'm
including having a catastrophic
failure of ten thousand cast
after the designed life so.
Okay.
Mr chair Senator I've heard
multiple comments with respect
to.
In our middle justice
implications.
Of this bill if the Senate
approved.
Frankly I have a hard time.
Squaring that with the multi
billion dollar investment in our
community.
She.
high paying jobs.
Which not were one job.
With a requirement for state
subsidy.
Please help.
I want to disconnect between
that reality and the
environmental justice.
Language.
This been put forth.
Here during this discussion with
could you.
Address for me please.
Mr chair representative
respectfully I'm not sure I
understand the question.
Mr chairman and senator hi.
standout.
This project relates to
environmental justice.
Cleared up at all.
Sure does and I'm really glad
you were you your more sustained
it absolutely speaks to
environmental justice Mr chair
and representative I'll tell you
how number one you have lots of
populations lots of people
living around that facility
whose voices have not been heard
few politicians have been hurt
if you look the social
environmental justice by nature
speaks to social justice speaks
to sometimes disenfranchised
people communities of color
Me just take a snapshot of the
people that spoke in support of
it today if you want to get down
to it the consider the
populations that live around us
that may not whose voices
weren't heard you look at the
community of gel but more so
than that Mr chair what I
presented a previous committee
was a map of New Mexico and the
rail routes that this these
materials would go by you have
to consider and acknowledge
however small or large you feel
the risk is that they are being
exposed to rest of that these
this rail will go through tribal
communities we'll go through my
community in Los crucis was our
communities all across the
country in reality this is a
national issue and so we talk
about environmental justice is
the justice of submitting
populations to risk that are not
in their interest certainly
don't benefit from Travis which
which even though there are
there are a few short term jobs
in the construction of this not
a lot of long term jobs in in
managing the site but most of
the country that is exposed to
this through in the
transportation part of it don't
even get any jobs clean most of
the people in New Mexico so yeah
that's what we mean by
environmental justice that
where's the justice in exposing
people to rest when there's no
benefit and without their
consent and again residents
communities represent forty
percent of state have said we
don't want this so you would
call that an injustice when
you're forcing on.
Mr chair Senator one last
comment I would.
Hello.
Hundreds of millions of dollars.
Yes project would bring to
southeastern Mexico and the
revenue that would accrue to the
state.
As a consequence.
Of that activity.
Would.
Send Hey.
Strong positive message.
With respect to environmental
justice because it would give
the state more resource.
To address these issues.
Mr chairman and senator with
this.
With this last year strong.
The attorney general's.
Which states that it's
abundantly clear.
The state cannot live.
Or otherwise.
Directly regulate general
storage facilities I believe
this legislation.
Yes attempting to circumvent
that statement.
And it is not a piece of
legislation that I believe I can
support thank you.
Mr chairman thank you senator
freelancers up to appreciate the
dialogue.
Thank you Scott next up we have
Representative Sarinana.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm and
thank you senator for bring this
bill I've been on the
radioactive and hazardous waste
committee for several years I've
heard all about this and
my biggest concern was transfer
is transportation Holtec just
deals with the spent rods and
storing the nuclear waste but
the transportation does New
Mexico is a real system strong
enough to handle these canisters
carrying the high level nuclear
waste.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative so don't no the
answer is no and not in all
cases and so what's been said is
that they would need to upgrade
rail segments around the state
they might need to build new
rail segments.
And so we don't know what that
looks like we've had rail
experts testified for Committee
so it would that they have
described it as a historic
transportation project of this
scale that we've never
experienced and I wanted to say
for people listening I
appreciate for more Tom Jennings
Rossell chiming in and I've told
him this it's really I think my
heart really goes out to people
in his community because it is
the final rail spur along the
route of which we were told by
Holtec every single shipments
were coming through all parts of
the Mexico virality be totally
top secret courting the company
only the governor's office would
be notified if becoming by armed
guard these are for security and
national security reasons and so
they would intentionally routed
around it'd be secret but every
bit of it would come through
Roswell through that final leg
as it makes its way down the Lee
County I feel really bad I will
talk about internal justice
really bad for committee it's
going to have ten thousand
shipments of dry cask storage
going by potentially not just
once but twice as it goes out to
them a permanent home some point
effective figured out but no Mr
chair representative the rail
part.
It is not sufficient to support
this project according to the
company but they would attempt
to make itself.
Thank you Representative and
thank senator and that Mr
Chairman
so.
They would attempt to make it so
or would the state be on on
would have to pay for who who's
gonna be responsible for the
upgrades or whatever we need.
Yeah Madam Mr chair
representative I believe the
company what I mean but it would
be in concert with the railroads
obviously and and the rail
regulating authorities.
Okay thank you Mr chairman
Senator.
If something did happen.
Who our first responders would
have to go in would they be
ready to handle something like
this a still.
Mr chair representative this is
really one of my biggest
concerns and when I was floored
okay the first hearing we have
with all tech the presented a
slide and it said emergency
response and it had kind of the
areas of responsibilities that
emergency response local
government local and state
government.
Just like wait a minute and so
the reality is now as we sit
here today we do not show up
high level waste through the
state of New Mexico it's you
know hazardous material
certainly local governments to
some extent or trained on
dealing with hazardous
accidents this is a different
animal this is high level waste
storage
You know another striking
difference with with with here
we are on the eve of a licensed
possibly being given most local
governments never been consulted
by hold back about this
they will tell you of there's an
accident
that we will reimburse a local
government but that's a far cry
from if there is an accident
somewhere in McKinley county or
near Clovis who's gonna be there
in the middle of the night if a
rail car.
You know I'm comes off tracks
and there's an accident it's
going to be the local government
the state so the state right now
equipped to deal with that I
would say absolutely not and
I've not heard any testimony to
the contrary so it's a
disturbing reality of exposure
that we all need to be aware of
that comes with this project.
Thank you thank you Mr thank you
senator you Mr chairman one more
question
how many sides are there in the
United States that will feed be
sending this nuclear waste to
New Mexico you know you have a
number.
math Mr chair representative I
don't know an exact number I
think I have a one of my head
but I want to be wrong done do
you know what number to how
many.
Power plants have this way
sitting there that would be
sending it over.
I'm if all of the waste would
come it would come from about a
hundred and twenty different
places ninety plus percent of
the spent fuel is in the eastern
half of the country.
but if you it could come from
all over the country if all of
it had came I would point out
however the full text has no
binding contract with any
company to bring this waste
which I think also goes to the
economics that.
The representative was just
talking about who would pay for
it.
The company doesn't pay for it
it would be the people who are
sending the waste which would be
utility companies from around
the country I don't believe
ratepayers and regulatory
commissions and other states are
gonna say and I will stand.
Tens of millions of dollars on
building new railroad lines
that's part of what frankly as a
failed economic model which is
why there currently are no set
sights like this in existence
for consolidated storage.
Although I think what's a little
different Mr chair
representative with all tack is
actually own dry cask storage
themselves they actually bought
a decommissioned plants and and
and I think of grave concern is
that they sat and again the
project manager just said this
we're getting a license will
start construction so I fear
they will try to change the
facts on the ground and
literally start building and
they own title to ways that they
can start shipping since the
facilities built.
Thank you senator thank you Mr
chairman I I do believe this is
an important bill I've heard
from all taken from everyone
over the last several years
New Mexico isn't the place and
as we heard from people as they
testified this isn't the place
to bring nuclear waste we've
already had enough waste
so I thank you for bringing this
bill I think it's an important
bill for New Mexico and I will
be voting for thank you.
Thank you representative
Sarinana next up we're
Representative Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you senator
You know I'm a I'm a I've heard
some.
I've seen some presentations and
a water natural resources
committee I believe in the
window so several years ago
and Holtec made a presentation I
don't serve on the radioactive
waste committee and I know you
chair that
but I want to just visit with
you Mr chairman and and senator
about the preemption concerns
that have been pointed out of I
know New Mexico Utah in the same
Federal Disch District Court I
believe the tenth district and
it's my understanding that
there's a similar law in Utah
that was dealt with by the tenth
circuit and they they overruled
such a law that similar to what
you're proposing can you give us
a little insight on that why why
this would be different than the
Utah law.
Yes it and I'm not sure Mr
chairman and and senator
what District Court Texas
would
the subject to but at least
apples to apples we're we're
with the and the same federal
District Court as Utah.
Yes go ahead Mr chair
representative so the difference
is is is in regulation that Utah
Utah which also the federal
government had approved I guess
actually I could interim storage
facility for you talk try to
then pass a few bills also not a
blue state it's time Republican
legislature tried to pass some
bills regulating spent fuel and
that's where you crossed into
the
That's that's what the court
said a year we have primacy over
the regulation that's not what
we're doing with this bill
outside of.
Of the permit issue that and
Garcia has recognized state
authority but it what we're
dealing with is the siding
siding of this material here and
so that's where we believe we do
have authority where three other
states again have done this
would not been struck down by
the federal government or even
suit including Texas where a
license was just granted there
so it's a different approach
than you talk.
I thank you Mr chairman thank
you senator
I guess a the Texas lost fairly
new.
And are you aware of any
Court challenges there I
understand there's there's a
strong possibility that schooner
Kerr
and I'm not sure what District
Court this would reside do you
are you aware of any pending
Court cases Mr chair
Representative the only
litigation it's existing on this
is not we're states are being
sued but the states themselves
are actually suing the federal
government state of Texas so in
the federal government over.
The giving of the license I
don't wanna miss characterized
to Texas suit but they have sued
the federal government has has
the New Mexico New Mexico
Attorney General.
So over there four even a dozen
eight consolidated interim
storage so that's where the
that's the litigation of exist
right now.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator
I think the.
This is a.
Pre ball project to I know you
mentioned
Said the Roswell former more is
not favored this sorry is in
favor your bill whereas the more
Carlsbad and Hobbs propose your
bill and the and they were
instrumental in recruiting
Holtec to.
Put this facility.
in in the in please listen Eddy
County and the so this is an
interesting dynamic we've got
locals.
That are very much in favor of
this and sure believe in your
local control of course we all
we all want safe disposal and
transportation.
In the.
And the forty four year
permanent as you mentioned
earlier.
It is the procedure on I'll take
as Mr chairman and and gentleman
they have a lot of experience in
Europe
Hamler nuclear facilities I
believe in in the the
Netherlands and it's interesting
to note.
Mr chairman and and gentleman
that
Because of the energy crisis in
Europe
England has just announced that
they're
licensing and and implementing
ten small nuclear reactors four
hundred megawatt variety to help
please their energy crisis
Europe is a unfortunately
they're overly dependent on
Russian natural gas which is a
vital for their energy mix and
other not a very safe supplier
will so I think this is a.
When you look at the big picture
we're you know New Mexico is a
blessed with rich natural gas
resources that helps supplement
wind and solar with that it wind
solar would be economic so we
all we all are concerned about
environment and I just to.
Just wonder a.
If this is the right approach so
Mr chairman and and
Representative state Senator
Steinborn it's good to hear good
to see thank you.
Thank you Representative
Strickler next up is
Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr chairman.
And Senator.
A couple of questions you of.
You alluded to are mentioned
about the Attorney General had
a.
Ending are ongoing I gas of
lawsuit and the district US
district.
Court.
Do we have any opinion or
inclination from the from that
court hearing today.
Mr chair representative I I the
don't.
What little information I have
data Senator
Would probably.
Lad me to believe that.
That court is going to find that
the.
Federal.
The store do will be upheld.
there was a couple of questions
a couple of comments
About this catastrophic failure
potential and
And I think it's important to
talk about that have there been
any catastrophic failures of any
of the tasks in that you know
of.
Mr Chairman representative no.
So
Seven I apologize Representative
I will say though that they were
safety incidences where all tech
was ordered in San offered to
stand down and actually change
out there cast design so the NRC
did their job they were aware of
a safety issue and their order
to do it so I appreciate to see
yeah but I appreciate that and
but in that at at that
particular incident that cast
wasn't dropped it was yet.
But it did not they all it it
withstood the impact there was
no release and and the
The system more I mean there
were changes granted but the
system worked as it was
designed.
I have not been able to find of
any.
Anywhere.
That there were any releases at
any of these
because of any of these hold
disabilities where they're in
the US are brought do you know
of any.
All Mr Mr chair representative
no and I but as a lawyer once
sat on that committee the
absence of proof doesn't mean
proof of absence site you know.
Mr chairman I appreciate that
and now.
I.
None of these trains would be
high speed trains as I.
As I understand they're all of
their all of them.
Low speed dedicated.
Trains on tracks that would have
been.
Of the proven upgraded and
monitored at a higher level of
safety is that correct.
Mr chair representative that's
what I have been told.
Meet me again Mr chairman and
Representative
I think it was Representative
Strickler Mr chairman that
mentioned the.
The support of of the.
Mares in the counties that are
around just have you reached out
to them and then is there any
negotiation I mean is there any
is very.
It seems a little bit.
Problematic.
For one of us in the
legislature.
To start.
Yeah.
It is clear to start
implementing in you know
specific rules that limits
another County.
And.
I think you would probably be
offended I introduce something
that you know was.
I was not in line with the mayor
and the county done in and I get
it.
And it I'm a little bit.
Concern that.
Or precedents of doing this.
Then the next saying it might be
no renewable energy now fossil
fuels are you know it goes on
and on do you think that's a
problem Senator.
Well I appreciate the question
because I think it's Mr chair
representative it's a false
premise and itself is kind of
offended me from the beginning
when some of said Hey this is a
local local project hands off
it's no longer local in that
cast goes by my community in Los
crucis it's no longer local when
it goes by you know goes through
the Navajo Nation when it goes
to the City of Albuquerque so
and you know what's really
interesting is to somehow not
local it is the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission held
national hearings on this page
Rolf virtual which is a problem
because there's additional
divided not everyone could
participate in lots of people
including our our federal
delegation urged them to wait.
Not pushing through during the
pandemic when people can
actually meet in person but
there are people all over the
country who weighed in saying
I've got a bridge a real bridge
to close by my house on ninety
five by New Jersey and I'm
worried about a cask falling off
their on my property so this is
not it's it's really frankly
disrespectful for someone in the
in place to say Hey this just
affects me and not acknowledge
everybody else it goes by and to
answer your question yes I have
had conversations with John
Heaton and folks in southeastern
Mexico impact our committee the
radioactive and hazardous
materials committee we had a
hearing in Hobbs and locals got
to come out and I would note
Representative Mr chairman that
of the community of job.
Right there that same county
passed a resolution opposed to
it.
And the fact one of the
counselors at this time said
something that was the most
precious thing I'd ever heard
she said when the sharks in the
water for god's sake don't just
don't jump off the boat what
earth would we want this waste
in our community when everyone
else is trying to get rid of it
so anyway it's we have had lots
lots conversations locally and
with advocates and we just
respectfully disagree you know
yeah.
Well Mr chairman and.
Representative I have the same.
Thoughts about the zoom process
that we're using today again I I
don't think it's
beneficial to the legislature
and I know you guys in the
Senate are doing that you're
you're in here Committee rams
and you're on the floor as
legislature's legislate or
should be and
I I think that is that's to be
commended I wish we were done
the same time.
Our our.
You know we have Mr chairman and
Representative and senator we
have a tense.
Court ruling.
We have on going.
New Mexico AG.
court action.
Don't you think it's a little
premature.
When you have all when you have
the RN's when you have the
regulatory and nuclear.
Division.
Long standing.
Recognized.
Good track record.
For.
Me just seems like we're trying
to get in front of some of them
to provide the at a court action
that we might not a lot.
And
I don't care what side or what
the you know what the subject is
that justice troubling to me I
think we ought to let the courts
in the AGM that federal District
Court judge of.
Handle that I I think it's been
held for a long time I think the
president's of starting to pick
and choose.
What we're going to do.
And how we're going to do it.
When we have recognized experts
with good track records.
And we're trying to do it at a
local level I am.
I just think it's a precedent
set I.
Or or I don't think it's good
for New Mexico and
So I I will continue to listen
to the.
I think today but I don't think
I can support it because I don't
believe I I think we ought to
stand down and let the courts
figure it out thank you Mr chair
thank you senator thank you.
Thank you Representative
Townsend except we have
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chair and and
Senator Steinborn.
So.
I guess I'm I'm a little
confused.
By your statement that this.
Well legislation is is different
than what has been struck down
in other states the issue here.
In in my opinion is the I is the
question of preemption that's
what the attorney general's
letter was about and I mean in
the in the title.
Of this act on on lines on page
one lines twelve and thirteen
says prohibiting the storage or
disposal of spent fuel.
And high level waste and if you
go to page three.
The page three and four under
section three beginning online
twenty two.
That's actually let's let me
begin
I I let me just begin at the
beginning of an online eighteen
no person shall Stewart dispose
of radioactive materials or
radioactive waste.
In a disposal facility until the
state has concurred in the
creation of a disposal facility
except as specifically preempted
by federal law.
And then it goes on to say.
Provided that spent fuel high
low level waste shall not be
stored or disposed of in the
state.
That's preemption that's exactly
preemption.
And provided further that the
state or political subdivision
the state shall not issue or
certify permit.
For construction or operation
operation of a disposal facility
for spent fuel or high level
waste and then you said the that
you didn't think that we would
be shut down because Texas has a
so are law they don't have a
similar law because you've went
on to say they have just
permitted.
A facility.
So.
There lies not like this law
this law is a preemption law in
the very title and that is it
specifically what the turning
general's lawsuit states is that
we can't preempt.
I mean you're saying.
Senator all presides here unless
they want to put a facility here
I mean I I it seems very clear
that this is the language of
preemption which has been struck
down in court.
Well to clear Mister chair
representative to clear that up
number one Texas does have a
prohibition against the words of
of high level waste in their
state you when you said they
gave a permit they did not give
apartment the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission gave a licensed
consolidated and storage
facility so the tax situation
our situation our top of the
state except Texas is now pass
this law we you have it before
you today but outside of that or
some well the other thing that's
different is in their case the
facility there has been given a
license Holtec has not yet been
given licensed by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission so the
other two did distinction again
with the AG in Utah on all that
is that we're dealing with here
is not regulations that you'll
we're dealing with the citing of
it and that's the lane then that
we believe in Texas and North
Dakota and we're gonna pass
these laws and if they are
Environment Department which
they've been numerators in there
FOR believe that their crowns
and Lane center which we do have
authority to say we cannot cite
this facility here we cannot and
that's where adults also
different from the seat that
exist now which yield to the
legitimacy of the N. R. C. even
granting consolidated interim
storage this is about the state
saying it should we this way
shall not be stored in the state
of New Mexico to citing issue
that's how it's different from
Utah in the and where we
believe.
And always experts believe that
we have the authority to do so.
So thank you for that it just
seems just kind of a circular
argument and in my mind where
you're saying this is a citing
issue and the siding issue is
not here that's preemption.
it so I think.
If if if Texas law basically
says not here I believe there
law will be struck down just
like Utah's law was struck down
so there has there is precedence
for us just within the courts
that says that we cannot pre
empt yes
so I that maybe that's going to
go all the way to the Supreme
Court but
maybe not but in the meantime I
think this is really just a
temporary halt here that we put
this in in that we do this
preemption so
Holtec cannot proceed
going forward with trying to get
that licensure and and I think
this is just to wait them out.
I don't see this as an actual
real attempt when we know what
the at least what the the tenth
circuit court has said so.
I think this is exactly what
Representative Townsend leader
Townsend said which is this is
isn't it and effect to try and.
The.
It looks like we're putting
something in place that we could
color the future.
Future rulings but if if this is
a question of preemption and
that's what the federal
government's position is that
that preemption is the problem
that's what this bill is this is
a preemption bill it's not a
citing.
You're not saying we could cite
it somewhere in the state you're
saying no we're in the state
that's preemption you can't call
it citing his preemption so I I
it I think if we were judges and
we were trying to and we were
knowing what in an outcome
already was.
we wouldn't even be doing this
if we were if we were judges and
I know you're a lawyer so the
idea that that is that judges.
One of the things I don't want
to do is is make a ruling that
they know will be overturned and
that's what you're asking us to
do is legislators and for that
reason Mister chair and senator
I can't support this because
that's what you're asking us to
you you're asking us to vote for
something that we know the
courts at least at this point
have already made a ruling on.
And you know if it's if there's
further action like you said
that Attorney General has we
need to stay away until that
action is complete so thank you
Mr chairman thank you senator.
Thank you.
Are there any further questions
from the committee before I make
a couple comments.
Okay since seen done you go
ahead.
Senator sign or
the I thank you this is your
bills it's got my name on the
air just in the house that you
brought it to me and I
appreciate that.
you know I I agree that Holtec
is that for New Mexico.
It's bad for the whole state.
There will be there would be a.
Short term economic benefit for
the local community yeah I think
that's what they're after.
But I don't want the state of
New Mexico being known as
nations dumping.
And I think Senator Wirth you
raise a really good point about
the transportation of this waste
doesn't back think the all
state.
Really so this is so as the side
and and I think we've already
done our part you know we have
with right we have the trainees.
we still have down winders
suffering from those impacts
yeah we had to national labs
which are important parts of our
state but aren't without
downside so we so we've done our
part I I don't want to.
I don't want to accept other
people's waste and that's what
this is not our waste it's other
people's waste there is a COVID.
With the state I don't care if
they needed here for the rest of
the time member of the public.
Well that's pretty much will
will likely happen
the permit would be for forty
years it would be renewed for
another forty years the company
spent there about that so it's
like you do yours right off the
bat.
You know that's a long time.
What's been here that long I'm
not optimistic about it moving
elsewhere and of course it does
elsewhere that's you know a
whole nother issue of
transportation.
I think the idea that this is
somehow zero emissions is a red
herring this is not the climate
bill we're not talking about
generation of energy we're
talking about waste.
You know I I do appreciate her
so much so is questions about
the point there is there's Texas
law which has the challenge
there's Utah case of which
overturned a Utah law it's clear
that the federal government can
preempt the regulation of.
You can arrest.
It's also clear that local
jurisdictions including the
state of New Mexico have
authority over construction in
in roads and stormwater and in
all the other things that local
authorities out of control.
You know where the dividing line
is between preemption and those
local issues.
Really clear you know what what
I do this bill as is asserting
the state's rates.
if we don't want it here we
should be of the state.
And we're searching our rights
states rights right.
The federal government will just
run roughshod over us and allow
this to happen in our state
without our permission.
So Representative Steinborn
thank you very much thank you.
Steinborn before except the
motion do you think the final.
Now Mr chair I I do want to
acknowledge there's
Representative and tribal
governors on the line there's
Representative as from the op of
the council of governors there's
others as you mentioned I
appreciate everybody's time for
for coming on to way and this
this is going to affect us all
this is gonna appreciate
potentially the future of the
state well beyond our lifetimes
and this is our moment to speak
up or forever hold their peace
as a state so this bill is
wholly appropriate and I really
appreciate the debate this
morning and.
And by the way Representative
Montoya I appreciate it because
being called bulldog but I'm not
a lawyer so just to clear that
up but Representative the waters
out there but I'm not a lawyer I
just play one on TV I'm sorry
now is the worst insult and the
bold on now you know we we love
our lawyers but anyway I just
wanted to that the record so
with that Mr chair appreciate it
I know for the comments.
Representative Sarinana we are
because motion yes I would thank
you Mr chairman I move house
bill one twenty seven to pass.
In that.
We have a motion for remand
sorry on that second from
Representative turned in
Augustine to do take the vote
please.
Yes.
Representative Garcia.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative one going out.
No.
Representative and yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative Townsend.
No Sir.
Vice chair Sarinana yes.
And chairman McQueen.
Augustine.
Representative Dixon is excuse
could you call her name anyway
just in case yes there
Representative Dixon.
My apologies Mr chair that's
fine I'll come back to me please
Mr Chairman queen yes.
I yes is and for no.
Thank you Augustine so you have
a do pass.
And that does it for today we
are still working on when we
will meet on Saturday but we
will meet on Saturday so thank
you to everyone
Thank you for your hearing good
discussion we are a chart.
