I would.
Members of the House roll call
is open.
Roll call is closed we have a
quorum.
Members please rise for today's
indication offered to us by the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Rod Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker members
We all come here from different
parts of the state and.
generally what we're thinking we
get here is is what is the will
of my community and what is the
oil that I want to get done well
I'm here but I'd like everyone
who wants to join me in the.
In the lord's prayer because I
think sometimes we forget that
there's someone who's watching
over us and.
Maybe we should consider his
will so anyone anyone wants to
join me.
Our father who art in heaven
hallowed be thy name thy Kingdom
Come thy will be done on earth
as it is in heaven give us this
day our daily bread and forgive
us our transgressions as we
forgive those who transgress
against us and lead us not into
temptation but deliver us from
evil for thine is the kingdom
and the power and the glory
forever amen.
Thank you John Representative
Scott would you please leave is
the pledge of allegiance.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Hello one more time with feeling
and and this but you'll.
He.
Representative when I see all
those indices for dynasties yet
but it'll.
Anderson Johnson please listen
saluting New Mexico's flag.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo Mr
speaker let's play ball of this
Sunday afternoon.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objections to order.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr.
Eleven fifty nine AM I will be
adjourn until twelve oh one PM
House come your.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules we
suspended and that the general
showing all those present in
this morning session are present
in this afternoon session.
No objection disorder.
I ask unanimous consent that we
suspended the record show that
the journal has been.
Subject to revision and approval
of those things and out of
business committee objection is
so ordered.
Good afternoon everyone are
there announcements.
Gentlelady from Chavis.
Mr speaker thank you very much I
don't know if the risks but it
feels the way I do but I'm ready
to go home.
Well generally we don't want you
to go home but if you choose to
you could always participate
remotely.
Mr speaker that's not what I was
selected to do of selected to
come up here and represent my
constituents once we do a turn
I'm out of here at the thank you
very much.
Okay the gentleman from the
Representative Pettigrew.
Mr speaker I appreciate the
opportunity to make an
announcement I've had multiple
requests state Mr speaker to ask
one more time that this B.
thirty two the moves to second
committee this time House
Judiciary thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen are there
for their nonsense.
He did the that that bill did
have a very long and thorough
hearing this morning I believe.
The gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln is pointing at someone
or something the gentleman from
Bernalillo Cibola County Sapporo
San Juan and violence yes
Representative Harry Garcia
thank you Mr speaker yesterday
mentioned that I had a
granddaughter's birthday well
today is my great grandson first
birthday well Happy Birthday to
him.
At twelve one thank you.
Happy birthday.
Are there for you know since the
gentle lady from Santa
Representative Powdrell Culbert
thank you Mr speaker I would
like to announce that the day is
more.
Only.
On my mother's side and she
turns ninety five today.
Happy birthday.
Today's also pi day everybody.
You know this IDA today is a one
day with highs around because hi
R. squared.
I'll I'll say it again the new
folks in hearing on Fridays
wanted buys around because the
pie R. squared.
It was needed sorry.
Everyone who is physically
present on the floor somehow is
also needed
Not sure why the house whether
further announcements.
Mr speaker.
This Representative Anderson
chair of management
I think on humor you would be
better to stick to jokes like
this very funny joke that I just
heard why do you not play poker
in the jungle.
One.
Many changes.
Really the T. deserve from
Boston
Okay the gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
We go to the next order of
business messages directions
ordered there to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in gross copy of house taxation
and revenue committee substitute
for house bill two fifty five as
amended with certificate of
correction has been read in full
and signed by the offices the
Senate in open session and
return same here with
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
this is very interesting.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in gross copies of Senate bill
fifty two.
Senate bill one twenty two as
amended have been read in full
and signed by the officers of
the Senate in open session and
request the can the signatures
of the office of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
this is really interesting.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed house bill forty three as
amended by the house and further
amended by the Senate house bill
two forty four as amended by the
Senate and request the
concurrence of the house to the
Senate amendments and that's the
Senate has passed house bill
twenty two was amended by the
house.
House bill twenty three as
amended by the house house bill
fifty two as amended by the
house house bill fifty seven as
amended by the house house bill
one oh three as amended by the
house house bill one fifty seven
and returned same here with
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
this is really interesting.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill
seventeen.
Senate bill one thirty three as
amended.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill
ninety as amended.
Senate bill one ninety two.
Senate bill two thirty four as
amended Senate bill three twenty
five.
Senate bill three seventy nine
and requested the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk this is Richard.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
committee report no objections
were click to read.
Mr speaker your state government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to them is been
referred Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four as amended has had
it under consideration forcing
with recommendation that you
passed as amended respectfully
submitted Georgene Louis chair.
Unanimous consent of the
committee force for the other
acted upon with the single vote
reflection the journal so
they're acted upon individual
hearing a junctions were clear
to me.
Senate bill one twelve as
amended to pass.
Senate bill one sixty as amended
to pass respectfully submitted
Georgene Louis chair.
We're adoption of the rules
committee for the Senate
taxation business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four as amended Senate
bill one twelve is amended
Senate bill one sixty submitted
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
Right day three four Sir that.
Mr speaker your Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee to is been
referred Senate bill thirty two
as amended has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it to pass
respectfully submitted Matthew
McQueen chair.
Move adoption production federal
committee for the Senate bill
thirty two as amended all those
in favor please signify by
saying hi.
I was.
It is close to the eyes have it
committee reports about to.
The gentle lady finally.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business third
reading of legislation no
objections so ordered.
The gentleman Bernalillo
Representative mess this are you
ready on item two.
The record reflect on action
necessary for placing Senate
bill ninety four as amended on
final passage has been taken the
gentleman to explain the.
Thank you Mr speaker good
afternoon honorable members
Senate bill ninety four.
allows those college athletes in
the state of New Mexico to
receive compensation for their
name image likeness or athletic
reputation without losing their
eligibility to play college
sports and with that I stand for
questions seen.
The gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker good
afternoon everyone will the
gentleman yield.
Thank you Mr speaker I gladly
yield to the gentle lady from
McKinley San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John but I did have a question
is there any restrictions on
what an athlete could actually
endorse.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
McKinley San Juan not in the
bill no.
So Mr speaker and gentleman the
endorsement could be anything
which is a little bit disturbing
to me Mr speaker and gentleman
what about former athletes that
may decide to return back to
school would they be allowed to
take advantage of this bill
thank you Mr speaker delay from
McKinley San Juan yes they would
they would they would not lose
their eligibility say a high
school senior has a.
A. I. internet presence
and makes money off of that they
would still be eligible for to
play college sports or as you
mentioned a student athlete
returning from from the year off
or whatnot or transferring from
another state.
Okay so Mister speaker John what
about someone that has been out
of school for a while a
supposedly may have graduated
but is decided to go back and
work on another degree but that
person also be able to take
advantage of this law.
Thank you Mr speaker delay from
McKinley San Juan yes yes and
less of course state they can't
come back from the pros but yes
they can come back plate as well
exports in the state of Mexico
and benefit from this bill.
Yeah what I was wondering about
Mr speaker gentleman is just
what I'm looking at the
sponsorship of this I understand
that one of the people is a
former athlete I'm just curious
if that might be a an issue but
I appreciate the answering of
the questions of thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen.
Mexico John from the
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield Mister speaker
yes I yield speaker and
gentleman looking through the.
The.
Right up on this particular
piece of legislation it looks as
though there is at least the
potential to run aground on
current in CA regulations could
you address that force please
thank you Mr speaker gentleman
from Lee and that that is the
point of the in several ways you
mentioned is the National
collegiate athletic association
which organizes major college
sports in this country there's
also other organizations in the
nineties that was the
The bowl coalition now there's
the college football playoff
there's different organizations
of delay with college sports
that are making millions and
millions and millions of
dollars.
Off of the the product and the
And the talent of these athletes
so anyway the incidentally has
fought things like this for for
decades every year at their
national conference they say
they're going to address that
they're going to address it and
then finally California passed a
similar bill I think it was some
like.
Thirty one to five or some like
that in the Senate seventy three
nothing in the state assembly so
once California did one sixth of
our economy a major college
conference of Florida's next
once once Florida does it it's
kind of came over for the and
several a and they have to
joined just be more fair to the
college athletes but to answer
your question Mr speaker John
from Lee.
What this would do would say
that it would essentially force
New Mexico.
All ages to to not help hold any
rule by the NC double a the
conflicts with the state law
Mr speaker and gentleman.
All of the events that the
colleges in New Mexico attend
are sanctioned by the NCAA court
they not thank you Mr speaker
John from Lee yes and both and
conferences of our division one
schools.
The.
The mountain west conference has
school has schools in a
California Colorado which is
going to do this soon I think
this year New Mexico state plays
in the black which is dominated
by California schools so it's
it's consistent with with both
those conferences despite states
decisions.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
is it possible that a student
taking some of this compensation
under the current regulations
were in place could lose their
eligibility and then as a
corollary developed any games
one with paid athletes that or
With regulations that are
currently in place would we be
at risk of forfeiting those
games up under the circumstances
Mr speaker I'll generally what
they're not paid athletes
they're not getting paid to play
sports they're just allowed to
you know coke you know.
Give up golf lessons for a fee
or you know or advertise for the
local car dealership or whatnot
they're not being paid by the
you don't directly for their
playing of the sports but no the
NC double a is going to address
this here in the next year or
two
But this will ensure that New
Mexico athletes.
Live in a fair market place like
to think this that this country
was intended that the end
Senator a stop being an amateur.
Athletics association fifty
years ago but still continues to
keep its athletes locked into
this
This unfair of Environment.
Mr speaker and gentleman unfair
though it may be it looks like
in this instance we might be
giving the court a little bit
ahead of NCAA rule changes thank
you Mr speaker thank you John
for answering my questions.
This for the debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo Santa
Fe Taurus and let's yet
Representative McQueen.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
Tallman this is German yield
Mister speaker I yield.
Mr speaker and gentleman
you know I know you're you're
interested in sports is is
passion
The.
Few years ago I used to watch a
lot of college football I really
enjoyed it
haven't had much time recently.
and I I think I believe been I
think you probably agree that.
Big time athletics.
NC double a Lexus for okay.
You know we
As you said they make millions
and millions of dollars in.
And I believe that the athletes
are exploited.
I think we should have in place
certainly health insurance.
Including for chronic or long
term injuries.
you know we have we have
scholarship athletes to.
receiver in board and tuition
waiver and Mr chairman to do
scholarship athletes receive a
stipend the spending money.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa Fe Torrance.
Valencia and Lille.
State of they receive a free
scholarship.
Those those like as you
mentioned those scholarship
athletes many athletes are not
on scholarship or on half a
scholarship.
I don't believe they receive a
stipend I could be wrong but
they may receive like Pell
grants and other things of that
nature but they but if you're on
full scholarship you do not have
to pay for school.
So Mr speaker German you know
that's.
Some athletes get through
college and I appreciate that
unfortunately I think all too
often we are focusing on.
You know the glory of football.
And not the benefit of
education.
Mr speaker John but I I don't
think your bill.
Six is a broken system I
actually think it makes it
worse.
Mr speaker gentleman I I think
the vast majority of athletes.
They don't have in a commercial
endorsement.
potential I mean there are some
so there are some college
athletes to clearly could be
making millions of dollars and
endorsement
The vast majority cannot.
Especially here in New Mexico.
I think we need a system that.
Takes care these athletes.
And and focuses on education and
focuses on the future other
than.
Professional sports.
The NC double a I mean it's
probably white washing but it is
a great series of that the the
the college athletes saying I'm
turning pro in something other
than sports.
And you know.
Coming from that particular
messenger at you know the
messengers were problematic but
but that's that's the truth you
know going to going to college
is a great thing for your
future.
Very few these athletes turned
pro sports Mr speaker German my
concern is.
That we're not gonna get true
arm slings transactions we're
not gonna get
People being hired to endorse a
product you said a local car
dealership.
Because can sell more cars we're
gonna get it is.
We're we're opening the doors
three doors pretty wide open.
For in to see us stirs.
To funnel money to athletes that
maybe and that maybe today or in
previous years it got at happen
under the table and I'll be out
in the open I suppose that might
be better but you know some some
athletes gonna get is picture on
the Billboard and it's going to
get Carl.
For the use of a condo or some
other.
Benefit.
It doesn't systematically
addressed the problem that we
have.
In amateur athletics that are
making millions of dollars for
everyone except the athletes.
And Mr speaker John I just.
I I mean I understand what
you're trying to do and I
appreciate that you're trying to
fix a broken system but I
honestly think this makes it
worse.
Mr speaker German are I
personally think here in the
state of New Mexico we're not a.
And the terminology keeps
changing is you know that I
think power five conference.
You know I I would be delighted
if we drop down to division two.
I mean let's have sports where
our athletes can enjoy sports
and I'd I did sports and
colleges division three but you
know that was a big part of my
college experience was being on
athletic teams.
but very clear.
Just when I went to school that
it was a chancellor it wasn't
the reason I was in school.
Yeah I think we need to change
that message Mr speaker German
and I think this bill goes the
opposite direction in my great
fear is that by swinging the
doors open in college.
It's going to filter down high
school.
And so not only have we
corrupted the importance of a
college education.
Well we're gonna start to leave
is that you know promising
athletes for not focus
exclusively on sports.
Rather than academics.
In high school.
So Mr Chairman.
Again I I appreciate what you're
trying to do
but I think this built in the
state thank you Mr speaker thank
you John.
This for the debate the
gentleman from the
representative had.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
kind gentleman from Bernalillo
yield Mister speaker yes I
yield.
Thank you
Mr speaker is I understand the
amendment on this bill.
For the bill in current form of
blast amended does two things
allows a.
Player athletes to wear shoes
and allows
of different the on the contract
for the school.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
understand that.
It allows a third party to
provide insurance lodging mills
different things like that the
debate would that be correct Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker John from the those
are two of the provisions in the
bill yes.
Mr speaker you aware that the NC
double a is
Working to adjust our by laws
right now and is student adamant
opposition against
insertions like this and that
this will Mr speaker make
students that choose to do this
in violation of the.
The NC double a.
Rules and will make them
ineligible Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr John from the the
NC double eight says they're
going to amend their by laws I
don't believe it I do not
believe in simply have no
intention of changing the
current system is not in their
interest they've created the
biggest.
You know.
Exploitation of workers you know
you can imagine in terms of the
money value but anyway that's
beside the point yeah service
figure I'll jump from the is no
they're not eligible that's what
it says in the bill that they
would not lose their eligibility
in the state of Mexico and so
they would continue to be able
to play on the team for example
a golf star I could hire golf
star for three dollars to teach
me to.
Correct my slice of the pie
need.
It always do that but they would
not if they were to do that
today they would get kicked off
the team this would allow them
to do that so yes they would not
lose their eligibility that's
the entire point they would not
lose their eligibility if they
made money off of their name
image or likeness.
Mr speaker.
so this bill presumes to be able
to tell an independent
Authority on how they can treat
their students and when I say
that Mr speaker I'm not talking
about one of our colleges here
in New Mexico what I am talking
about very specifically is the
fact that NC double a could
remove their eligibility and
force Mr speaker them not to be
able play.
Mr speaker John from the US will
respect no no the and certainly
cannot do that
the the up they cannot do that
then Senator a cannot tell.
After this bill is passed I
cannot tell a New Mexico
university to kick that student
off the team state law would
prohibit this doesn't tell the
NC double a what to do this
tells state colleges what to do
when their players
Are allowed to live free and
market their name image and
likeness.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
I understand that argument the
NC double a does have the
ability to not make New Mexico
state or UNM and eligible school
to play in NC double a games.
This bill cannot address that
and does not address that would
you agree Mr speaker thank you
Mr generally it does not to
because we're a state with state
laws but hello once again
California already passed this
by the end of the summer in
Florida Colorado other states
will pass this the pac twelve is
still intact instead of only
needs the pac twelve
so does this not just the NC
double a to do the right thing
probably
but this is about New Mexico and
New Mexico athletes.
Mr speaker I I understand.
Where the gentleman is coming
from I I I think we take it a
bit far Mr speaker when we.
Start making assumptions that
the state of New Mexico has the
same power as the state of
California over the state of
Mexico state of Florida.
Mr speaker I do understand the
six other states have passed.
Laws that were similar to SB
ninety four in its original form
but as amended.
Take.
As this bill is amended right
now Mr speaker this takes us so
much further than the.
The.
Then what in CLA is even
considering right now I find it
concerning Mr speaker that we
would do this and so you know Mr
speaker were.
You know through the house we
have passed the recreational
marijuana bill.
in in the in the bill that
allows people to use
recreational marijuana.
our schools still have policies
that make drug use the legal and
it's not gonna stop them from
For all.
From the Mr speaker
From getting in trouble and
becoming ineligible for this I
think I I I just get very
concerned Mr speaker will we
start telling an independent
authority to all what they can
and can't do and I just I find
it interesting that we think
that we have the same power as a
population of of the state takes
one sixth of our economy and so
with that Mr speaker I yield
back.
As for the debate the gentleman
from Chavis and Lincoln
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from Bernalillo county
yield.
Mr speaker yes I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I just read this bill
after it was brought up and I
notice there's possibly one
thing missing from this bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman
would you agree with me that the
athletes going to public
institutions in New Mexico and
and serving as athletes for
those teams are utilizing a
platform that.
We the state of New Mexico has
provided to them.
Mr speaker John from Travis link
it it depends if they were
famous before they were famous
before but but it certainly is a
wonderful opportunity to play
college sports in the state of
New Mexico but but you would
agree that if they are if their
likeness is being utilized
because they are as the
representative from staffing
said a football player on the
UNM football team more The New
Mexico state football team that
is New Mexico that's providing
the platform if you will for
them to engage in their chosen
sport.
Mr speaker John from Travis
Lincoln I I would tend to agree
with that yeah unless they had
like some tick tock personality
that was unaffiliated with
sports but yeah I I I would
agree with what you just said.
And so their likeness is
utilizing that platform that the
state is providing I I'm I'm
really wondering why.
We don't deem their
compensation.
For utilization of their
likeness to be deemed to be in
the state of New Mexico and I
say that for income tax
purposes.
Because if we have a student
athlete from the state of Texas
playing so
Let's go back to football
football at the university of
New Mexico and received
compensation I'm afraid that
they will be not paying New
Mexico income tax even though we
are providing the platform for
them to receive the compensation
as provided herein would you
agree with that thank you Mr
speaker at gentleman from Chavis
Lincoln we're also getting that
ticket sales off of their name
agent image and likeness were
also potentially selling jerseys
with their name on the back
they're not getting a dime from
that sale we're also getting TV
contracts with other colleges if
we go to ball games and
generally tournaments this is a
multi million dollar industry
where an athlete you know can we
get a mail from somebody without
getting kicked off the team and
so
But with regards to income tax
that's gonna be up to tax and
Rev I I would argue that they
would have to pay New Mexico
income tax if they made their
money here in New Mexico but I
will get to the tax and Revenue
Department well I I.
I'm a take that a step further
it seems to me that we ought to
in this bill deem that that
income is derived from the New
Mexico and and address that
issue up front because to do
otherwise means that we might
have athletes that
could be making maybe quite a
bit of money.
And as they are from a state
that does not impose an income
tax they would be of not paying
taxes on that the use of their
your major life yes and you know
the professional athletes the
second question Mr speaker and
gentleman is.
Are we setting athletes up for
potential
problems down the road and I say
that in light of another tax
situation professional athletes
have to hire teams of
accountants to keep track of
their income because they get
taxed in virtually every state
in which they played games and
in many instances.
Cities in which they play and
they have questions each of
their
games is attributed so much
portion of their salary and
they're having to report income
to the city of Denver as well as
the state of Colorado if they
played in Denver Colorado and
that's true whether you're of
Denver Bronco or a Kansas city
chief.
Part of your income is derived
from the game in Denver and
they're having to file income
tax returns and so if I'm
wondering if if we do this if
student athletes all of a sudden
are going to be saddled with
having to figure out where they
have to pay income tax figure
out where they have to
meet local and state and
regulations and it may be a lot
more complicated than student
athletes would recognize and the
compensation may be such that it
wouldn't pay for those teams of
lawyers and accountants that may
be necessary to navigate those
of those fields on I'm
concerned.
With respect to the the two tax
issues I raise one
New Mexico's interest in this
and then secondly whether of the
student athlete themselves would
be subject to.
Scrutiny and potential tax
liability in multiple venues as
a result of of this type of
legislation
Mr speaker and gentleman I I I'm
sympathetic toward the the
athletes I just raise those
issues because I think it's
probably some things of the
college athletes have not
thought about the pro athletes
certainly surround themselves
with people that are capable of
navigating those waters thank
you Mr speaker thank you John.
Sure the debate the gentle lady
from going into Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you Mr speaker my
questions were answered by the
previous
members thank you.
The next to the general is doing
in a grant is here
Representative Terrazas.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
time zone from Bernalillo please
feel Mr speaker yes I yield
thank you Sir you know I just
had a couple concern well couple
things most of the things you
answered
one of them is a possibility
that they could be in balance
have you thought of that as far
as offers.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from a Dona ana said a
grant counties I'm not quite
sure what you're I think I know
what you're getting at does this
kind of change the balance of
power I think it I mean there's
probably no greater disparity of
power in college football today
than there have been there ever
has been but if you look at
section three paragraph for it
and it talks about.
The name image likeness.
The nobody could pay that
athlete for such deals as
inducements to recruit so this
cannot happen as an inducement
to recruit however once that
actually is chair New Mexico
playing playing sports then
there have been there able to
market their name image and
likeness without getting kicked
off the team.
Thank you Mr speaker John Andrew
is there you think there's going
to is this going to change the
right way how will this change
recruiting as we know it.
Mr speaker a gentleman from
requests yet Dona Ana dot a
great question I mean.
That will play itself out I
think frankly maybe larger
cities may have advantages over
smaller towns but I.
I think the house we're still
gonna be the haves and have not
just gonna be the have nots but
it's not really about that it's
about the student athlete being
able to have three square meals
a day or simply live be able to
market themselves like every
other human being in this
country without losing up
without getting kicked off the
team.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman I
I just think that the the could
we could might be in that
disadvantaged to other colleges
as far as Chris recruiting could
cause some bidding wars that we
may lose some good players out
to another all college that's
just a statement but up
Mr speaker and gentleman is
there I can find that there was
a cap is there a cap to the
amount of endorsements in your
bill Mr speaker gentle from
grant said I don't I don't know
in the United States of America
there is no cap on how much
money you can make.
I think I just have some
concerns about that Mr speaker
gentleman with caps I think it
would because of again
inequities two of between
colleges possibly endorsements
from bigger companies like bank
or you know it's I don't know
big companies like that big
corporations that could cause
some issues in our recruiting
and increase our state thank you
for answering my questions Mr
speaker gentle.
This for the debate the
gentleman from civil and
McKinley Representative Alcon.
Thank you Mr speaker will
the you'll.
Yes Mr speaker I yield so one of
our first follow and follow us
on generally these question from
McKinley and and and I want to
rephrase it this way okay
Representative live loan Maestas
a star player on the house
basketball do.
Okay and he wants to go back to.
To the.
U. N. M. thank you at the.
The PAC and psychology.
Okay because it definitely means
that after being in the
legislature for so many years.
And also know that he is a goes
back to college the sides that
go out little on and get on the
global team.
Will he be eligible for this
incentive.
Thank you Mr speaker is from
McKinley C. will I appreciate
that I don't think I could ever
make any money off of my name in
the image and likeness as it
relates to my look abilities but
I would be ineligible Mr speaker
and gentleman from single
McKinley to be of a division one
athlete I believe.
You cannot be older than the age
of twenty seven.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
and gentleman what expresses a
recent division one so does this
mean Mr speaker and gentleman
that schools like New Mexico
highlands and eastern western do
not qualify for this program
thank you Mr speaker gentle from
sibling can lead know all states
would qualify also would qualify
all student athletes would
qualify within the state of
Mexico but you're correct for
those folks wants sports people
we have to division one schools
and the rest play and lower
athletic divisions more regional
divisions but I would apply to
all student athletes and all New
Mexico colleges and
universities.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker.
Through the debate the gentle
lady from Santa Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman.
From Bernalillo you Mr speaker
westbound
Mr speaker and gentleman not I
voted for this bill to.
Our economic development
committee to have this
discussion on the floor.
And
here.
Now what I of course this and
that I have some concerns every.
The the athletes.
Yeah because not on the table
but I would like to a guy that
was UNM football.
And went on to play pro with the
Washington Redskins.
For seven years.
And.
We were U. N. M. you know I was
the one that was working and
providing for us because.
Of the
anymore.
Support the athletes.
Get.
But I also major concerns
because actually this is back in
the seventies back then if they
could find a job on the side
they they got jobs on the side
and.
If you all know teach you some
very drug taking hard almost all
of you and it was basketball and
football teams to work
during the summers to help
support themselves during the
summers as well as the
The school year and my concern.
Is.
The athlete even though I know
how they struggled.
You know he transferred to the
university of Hawaii and there I
went to the university of Hawai
and we struggled because of that
it is signaling rules at that
time which apparently still
stands and more talking about
many years ago.
But my concern is.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is
the.
Mental health of these young
athletes.
And developing and passing a
program like this for the state
of New Mexico for the athletes
who comes in and who's not a
star player.
And who does not.
Get the opportunity to
Benefit from this how is that
going to affect their ability
number one to play because
they're not receiving the offers
that that.
First round players.
The coming to you and them and
I'm concerned about that I'm
also concerned about the
knowledge that these individuals
have the costs now you see the
development of a new class.
The agent representatives.
Negotiating with the car dealer
are with the.
Lot of Burger.
Taking part of the money and so
is she or he still look the same
Marci.
You know as they are within
three double eight.
Thank you thank you very much Mr
daily from Santa knock accident
points that the rules you spoke
about back in the day or even
more strict of those jobs that.
The former a reserve Q. seven I
gave those students pry could be
given out today and those
players that aren't superstars
that that are going to do the
advertisements and this and that
they may not make make money off
of their name at least they
could make money by up you know.
Coaching a team or or are
working here working there I
think that those more size
athletes that aren't the stars
may benefit the most because
they'll be able to.
To earn a living or not
necessarily living but earn some
money during college to to not.
Just be that poor you know
student eating top ramen all
night long and.
This gentleman do you think the
this piece of legislation.
Will of I know a lot of let me
back up I know a lot of the
athlete's skill sometimes
volunteer to work with different
programs throughout the
community for over the college
is located.
Do you see a situation of where
now that player release a star
player mediocre player.
Is saying well now you have to
pay me to comfort to participate
or pay me for an appearance
thank you Mr speaker jelly you
know what I don't I don't think
so I think of if it's if it's
part of the team it's if it's
part of what the team does or or
the coach you know once you know
I baseball players to go to the.
The kick off of the legal what
not that's part of your team
that's part of what you do as a
team and the camaraderie of the
team but it would allow those
athletes individually.
To make money off their name
image and likeness but the team
events the team obligations are
only those will change and I
don't believe that.
And that's within the team of
one player is of type because he
doesn't want to go that's
between him as coach but I don't
believe that would play out that
we've speaker gently.
Mr speaker and gentleman I know
I remember when New Mexico state
played some major.
the case college here a couple
years ago and I received a may
get even though they were not
and that
Eight I can remember what's
called in that in that believe
are in that conference is the
right word and
The the players benefit from
that because I know there were a
couple of their maybe their star
players that were entered pretty
bad.
So how does the the actually
benefit from that are if at all
thank you Mr speaker jelly they
actually don't but what the
general is talking about a
speaker is the call of million
dollar games where the smaller
schools play on the road.
And receive a million plus to
play in that game it helps
finance the that season helps
create revenue for that athletic
program so New Mexico state lost
its conference affiliation and
played about like I then hard
games they played up at Alabama
at Minnesota they're going all
over play these big time schools
so kids get injured and and that
was
but it was the way to finance
the athletic department that's
kind of a issue with and then
Senator it it's pry gonna get
resolved during the next five
ten years but this up.
It's not really an.
Part of this bill but but those
athletes will benefit from this
bill does actually think got
injured in those games would
benefit from this bill.
Okay Mister speaker and
gentleman I I I I have some and
I stated this before I have some
major problems with this because
I don't think it's been fully
thought out so that it benefits
every.
Athlete.
Into our New Mexico schools.
And we keep talking about
football and best basketball.
Which are should the major
activities but we have the
women's sports which are really
behind so you know I just think
we would be better served to
look at this a little bit more
doing more on number one and
number two maybe we need to look
at the scholarships that these.
Individuals are receiving and if
you come into New Mexico school
that there is a mental home.
Rick Scott requirement.
That every student should every
athlete should receive as part
of this scholarship other than
just the basic books and and
housing and them their meals so
I have major issues with this
because of the experience.
And are watching a lot of these
athletes both male and female
struggle.
to make their ends meet because
they came to New Mexico to our
play to play ball or to run
track or to to play golf our
women athletes.
Have never been fully
compensated to the same level.
Of a scholarship as our male
athletes so I believe that if
we're going to do something like
this that we look at the entire.
Athletic and scholarship
programs here that all of our
colleges and so I just major
issues.
With this and I think have
bringing it to the floor having
this discussion is really
important because.
R. eight.
You know maybe one percent will
ever be even considered for
parole.
And the rest of these kids never
fenced finish school most of
them never finished school.
And some of them are injured.
And no this is a permanent
throughout the rest of their
lives and calls them.
Ones you know and and I've been
affiliated like I said with and
the same thing happened to us
with the Redskins.
You know his name was the was he
was.
Just messing around what would
Joe I wanted but and they were
both in all.
With one another.
Before practice and his name was
hit accidentally and that was
the end of the career and so I
think a lot of folks think with
these guys make parole when they
go through U. N. M. a New Mexico
state and that the superstars.
That it is
You know ticket to paradise is
not anything close to that so
gentleman and and Mr speaker I
just have some major issues with
this piece of legislation thank
you.
This for the debate the gentle
lady from Chavis.
Mr speaker thank you very much
will the gentleman from
Bernalillo yield if I could see
meant would help but I can't see
him Mr speaker I yield yes.
Mr speaker thank you very much
the screens are so fill me right
now I have a hard time C. and
I'm supposed to be talking Mr
speaker gentleman
I too have concerns with this
I just want to make sure.
Whenever I'm talking whenever I
am referencing college athletes
it also includes the women
athletic department Mr speaker I
use to compete on the New Mexico
state university's gymnastics
team.
Of the but as far as athletic
schedule of.
Women also participate in
basketball soccer golf swimming
gymnastics softball track and
field events and the list goes
on and on.
Rodeo is a big one.
And then Torrez Mr can't can
come from rodeo are.
Unbelievable Mr speaker
gentleman.
We have a I like to brag on my
kids whenever I call of my kids
its prince mine that have pets.
Their children graduate from the
schools that I represent their
issue and lady that graduated to
couple years couple three years
ago from Roswell high school she
plays for UNM and she is an
outstanding basketball player
she is within a handful of
points of being that high score
in history for you NM.
If this was to pass do you see
her being able to.
Get the same.
Right meant that the male
football and basketball players
would be receiving thank you Mr
speaker jelly from Chavis no
wonderful points I think that
females.
Would benefit maybe more
proportionally to the male
athletes because there's less
professional opportunity for
females than males.
And there may be some unfairness
with regards to the star
quarterback as opposed to the
the third string runner on the
cross country but that's that's
something that we as a
legislative body count sure
that's just life but what we can
do as a legislative body is
provide an opportunity for every
single student athlete in the
state to market their image name
and likeness to the best of
their ability in the spirit of
what this country's all about
but I think now that you mention
I think the females may and may
benefit more because they don't
have that professional
opportunity that up that the
mail due particularly in
football.
Now Mr speaker gentleman I can't
believe you just said that of
whether we're talking about
rodeos these girls are tougher
than any guys out there and I
know that one of my daughter's
best friends let her college
rodeo team to the national
finals in Texas tech won it all
of whenever they got home they
were T. shirts Mr speaker and
gentleman that said Texas tech
where the men are with them then
our man and women are champions.
And they are every one of those
young ladies that participated
on that team are still competing
in rodeo so I I don't want to
hear that as far as soccer goes
you bit.
The term soccer mom doesn't
apply just to these women that
take their kids to soccer
there's still women out there
that are competing it might not
be on the national level more
often than not but you know what
we are still very active in our
sports Mr speaker.
As far as our conferences go.
It's going to be hard for New
Mexico if this is passed
nationally in line I know that
there's been talk about Congress
taking a look at it but I also
know that there's been
injunctions filed Mr speaker
gentleman can you elaborate on
that.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
I don't know any lawsuits that
have been filed because of I
know there's been numerous
lawsuits against the NC double a
and and the famous ban and
persistence to table a case in
the nineties where NC double a
sold a video game with with
people's names on the back in
the Supreme Court of the United
States said you owe them they
they do do they should get
compensation for you using their
name image and likeness so at
about and the for best most of
UCLA with the lead plaintiff in
that case class action case.
So something will come to a head
whether it's Congress the NC
double a.
Major college sports I think has
to reorganize itself but that's
not really what this is about
this is merely allowing New
Mexico athletes to market their
name image and likeness and and
I agree in terms of coming back
from injury in terms of playing
as a team rule females are
better athletes and there they
are tougher but those
marginalized female athletes
that may have to quit the team
to make to make a few dollars to
get to school I think this would
keep them in school and keep
them on the team but I'm not
aware of any injunctions are
lawsuits Mr speaker gentleman
what will what happens of New
Mexico passes this law before.
The NCA a consider sister makes
changes to its rule what happens
then thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady it will up this is about
New Mexico New Mexico athletes
but I think to answer your
question I think it'll just
continue to force the hand the
more states the past this the
more states that believe in free
market and end up in liberty the
past this it will force the
instead of late to adjust its
rules to allow students to.
You have to be to be reasonable
I think it's gonna happen by
this summer and if we passed
this office floor I think
that'll that'll speed up that
day.
Mr speaker gentleman from
Bernalillo right now if I'm not
mistaken is just Florida and
Nebraska that have these rules
pending that's going to take fit
affected two thousand twenty one
is that correct.
Mr speaker gently from Chavis a
call in for on our reality
Colorado and California and
you're correct Nebraska Florida
there's gonna be others some are
I'm not sure about the dates of
when those those kick in but.
But I think some of them are
delayed.
And Mr speaker gentleman.
Do you foresee in the very near
future that Congress will
address this problem with
authorization from the NCAA.
Mr speaker gentle lady I don't
know I don't know what I'm I'm
not about to wait for Congress
but yeah there's some
congressional leaders dealing
with this then Senator has been
grappling with this and delaying
it but as I said I think
something will give so to speak
soon but that's not really what
this bill is about this is
merely.
About New Mexico students
marketing their name image
likeness and frankly are
division one schools being on
equal footing with their
competitors in Colorado and
California.
Mr speaker gentleman thank you
for your responses thank you
Charlie.
Through the right generally from
Santa Fe Representative SAINATO.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo yield
Mister speaker yes I yield thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman I'm I had a couple
quick questions I know in our
house commerce economic
development committee hearing on
that the the senator had
mentioned
an example of someone using
their like this not related to
sports of the day it started an
Instagram presence in that
they've been making money off
that is that correct that under
the current rules they would not
be able to continue their online
business should be related to
their image or likeness thank
you Mr speaker Jenny from Santa
but yes I think what you're
talking about is the volleyball
player from Michigan who had
this you know incredible
internet presence apparently if
you have a.
Person you can be on the
internet and people to advertise
on your page you can make a lot
of money she would have been
kicked off the volleyball team
about Ford's this rule that that
I believe the initiatives hatter
or the state of Michigan has.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John and I think that's really
relevant you know I I know like
Chloe Kim for example the
amazing young woman US
snowboarder Olympian you know
she has this incredible online
presence as well and you and it
really is for better or for
worse Mr speaker development of
current market that exist you
know and that's definitely some
place where a lot of you know
folks young folks younger folks
in myself that I've heard and
I've known have been able to
really hone in their skills and
really build off of that from
there on you know you have a lot
of people that had had former
successes point a really again
bill that that's that's the
market exists today all
preventing them from engaging in
what their fellow students can
currently do if someone is has
great music taste and is really
good on Snapchat they can make
money off of that state but
unfortunately a student athlete
would be able to tap into that
market just like you know his
his or her friend and he's is
oversight class class or
something like that I am also
curious separately you know I
did see that one of the one of
the the the the changes that
came in here was about
that the that universities would
not be allowed to prohibit or
discourage student athlete from
wearing footwear of the student
athletes choice during official
mandatory team activities so
long as the footwear design
reflective fabrics or light or
pose health risks the student at
and I'm just curious from that
aspect I'm curious Mr speaker
gentlemen if you know why on
that language was added in or if
you had any insights on that
language thank you thank you Mr
usually from some of it don't
create the question that's
actually not really part of name
image likeness that's just part
of fairness fairness what
happens if you're a big will
coach you can sign million
dollar contract with this with
the shoe company and part of
that contract is making your
players wear those shoes and so
say a player has a social
consciousness and doesn't like
how the issues are made and age
or whatnot put the tape over the
swoosh or whatever then act that
violates the coach's contract so
the coach has to discipline that
player.
And say Hey man you gotta wear
my shoes so anyway this this
this allows students to wear
whatever shoes they want as long
as they're safe on the court or
on the football field and it's
just a question of.
Doing away with this
exploitation of all these folks
making millions of millions of
dollars off of college sports at
at the expense of the athletes.
Thank you Mr speaker that'll
thank you John I I appreciate
that and that's actually really
helpful and certainly understand
you know in my experience I
friends that would play called
college sports and I remember
one of them getting home and
this is the on the go but she
got home and and like flicking
around barefoot would look great
I hate the issues the and she
had to wear them because of the
agreement they had come to and
it took so long to get use that
she was concerned with different
injury long run she actually
doesn't play professionally she
wasn't the star of that
particular sport and she's done
fine otherwise but again you
know I think those kind of
limitation but so I appreciate
that aspect of the bill I
appreciate that it puts our
student athletes on on par with
their ability to make money just
like a lot of their friends
college currently are on and I
that's all I have thank you Mr
speaker thank you chairman I
yield back.
Mr the right gentleman from
Bernalillo Cibola McKinley
Sikora San Juan and Valencia
Representative Harry Garcia.
Thank you.
You Mr speaker I will yield.
Of the you Mr Senator Mr speaker
I just have one question.
If these athletes are getting
money for all whatever reason
they're doing it for
Your individuals or whatever
fiscal effect they're all bill.
The more we did for them in the
school how that would work out
thank you thank you Mr gentleman
from William McKinley civil us.
Focal in San Juan I believe
great question some of the some
as I mentioned before some of
the student athletes are not on
scholarship there on a half
scholarship or they're a walk on
and what coaches do to bring in
more athletes.
who are from New Mexico is
they'll give that a state kid a
scholarship knowing that the in
state student will be on the
lottery scholarship
So this would and if as long as
they're eligible for the lottery
scholarship normally than any
job they make or any money they
make outside of college.
good because a lot of the
scholarship is not needs based
it would not affect the lottery
scholarship.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo how
about the the the free
All the good the governor wants
to do for no of no
Can do the work right now of.
Tuition for students how's that
going to affect them information
money on the side with these
things we're trying to do here
Mr thank you Mr don't gentleman
from Bernalillo McKinley C. will
up supportable itself San Juan I
that's a great question I don't
know it's a it depends if there
need based or not if if if
somebody gets a Pell grant and
then they make a million dollars
in a longer eligible for the
Pell grant that type of stuff
that's between the student the
adviser and the money that
they're seeking but I don't
believe it would affect I
believe this bill would affect
that bill of that bill would
affect this bill.
Thank you all Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo just
concern because we're giving
three of.
Commission and also of given all
lottery to the students.
And the manager on make a whole
well.
Look at the money it would still
grow question or concern thank
you Mr speaker thank you.
As for the debate generally from
catchments Sikora influencia.
Thank you Mr speaker I have
actually taken my hand down but
I I will go ahead and make a
short brief statement the will
the gentleman from Bernalillo
yield.
Mr speaker yes I yield.
I just want to tell you a story
thank you Mr gentleman about a
the elderly gentleman that came
to my ranch for now cuts.
With his son and his grandson it
was a three generation Alcott.
And his name was Walt garrison
while garrison.
at the time he was about seventy
years old.
He wrote a book called always
account voice.
Always a cowboy was because he
was a cowboy in high school a
cowboy
as far as a mascot goes in
college and a real cowboy and
then he was drafted by the
Dallas Cowboys.
And during his he told me lots
of stories a lot of stories but
one of the stories that he told
me Mr speaker gentleman is that
when he was in
college he got drafted his first
year in college you know into
the Dallas Cowboys.
Football he was a full back.
And
He was also of a college rodeo
he was he loved rodeo more than
he loved anything Mr speaker
kind gentleman during his rodeo
time when he wasn't playing
football where he didn't get
paid a lot of money Mr speaker
gentleman he had to have another
job.
When it during the offseason to
make ends meet because then in
those days they were not paid a
lot of money.
And Mr speaker kind gentleman
during his rodeo about he was
very he is a very handsome man.
And he to Copenhagen.
And I don't know if any of you
all remember just a little pinch
between your cheek and gum that
he was in those commercials and
he got
recruited Mr speaker kind
gentleman from the tobacco
industry doesn't matter if you
like the tobacco industry or if
you don't.
What that turned out to be just
after his significant knee
injury.
he became a spokesperson and
commercial ran commercials for
that company and then he wrote a
book like I said always a cowboy
and so he did get his education
she lives what do you love to
which was rodeo and cowboy you
played football to get is
education but in the end he
ended up doing something that he
was recruited for while he was
doing college rodeo and so.
I believe in this bill I don't
think there's a thing wrong with
that and I just wanted to make
that short statement I could go
on and on this handsome
gentleman told me millions of
stories for hours and hours on
end and I will never ever forget
all of the stories thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Si no further debate John the
close thank you Mr speaker I
will members just a quick moment
I normally don't do this but.
Is going to make a few points
and just ask people I mean.
Over a hundred years ago Jim
Thorpe won Olympic gold medals
he was the I believe the
pentathlon champion Graeser
athlete in the world at the
time.
He lost his medals.
Because I think they finally
came back to on to his grandkids
but he lost his battle because
he got paid playing professional
baseball that summer.
the the the world
finally went pro in the early
nineties and you recall the
Dream Team in nineteen ninety
two allowing pro athletes to
play in the Olympics the answer
that way it's kind of a last
hold out on this notion of
amateurism and I to romanticize
about college football and and
and the and the how much roughly
but those days are thirty forty
years long past.
so I just hope that you know my
friends who are conservative and
and are resistant to change
think about.
The rugged individualism about
free markets about liberty about
the freedom to market your name
image and likeness without
getting kicked off the team for
folks who worry about the
unintended consequences of what
will happen.
Those are the consequences are
going to occur because these
stupid the students have
freedoms that have been denied
by the NC double a for decades
silos the body table yes and at
this time I now move that Senate
bill ninety four as amended do
now pass urine final passage of
Senate bill ninety four as
amended the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The critical members without a
recorded vote Representative
Madrid.
Representative Maestas.
Yes Representative my S. as both
yes Rehm most yes to and
Representative Madrid both yes.
Those close by a vote of forty
three the Fuhrman of twenty one
of the negative Senate bill
ninety four as amended has
passed the house.
Next to that item number five
gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Figueroa are you
ready on that item.
Yes Mr speaker would you get to
that point for the record
reflect all action necessary for
placing Senate bill twenty one
as amended on final passage has
been taken the General provided
the.
Senate bill twenty one as
amended came out of the pension
oversight interim committee it
modernizes language in the New
Mexico retiree Health Care Act
and with that I stand for
questions.
Seeing no debate the gentle lady
to close.
That Senate bill twenty one as
amended do now pass we are on
final passage of Senate bill
twenty one as amended the vote
is now open.
The vote is now closed revenue
sixty three deferment of one
indicative house Senator Senate
bill twenty one as amended has
passed the house.
Thanks for that item six
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Garcia are you
ready on that item estamos
speaker can you get me to the
power point that the record
reflect on action necessary for
placing Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill seventy five as amended on
final passage has been taken the
gentleman to explain the bill.
As the non speakers Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill seventy five
well creating privacy policy for
all state agency employees which
states that no public employees
this close sensitive personal
information acquired by virtue
of his or her position within a
state agency.
To anyone outside of that state
agency estimates speaker the
subsidy provides exceptions I
don't these for violation the
act and I stand for questions C.
right the gentleman from Chavis
the end result.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
I'm most gracious the yield to
the gentleman from Chavis the
Roosevelt.
Thank you chairman I'll be real
quick with my question is it's
really a question it is simply
do we have to do this by state
law or can the executive do this
by executive order and once that
ever discussed in in your past
with this legislation question.
Because the madam speaker and
gentleman from Chavis the and
Roosevelt
That
that's a good question and yes
we have to do it through
legislation because there's
different Alec aspects and
elements in different
legislation but not in a
cohesive format which were
bringing for.
Thank you thank you for that
answer Mr speaker that of that's
my question thank you.
Seeing a further debate the
gentleman a close.
Thank you as the most beaker and
with that I do now move.
that
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
seventy five to pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
seventy five as amended the vote
is now open.
The clerk of the member without
a recorded vote Representative
Lundstrom.
The vote is closer to forty five
in the affirmative eighteen in
the negative Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill seventy five as amended has
passed the house.
A second sorry.
New Mexico to item seven
gentlelady from Eddie are you
ready on that item yes Mr
speaker I am with the record
reflect all action necessary for
places Senate bill seventy seven
on final passage is been taken
the gentle lady to explain it
all.
Thank you Mr speaker members of
the body so Senate bill seventy
seven allows six public colleges
and universities in New Mexico
to enter into two plus two
agreements creating a simple
clear pathway for students
seeking a bachelor's degree the
model two plus two allows first
time freshmen to complete the
first two years at a community
college then transfer to a four
year university to finish the
remaining two years where the
student would earn a bachelor's
degree.
I stand for questions see no
debate gentle lady to close Mr
speaker I move that Senate bill
seventy seven do now pass.
Our final passage of Senate bill
seventy seven the vote is now
open.
Fifteen.
All you want my.
The vote is that close to sixty
for the firm is here and it is
Senate bill seventy seven has
passed the house.
Next good item eight delays were
Leo Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Ready on the Senator lady.
I am Mr speaker can you please
take me to that point the record
reflect all action necessary for
the C. Senator eighty eight has
admitted with an emergency
clause on final passage is been
taken the gentle lady to explain
the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker Senate bill
eighty eight as amended is the
public project revolving fund R.
P. P. R. F. project
authorization bill which isn't
and endorsed by the New Mexico
financed Authority oversight
committee as amended this bill
authorizes NMFA to make loans
from the PPRF to one hundred and
sixty separate state and local
government entities included in
the bill based on terms and
conditions established by the NM
NMFA the PPRF legislative
authorization also carries a
three year authorization period
and with that I stand for
questions.
C. noted gentle lady to close
thank you Mr speaker I now move
that Senate bill eighty eight as
amended do now pass.
This is the Senate bill eighty
eight as amended with an
emergency clause the vote is now
open.
The card member without a
recorded vote Representative Rod
Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya both
yes Representative closed with a
sixty four the Fuhrman is here
the negative.
Senate bill eighty eight as
amended with an emergency clause
has passed the house.
Chaeronea item number nine
gentlelady from Danny at
Representative Ferrary are you
ready on that yes Mr speaker.
The record reflect election
necessary for the Senate bill
ninety six as amended on final
passage has been taken to
gentlelady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker Senate bill
ninety six as amended update the
maternal mortality and morbidity
prevention act of twenty
nineteen that established a
maternal mortality review
committee within the department
of health that is responsible
for making recommendations to
further maternal morbidity
prevent maternal.
Morbidity and without I stand
for questions I see no debate
the gentle lady to close.
With that I do now move that
Senate bill ninety six as
amended do now pass.
Final passage of Senate bill
ninety six as amended the vote
is now open.
Number of.
The clerk to call the member
without a recorded vote
Representative Madrid.
There is a closer to sixty four
any fermented zero negative
Senate bill ninety six as
amended has passed the house.
Is the gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Romero ready on
item ten.
Mr speaker we can't hear you.
I apologize.
is is the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative Romero
ready on item ten.
Mr speaker I am ready let the
record reflect that all action
necessary for placing Senate
bill one thirty one on final
passage passage has been taken.
The gentleman to explain about.
Thank you Mr speaker the Senate
bill one thirty one makes
changes to the public school
capital outlay improvements act
slide correctly referring to
prior year funding program units
it also eliminates the state
match for
no longer obligatory programs
such as extended learning and K.
five plus with that Mr speaker
stand for questions.
There is the right.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker this
gentleman from Bernalillo yield.
Mr speaker audio thank you Mr
speaker I'm not sure if you're
aware but the the gentleman who
replaced the speaker in the
speaker chairs wearing a bow tie
just thought you would need to
know that.
Thank you gentlemen.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from granted
arguments here Representative
staff thank you find speaker of
wheels and gentleman from
Bernalillo please feel.
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady thank you Mr speaker thank
you chairman of could you please
explain why we are reducing the
state's match to capital outlay.
Yeah so Mister speaker and
gentle lady what we're really
doing is is adding these
programs that are discretionary
back could deceive globalized
our our capital needs and it's
it's not really necessary for
for capital needs.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
and thank you chairman.
Saying no the further debate.
The gentleman to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
Senate bill one thirty one do
now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill one thirty one the
vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
With the clerk called the
members without a record.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
both yes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of sixty four in the affirmative
and zero in the negative Senate
bill one thirty one has duly
passed the house.
The gentle lady from grant
Sierra and her dog goes.
Is the.
I'm.
Is the gentle lady from granted
although in Sierra
Representative Dow ready on item
number eleven.
Thank you Mr speaker will you
give me to that point.
But the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
Senate bill one thirty seven on
final passage has been taken and
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
Gentlelady to explain the bill
thank you very kind speaker and
Senate bill one thirty seven is
the annual appropriation of New
Mexico finance authority water
projects this legislation
authorizes thirty seven water
projects for which New Mexico
finance authority will make
loans or grants statewide and
with that I stand for questions.
There is debate the gentle lady
from Chavis.
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the lady from grant Hidalgo
is here a yield place thank you
Mr speaker yes I yield to the
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady this
legislation as has thirty seven
different water projects in it
and
They have to meet certain
requirements before they do get
approval.
What happens if there is no the
I mean there won't be any
guarantee that these projects
will get funded.
And if that is the case is
another project pull up in its
place or is that held until the
fall is that are those dollar
sales until the next year.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady I do have Mart
Marquita Russel is my expert
witness and I'm waiting for her
to text the answer and I do
believe that they revert right
back into the the water project
fund for the next appropriation
but this.
Mr speaker and gentle lady this
project has I flood prevention
projects to water conservation
treatment recycling reuse
projects there's twenty seven
water storage convenience
delivery projects and for
watershed and restoration
management products.
Jex they have already been
vetted
through a very vigorous process
and they should be but although
you're correct there is no
guarantee that they will be
funded.
And Mr speaker gentle lady from
the we're talking about the
funding some of these are set to
what was smaller solicit mutual
domestics that they might have
to make applications so they can
get the get a grant so they can
get the project started is that
correct Mr speaker and gentle
lady thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentle lady that is
true and some are grants and
summer loans and these folks do
have to find paperwork and
receive approval.
They've they've been at this
point they've been evaluated by
proper project management team
comprised of seven agencies
prior to this point of
recommendation.
In Mr speaker gentle lady of.
Mr speaker gentle lady I did get
an answer if there is a project
that alternately is not funded
they will at the money will be
available and available for
another authorized project.
Mr speaker gentle lady could you
repeat that I'm sorry Mr speaker
and gentle lady if ultimately a
project is does not receive the
final in MFA loans or grants the
money will be made available for
another authorized project okay
Mister speaker that's for us
going with that I want to make
sure that money was expended for
two thousand.
For this coming fiscal year Mr
speaker gentle lady
one of the question regarding
that if this particular project
that has been right now
authorized that may not be able
to qualify for the funding will
they be put at the top of the
list for next year's projects
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I am up I see my
little.
A message is being received from
our cat a wrestling.
Mr speaker and gentle lady they
will have to re apply.
Okay Mister speaker so they do
have the opportunity to re apply
Mr speaker I think this is one
way that we can help our smaller
communities those are struggling
to get.
Good clean water to the people
that.
Are needed whether it's through
a new water system of
water storage tank whatever the
case may be and I fully support
this bill thank you very much.
Sen no further debate the gentle
lady to close Mr speaker I now
move the Senate bill one thirty
seven to pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill one thirty seven the
vote.
With emergency clause the vote
is now open.
Thirty seconds remaining.
Electronic portion of the vote
is now closed with the clerk
called the members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative ever
Armstrong both yes
Representative Cook.
Representative Ortez.
Yes Representative Ortez votes
yes.
The vote is now closed.
By a vote of sixty five in the
affirmative and zero in the
negatives Senate bill one thirty
seven with the emergency clause
has duly passed the house.
Mr speaker.
Women from Chavis and Lincoln
all rights to make an enquiring
whether the numbers can remove
their jackets.
Seeing no objection the
gentleman may remove their
jackets.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Is the gentle lady from catch in
Sapporo and Valencia ready on
item number twelve.
Yes Mr speaker would you get me
to that point.
What the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
Senate bill one forty five on
final passage has been taken and
that it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution
gentlelady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker this is an
agency bill it's our has to do
with the sunsets
it every so often these come up
and it's to
extend the sunsets on boards and
commissions in the state and
there's a twelve on this bill
and with that I would stand for
questions.
Mr speaker point of order it
appears we have seventy one
members.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker that's my helper.
We have the the lady the gentle
lady from Chavis.
Mr speaker thank you very much
and will the gentle lady yield
and I didn't want to debate I
was just going to give
recognition to help for thank
you Mr speaker.
Thank you saying no further
debate the gentle lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker with that
remove that Senate bill one
forty five as amended do now
pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill one forty five as
amended the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds remaining.
Current portion of the vote is
now closed liquor Clark please
call the members without a
recorded.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
By a vote of sixty four in the
affirmative and zero in the
negative Senate bill one forty
five as amended has duly passed
the house.
Is the gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Garcia ready on
item number sixteen.
Estamos speaker can you get me
to that power point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
Senate bill thirty five as
amended on final passage has
been taken and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution gentleman to
explain the bill.
Thank you is the most bigger is
the amount of speaker Senate
bill thirty five as amended
repeals the sub minimum wage of
eight dollars and fifty cents
for students eighteen and under
enrolled in high school and the
consumer many amended
in the content the consumer
Committee amendment also removed
the minimum wage exception for
non students eighteen and under
as the most beaker this measure
ensures equal pay for equal work
to all those individuals and
what that is the house speaker I
stand for questions.
There is a great.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Strickler.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo please
yield.
I'm always gracious the yield to
the gentleman from someone.
Thank you thank you gentleman
Yeah I've got a lot of
experience with helping high
school kids get work in my
community and most of those jobs
are in the fast food business.
And the sub minimum wage really
helps him get get a good start
and.
Without this these young kids
well they're just not going to
get higher and I can tell you
from experience the gentleman
and and Mr speaker
What these companies do they
hire senior UNM police.
That have have previous job
experience and they can justify
paying them
the ten dollars and fifty cents
that were currently in paying
now.
And gentleman are you concerned
about those high school kids
they're going to be passed over
for
of possible training job.
Mr speaker and in in San Juan
I am concerned for those
students eighteen and under
because of the fact is the most
beaker that many of these you.
Kind of don't fall into the
nuclear family conception of a
teenager.
in terms of.
Astor types a lot of are you
this is the most speaker
eighteen and under
Often times provide for their
families I'm from a single
family households.
And and help with the with the
expenses living expenses of the
household so yes I'm very much
concerned that's why we're
making this change and also as
the non speaker Jim influence on
one
this issue in terms of sub
minimum wage of eight fifty four
I schoolers eighteen and under
was part of the minimum wage
monumental bill that we passed
in twenty nineteen it was not an
issue that the house address.
Because we we wanted to see
equal pay for equal work that
measure was put on in the Senate
and and basically went into the
negotiations in terms of the
conference committee but you
know it's not speaker general
fund someone what we're seen
and we're getting anecdotal
reports is the opposite of what
you're addressing what we're
actually seeing is that some in
this sub minimum wage is
actually incentivizing.
employers to hire you over more
mature workers with families as
the mouse speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
Well I.
I guess I have a different
experience
My wife and I have seven kids
they all work minimum wage jobs
I help them get those jobs and I
I continue to do that with the
the youth in my community and
that's that's not what's
happening up in San Juan County
these kids are given a chance
to be trying to took to learn in
this case there was some light
we've got a very very good
subway
ownership in our community and
they really reach out to these
young kids again going not just
tell you this Mr Mr speaker and
gentleman my two younger sons I
had the privilege of working for
subway wanted busy stores in the
state.
And their manager gave me a
chance and they.
I'll be honest with you they
were very good workers at first
but they learned it took him a
to come some good training can
get patients by the by the
senior manager she's a wonderful
lady in her seventies they just
love to work and she gave those
to voice my two sons a chance
and
The ten fifty minimum wage is a
really a it's a tough it's a
it's a high threshold I don't
think they're taking advantage
of I think they're giving these
young people a good a good
chance and I you show people all
the time on on my community
garden and and and chilly chilly
Farm and and Farmington coarser
kinda ever cultural workers such
a different category but I think
we need to be careful about this
we don't want to hurt these
young people and not give them
the opportunity to get started
and and Mr speaker and gentleman
if they they do a good job and
they perform they get raised a
pretty good because good workers
are hard to find but talking to
some of the other fast food
companies in in Farmington and I
they hire senior level
of employees that have a lot of
experience they can justify
paying those wages and Mr
speaker and gentleman last year
was a tough year with the COVID
and and with the the partial
shutdown of our businesses and
and in some cases you know
complete shutdown of our
businesses so we're trying to
heal up we lost thirty thousand
jobs in our state since
beginning of last year and we're
trying to recover those job
losses so
I just I just urge caution there
we don't want to hurt him.
we don't want to hurt them we
want to help them it is a it is
a training wage and it really
comes into
really have some so
Really appreciate it
gentleman from Bernalillo.
The hope to see in person one of
these days is great to hear you
on the on the big on the big
screen
we we we love your love your
presentation so thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentleman.
There is for the debate the
representative from Dunn and
grant and Sierra Representative
trust us.
The.
Thank you Mr speaker with
gentlemen please yield.
Yes I was basically to the
building a gentleman from grant
you gotta go.
Area.
Which is just as Mr speaker
Dillman a quick question up.
Well Mister speaker I didn't see
where the this would if this
past when we're going to affect.
Estimates speaker does not have
an emergency clause so it
doesn't think of that.
The.
One the signing of the
legislation by the government.
By the governor
so whenever I not just a piece
of legislation does not have an
emergency clause it goes into
effect ninety days.
After the legislative session
ends.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
so my questions we've passed
quite a few bills a at for this
minimum wage of fifteen dollars
an hour I'm not sure actually
what is actually still alive on
the on the Senate side do you
happen to know if there's any
fifteen dollar minimum wage bill
still alive on the Senate.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
grant.
in the New Mexico and my
understanding is that this is
the only piece of legislation
that goes of minimum wage that's
still moving through the
chambers.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
so my concern is if we pass this
bill we're going to be paying
the
the kids are sixteen to what is
is eighteen.
More money than the than the
minimum wages for anybody older
than that with a higher skill
set have you taken that into
consideration.
That's not speaker
What this piece of legislation
does.
Is that it
Basically right now according to
the law that we passed in twenty
nineteen estimates speaker.
High school students eighteen
and under
we're on what was the some
anymore wage of eight dollars
and fifty cents that was
fixated.
That doesn't fluctuate.
it's it's not bound to
inflation.
And
the current.
The
the minimum wage as of January
first is ten fifty.
And what this bill does it
brings those you into the same
As the majority of minimum wage
workers in our state.
Mr speaker a gentleman so what
you're saying is that the
students the oil I'm gonna come
these kids are under age
eighteen what then just fall
into the normal minimum wage in
other words it would get ahead
of the rest of the workers that
are minimum wage.
That's correct they basically
come in at the same rate as
already existing minimum wage
workers over the age of
eighteen.
Mr speaker and gentleman which
is also for that and I
appreciate you answering that
question for me now I'm gonna
tell you is is it the guy that
started at three dollars and
thirty five cents an hour I was
looking to get a job.
when I was a fifty years old to
mop sweep vacuum in other words
also go for their.
And not a lot of money but sure
did give me give me the
opportunity to work at in the
field that I'm in today and we
go from I guess the goal for
two.
Being the owner of the of the
establishment so I am hesitant
is the Representative earlier
spoke that you know.
They may not obviously they
don't have the skill set that.
Some other.
Individuals have as a business
owner to tell you this
If you're just doing something
minimal Mr speaker gentleman and
something very very simple I
don't know I have people that
open the front door for from
establishments of people in
touch the handle and keep keep
ourselves safe from spreading
the disease but if you get into
any other skill levels I can
assure you that I will hire
someone that has better skills
at a higher rate than I would a
young man or young lady that
wants to learn but I would
always give them that
opportunity so does give me a
little concerned thank you for
clearing up those those issues
for me Mr speaker gentleman and
LCH Committee god bless.
There's further debate the
representative from Cibola in
McKinley Representative all
going.
Thank you Mr speaker was.
GOP a little.
Most gracious the yield to the
gentleman from the lack.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo you
know
In two thousand nineteen when we
passed that the.
That the minimum wage of bills
which I really wasn't happy with
but we best anyway this state
dollars and fifty cents was
brought in and we heard over and
over again that it was disable
one industry basically but
honestly
And Mister speaker.
Eight hours work for seventeen
year old and a sixteen year old
is just as hard work as it is
for somebody who's twenty three
years old.
So in all fairness
I just cannot understand why we
should not be able to pay a
young man or young woman the
same amount of money for the
same amount of labor that
somebody else's over I can see
that in my mind you know this is
coming from somebody there
gentleman before me said he
worked for three dollars and
something in our one user when
he was a young man we are not
we're not a seventeen years old
going to colleagues I work for
ninety cents an hour in the gas
station.
And it was some tough work
especially in the winter time
when you had to go out and clean
every windshield and check the
oil and everything else on the
field.
That they may need medicines not
or but they paid me in ninety
cents an hour just like the rate
that twenty two year old college
student don't work but a lot of
time with me.
So it was very labor I would
just as hard as twenty two year
old and he worked just as hard
as the seventeen year old I was
working with them and I see that
today and I do want to mention
and I you're good to go over a
little bit gentleman the lot of
the staff who spends instead of
hiring somebody that's over the
age of
eighteen we'll go ahead and hire
a young man or young woman in
order to save themselves a
couple of dollars an hour
there's a lot of status ones
that are doing that and it's not
fair it's just not right so I
just want to stand in support of
this legislation Mr speaker and
gentleman I just think it's fair
they're not kids I don't know
why everybody wants to call of
kids these are young men and
young women and they are our
future and they should be
treated like our future thank
you gentlemen and thank you for
bringing this bill forward.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo Cibola
McKinley Sapporo San Juan and
the lengths Representative Harry
Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker will the hi
and gentleman from really
appeal.
I was basically able to.
The gentleman from of Cibola.
Thank you will gentleman.
Mr speaker on question I have
for you is.
These young people are working
the seventeen eighteen let me
said sixty to seventy year olds
are working also read cars on
dating more Mr speaker and you
know.
Just last week General C. but I
would think so yes.
And and the reason I brought
that up is because you know what
cost them as much money work is
a twenty year old were nineteen
year old because they all rate
cards anymore and and in my
community Mr speaker
Representative dot that I feel
you know some of the the student
drive fifteen twenty miles will
work.
The brigade for wage it just
makes it all twelve to do
anything and Mr speaker younger
gentleman to of one president of
the largest city saying you know
equal pay for equal work.
It will be the same thing Mr
speaker gentleman if you will
say well the lady's gonna work
so we're going all there are
dollar listen our good with the
guys you know they work as hard
as everybody else does Mr
speaker and gentleman and I
think that they are they should
be treated equally Mr speaker in
don't we have more so you know I
support this bill and I'm thank
you for bringing it up and
backed was just finishing
everybody should be treated
equally my correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman on a
C. will that that's the essence
of this of this legislation
before us to give equal pay for
equal work.
Thank you Representative Austin
Mr speaker at all I have.
There's further debate.
The gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo
healed.
I was graciously of the two but
German man I mean I'm was graces
the yield to
king Birmingham from the house
of Scott I mean I'm was gray
seal to the general from the.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
and gentleman from Bernalillo
for all those yields.
Read an article with respect to
the national movement to raise
the minimum wage and so all one
of the studies I believe this
was from the Congressional
Budget Office.
That was going to cost one point
four million jobs that would
just disappear in the event of
the the current have you seen
any statistics or documentation
as to how many youngsters if
this legislation is approved
might not be hired that is do
you have any statistics on.
Whether any of these jobs will
just disappear.
It's not a speaker and gentleman
from the unfortunately I didn't
get around to moving out.
Some of that data that you're
alluding to us the most beaker
and in in in in conferring with
the sponsor Senator Steinborn he
didn't either so to answer your
question not no we don't have
any data available.
Mr speaker.
Chairman Curtis talks to say.
The folks that we're talking
about here would have virtually
no experience in most cases
would have no skill set to
contribute to an employer at
least in the beginning.
Not.
Actually what.
More training wage if you will
in order to gain those skills.
Is that not speaker and you
probably know my comment to your
type of questioning is that I
don't respond to hypothetical
questions I don't answer but
questions is you know just like
Mr to log on on the Star Trek
Voyager you know there's no
logic.
And the answer.
As the loudspeaker generally.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Appreciate the answer I would
like to remind you that the
minimum wage is out in the real
world is always right.
And that is the complete lack of
a job opportunity thank you Mr
speaker thank you a gentleman
for answering my questions.
The representative from Santa
Representative Harper.
Thank you Mr speaker does the.
Enjoyment from Bernalillo.
I'm most graciously up to the
sole remaining rocket scientists
in the house speaker from
Sunderland.
Well thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and you are made by
heart happy was to to walk
reference.
we just finished watching the
entire Voyager series with my
family and we just we love it so
many good episodes I love Star
Trek when I should.
Your favorite ways
Representative sometime.
So Mister chairman
we we live
debated on the floor in the past
when it comes to the wage.
And and and but I think you and
I respect each other's
differences are coming from I
just want to share a couple
slides you're perspective again
Mr speaker John if that's
alright.
so my very first job I was a
dishwasher.
at the national golf and Country
Club
made minimum wage work terrible
hours and I was even more
strongly.
that I am now and the number the
hardest part was at night
driving out the trash and trying
to sort above my head into these
big dumpsters and just
struggling in and you know
trying to get up enough speed or
momentum going to toss it out
there and and I've succeeded
every night except one.
and I remember that night very
very well because I remember was
especially heavy and I stood up
there and I could tell I don't
have enough I just kind of put
my hands up there try to hold
off and it my hands appears the
bag I got showered with trash.
that was you know I was beside
myself at the moment you know
there's not just rentals late
and I had a claim on go home and
shower but you know looking back
it was a great memory no and
having the opportunity to work
and
have that responsibility.
I think we could all share
stories like that of our first
jobs.
Speaker and gentleman so.
All right I actually really.
why do other specially Tax Year
because it's shown that.
Government.
Policies can have a big
influence on people.
Speaker and gentleman you
mentioned like for example that
by having this.
this provision in our statutes
that perhaps there's a desire to
hire more.
Teenagers as opposed to more
seasoned
experienced professionals that
get you that right speaker John.
At as the non speaker and
gentleman from some though
yes I did make mention of that
in terms of.
what the sponsor and also what
some of us have been kind of our
anecdotally kind of picking up
in our in our districts.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman
yeah I I think that's probably
about right I don't it's like
pervasive what it's like
everywhere but I I I do believe
that.
this current.
The whole policy that's been
adopted by for these kinds of
jobs that are perhaps most
skills you know it's kind of
more entry level jobs that this
policy would favor teenagers
receiving this Java speaker John
R. I think I agree with you on
that is what I'm trying to say.
Mr chairman I I think that's the
right as mystery policy
and I have a a couple reasons
I'd like your thoughts on these.
the first is.
so I have I have four kids of my
oldest is eighteen
he's had three jobs yes double
Caesars.
For about a year Sierra got a
safe flight for about a year and
then safelite and up letting go
all of their
Non full time staff during the
COVID so you know without work
for a little bit now is working
adults don't.
Creamer.
Mr chairman I'll tell you that
my wife and I are are so happy
that he has these jobs that is
have these jobs the things that
he's learned being able to be
out and no money she's going to
go on a full time mission for
our church that cost about
twelve thousand dollars out of
pocket.
she wants to go to college we
just actually calculated
yesterday how much that'll cost
because you want to go to about
fifty thousand dollars for four
years altogether with
springboard in books.
And she has been working hard
and earning money.
The mysterious your question to
him.
Because we all know that when
you got skin in the game you do
better at something so this is
just handed to you.
You know we could probably.
Our family if we really tired of
it I pay for office college then
first mission.
would be able to be a hard
challenge for us we call it
could.
We decided not to because we
know she will be a better person
by working hard and saving up
until work harder at school and
on his mission because he worked
hard to pay for Mr Chairman do
these two things sound.
Similar to Iraq the does this
make sense what I'm saying.
You're on your.
Thank you for that this must be
guarded general fund money
Sunderland yes it makes sense.
Mr chairman I think you and I
would completely agree that.
Are working hard and having to
get a game is as crude as
critical.
and helps our young men and
young women grow up to be
contributing adults.
And so I think it's important we
have.
These opportunities for that
and then also they have a great
opportunity to go to school
right right we have a lottery
scholarship we have lots of
different training programs CNN
programs that are for free if.
We we have ways to.
People to climb that ladder to
go from entry level to with no
skill to now higher level with
skill I don't really.
There are some barriers to entry
are some some challenges but
we've worked really hard in the
state and then this body to
lower the the energy the
activation energy for overcoming
those hurdles and I think that's
something we should all be all
the products.
So this figure and.
Gentleman
Looking at this proposal in
front of us to remove this now.
I think if the minimum wage was
Are not trending up.
this would not be as big of a
problem.
Mr Chairman
but I I I believe I recall you
mentioned that you believe we
should have a living wage that's
around fifteen dollars an hour
for minimum wage might my
recalling that correctly.
This must be presented with
someone I have a I have to make
reference to that in this
presentation
normal have I made reference to
that even when we were carrying
the the minimum wage our bill
that started in the house of
which I was sponsor we always
fixated at twelve we didn't even
come that Mr speaker okay Mister
chairman thank you for your call
and I I apologize twelve twelve
dollars
fifteen I think it's just the
numbers used a lot across the
nation the news this point where
I got that number from small
might my apologies John.
Mr Jones worked as we're moving
more towards.
In the state of a living wage
that is
you know twelve dollars or or
more.
I can now see where we would be.
Hurting the opportunity for our
young adults
to get jobs because we're now
paying more than what an entry
level position would be with
most skill we're now trending
towards more.
What what someone with an
associates degree my expects to
get for personal with some
skill set would would get and so
we're not we're not talking
about shifting the current
public policy which thank you
and I agree.
Helps
or perhaps provide an incentive
to hire young people to know
about because you that would
move away from that.
Make it harder for young people
to to get jobs and speaker and
gentleman what your thoughts on.
Speaker I
You know I don't I don't quite
grasp.
You know the essence of.
Of the opportunity that you're
proposing.
You know the dynamic system must
be clear you know
within business within the
workforce.
Is is always changing as we
speak
you know if you recall is not
speaker are in the Water Street
map down of of two thousand
eight two thousand nine.
That had devastating effects on
the housing industry and
in and that effect on the
housing industry that trickle
down in terms of lending
institutions and then the
construction
industry you know as the more
speaker up forty percent of
workforce in my district is in
the construction industry.
Mr speaker when that incident
happened.
You actually some people with
masters and whatever the
converters maybe Dawn miles of
water burger.
It that change the dynamics in
terms of of the workforce.
As there was no other employment
for these individuals that
maintain high salaries you know
in fifty thousand and upwards
estimate US speaker so I think
there's there there's an element
in terms of what you're you're
addressing that isn't fixated.
That the issue of wage the issue
a workforce the issue of equal
pay for equal work is always in
play you know and and and is not
fixated and that's what we're
trying to bring to the table to
stay with this legislation is
that.
It high schooler eighteen and
under as the same opportunity to
land a job.
You know with.
These fortune five hundred
corporations even if it's
starting at minimum wage as the
as a person that's twenty eight
in over with three little ones
you know I'm having to take care
of wrap up the house you know
and so so there is this
advantages to not speaker gentle
Santa Fe terms of what we
currently have statute.
Where we do not have that
element of equal pay for equal
work when it comes to these
students eighteen and under.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
rose thank you for for for sure
your your thoughts on that and.
And what.
I'm going to your your your
example of you know there is a
housing market.
Last year and recent past now
people who I think we would say
are maybe over qualified to work
in these positions not working
these positions right yeah I
picked this year should be ready
at all.
This is this is kind of the one
of the points I try to make sure
is that yes I am
a manager at Waterford.
And and I am looking to fill to
cooking slots.
And I have I applicants and I'm
trying to decide
Which of these I am going to
employ and I'm gonna pay them
you know you know twelve dollars
an hour because that's the new
minimum wage.
I'm gonna look for the ones that
have the most experience the
ones that I know I can rely on
because they've been.
In.
Of situations where they've had
a bureau before they have that
experience right versus someone
brand new who I has not had
experience does not have that
still have to be trained.
I'm gonna choose.
The the chair yes for my to
coax.
so that's that's kind of the
point I try to try to make one
of the points and trying to make
sure is that by shifting this
public policy we're now going to
make it less likely to hire
teenagers that will be higher
folks that have skills and more
experience which is something
for us to consider.
and then also share some data
that shows that this is not just
anecdotal over the last decade.
the percent of teenagers in the
labor force has dropped.
from fifty percent to about a
service it dropped seventeen
points.
And of course there's lots of
reasons for that you know school
is more challenging
you know our culture is
different but one of the main
reasons on this report I read
was that
in states where they have
increased minimum wage.
The teenager unemployment has
gone up.
That's just common sense.
That if you have to pay more.
You're going to choose those
people that apply.
That.
For sure that resist those who
might not my take a rest on like
I.
But the gentleman from San Juan
Representative Strickler was was
mentioning.
that's just where I'm a little
concerned you know my daughter
my two other sons who I'm still
have to go through a teenager
labor force and raise money for
their missions not college.
You know are they going to have
that opportunity.
as we continue to increase how
much it costs to employer and
that's something that I'm really
concerned about.
but generally but I'm I'm I'm
really concerned about that
speaker and gentleman your
thoughts.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
some the Latino I I kind of
respect your.
Your profound
I just stand on.
What you just going to share
with the body.
But I don't see it quite
happening that way is the most
speaker.
Because this issue up
some.
Minimum wage for high schoolers
eighteen and under.
Is a two year phenomena.
It wasn't around when we were at
paying five dollars and fifteen
cents an hour see more speaker
and we stayed at that for the
longest time.
And most people it wasn't around
we're paying seven dollars and
fifty cents.
You know that was in two
thousand nine.
You know so it took us ten years
is to come to where we're at now
incremental.
Starting at nine to twelve
dollars and twenty twenty three.
So you can see is a must be
returned from some of our that
this issue of.
Some minimum wage is a brand new
phenomenon in our state.
It's only two years old.
You know and I think some of the
issues that you raise that are
real profound in terms of your
assessment.
What.
But it's it's it's not it's it
hasn't been being
The standard.
Mr speaker in terms of how our
state has dealt with paying
minimum wage to high schoolers
eighteen and under.
Yeah Mr Mr speaker John thank
you for that I
very much appreciate you sharing
your thoughts on that and and I
agree this is a this is a new
phenomenon and that.
That kind of gets to the the
second point that I was trying
to make is that.
When the minimum wage was lower
this really was not much of a
concern.
that was five and a quarter
which is what I first made you
know and then a trend of
deception and then perhaps nine.
As it continues to approach the
the twelve dollar mark.
then it becomes a bigger
concern.
Speaker and gentleman
And.
Yeah I can understand I can
understand why is it is a you
know to your phone but but we
can understand what I'm saying
also yes.
Really what in two years that's
because we've had this big
trying terms state now.
recently towards the twelve.
Twelve dollar mark.
So.
I guess Mr speaker and gentleman
all just.
concluded by saying I I very
much appreciate this time we've
had to share our different
philosophies.
Back in force.
And and I appreciate where
you're coming from.
I really feel that we had
structure right balance here.
with this current policy because
it wasn't just all teenagers.
would be subject to this
difference there was only those
teenagers who were in secondary
school.
And so those who had perhaps
dropped out because it is for a
family
or for whatever reason
they would still qualify for
this higher minimum wage and I
thought that was that was a fair
compromise to say okay we
understand that not every
teenager is in the same position
as I once for perhaps you were
or my kids are that there are
some out there who perhaps
really are needing help support
a family.
And that's in here.
But also it it took into
consideration that there are
lots of young men and women who
just need a chance I don't have
any skills and perhaps are going
to be really good employees to
start.
And still given the opportunity
to gain that experience I think
we all of kids who have jobs
early on the perform better in
school they have better
relationships and
and they they end up having that
confidence and self worse that
it leads them to great things
and I just worry that we're now.
I'm gonna move our public policy
away from helping these young
people get their first job.
Speaker and gentleman but I I
respect you respect the time and
and and thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman on.
We have further debate the
gentle lady from Maria Riva
Santa Fe and Taos Representative
headed a.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
kind gentleman yield.
I was basically able to the lady
from the Arriba child's and
Santa Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
kind gentleman
I stand in support of your bill
and I I guess I want to say when
we raise that minimum wage two
years ago I was very very
curious about how that would
affect my County the city of the
Espanola of northern counties in
recovery this so I think I went
through the town and I would
just ask you you know how much
you making I'm in I told him I
was a legislators going to go to
the capital we're talking about
minimum wage and I would just
ask everybody you know I'm to
you making now I did not find
one young person no I did I can
one person but I'm just ask
thirty younger kids younger
students I should say or or or
workers between the ages of
sixteen and twenty I would ask
them their age and then I'd ask
them how much you're making they
were all making at that time in
two thousand nineteen they're
all making more than ten dollars
an hour I was a little surprised
at that but I took note there
was one young woman who is
sixteen years old she worked at
center market she only work ten
hours a week she was a box with
a column box girls I guess you
know she was so one of the kids
and she was making eight fifty
that was the only person I I
found that was making less than
ten dollars an hour so I I
actually think the market keeps
up with what the market yes and
and maybe it's because of the
proximity to Santa Fe I don't
know would still happen our way
I just I just found that
everybody was already making
over what we were going to put
in as as the minimum wage in two
thousand nineteen so so I'm kind
gentleman
Leo I I support this effort and
I think a fair wages the fair
wage and I I I think we should
support all workers who do a
fair days so we're support and
and if that employer doesn't
think so then they let that
person go and they get another
one but I think those wages
should be fair and they should
be equitable and with that I I
yield to the kind gentleman
thank you.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis Lee and
Roosevelt Representative
Anderson.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo yield.
I'm especially up to the
gentleman from Chavis.
Arose out then the.
Chairman of.
I I my question is yes I live in
the state it's gone from forty
seven ten per capita income to
forty nine.
I think that job opportunities
are.
Not a budget.
I think that.
beginning job for a young person
is important
our.
For their development in the
workplace.
I worry that setting.
The minimum wage higher will not
achieve the desired result other
than.
Making yes in experience never
in the work force workers.
More unemployable.
so I guess gentleman my question
is of course there opposition to
this bill from
of of the business
organizations that we might
expect to hear from on an issue
like minimum wage.
Questions.
speaker and gentleman from
Chavis rules about them the
I was not in in
In terms of the presentation of
the Senate bill in those
committees that the chief
sponsor Senator Steinborn what
is basically are overseeing and
directing so I can't respond to
that in terms of what.
What the audience response was
either for or against is the
most bigger gentleman from
Chavis.
Thank you thank you for that
I think that that
I think that we've got to do
everything we can to employ
young New Mexicans with their
first job and I I listen in the
debate two of your own New
Mexicans making a wage above the
minimum and I think to myself I
wonder how many of them started
at the wage they're making today
and that I think that that if
you set the minimum too high an
employer has.
Of course works ability in in
wage
of increased in order to
encourage and
reward a hard worker and so I'm
I'm I'm I understand what you're
trying to do I think it doesn't
help raise New Mexico's per
capita income to to mandate a
higher working wage beginning
way.
So
he a young worker wage I I I
think it actually works against
us and the.
For this reason I am reluctant
to support your bill gentleman
thank you very much.
Seeing no further debate the
gentleman to close.
Thank you Mr speaker with that I
do now move that Senate bill
thirty five as amended do now
pass.
We're on final passage of Senate
bill thirty five as amended the
vote is now open.
Thirty seconds remaining.
No portion of the vote is now
closed for the clerk to call the
members without a recorded vote.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Cook.
By a vote of forty in the
affirmative and twenty five in
the negative.
Senate bill thirty five has duly
passed the house.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business.
Announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Seeing no objection it is so
ordered.
Announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Are there any announcements.
Mr speaker some of us are not
met change nonsense we have our
hands up.
The gentleman from Bernalillo G.
Andrés Romero.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
Education Committee will meet
tomorrow at our regularly
scheduled time eight AM so we're
back on at eight AM tomorrow
morning thank you Mr speaker.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
house judiciary will meet
tomorrow at eleven thirty AM.
All who seven thirty tomorrow.
The representative from McKinley
and San Juan chairman Lundstrom.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to announce house
appropriations and finance
committee will meet tomorrow at
eleven thirty AM thank you.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lewis Jennison.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation.
See no objections ordered thirty
three.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill
seventeen.
And after leading to public
education and acting the family
income index act requiring the
calculation of family in the
income index and providing for
funding distributions to school
districts throughout that index
requiring allocations to
eligible public schools
providing allowable uses for
distributions and allocations
requiring information sharing
agreements Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill seventeen.
Senate finance committee says to
percent seventeen having been
read twice by title is referred
to the Education Committee.
Senate bill one thirty three as
amended introduced by Senator
Gonzales and Representative
Harry Garcia and act relating to
aviation and acting the rural
air service enhancement act
making appropriation Senate bill
one thirty three as amended.
Senator one thirty three as
amended having been read twice
by title is referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate health and
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill one
ninety as amended and
potentially leading to
disability amending an acting
sections of the developmental
disabilities act to make changes
to the develop developmental
disabilities planning council
membership authorization and
duties renaming the
developmental disabilities
planning council as a
developmental disabilities
council Senate Judiciary
Committee sub two percent health
public affairs committee
substitute for Senate bill one
ninety as amended.
Senate Judiciary Committee says
to resented how the public
affairs committee substitute
Senate bill one ninety as
amended having been read twice
by title is referred to the
health and Human Services
Committee.
Senate bill one ninety two as
amended I'm sorry said to one
ninety two introduced by Senator
Lopez and act relating to law
enforcement requiring law
enforcement agencies and peace
officers to disclose evidence
favorable to an accused in a
criminal case allowing for
certain actions against a police
officer certification for
sailors for important disclosure
duties or for hindrance of other
peace officers performance of
those duties providing a penalty
Senate bill one ninety two.
Senator one ninety two having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill two thirty four as
amended introduced by Senator
Pirtle and potentially leading
to high higher education
allowing home school students to
qualify for legislative lottery
tuition scholarships Senate bill
two thirty four as amended.
Senator two thirty four as
amended having been read twice
by title.
Is referred to the.
Appropriations and finance
committee.
Senate bill three twenty five
introduced by Senator Shendo and
after leading to transportation
providing for the process for
the collection of damages by the
department transportation for
destruction of property Senate
bill three twenty five.
Senator three twenty five having
been read twice by title is
referred to the transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee.
Senate bill three seventy nine
introduced by senator Munoz and
after relating to license plates
creating a New Mexico miners
special license plate making
appropriation Senate bill three
seventy nine.
Chairman I want to go back to
Senate bill three twenty five.
Senator three twenty five eighty
Instead of the transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee lesson
that can build to the Judiciary
Committee Senator three to five
is not referred to the
transportation committee instead
to the Judiciary Committee.
Senator three seventy nine
having been read twice by title
is referred to the taxation and
revenue committee.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Your introduction this order
members we have a calendar house
bill three twenty seven House
Bill three twenty seven at the
request of a sponsor I am
referring that builds the rules
in order of business committee.
Any further announcements.
Mr speaker can you hear me now.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Is there another answer.
Mr speaker can you hear me.
No.
Great.
Third time's a charm welcome
back Mr speaker the house state
government elections an Indian
Affairs Committee will meet
tomorrow at ten AM thank you
members say no the generators
Gnagna thank you Mr speaker
taxed revel meet tomorrow at
nine AM.
Never say no the person always
win the big east.
This thing on.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo Mr
speaker I move that the house
standing recessed until four PM
tomorrow afternoon thank you
members for a good afternoon and
early evening of work enjoy the
rest your evening stay safe for
a mask and join this by zoom to
participate our committee
meetings tomorrow the house is
in recess until four PM
tomorrow.
