Representative Lundstrom.
It's.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero.
Here.
Sure Garcia.
Madam chair Rubio here.
We have a quorum.
And thank you everyone good
morning it's good to see you all
I hope you're staying warm I I
walked my dog out in one degree
weather which I didn't think was
possible but here we are and I
have no I'm not at all prepared
for it though she's totally into
the winter I and I am not
I appreciate you all being here
thank you I want to introduce
Representative Hochman Vigil it
whenever you're you're ready to
begin.
You madam chair and if I could
just ask that Joe's beta and
wearing her brand be promoted to
panelists as well they're my
experts you need them yes
they're both in already right
thank you madam chair hi madam
chair members of the
transportation committee thank
you so much for taking the time
out of this frosty chilly snowy
day to hear H. B. one seventy
one I think many of you will
remember the enhanced air
service order from last session
that we passed into law it
basically allows communities
that either have little air
service or no air service at all
with the other throughout New
Mexico the ability to get
government or state subsidies to
allow for air service are to
increase that service it's a
great economic development
driver we're here today on for
some changes on the rural Aaron
Hansen Act more notably we are
increasing the grants for
communities that already have
existing or serviced one from
one point two five million to
two point two five million each
and we are increasing the grants
for communities without any
service at all from one point
seven five million to two point
seven five million each we are
widening the scope of the act to
include aircraft that are have
thirty seats or more before it
was just nine and we are
appropriating fifteen million
dollars for fifteen million
dollars and and and and and and
dissension I million dollars we
did last session for the real
Aaron Hansen Fund and lastly we
are defining some terms within
the act including a new air
routes expanded air routes and a
charter flight public charter
and scheduled operations with
that madam chair I will defer to
my experts introduce themselves
and see if they have anything
else they want to say.
The first.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Larry R. and
Richard lobbyist for Taos ski
valley we operate tells air and
that's been one of the it's been
a great success and and we see
what the economics of that what
they call the insurance circle
around the tiles area have come
from air service part of the
struggle is as you're expanding
our service we're starting your
services you need to get up and
running for those those first
couple years so we we appreciate
the legislation was introduced
last year there's at least two
communities that are either in
the process of applying for
grants or or have already
applied for grants under the
existing act and we just want to
have the up the the ability to
you to utilize the act expand
their service Representative
hopping hill described what the
bill does very well so I would
just stand for questions thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Larry Joe did you want
to go ahead.
Thank you madam chair good
morning good morning members the
committee thanks for the
opportunity to speak with you
all today I'm director of
aviation for House there we're a
regional air service that
operates out of houses Larry
mentioned to Taos Austin ally in
Carlsbad we operate thirty
passenger jets
so you know this this bill with
allow us to qualify for the
changes to this bill will also
qualify for the program.
the program yeah we're
projecting looking forward nine
million nine point three million
dollar economic impact for the
enchanted circle region
and.
More anecdotally we're seeing uh
tell us and and chance are
locals making up a large
percentage of our travelers
going out to visit family do
business seek medical care
vacation so I'm happy to answer
any questions that anyone might
have.
Without madam chair will stand
for questions.
Great thank you all I'll open it
up to the attendees first to see
if there's anybody who would
like to speak in support or in
opposition if you're in the
attendees and are interested in
speaking if you could please
raise your hand.
Okay we have one person Federal
Ryan you can go ahead.
Yes I just want to say that I'm
the director of the aviation
division and I'm here solely for
the purpose of.
Providing any technical
assistance or comments in the
building unit that's all thank
you madam chair and thank
committee.
Great thank you so much Mr read.
So we'll go ahead and open it up
to committee members
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair in the
thank you Representative for
bringing the bill I like the
bill of my only question is does
this bill affects any other
communities that have a
relationship with the essential
air service at the federal level
can you speak to that
relationship and how your bill
impacts that.
I thank you madam chair thank
you Representative Crowder for
that fantastic question so just
to give the other committee
number some context essential
air services program is a
federal program offered by the
FAA Federal Aviation
Administration to allow what we
call essential air services to
rural communities that otherwise
would not have service that is
of a particular federal program
that's been a while around a
long time we haven't we do have
some communities in New Mexico
that are qualified for central
air services however it's been a
very long time since we've seen
any expansion of the essential
air service program that was
actually the impetus for this
bill Representative Crowder
madam chair and that because the
central Services program has a
very particular scope and is
very hard in some instances to
to get into we wanted to provide
our own rural communities in New
Mexico the ability to expand
their services without who may
not otherwise qualified for the
FHA program this state program
has nothing to do with the
essential air services programs
we we don't mention it for a
reason actually crafting the
first bill me tight around with
you know that excluding
communities that have qualified
persons or services but we ended
up taking that out because it's
apples and oranges really in our
program is actually the scope is
a lot broader which is a good
thing so thanks for the question
thank you the end and I look
forward to support your bill
thank you.
Thank you Representative Crowder
next we have I Strickler CEO.
Madam chair I motion of the past
when you can entertain that
motion madam chair okay great
thanks Robert vice chair we have
Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative HochmanVigil I
just have a couple questions
more so I can visualize what's
going on so in the case of
Paolo's I'm with the thirty
passenger jets they would be
eligible for the a one million
and one point twenty five
million to two point twenty five
million for existing flights
with that twenty percent local
grant cap is that my
understanding it right.
Madam chair representative
Garrett yes that's exactly right
thank you also for highlighting
one change in the bill that I
forgot to mention that we are we
are decreasing the local match
cap from fifty from my head at
fifty percent to twenty percent
so as to allow more communities
to participate in the act thank
you for the question thank you
madam chair and and thank you
Representative and the two
communities a merry mentioned
that to communities of already
applied for last year's nine
million grant what communities
would those be.
Madam chair Representative
Garrett I will defer to Larry to
answer that question because I
don't know.
Thank you madam chair
Madam chair representative so
Gallup has applied and the city
of Los crucis is in the
application process I'm not sure
if their applications been
submitted by do know they are
there are a few years out for
the operator so those are the
two communities that are already
participating in the program and
as for where they are in the
program I don't know
specifically but but Mr rail may
know specifically where they are
but those are the two.
Madam chair I see Mr riles hand
is a.
Yes give me one second.
Mr Ryan if you want to go ahead
and meet yourself okay sorry
about that.
Can you hear me now madam chair
yes we can hear you all right
the city of Gallup has actually
applied to the applied to a
couple of months ago and we're
in the process of discussing
within their application and the
requirements under the rule so
they are in process we expect to
have another meeting with them
within the next week or two and
make some decisions on their
applications the City of Los
crucis has been in communication
with us they have not formally
submitted an application yet but
we expect that to hit our our
desk so within just days or just
about any time now.
That's what we are locations we
have heard about some of some
other.
Area is being interested but
have not received any formal
application or had any serious
conferences with them.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee members thank you Mr
Ryan.
Madam chair and I just want to
make sure I understand the
finances so last year the
original bill we allocated nine
million so the fifteen million
is in addition to the nine
million is that correct.
Madam chair representative there
that is correct.
Okay and madam chair
representative thank you because
one of the analysis pointed out
that this really makes it
reduces the eligible applicants
for the service fund so that the
smaller airports localities
around the state
can have this chance to
stimulate their economy so so
thank you for the thoughtfulness
that went into the preparation
of the bill thank you and and
madam chair there's no other
questions a second by sure
Garcia's motion.
Okay great thanks Representative
Representative Crowder were you
going to try to the
representative here to that
now they have a lot of okay
think of it so I did have one
follow up question it is the
fifty million that's in this
bill within the budget is or is
it already been approved through
the budget process.
Madam chair representative of
Crowder it not currently but we
are in negotiations currently
with the Senate and expect to
see for someone of the of the
appropriation act and some
point.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative Crowder
are there any other members with
any other questions.
Well Representative I happen to
you thank you for your
presentation I know that Act is
serving the city of Los crucis
well I wish we had I mean I
think we're getting there but
many of us have to drive to el
Paso to catch a flight and and
so it would be it's it's it's
really encouraging to see
programs like this building
uplifted particularly for
smaller communities but also in
places like Los crucis which is
the second largest in the state
to have opportunities for that I
think is is really critical so I
certainly supported and and good
luck to you moving forward with
this legislation so we have a
motion from by trigger Sierra a
second from Representative
Garrett is there any opposition
to moving this legislation
forward.
Would okay we'll go ahead and
roll call vote Representative
trees if you can do that please.
It's.
Representative Crowder yes.
Representative Garrett yes.
Representative Harper.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Vice chair Garcia.
Yes.
Madam chair Rubio.
Yes.
It is I yes one now.
Thank you Representative with a
five one vote you have a do pass
on house bill one seventy one
thank you very much madam chair
thank the committee she it.
Thank you.
I'm sure that's really it for us
today folks I did want to let
you all know we do have house
bill one forty four which is
related to CD els that passed
out of committee yesterday and
we're wanting to hear it in this
and and and needing to hear it
in this committee just in terms
of housekeeping want wondering
about what what your
participation would be like if
we scheduled a meeting Saturday
morning to just get that bill to
hear that bill wanted to get
your thoughts on that.
Sure we'll probably end up with
the
The C. pack Committee usually on
Saturdays they started ten so.
Any time before then would work
or typically are committees
because six seven hours so then
it would be late afternoon.
Okay great yeah I was thinking
about nine AM so I wanted to to
get your thoughts since with it
I don't I don't with the
conversation that we had
yesterday in commerce didn't
take very long so
So yes.
And madam chair yesterday the
speaker said we would probably
be meeting on the floor Saturday
afternoon so it's not like we're
going any place of for already
here okay great I just wanted to
get your thoughts so if if
Representative Crowder madam
chair it's all possible I will
be there okay great so we'll go
ahead and schedule as far as I
know right now it's just house
bill one forty four and so we'll
go ahead and plan for ninety and
one on Saturday and and I don't
expect it to go longer than an
hour.
But I'm sure request.
They just send us a protest but
link the.
To the members in in not the
other links I'm getting so many
links for different meetings
that is beginning to confuse me
in there there is one that says
participants in and that's I try
to find that but that would be
helpful.
Well we'll go ahead and do that
Representative thank you.
You for for letting us know.
Thank Roger.
No thank you all are there any
other questions Mr Garcia.
No question madam chair thank
you okay all right thank you so
much thank you all for your
participation today and we will
then see Saturday at nine AM.
By.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
