Members your calls because we
have a quorum.
Please rise for today's
indication on produced by the
gentle lady from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Those of you that feel so
inclined please spell and let's
pray.
Lord our god almighty.
We are thankful for the many
blessings of this life.
You have blessed us the pip
those who have cried with us and
brought untold truly to our
lives.
God I miss king.
To get the members of this body
patience and tolerance.
The wisdom and courage needed to
make the decisions that benefit.
All of the state of New Mexico
and her people.
Protect our citizens and their
travels to and from the
roundhouse.
Thank god.
To the us to live our lives more
closely following the example
set by your son our savior Jesus
Christ amen.
Thank you Jerry
with the gentleman from
Bernalillo Santa Fe Torrance and
Valencia Representative McQueen
please leave us in the pledge of
allegiance.
And with the generated from
captions or coral influencia
please ladies and saluting New
Mexico's flag.
Gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you Mr speaker good morning and
then go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objections so ordered.
Good afternoon everyone.
A little bit of housekeeping
we're waiting in amended
proclamation from the governor.
in a the manager wants bill
introduction.
I did want to drive was
attention this is an important
matter everyone.
we had a member of the
legislature yesterday test
positive for COVID nineteen.
I know emails going out as want
to reiterate to insurance on
attention to the email
the juices are in it doctor
hunger in for the health
department is doing contact
tracing so anyone who was a
close contact with the member
who tested positive we'll have
been notified by now so if you
haven't been notified you were
not a close contact few members
of asked if we could identify
the legislature or the tested
positive the answer to that is
no we do not Rio reveal
your private health care
information however within the
context of contact tracing
we have been in touch with all
the people who have been
identified as close contacts.
I edges rises that despite all
of our efforts in vaccinations
and
masks that it is here we're
happy to report the legislature
is feeling fine so there's no
worry there but they are
isolated.
in that or not in the building
have not been in the building
since they tested positive
senator these are a reminder not
to let our guard down it's
important to wear masks just to
make sure that we don't
inadvertently
the costs and the symptomatic
spread of COVID nineteen and
hopefully.
And what is the governor
vaccinations and please get your
boosters if anyone needs
information about if you haven't
already got your booster shot if
anyone needs information about
how to get that.
Please contact my office and we
can help you get the information
you need to get your booster
expeditiously.
Are there announcements.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you is that we go to the
next order of business committee
reports.
No objections so ordered to
read.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too is been referred house bill
eight has had it under
consideration for some of the
recommendation that it to pass
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Mr speaker move adoption of the
committee report for induction a
favorable committee report on
house bill eight all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
All this first name.
Committee point about to.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Them go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business area
directions ordered the gentle
lady from Valencia like to make
up for my grievous omission from
the conclusion of yesterday's
proceedings and entertain us
with a joke thank you Mr speaker
I think I'll do that we'll do a
morning show today Mr speaker
just real quick question what do
you call center when he goes
down a fireplace that still let.
The hunger burning love.
Hey Kris kringle.
Very good deleting.
Members ask unanimous consent to
suspend the rules to allow the
CDM guess.
Under the age of five and over
the age of four on the floor of
the house let's welcome.
Representative.
Never mind.
Sorry to ruin the surprise.
Representative Harper would you
like to sing for us all right.
I would like to see seeing some
of your favorite death metal
while doing that dance could
that be ranged.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you.
We go to the next order of
business messages no objection
it is so ordered the clerk to
read.
House executive message number
two honorable speaker Egolf and
members of the house today I
have issued an amended
proclamation under the authority
vested in me by article four
section six of the New Mexico
constitution calling the fifty
fifth provided the state of New
Mexico into special session
which began Monday December
sixth six twenty twenty one at
the state capitol building in
Santa Fe respectfully yours
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor.
It is very.
We're.
We're just.
In the country the amendment to
the proclamation.
The revised portions of the
proclamation
aware of existentialism
divisions have raised
significant concerns regarding
recent amendments to the medical
malpractice act set to take
effect January first twenty
twenty two that may force them
to shut other practices to avoid
unsustainable financial
liability and.
now therefore I am Michelle
Lujan Grisham item number four
amending the medical malpractice
specifically as follows.
By removing the phrase important
not and agents from any missing
nineteen seventy eight section
forty one dash five dash three
he.
Nineteen seventy six as amended
through twenty twenty one.
I adding eighty temporary
provision providing that from
January first twenty twenty two
to July first twenty twenty
three except for punitive
damages and past and future
medical care and related
benefits the aggregate dollar
amount recoverable by all
persons for.
Arising from an injury or death
to education as a result of
malpractice shall not exceed
seven hundred and fifty thousand
dollars per occurrence for
claims brought against an
outpatient health care facility
if the injury occurred in that
time period item three adding
infection providing.
The provisions of laws twenty
twenty one chapter sixteen
section three apply to
outpatient health care
facilities described in section
one of this act on.
And after July first twenty
twenty three New Mexico and
former.
Adding an emergency section
providing coal it is necessary
for the public peace health and
safety that is active affected
immediately New Mexico.
Message we entered.
And just for members information
the proclamation is being
emailed in full to all members
right now.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business introduction of
legislation.
No objection it is so ordered.
Where's Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Generated a bill to introduce.
Yes we do we're just getting a
couple last signatures in just
seconds.
to read.
House Bill eleven introduced by
Representative Hochman the hero
and guided us and act relating
to medical malpractice modifying
the definition of independent
provider limiting the
applicability of laws twenty
twenty one chapter sixteen
section three for certain
outpatient health care
facilities declaring an
emergency House Bill eleven.
House Bill Evans I determined to
be germane pursuit to article
four section six of the New
Mexico constitution order
printed and referred to the
Judiciary Committee.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objection it is so ordered.
The gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan Representative
Lundstrom thank you Mr speaker
good afternoon everyone I just
like to announce that house
appropriations and finance
committee will not be meeting
today thank you.
Members take note.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker ladies
gentleman of the house Judiciary
will meet tomorrow morning to
consider the legislation that
was just introduced house bill
eleven and I I know we want to
do it morning but I'm not sure
what room is available we let us
know that.
I don't believe appropriations
meeting in the morning so we
could do three oh seven.
Get through three seven
available seven.
Members take note
with regards to.
There's reserved house bill nine
above the rear questions the
Public Education Commission is
my understanding that there is a
good tweet that was this is
necessary that is being done the
state government elections
Indian Affairs Committee is
going to need
this afternoon to pass that bill
out.
and so with that understanding I
wish to drop the Judiciary
Committee referral for house
bill nine.
hearing objection it is so
ordered the judiciary referral
for house bill nine is removed.
No no objection unless some
changes were made understood
understood.
Are there other announcements.
As of the plan tomorrow when we
come on the floor we will
consider house bill.
Eight nine eleven.
On the floor tomorrow starting
at one.
assuming that nine eleven
combative Committee but if
they're out of committee will do
them eight nine and eleven and
leader Townsend I presume that
Of the just do a better job from
Bernalillo Sandoval we agree
that we would have a twenty four
hour rule for bills are
reinforcing the state house is
that right yes Representative I
want to make sure that I'm
recovering from that is correct
and for the state house and the
since the committee were full
just happen to be tomorrow okay
so will so we will have a
unanimous consent to weigh the
twenty four hour rule as to
house bill's.
Nine eleven tomorrow and aid is
been on the floor since the
committee for the Senate drive
Taos will have twenty four hours
for that okay.
Sure sure I'm not Mr membrane
okay any other announcements of
gentlelady from let's see you
want to do one more to get us
off on the right foot for the
afternoon Mister speaker I have
a quick question for you we had
a young gentleman who actually
stole a Christmas calendar here
in our body do you know what
have until.
The gentle lady what happened he
got twelve months.
You are an upward trajectory on
the jokes.
This bill as well for the rest
of the special session.
need to be from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey funds and
so maybe if you could get a day.
The.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr chairman of the
house stand in recess until one
PM tomorrow afternoon.
As a technician thank everyone
for being with us today the need
for the state government which
is needed for this committee
will be meeting and I think to
thirty.
Judiciary at nine AM tomorrow
morning with three oh seven.
Enjoy their issue if you have a
good evening wear your mask the
rooster and your shots we'll see
you tomorrow at one PM.
He said turning on.
Whatever was previously
announced.
To apply to answer two o'clock
thank you.
