Representative Lundstrom.
I see.
Representative panic excuse
Representative Powdrell Culbert
here Representative mental.
Your.
Chair Rubio here.
The six members present we have
a quorum we can begin.
Thank you.
You everyone who's watching and
then
we are going to have a
presentation today from Mr R.
Terry Doyle was the director of
the real natural the real runner
and if we can let them in
When I remote to Terry okay
great and I'm actually really
looking forward to this
presentation I'm sure others are
as well and so
Terry when you're ready please.
Proceed.
Good morning madam chair I want
to start up the presentation
I wanted to my name is doing
cave
and I'm want to thank you all
for the opportunity to share
with you this morning
little bit of information about
the New Mexico Roadrunner
express
again my name is doing cave on
the executive director for the
mid region council of
governments as well as the
executive director for the the
real metro regional transit
district.
Well I see some familiar faces
in the zoom call I thought it
might be helpful to write some
brief background information for
those of you who may not have a
full understanding of how the
mid region council of
governments serves as the on the
role as the fiscal agent as well
as the operator of the New
Mexico Roadrunner express.
As many of you may know Mister
car was involved in the planning
and implementation of the road
runner back in two thousand
five.
Much of our rural started out
because of the natural logistics
of three of the four counties in
the central region which where
the train travels they're part
of the council of governments in
additional informal interview
was established between the New
Mexico department transportation
and the real metro regional
transit district some years back
to really solidify this
agreement.
With that being said there's a
combination of funds that that
we use to operate we have user
fees we use gross receipts tax
there's some local funds in FDA
grants basically to sustain the
rolling stock and maintain the
border on behalf of the state.
While the state is responsible
for the debt service on the road
runner system wanted to impress
upon you that currently there
are no state funds required to
maintain the operations and the
maintenance of the system.
Real metro operates the runner
in cooperation with the state
and and M. D. O. T..
Offering a commuter rail network
that provides fast reliable
transportation along at one
hundred mile corridor.
With more than sixty bus
connections at stations from
Santa Fe the lan they can take
past years as far as northwest
house and as far south as the
coral.
But let me qualify that by
saying that this past year has
been very different this was an
exception because we postpone
passenger service due to the
pandemic.
But even given that shut down
I'm happy to report that during
the closure we've been extremely
productive using the down time
to implement a federally
mandated safety enhancement
called positive train control or
PTC for short this technology to
prevent train to train
collisions hi speed derailments
and a number of other
catastrophic events so we're
glad that we're able to use this
downtime to meet this federal
governments end of twenty twenty
deadline and would then get the
PTC installed.
So let me just say that part of
our agreement with the state is
to keep you apprised of the
finances of the capital
improvements as well as the
planning issues that we're
dealing with and by presenting
to you an overview of we
sometimes we call it an annual
report but anyway we're taking
this up thank you for this
opportunity today to to report
you and with that I want to
interviews to you Terry Boyle
who is the director of the
regional transit district and
he'll be presenting to at one of
more in depth overview of the
system so thank you this for
this time this morning.
Thank you Mr thank you Sir.
Matt madam chair
Provided on the director very
much regional transit district
it's a pleasure to be here today
and after this morning with you
all
I have a brief presentation and
I'll probably touch on on some
of the things that to reset in
the introduction here
but I but I want to say I you
know I mean over the lifespan of
the rail runner.
Sometimes we've had some better
relationships and some some of
the worst relationships kind of
along the way but I think this
is probably in my ten year the
best relationship that we've had
with with state DOT with the
legislature with everybody in
general and I think you'll see
throughout this presentation
we're doing everything we can to
make sure that we don't come to
you and ask for money and less
we absolutely need to and so
with that Mario I'm hoping that
you'll be able to share the
screen and this presentation and
I'll run through that.
that you can get on the next
slide if you don't want.
All right so today kind of the
talking points
you know we're gonna go into
like a little bit of history
here but I think one of the most
important things is
relationships
Roadrunner state owned and and
operated by remote for regional
transit district will kind of
get into those relationships and
some other relationships that
were involved in the purchase of
the line and.
some commitments that that I
think are more to the trying to
carries out on behalf of of and
G. O. T. because they have a
commitment to the NSS
will also talk today about COVID
nineteen around our service I
think most of you know we've
been shut down since March of
last year we'll talk about kind
of what that has meant for us
what we've been able to do kind
of in that interim period as it
relates positive train control
and you know I I think we're
pretty proud on the board of
perimeter is pretty proud that
we haven't had to really lay
anybody off we've been able to
work through some things and
we'll talk about how we've been
able to to do that update on
positive train control are also
talk about today that peace is I
think the short answer is we are
installed we are certified
positive train control railroad
by the federal railroad
administration but all doing a
little more detail we get to
that point
then we'll spend a little bit of
time on the rail and budget in a
multi year contracts so we've
put together a short range plan
every year that kind of looks on
seven years into the future so
that the you know when our board
approves the current budget that
it's in a context of a of a
bigger picture it has in there
you know some idea of what we're
expecting the taken in revenues
and and what we can do what a
little bit about ridership and
then we'll finish up with the
rail capital needs next slide.
So relationships as I said the
state of New Mexico through an
NGO T. owns the real order track
signal system stations
locomotives and passenger cars
just to name a few things
when the reporter was purchased
from BNSF the state entered into
a joint use agreement with the
NSF that comes in the
relationship between BNSF of the
state before we leave this slide
a couple of things with that
that that purchase left a
permanent and exclusive right
easement in place for BNSF to
operate on and then really a bit
put some onus on on the G. R. T.
in the state to make sure that
that one was available for that
freight service for being a
staff and that the risk you
guarantees with that so more if
you go to the next slide.
Your TD operates and maintains
the anorexic of memorandum of
agreement between the a and M.
yet see and relate to regional
transit district and as required
by that and a real metro covers
many of the commitments that the
NMDOT has to be honest that and
just so you know what's in that
joint use agreement Israel for
maintenance the state's not
allow to let the rail line
reducing class is going to be
maintained at the at the current
classes that
also responsible for dispatching
of the territory and that's a
twenty four seven three sixty
five operation
for paying the required
insurance so as part of that
purchase at JI way has a
requirement for kind of an
umbrella policy for for the line
and and the DOT responsible for
paying that and then we'll kind
of touch and I don't think it
was contemplated at the time of
purchase but there is talking to
you I a about positive train
control even though one of
purchases first then it wasn't a
federal mandate it's still
became one of those things in
order to provide that that level
of freight service exclusively
to BNSF that it had to be
installed and so the first three
there's a rail corridor
maintenance dispatching and the
insurance
you know we we pay that annually
and that cost us about nine
million dollars so you know I
just want to say that I think
the relationship is really good
I think when the transit
district act was passed in and
we were set up it was always
with this contemplation of
finding a home for relevant land
I think we always do that we
were gonna be the ones tend on
the whole financially for
preparing the stuff out and you
know I'm gonna say we have a
great relationship with the to
the rail and transit Dave Harris
I see Tom church on this call in
the last administration I think
you know our relationship was
really solidified I'm gonna send
nothing but improve and and and
the current administration
So on the next slide.
So in nineteen and are just one
of the state a little bit
earlier railroaders been
temporarily suspended for
passenger service since March
fifteenth of last year.
We have however ran regularly
without passengers to support
the implementation of positive
train control since the
suspension and I'll talk a
little bit here but I'll talk a
little bit more on the positive
train control stuff as we we
move through this presentation
I I just want you to understand
that
You know we were we were able to
install positive train control
in in a really reduced a period
of time and part of that was us
not running passenger service
meant that we had trying to
access to the territories to do
testing so when we originally
contemplated doing this positive
train control testing we were
always trying to find a place
that that testing in with the
passenger service I am and
that's in some points if you
look at our schedule you know we
had six weeks seven weeks of
testing to get through kind of
compulsory things that federal
railroad administration required
us to do
with not running service we're
able to compress that greatly in
some instances you know check
turning six weeks into a week
and then having federal railroad
administration here so we really
allowed us to to really kind of
pushed us forward and I'll talk
a little bit about that China
has as we get into that part of
this this presentation of
positive preclinical the other
things that COVID kind of
brought to on in Mexico road
runner stress the cares Act
right wise of transit money to
the Albuquerque.
Use the urban urbanized area and
out of that of the rail runner
received forty seven point six
million in in federal transit
funds for relief to help support
the operations those funds came
to us without the requirement
for match and with some really
relaxed uses for those so
traditionally those federal
dollars came here and they were
to support kind of capital
pieces and state of good repair
when this came it was able to
support our administration it
was able to support our
operations and I think even a
larger piece of that it was able
to support our our keeping
people employed while we had
people furloughed
you know why we had services
spend it and so you know when we
talk about PTC in kind of this
interim period when we're sat
down we would try to rotate
transfers through here to keep
them employed but we have them
we have you know for the during
the week we have them for a
little bit all
and you know I think is really
important our board that we
didn't anybody off I think if
you look at that real honor
you know directly employed by
Rio metro and and then employed
by our operation and maintenance
contractor we're talking about a
hundred and thirty six people
and and so those are people that
you know we're able to keep
their jobs they were they all
live here I I think is really
important for our board to be
able to do that and the cares
Act really made that happen for
us
I'm happy to tell you that you
know we've been working with the
governor's office probably since
the shut down in March we've
been working with her task force
on the re opening of the state
and our thankfully we reached an
agreement the whole weeks ago on
on a reopening of the road
runners which will happen next
Monday on on March the eight
that would be a severely reduced
schedule so we're gonna be
running about ten trains a day
instead of the twenty two that
we run on weekdays prior to.
To comment we will not be
running we can service at all
and then we have a severely
reduced occupancy rate on the
trains will be operating at at
twenty five percent city
you know we kind of the schedule
around.
You know what are what what
we're kind of our highest
loading stations at what times
so we're not able to serve all
markets that we can serve we're
doing twenty two trains since
we're only doing ten but I think
we're restore we're serving the
largest markets and the markets
that probably of the biggest
potential to come back almost
immediately
we don't really anticipate
getting to the twenty five
percent capacity and I think a
couple of things if you look if
you look nation wanted to me to
rail as part of a COVID deal
even all these folks are back in
service are down somewhere in
the neighborhood of seventy to
ninety percent ridership I think
we'll be down in that and I
don't think we'll see kind of a
return to to ridership and so we
have a little further along in
the reopening process and really
until we see state and local
government workers returning
back to work in the office to
work so we're happy to be
running we do get calls on a
regular basis and we have
throughout this pandemic on when
we're gonna start again and and
folks that need to get to work I
I think it's kind of a wait and
see attitude on on our part on
on how much ridership will get
and then we'll continue to work
with the with the governor's
office and and the state's
reopening task force on
expanding that service as
appropriate as we move forward I
think that would be really
predicated on a couple of things
not the least of which is
probably our numbers and and
getting the counties that we
operate in instead of trying to
that green area on the topamax
and and probably
and and hopefully sooner rather
than later to the new so the new
designation to request and then
I think that'll cannot allow us
to open up a little bit more.
On the slide
You know I I haven't I haven't
cap off on on the the relief
bill in DC this week but at the
end of last week
I think the the bill that came
out of the house you know high
for COVID relief
potentially is bringing an
additional nineteen million in
federal relief for the end of
our acts in the New Mexico to
build we will have to see the
final bill looks like but this
is that you know the second
round of funding
has some limitations on it
nation wide depending on how
much money received in the
beginning
and I think our best guess on on
what we're looking at the wrong
or it is somewhere between
probably fifteen in nineteen
nineteen spent on our side and
we're hoping we get
I think that's a recognition of
the federal government's part
that's going to take awhile for
ridership to return to the
levels pretty COVID and this is
their way of making sure that
the service doesn't disappear or
have to be reduced and it's and
it's really kind of a supplement
these they're trying to get
agencies over the hall I I do
want to say when you look at the
cares Act and you look at this
bill is on the table
if that DC
you know one of the things to
really look at is is both those
bills really favored
transportation cities with
commuter rail and so when we
look at that you know the state
of New Mexico and receipt
whenever seeking nearly the
amount of funds that they
received if if around our wasn't
in the state and so what kind of
came out of that was super
helpful for us I think we were
trying to sitting in a in a
pretty good spot in the state to
receive
I'm not gonna call a windfall
but it's it's a lot of money and
you'll see that when we get to
the budget on on how much money
is actually is in relation to
our our revenues and and our
expenditures so next slide.
Control I think due to good job
on on on talk a little bit about
this can gradually mandated
safety system to protect against
train to train collisions
overspeed derailments are moving
through red signals in response
which is an intrusions into
active work zones on on the line
the implementation costs for the
Amarin's territory was roughly
sixty million dollars
I do want to say you know DOT
staff out of the rail transit
euro and and my staff
really did a great job on in in
competing for.
Requests at the federal level
and we would we would have never
been able to pull this off if it
wasn't for us receiving upwards
of forty million dollars in in
federal competitive grants
through a number of F. T. A. and
and federal railroad
administration competitive grant
programs and DOT Dave Harris in
particular was really she Amanda
are David I went back to DC up
that you over the last probably
three or four years it's got to
be some more than a dozen or a
dozen and a half times to really
talk with federal railroad
administration to talk to FTA
talks with our delegation and to
really try to push to get us up
on.
High on the list we explained
FRA that there was no we were
gonna be able to install this
month we got some help and and
thankfully that help came
through
okay like I said in in the COVID
shut down we're really able to
compress yes federal
and we are the fastest
implementor in the industry at
twenty months most passenger
rails and in the United States
took anywhere from three to five
years to install this and and
you to certify that I I think
some things that we that played
into our hands was the fact that
we were coming to the table last
late there's a lot of lessons
learned on other territories
that we were able to take
advantage of in in scheduling
things out
and we were conditionally
certified by the F. R. A. on
December seventeenth twenty
twenty and that was before the
federally mandated deadline
which was December thirty first
of last year we estimate the
annual maintenance costs for
positive train control three
point four million bills will
still have to see how that kind
of plays out but it talking with
our peers and and others in the
industry based on the size of
our territory and everything we
think this about right I think
internally we think we can get
this down a little bit but we'll
see what happens with that next
slide more if.
Little bit about the Roadrunner
budget and we'll start with with
this document which is around
our revenues and really this is
right out of our short range
plan which I believe we give you
a hand out on this kind of
report and then our short range
plan is attached in the back of
that
but if we just stay on the
screen here and I think it's
it's probably better if you look
up at the top of our screen in
FY twenty twenty one you'll see
out of a large urban capital we
have in their little over
seventeen million dollars just
just and and if you go down that
is for the item on there which
is fifty three thirty seven
state of repair phones we have
in there at that twenty six
million.
Just so you know how we operate
we usually operate with with
both of those categories a
little bit in the rears and so
what I mean by that is we use
kind of last year's money in the
current year but we always put
in the current year well fund
talks that we have probably
available to us and so when you
look at our Revenue peace on
that I want you to understand
that what's in FY twenty twenty
one which is our current budgets
that is FY FY twenty and FY
twenty twenty one funds are when
we get over the expenditure side
we're only looking at spending
half of that so we always look
at moving that forward the
reason that we stick both of
those in the budget like we do
is is in the event of we of some
catastrophic stress traffic
failure on the line and we've
had some instances in the past
that some wash outs that we've
had director trying to get out
there and spend some money on
instantaneously and move it
thankfully we haven't haven't
had a bridge that's washed all
the way out we're we're we're
we've had to replace the bridge
but but that's why we love this
up is just in the event that
that something like that happens
and part of that again for us
and being able to to respond to
that is is again part of the
DOT's commitment of UNICEF on
the joint use agreements so if
anything happens we have a
requirement to get the railroad
open in the shortest amount of
time possible and and this is
one of the ways that we do that
the other piece on here is if
you look on online I down there
is our cares Act we talked about
that forty seven million coming
in and and you can see that you
know that is part of the money
for this organization and we'll
get so what that means for us
here in a little bit.
The next piece on there is a
real metro and the north central
regional transit district gross
receipts tax and so a real
metroplex gross receipts tax
it's an eighth of a cent in
Valencia County San Juan county
and Bernalillo county and we
we don't so half of that about
sixteen percent goes to ground
water operations the other half
of that goes to our US
operations in those counties
North central regional transit
district also is is entered into
it and a with us and they give
us about half of the gross
receipts tax that they collect
in Santa Fe County and so when
you look at that if you look at
our our FY twenty twenty
approved budget we're at fifteen
and a half million dollars with
COVID coming in when we approve
our our twenty twenty one budget
we reduced what we thought we
would get in gross receipts tax
by twenty five percent and we're
looking to try to operate in
this inside that that wind
obviously the forty seven
million that we got out of the
cares Act that was a hundred
percent money that we could use
for everything maybe it's
something where we can absorb
that but we really didn't know
what the impact is I talked
yesterday with with Connie the
hill who's our our chief
financial person here the
district and she indicated to me
that right now we are on on kind
of schedule this this fiscal
year to bring a little bit over
fifteen million dollars so
rather than taking the twenty
five million dollar hit we're
talking about two or three
percent it is what it's looking
like right now and so we'll talk
a little bit about that what
that means for capital projects
a little bit later in this
presentation.
and then I just want to hit on a
couple of things here obviously
if you look at twenty twenty one
we have a fair box intake of one
and a half million that's
probably gonna be zero this year
we haven't ran since March of
last year and we're just gonna
start running this year so it'll
be significantly less than that
and then if you look at the BNSF
and Amtrak trackage fees we have
that at two point two million
just you know what happens with
that is
there's agreements between the
state and Amtrak in the state
and BNSF that govern what they
paid based on gross ton miles
for use of the line and then
there's also a standard payment
that's bait that is basically
their contribution for the
percentage of use that they have
on the line for maintenance of
the signal system and that
piece.
And I'm sure you you're aware
but Amtrak used to run a daily
service on their southwest chief
between California and Chicago
and that's been dropped now that
two days a week during COVID
times so that's gonna affect the
bottom line on on that the piece
as well I think luckily for us
we do have the cares Act money
in place and we do have quite a
bit more G. R. T. coming in than
we originally thought.
so
About on the slide and I'll let
you guys have some questions on
that after the presentation if
you'd like to move to the next
slide more in.
Expenditure side
so I'm just going to cover a
couple of things here you can
see trying to up on the top
there training in that that.
Peachy color we're just total
operation maintenance costs for
foreigners stress we're right
around twenty million dollars
and and ask yourself what's
included for that twenty eight
million dollars it's it's
running the service it's
maintaining all the rolling
stock is maintaining the signal
system on its maintaining that
the trackpad and in the line as
a whole I want to say
maintaining the track that
you know if you're familiar with
with what happens on on roadways
you know like the state DOT's
maintenance forces go out there
and kind of re repair potholes
and do Praxiteles and that type
of stuff honor kind of routine
maintenance basically was
covered in that twenty million
is basically that same kind of
operation for the rail so you
know we have a section of track
that we have some issues with
them we need to replace its ties
and spot time replace that
that's kind of what happens on
on that piece we have a single
it goes down we responded that
swap stuff out it does not
include capital which is kind of
at the bottom of the sheet but
you know we get to that here in
just a sec so twenty million
dollars when you when you look
at that in context of the forty
seven million dollars actors Act
money that we received I mean we
almost received two years of
operating expenses for the rail
are
which is pretty good for us I
think if you look down where we
have PTC that right under that
top part
you know R. as part of that
sixty million dollar price tag
for installing positive train
control we entered into a state
infrastructure bank loan
agreement with your TV for
roughly eleven million dollars
and so we have some debt service
that we need to pay on that
eleven million dollars and I and
I think you know as soon as a
send I talked to my and my
financial person yesterday and
and with the G. R. T. money that
that we're able to trying to put
aside right now I mean we feel
like we're in a probably a
pretty good place to repay that
debt relief
and then on top of that I I
think we also feel.
Like rather than coming to the
legislature for match money for
for federal grants to do up
Google capital projects that
we've got kind of federal
funding for we'll be able to
match that money as well talk a
little bit about that in the
last couple slides.
Capital maintenance programs as
as we try to have it down there
which is the next section in
this piece we spend about six
seven million dollars annually
in capital maintenance.
and the next I'll try to dictate
what this is but I I just want
to let you know that I think
since you all of purchased line
and you all know on the line now
is in a much better stated
repairman was when you purchased
it
so much so that you know I think
we're we're talking about
reducing some of our our
administrative requirements on
the next I am contracted goes
out because we've been placing
replacing a number of ties about
eleven thousand ties annually
since the inception of
groundwater and the track itself
is in really really good shape
we haven't had any kind of spots
I replacement or anything
probably the last four years and
we just keep improving that
track that over and over again
so I think we're at a place
where where we can try to come
back a little bit and we
probably need to refocus our
efforts on on rolling stock of
the rolling stock now is is
twelve thirteen years old it's
through probably half of its
useful life and you'll see on
the next slide that we're
beginning to do some capital
work on those and then we have
some other capital projects that
I think would improve our
operational talk about I'm on
the next couple slides so more
if you don't mind on the next
slide.
This is just a list within a
short range plan of our capital
maintenance program so on the
previous slide to the bottom
portion of that slide this is
gonna break out to look at what
we're actually doing those funds
and so
you can see kind of level top
areas rolling stop what we're
doing you can see in twenty
twenty one we have a couple
complete overhauls locomotive
stopped over all that we're
gonna be doing hi we have that
kind of in place kind of going
forward into the out years
we also have some items on there
for for coaching cap ours and
and some of are also related to
those.
On the fixed guideway part
Every year you know we do some
resurfacing which means that we
have to bring in some
Palestinian to kind of level
attract back out so we do a lot
of that going to annually on
emergency drainage
please talk about I think some
of the things that I want to
focus on here in the fixed
guideway pieces the PTC FY I
capital maintenance
so as we talk about we're in
Fiji C. section on we're looking
at about three point four
million dollars a year for that
part of that is also maintaining
a wifi network and I want to let
you all know that we're in the
process and the legislature last
year give us a little bit of of
capital money for upgrading or
wifi system
are in it's it's being operated
in the context of positive train
control so positive train
control right now
Really there's a there's an
overarching wide area wireless
network that sits over the top
of the track and and the wayside
units and the locomotives are
constantly talking within that
wireless network for fail over
just in case something happens
that wireless network we do have
cellular service on board the
trains that take some of that up
but we do have some dead spots
on the line and this is why I
project that we're spending
about five six million dollars
on to install will really try to
fill those gaps and will give us
kind of a third redundancy in
the communication back for
positive train control in
addition to that redundancy
it'll also enable us to bring
back in a relay session all of
the wayside aspects of what I
mean by that is the PTC system
constantly monitors the signals
up and down the line and and
relay that information to the
train directly through kind of a
short from wireless on and it
wasn't known if it's red and
yellow the screen what what what
goes on with that
this relay service allow us to
bring out all the way back and
in state that.
In our positive train control
back office computer which means
that our back office system will
know what's going on with all
those all the time as well no no
what signal is being sent out I
have a site interface unit and
that's a huge upgrade for us
when it comes to the reliability
of that system and in our
ability to use it
The other thing the benefit that
we're gonna get out of this this
current wifi installation for
five six million dollars is also
an operative for face wifi and
so the passenger why I for those
of you that are familiar with
the trades worked really well
from the first couple years that
it was install unfortunately the
company that provided the
material for that file
bankruptcy and it was kind of a
proprietary system that was in
place and so I'm kind of over
the years it it's just been
degrading integrating
integrating to where now I
probably only have coverage over
like a twentieth of the
territory and it's not great at
that this new system will it
it's a mesh network it'll have
on connectivity along the whole
line and it will allow for
probably ten times the level of
service that the previous
wireless system allowed which
should allow our passengers to
be able to to work and answer
emails and do some different
things on the training
and I'll give my little plus
here you know my my hope is that
when we re open all the way we
can work with the governor's
office and and the state on
maybe letting some of the time
that's to muted on the rail be
used as productive time for
employees if they're answering
emails and doing that type of
stuff so it's just a little
blood on my part we've had a
pulmonary conversation with
governor's office before the
pandemic but it'll have to be
something that we take a long
look at and and when we look at
but we think that would be
something that we can officially
employs an obviously beneficial
for us
I'm
are run on to the to the next
slide.
Just to give you a sense trend
over the last three years and
and where we are at twenty
twenty
the table at the top gives you
kind of our monthly you know
look at that ridership and you
can see kind of ridership
there's been slowly diminishing
and then the table the bottom
really able to kind of our
average weekday ridership and
our average Saturday and Sunday
ridership and you can see we're
right around twenty five hundred
so some on an average weekday on
one
You know I I I think our hope is
that ridership would go up about
this I think probably the
biggest thing contributing to to
low ridership part of the
pandemic as gas prices and
that's why this little monthly
revenue passenger trips versus
gas prices historic is in here
you can see you not to hide of
our ridership gas prices were
north of of three dollars three
fifty in some instances and when
I was up there we're really good
you can see one when gas prices
drop below around mid to sixty
to seventy we start to take a
hit on passenger service and and
I think it's just it's easy for
people to drive what instruments
that low there's no real
financial benefits for them I I
do want to say that that twenty
five hundred that we have on is
you know a little over the
equivalent of of one lane of
interstate traffic per hour so
you know that I. twenty five
corridor we are taking off of
substantial amount of traffic
for the folks that used to run
around under and then our
ridership over the years I mean
I what we're down to when we
look at twenty five hundred is
really kind of our poor
ridership it's people that
really like the opportunity to
travel by rail rather than by
car they like to have the
opportunity to do something else
in in the training.
And to really have that just as
more productive time and in
their communities and you know
whether it's reading a book
hopefully the new wifi system
being able to do some work or
being able to answer emails you
know catch up on the news
whatever that is something we're
really hopeful that that that
amenity that once I'm gonna be
coming back will be something
that helps bolster some
medicines well
and then you can see starting in
April of twenty twenty we went
down to zero rate of cemex and
zero ever since and then
your resume and Services so next
I are.
A couple little capital projects
that we've got the words and I
think last year I was out
walking the halls of the
legislature trying to find some
match money for for on this
project this is a serialization
project of downtown Albuquerque
the downtown Albuquerque rail
lines just to give you an idea
what happens currently in their
that existing conditions slide
up the top figure five dash one.
At the bottom of that figure you
can see where the where it says
authorized restricted minutes
Max speed twenty miles an hour
that's a pretty big stretch for
us so it's a little over four
miles and
Us from having to reduce speed
because we don't have a single
system in there that handles
traffic and we have to run this
restricted limit penalizes us
anywhere from probably five to
nine minutes on and and runs
from Belinda Santa Fe and so
signalized in medicine being
able to to run this area through
are dispatched will allow us to
an increase speeds in that area
upwards of fifty to seventy nine
miles an hour I mean I think
we're still in leave it at fifty
we a lot of traffic in there but
but once this is done we'll be
able to to raise speeds and and
top that off our our our travel
plans.
We've participated in the in the
local just following training
organization process and through
that process a number of years
ago we were able to garner
roughly ten million dollars for
this operate that money becomes
available in twenty twenty one
and twenty twenty two with a
little bit left in twenty twenty
three and we're trying to work
with partners at the MPO to move
that last year up in the twenty
twenty two so so one of project
on our end and it was always
kind of when you look at our our
financial picture typically we
were using a hundred percent of
our gross receipts tax to match
federal funds are coming in here
to help support the operation.
Coming in and and bring that
money to us and in us actually
receiving more gross receipts
tax on this year than we thought
we would
were able to actually in our
panelists matched without coming
to the state and asking for the
funds and so I'm super happy
about that I think it's always
good on our part to not ask for
something unless we absolutely
needed but this is something
that I think will help with
ridership because of approve our
our travel time.
By somewhere north of of five
six minutes between Albuquerque
and Santa Fe and and I think
that will we'll have a little
bit and bring some riders
and I only have one other
capital funds to look at some
more if you still
events one more sorry system
maintenance facility and I and I
think interesting here
You know the the picture at the
top on the left hand side try to
give you a lay out of of what
we're adding so once that blue
box is an awning area that's
where we handle a hundred
percent of our treatment and so
it's all outdoors there's no
sides on that thing is just a
cover on it with one fit in it
so when we have to surface
underneath the vehicle when we
have to do moves on on on each
one of those trucks sets and run
all that we have to reposition
the trains of position every car
over that so able to do that and
so so the cumbersome operation
for us
and the guys who do it to a hell
of a great job on that being
outdoors especially in the
winter time and and really in
the spring time to as soon as we
get the wind's going when
they're open up on the engine
compartment and and we got Sam
and stuff blowing in their they
do an amazing job restraint rap
and and temporary supports for
the slick wrap to to make wind
barriers and all kinds of stuff.
I'm.
I think this is a fine thing our
provide maintenance operation to
start out with but as our
equipment is getting older were
having to do more on the
equipment this is an operation
that that we write really like
to see move indoors and I got a
couple other pictures on here
the the you know the the green
border around that picture on
the top left is our warehouse
that was an existing warehouse
on the property
that we lease it's
It's not the best feeling in the
world I mean it's a metal
building roof leaks we've we've
done.
You know annual maintenance on
that thing on a pretty regular
basis and and we really like to
be able to upgrade that to
something that's a little bit
more secure and then I'll just
talk to the buildings outlined
in the red envelope from the
north and or maps of the the
green box is is really our
maintenance of equipment folks
they're all housed in their it's
in close proximity to the
Ontario were to make this panel
and all those cruise going to
come in that's an operation that
happens overnight as well so as
not to act operation happens
during the day while we're in
service so we're gonna that
owning it's always at night and
and apple peas and then the
other building on the property
that's kind on the floor right
hand side that's our
administrative offices where our
contractor and the folks at Rio
metro employees to have
oversight our house so if you go
to the next slide I think that
kind of shows what we're hoping
to get to
we did a study probably four
years ago and it was just kind
of a real.
Trying to work on on what we
could do kind of in the existing
property what kind of property
we would have to I a portion of
that property we have to I and
what kind of track work we have
to do to kind of put that that
operation indoors and we kind of
have a based approach are for
that the full build out is is
roughly forty million dollars
but really are you know that
phased approach would be done in
five stages phases and the first
meaningful phase which would be
getting an operation that's
under that on in the course
getting a ten place that we can
service multiple cars under and
looking motive under is about
fifteen million dollars
so my staff is going to work on
trying to get some discretionary
funds competitive grant money
out of the federal government
for this and this is probably
something that we're gonna have
to come back to you all for
management for and I think one
of the things we're gonna try
and do is not come back to you
for the match money at least for
the first budget and and really
look at our savings in gross
receipts tax when we look at at
our retirement Avid state
infrastructure bank loan when we
look at what we can do like like
can we afford to do this if we
get some grant money in place
and are able to do it and so so
I want you know like it's I
think it's position us to take
better care of of you know your
asset on to make sure that this
asset is around for a long time
and really improve the way
things are going and I think
that's the end to give you a
side of the.
So thank you and I think with
that will stand for any
questions from from if.
Thank you all this was really of
the a very good presentation I
certainly learned a lot
I I will say that it
from just your your closing
remark I do believe that the
station invest and so you can
certainly find an ally in me
moving forward because I I know
that there's a lot of politics
around the the issue of the rail
runner
but for me my issue has always
been that we did invest more and
that we didn't do more because I
I grew up in the southeastern
part of the state I'm I'm I grew
up just south of just north of
Artesia and I've lived and
traveled all over the country
and the world and to know what
public transportation does for
communities especially in areas
that are more remote
like our state I feel like this
is one of those investments that
we should be making
as a state and certainly utilize
you know I think there's a lot
of cynicism around a lot of
these issues and I'm really
hopeful having served in the
legislature the last four years
that we as a state can become
much more open to this idea not
just of the rail runner but this
idea around public
transportation and what it can
do for our communities
especially in rural areas we are
very much a personal vehicle
culture in the state and I think
part of the reason why ridership
and all those issues come up is
is also because we're not good
at promoting
issues related to public
transportation we always see it
as well what the only poor
people use that only black
indigenous our communities of
color that only those
communities use it except that
it actually is something that
would benefit the greater good
people with disabilities could
travel more especially in rural.
Areas if we made these
investments veterans who need to
go to the VA could could utilize
these these issues up there
could be a massive reduction in
accidents especially because
there's so much driving in in so
many of these rural areas and I
think it also reinforces so much
support local economies that
that I think we don't have right
now and so I really appreciate
your presentation not just
because of what you all have
been having to accommodate over
the course of the last year
through the shut down but
because I think as you're trying
to make all these efforts work
you're doing so when there's
politics that have been involved
in this whole process but at the
same time having to compete with
this private what this personal
vehicle culture that my hope as
someone who writes for bike all
over the state can somehow
shifted that narrative into
making sure that we don't have
to drive everywhere we can
actually make these investments
and and and promote
Capital infrastructure and and
and really do what we need to do
to to make the state I think
much more
Accessible to to everyone and so
I I'm very appreciative of this
presentation so thank you very
much for your time I will
certainly open it up to the
committee if there's anyone who
has any questions first we have
Representative Powdrell Culbert
thank you madam chair just a
quick question earlier it was
stated that
Well run a would be running a
twenty five percent capacity
about how many riders.
Is that per day and as far as
And I guess for lack of a better
the better word does that
generate each day.
Madam chair representative on
what we're gonna be running ten
trains a day
I think when we first started
our around those four car sets
at twenty five percent capacity
that's basically the equivalent
of one car which is about a
hundred and sixty hundred eighty
people
depending on the configurations
so so not a lot
but if we're full at the twenty
five percent capacity that's
what it is I think for us it's
been one of those things that we
have been visible we want to be
visible we want to be out there
for everybody
I'll be surprised just so you
know if we're running at that
twenty five percent capacity
because if you look historically
our ridership a lot of it is
based around the commute times
for government employees whether
that state government whether
it's federal governments or
whether it's local government in
Santa Fe and Albuquerque New
Mexico County and while those
folks remain kind of a work at
home please with only a sense of
what's coming in I don't think
we're gonna see a lot that's my
guess I hope I'm wrong I hope
that we have the other problem
which is I'm full up we are
we're going to employees
security guards and and some
additional personnel at stations
that accompany in constant
communication with our dispatch
office with our customer service
folks so we'll know what the
capacity is an upcoming station
will know whether we can
accommodate the people are
waiting or not and that was kind
of our way of saying why are we
were hoping that we don't turn
anybody away but if we do we
want to you know early so that
you can you can really get your
car doing you need to.
I'm.
As I said earlier I think our
our our biggest hope and I think
we've got a little bit of time
so this is that the governor's
reopening task force in the
governor's office as we move
from yellow to green and and
read it but I just
will look at us and say you know
you can do more and and
and and hopefully you can bring
more people in our.
Five percent capacity were able
to keep people sixty part in the
in a train compartment which I
think is is super important
right now
and I think it is as of you know
as vaccination rate goes up it's
all those things go up I think
we'll be able to try to reduce
things down I think our second
hoping and this is really kind
of reiterated on my board is is
that the next thing for us is to
be able to bring some weekend
service backed
And and I know that some more
discretionary rights rather than
rights that people have to take
up and down the corridor but I
think our hope is as we move
into green that we're able to do
that.
Okay as my second question over
the past few years
been on this committee.
Although no we do that you know
this kind of catastrophic events
as the
What arms are column arm dot org
thank I've always called to mind
but did did the gates that go up
and down to control traffic is
trying is
trying is moving and there was a
time that we were going through
you know making sure that the
trying crossings were secure and
say when you all were doing
quite a bit a new work on that
with COVID that we've been able
to get those crossings pretty
secure and taken care of.
Madam chair representative you
yes we have and we feel like
we've been a lot of progress on
kind of this downtime with with
bolstering some intersections
that were issues
one for us that always kind of
stands out on leave or not is is
Rio Bravo
which is kind of Bernalillo
county kind on the south and
there and the counties got a
reconstruction job for that
intersection at second street
and real Bravo as part of that
you know we're gonna be swapping
those out so
so you know I think we're
probably a pretty good spot from
the state of good repair
perspective on those gates I
think the other thing just so
you know as is this positive
train control system one of the
ancillary benefits of it for us
is if we are notified of of
malfunctioning gates we kinda
instantaneously put a a a notice
out that decade is not working
and by rule even if we didn't
have positive train control to
transpose distrust opt for those
crossings they're supposed to
drop a a flyer and the flyers
was the flag that intersection
what positive train control will
do now is as soon as we get that
notification and and that notice
goes out to all the operators it
also gets put into our positive
train control system which will
enforce the stop short of that
malfunction gate and so it takes
time that you element of having
to remember that and the rest of
that out we never had that
problem in the past when we've
had nothing to gates all our
people to stop short but I I I
do want to reiterate that that
that system has that it added
layer of safety on top of that
that will automatically prevent
that from happening.
Okay what was that
you you all have not had a.
Any type of an incident now
about three years.
No not.
Representative.
Yes you know I think we've been
super fortunate in you know I'd
be remiss if I and Sam and I
think I said this when we were
in the throes of trying to find
money for positive train control
we have never had an accident on
the rail runner line that was
positive train control
preventable
so so we've never had it you
know something happened that
that TTC were prevented I think
we're very happy that we have a
system in place because I think
and then it takes the likelihood
of of anything like that
happening on out of the equation
it'll probably help us a little
bit with our insurance premium
because we have that in place
but yeah we haven't we haven't
had anything really catastrophic
probably three or four years
purpose.
I'm really glad to hear that
because for some of the other
members I know when when we
brought we're looking at road
runner back in two thousand to
two thousand what two thousand
three when I came in I was the
only Republican that voted for
not got beat up for about five
years.
Because of being so supportive
than it was in a it was in a fun
way you know they were just
beating me up because rel runner
wasn't doing so great but it's
as someone who have had the just
have the opportunity to watch
the changes take place and and
see the impact I still really
believe that it is very much.
Unnecessary.
A piece of our total
transportation.
Our system so I'm with you guys
and I'm just you know maybe in
some ways comment.
Slowdown was a blessing because
it it gave us all an opportunity
to address some of the issues
that we were facing the you know
that we just could not.
Thank you take care of them so I
just want to give you guys a
thumbs up from somebody who's
watch you grow up from little
babies.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you for the presentation and
thank you Mr came for joining us
I've been studying the mid
region council of governments
website with the magnifying
glass due to the roads that we
share in Santa Fe New Bernalillo
county so it's great to have you
here as well Mr Doyle thank you
so much for the presentation I
really have to echo what
both Representative Rubio and
and Representative Powdrell
Culbert said I live in South
Korea for eight years in the
countryside at the I could take
for different kinds of trains to
Seoul from a bullet to a slow
movement
subway so I'm it's just shocking
as Representative Rubio pointed
out
and I never realized actually
into we had The presentation on
transit equity day how much our
public transportation was
related to people having money
and having cars and people not
having money not having cars
but I I do I it's wonderful to
hear the train is starting I
wrote it myself
She with whether or you know not
wanting to.
Dr in poor weather but with
schools reopening I know the
school for the deaf has a
tremendous ridership and some of
the other schools the government
workers I know Mario.
Our committee assistant is a
great band and constantly
publicizes that thank you for
what you're doing and I think
also with the.
Spaceport America.
at I mean I know there's people
are committee that don't feel
maybe like the three of us that
this is the greatest thing in
the world but
I I just thank you for
everything you're doing also for
the financials you can see how
your financially accountable so
thank you for including that I
in the report I just really
appreciate it if you can be no
board of creative ways to
increase ridership on the rail
runner please include me I would
love to see some of those murder
mystery dramas hi how are you
one thing that is going to
increase as they have a small
village movement so every
neighborhood actually has a
little circulating by us as part
of the problem with the rail
runner is getting to the rail
runner so as a teacher in the
south valley bringing kids up to
the state capitol we wanted to
bring on the rail runner some of
them have any minute on city
buses but I'm we had to hire
buses if we wanted to get them
to the rail runner so just as we
continue to go out I'm at I'm
hoping that we can increase some
of those sixty buses to ways
that can support school groups
as our society opens up again
school groups to the rail runner
because just riding that train
as an incredible education for
kids but thank you for this
presentation thank you for your
accountability attention and
educating us on everything that
goes into doing what you're
doing and for your match your
mobile bash
Wireless network that's terrific
to thank you.
Representative thank you.
Thank you Representative are
there any is there anyone else
in the committee would like to
make have any questions.
I did have one question is that
I wanted to pass it was related
to I know that in the here it
within this around the state
there's a lot of challenges with
investing in infrastructure I
know you mentioned I mean
there's mentions of like our
bridges are not at all I mean
there's just so much work that
we need to do related to
infrastructure and I just was
curious in terms of your own
budget like how how does the
rail runner interact with those
conversations around making sure
that any capital improvements
that we do in in throughout the
state that there are some
alignment with that sort of the
the efforts that you are you all
are trying to to address from an
infrastructure standpoint.
Madam chair is a good question
so part of our MLA with with the
DOT we're actually required when
we put together kind of that
that serve a range plan and our
annual budgets to work with them
on what the capital needs and
and I capitalize it looks like
and so there's always a really
good dialogue back and forth
between Realmeter regional
transit district and the NM DOT
rail transit euro on what our
needs are you know I I know Dave
Harris again Harrison I probably
talk two or three times a week
in an average week and we stay
up on kind of a lot of things to
this positive train control
implementation I think is really
solidify that relationship you
know with with around transition
us because I I think it was one
of those things that was a
requirement that we all trying
to get on board to work together
and and make sure that we're on
the same page getting to where
we need to get to and I think
that that's translated over
really well on the capital side
of things
said we also participate we are
a member
on the the next long planning
organization board down here so
that Mexico and transportation
board we are voting member on
that board so
and we participate in all the
subcommittees that we adopt to
that that generation of that
local transit transportation
proven programs I guess rolled
up into the into the state
transportation improvement
programs and so even locally our
voice I believe the server
really really well and I think
here you know in Bernalillo
county Sandoval County
there's probably more of a
recognition because we have that
river crossing issue down here
where we have this population
that's growing and there's only
X. amount of ways to get from
the west side to the side of the
river and there's not a lot of
stomach for building another
road crossing there's only so
much capacity that's there so I
think that there's a
longstanding recognition at
least kinda in the central
region that that transit in the
opera.
Suniti to have that as an option
for people is going to be pretty
huge because it's the only way
we're gonna be able to handle
those those increases entrance
across the river and I think
it's always said here kind of
jokingly that the last time this
region are you want to build a
river crossing was then Tania
and from the time that the City
of Albuquerque decided that they
were going to do that until the
time it was open to twenty two
years so
so it's one of those things you
know and I think if you look at
the the next fall plan down here
what happens with that I think
there's there's a lot riding on
the transit system getting
better better over the next
decade two decades and better
connectivity to rail having
having
having rail service more
backbone and madam chair also to
touch I think you brought up
some stuff with the with
veterans and I think we have a
press release going out today
that you know do we talked about
the sixty bus connections and as
far north as thousand as far
south as Sapporo every one of
those partners that that meet us
we offer a free fair to that
veterans so if you have a valid
the a chart and you get on our
services you shows that you're
good to go and everybody that
connects us this honor that as
well and so when you talked to
the Veterans Affairs
administration we have the
largest forty transportation
geography
in the United States to get
folks in the state to Veterans
Affairs and a hospital here in
Albuquerque and so
so that's a huge thing for us to
to but I think that that's you
know that that's a microcosm of
what we're talking about bump on
this better connectivity and I
think from our perspective and
our and our partner's
perspective on the on the
transit sat.
I think I think the what's the
way we get more choice riders is
having people not to having to
have them look at our schedule
they just know initial to the
station is going to be something
there for them in the shortest
amount of time possible they're
not going to sit there for an
hour and wait for something it's
gonna be a shorter amount of
time and we're always striving
to try and improve that whether
it's on the on the right one or
service or on a bus service
we're working with our partners
City of Albuquerque city of
Santa Fe essential regional
transit district whatever we're
always trying to find a little
bit more capital in a little bit
better ways to run that schedule
so that we're kind of in in that
same rather than it's and we
pull out the schedule and see
you know what to are we going to
show up there and when that is
so.
Great no thank you all so much
and and like Representative
Garrett if there's any any
creative group that you all
organized I'd be happy to to
participate as well so
I I I'd be excited to do that
I'm if there's no other
questions from the committee I
think we will we're we're done
here today I did want to let
folks know that we are starting
to get some
some legislation sent over from
the from the Senate so next week
along with the trip report of
because people wanted to hear up
an update on that and to get an
overview we we should also have
talked we're we're certainly
gonna make time to hear house
memorial twenty and Senate bill
one twenty one and so I know
there were some questions about
set Senate bill one twenty one
which is the bond bill
during Tuesday's presentation so
we'll we'll hear that and then
and then of course the the
overview so we'll see you on
Tuesday I'm in the meantime
again please thank you so much
for joining us and giving us a
presentation on the road runner
I certainly noted out like I do
in a lot of these transportation
presentations and so
I I think the others I
appreciated it as well so thank
you all for joining us today and
I look forward to meeting you
all hopefully in person soon.
Madam chair and representative
as we took notes when we do the
creative stuff we're gonna let
you all in
and I want to thank you for the
time today and and Tom Mario
thanks for your help as well Hey
Tom.
Austin.
Well thank you all have a good
day and and we'll see you all on
the floor.
Right thank you.
