Members will cost close we have
a quorum.
Please rise for today's vacation
offered to us by the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Garrett.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
everybody please join me in
prayer.
The parent.
During these final four days the
legislative session I pray that
we can come together.
With respect for each other
depreciation for each other our
sacrifices.
And during this time of winter
when there's so many spring
religious holidays coming forth
has over Easter the birthday of
the boot up.
We can really reflect on the
words of St Francis I'm going to
share is prepare.
Lord make me an instrument of
your peace.
Where there is hatred let me sow
love where there is injury
pardon where there is doubt
faith where there is despair
hope.
Where there is darkness light
where there is sadness joy.
divine master grant that we may
not so much seek to be consoled
as to console to be understood
as to understand to be loved as
to love for it is in giving that
we receive it is in pardoning
that we are pardoned and it is
in dying that we are born to
eternal life thank you and we
pray that your wisdom and your
love and these words can guide
us it.
Thank you generally.
Of with the gentleman from
Colfax more of Rio Arriba Santa
Fe please listen the pledge of
allegiance.
Pledge allegiance to the flag of
the United States of America and
to the Republic for which it
stands one nation under god
indivisible with liberty and
justice for all.
And would the.
Jonathan curry please leave this
in saluting New Mexico's flag.
Generationally off Mr speaker
good afternoon Mister speaker
members of the house Mr speaker
I move that we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business that
no objection it is so ordered
good afternoon everyone.
Yes Representative Scott.
Good afternoon Mister speaker.
Are there announcements.
Miscellaneous business.
Any miscellaneous announcements.
members we have.
suffered another loss in our
house of representatives family
Loyce of lock to many of you
will remember I was the long
serving deputy chief clerk of
the house.
Put in decades of service to
this body in she passed away
this is a I believe is this
morning.
And we are.
Intentions a family is a very
sad loss for her family she
spent.
Many many many years making sure
that the members of the house
were held and supported look
after taking care of and her
losses a.
A big big hole this opened up in
Santa Fe community I hope the
members will join please and
standing in.
Remembering Elesa and her
wonderful.
Good humor her wonderful
demeanor her always pleasant
smile and are always a helpful
attitude and just heard her just
impeccable elegance and the
class in the in love for this
institution that she brought
with her every day she came to
work she'll be very very greatly
missed we're sending on behalf
of the entire house of
representatives
of okay if of flowers the family
and as a sign of our sincere
condolences to them at this time
of loss of please please rise
and let's remember away so for a
moment silence.
The members.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business messages.
Your injection is so ordered.
Click to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to four
Senate has passed house bill
sixty seven house bill one
twenty as amended by the house
house bill one sixty eight house
bill one eighty five house joint
resolution fourteen and returned
same here with respectfully
submitted Lenore and Lara host
Senate chief clerk.
This is Richard.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
concurred in house amendments to
Senate bill one twelve as
amended respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk this is really
interesting.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the duly enrolled
in gross copies of house bill
twenty three as amended house
bill fifty one as amended house
bill one oh three as amended
house bill two thirty nine as
amended house bill two forty as
amended have been read in full
and signed by the officers of
the Senate no concession and
returned same here with
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief
clerk.
This is really interesting.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill for as
amended by the house and further
amended by the Senate house bill
two thirty as amended by the
Senate and request the
concurrence of the house to the
Senate amendments respectfully
submitted Lenore and Lara host
Senate chief clerk this is
really under.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate bill fifty four as
amended Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill one
thirty five and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
this is really enter.
House executive message number
three.
Honorable speaker Egolf and
members of the house I have the
state signed house taxation and
revenue committee substitute for
house bill two fifty five as
amended with certificate of
correction enacted by the fifty
fifth legislature first session
twenty twenty one respectfully
yours Michelle Lujan Grisham
governor.
Message of interest.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
committee reports.
no objections so ordered.
to read.
Mr speaker your state government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to whom has been
referred to Senate bill two
thirty as amended has had it
under consideration point thing
with recommendation that it to
pass respectfully submitted
Georgene those chair.
And it was consent to have the
committee point road to gather
act on the single vote and
reflected in the journal so
they're acted upon individually
hearing objections so ordered
click to read.
Senate health and public affairs
committee substitute for Senate
bill two forty two do path.
Senate bill three forty five as
amended to pass as amended.
Senate Joint Memorial to do path
respectfully submitted Georgene
those chair.
Move adoption.
Transaction a favorable
committee reports and Senate
bill two thirty is amended
Senate health of public affairs
for the substitute Senate bill
two forty two as amended Senator
for thirty five as amended in
Senate Joint Memorial to all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
I.
All those.
Oppose Reports reductive.
Mr speaker your taxation and
revenue committee tomb is been
referred house bill three oh
eight has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that it do not
pass but the house taxation
revenue Committee substitute for
House Bill three oh eight do
passed respectfully submitted
Javier Mart√≠nez chair unanimous
consent of the committee
portrait to gather act on in a
single vote reflected the
journal so they're acted upon
individual hearing objections so
ordered to read.
Senate bill forty three to pass.
Senate bill three twenty eight
to pass.
Senate bill for ten as amended
do pass respectfully submitted
this Martinez chair the speaker
move adoption of the committee
reports we're honored option of
unfavorable Committee for in
house bill three await disable
Committee reported taxation
revenue for the subsea
presbyteries in percent of bills
for you three three twenty eight
and fortunate all those in favor
please signify by saying hi.
Hi all this is Nate reports are
that.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too much been referred
Senate bill three twenty five
has had it under consideration
point in with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Gail Chasey chair
unanimous consent of the
committee point read together
acted upon the single vote
reflects in the journals of
their act fund individually
hearing objections so ordered
where to eat.
Senate bill three forty two
passed.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill three
seventy five thousand minted do
pass respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Mr speaker move adoption
transaction Senator commute
forces Senate bill three twenty
five three forty Senate
Judiciary Committee says two
percent of three seventy five is
amended.
All those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
I was reports reduction.
Jelly's relief.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objections order the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey.
Mr speaker if it would be all
right I'd like to safety worries
about invoice of law.
That.
I think that a voice that was
just a.
An institution here and the
legislature and I want to recall
the time that I first heard
that about her when I was
running for office I was in the
field of early childhood special
education at that time and a
colleague who I didn't know well
was helping me walk and knock on
doors.
And when we finished our couple
of hours doing that she said to
me well when you're elected my
mother will take care of you.
And I said who's your mother and
she said well she is the
assistant to the chief
The house.
And that was a voice of what
ensuring not only did was to
take care nation takes care of
everybody who not all of the
members and all of the workers
and she was an elegant.
Spiritual presence up there on
the podium sitting close to
probably about where robin is
sitting now.
And we saw her every day.
I
Happened we we we had kept in
touch because when she retired
we would encounter one another
and areas
at various occasions but
actually it last to restore she
was at the heart hospital when
my husband was a heart hospital
and that was about six years ago
and she looked just as beautiful
after this heart procedure and
she had been in there on in the
merchants State and she was just
as she always is just full of
grace and hope and encouragement
and inspiration so I'm I send my
love to Sophie and everyone in
the family.
Four at this time it must be
hard to say goodbye to someone.
this.
US right to.
It wants to touch so many of our
lives we loved her thank you Mr.
Thank you generally.
Speaker of the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Stapleton.
Mr speaker and members of the
house I too would also like to
give a word of thanks for
elisa black while she was here
in the house of representatives.
As the speaker mentioned she was
elegant she appeared to looked
at again she spoke elegant she
it was a warm friendly and
caring person in the house of
representatives and when it came
to the culture of the Hispanic
community she manifested it and
showed it brightly especially
Hispanic day and I know a family
well I'm Mr speaker and members
of the house I do hope that god
will continue to bless and give
them peace at the time of the
loss of their mom and dad
grandma that I'm and.
All rural she loved all her
family as they surround
themselves this time with peace
and conflict of god thank you.
Thank you gentle lady.
The gentleman from.
Grant.
Sierra.
In Dona Representative SS thank
you Mr speaker.
Los locked also I'd like to
speak a little bit about our the
wonderful wonderful person.
A personal family friend
specially to my mother every
time she came out here my mother
would come out here to
I I also wish to express of some
words of condolences.
Regarding the license black.
Members were holding places the
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
components no objections order.
And we are back up on the
webcast.
We're gonna start item to the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval.
Thank you Mr speaker
so the Senate has amended.
House bill two thirty to
redefine property management to
take out home owner's
associations that is something
we would ask the body to concur
with.
I'm Mr speaker I move that the
body concurrent with the Senate
amendment.
Okay and how do you urged the
body to vote.
Urged the body to concur.
the gentleman.
Has explained even.
The gentleman has moved it house
concurs urged Baijal yes it is
there debate on the amendment to
house bill two thirty.
The gentleman from Chavis any
answer.
Thank you Mr speaker
well the gentleman yield Mister
speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Sir can you give us a
little more
Body
to the amendment what it does
some and why you believe it
should be something that we
should concur with yeah Mr
speaker John and it's real
simple it is in the definition
of property management which was
added as part of the original
bill this is as you'll recall
was the real estate trust funded
that provided for protection for
people that were victims of
fraudulent activity it takes out
the words homeowners association
and then says property
management does not me and then
it adds this were this phrase
for the management of a
condominium or homeowners
association both the advocates
and those that were concerned on
the Senate side have agreed to
this so there's nobody that is
as I as far as I know that is
opposing this change in the
Senate.
And Mr speaker and and gentleman
for for those owners that would
be affected what additional
what additional protections did
they have with this language.
Mr speaker there are it doesn't
affect the protection one way or
the other the protection is
still in there are changes
nothing about what we did on the
house for with respect to the
trust fund.
Thank you a gentleman thank you
of Mr speaker.
Casey no further debate the
gentleman is move that the house
can Curtis said those are the
general from Valencia
Representative Baldonado.
Thank you Mr speaker the the
my noted for their ask my
questions thank you.
Casey no further debate the
gentleman who's asking cursors
body to vote yes all those in
favor of concurring to Senate
amendments to house bill two
thirty as amended please signify
by saying hi our.
Of those opposed nay house
concurred the sentiments house
bill two thirty as amended.
I know that I am one generally
from.
Bernalillo and when I say I
don't want members I'm referring
to the supplemental concurrence
calendar the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative Lewis.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
the house concurrent sentiments
to house bill four.
And there are.
One is regarding a state can't
clarification technical changes
further clarifying those small
public entities exempted from
monetary damages.
The other one is permissive
attorney fees modifies the
attorney fees provision in
section five so the attorney
fees are permissive and no
longer mandatory.
There's also mandatory excuse me
there's also a perspective pro
specter of application so that
claims arising solely from acts
emissions that occurred prior to
July one twenty twenty may not
be brought pursuant to the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act.
notice of claims similar to the
TCA this amendment requires
plaintiffs to provide law
enforcement agencies notice of a
potential claim within one year
of the violation of a civil
right.
So there's also an effective
date again the effective date is
July first twenty twenty one and
I move the body to conquer and
vote yes.
Okay the gentle lady has moved
the body has explained that we
will have a roll call vote
others debate the gentleman from
Chavis enter.
Mr speaker that was so what I
rules for was to make sure of a
rogue cop out there other people
on the board thank you the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you Mr speaker visit
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you gentle lady
Mr speaker I see that.
This legislation now accepts
certain.
Entities from coverage.
And that in the words used but
not including Anastacio or
community did chisel water
conservation district a land
grant percent thank you to all
domestic water consumers
association.
Or other.
Argonaut or other association
organized pursuant to the.
Sanitary projects that for water
users association I just want to
make sure because usually we
saying the word including
To be Representative and and not
the the limited.
And the word including here I I
presume.
Would be Representative but the
only other entities that would
be accepted would be.
Those organize pursuant to the
sanitary projects act or water
users association would that be
your understanding Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
that's correct.
And then the other major change
Mr speaker gentle lady was to
make the.
Earnings species permissive
instead of mandatory if I
understood your comments
correctly is that correct Mr
speaker and gentleman that's
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady that the
Senate do anything else in there
Amendments to the bill that we
sent over to them.
Mr speaker and and gentlemen yes
again they made it prospective
so that claims arising solely
from Axar emissions that
occurred prior to January one
twenty twenty may not be brought
up pursuant to this act.
And I saw a couple other things
Mr speaker gentle lady one was a
change the.
Our interest provisions of I
think of.
What we sent over referred to
the Wall Street journal and
they've now changed it to I
believe the Federal Reserve Bank
so I I caught that quickly and
then of.
There was one other item that
Caught my eye on a quickly
There was one other thing.
Change that they made that seem
to jump out of.
explained to to the body the.
Change that the Senate made with
respect to the ability to a
file.
And action under this
legislation verses the tort
claims act and the interplay
between the two because I think
they made a change to that that
they're not.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
not correct there is no change
made in that regard.
Okay I thought I was so
something that.
When looking at the.
Point two two zero eight two
zero point three amendment.
Dated March sixteenth twenty
twenty one.
Was that.
Particular amendment it wasn't
stricken by any of the other
amendments was a.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentlemen so you're looking at
the amendment point two two zero
eight two zero point three that
is that none of those notice of
claims provision as well as the
prospective application and the
permissive attorney fees.
It was not stricken.
Okay it is so.
What caught my eye was the
amendments toward the bottom of
the first page.
And then cover up the when I
read it real quickly if for some
reason I thought that many of.
Altered the ability to file an
action Andrew this if.
If there was not
Or if you filed an action under
this.
I'm gonna have it wrong if you
follow the action under the tort
claims act you couldn't find
action under this plan or vice
versa for.
Maybe I just miss read of the I
thought it had something to do
with needing time notices and
you couldn't the file under this
if you Mr time for filing a tort
claims act.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentlemen so
Section thirteen B. that
language and perhaps this is
where you might be thinking in
terms of the tort claims act is
that the section is very similar
in their and there is no
prohibition that you can claim
one and not the other but there
is a prohibition on being
awarded by both.
Okay so maybe that's my
confusion that the I was reading
through March and into that
amendment so.
Under the bill that we sent over
to the Senator at you can still
follow an action under either
and I think we have some
question and along the lines of
could you file your the
alternative I think the answers
were yes you can still do that
but your your recovery is one or
the other as I understand it
that remains in place.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady of
thank you for answering my
questions
I didn't have much time to serve
to read all the amendments but I
appreciate your answer in the
the questions that I did have
from quickly thank you.
And next to the gentleman from
Chavis Lee and Roosevelt
Representative Anderson.
Thank you Mr speaker of will the
gentle lady yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you I'm gonna be shortened
to the point because I believe
of previous questions addressed
my.
My questions but
I tend to think the US Senate
amendments were of positive
but of the whenever I hear about
attorney's fees I hope I won't
offend anybody but none the less
I see where we go on from
mandatory to permissive it is
that as far as the amendment
takes attorney fees question.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct and and what the
modification regarding the
purpose of attorney fees means
is that in order to collect
attorneys fees the plaintiff
must win their lawsuit and then
petitioned the judge to award
reasonable damages the judge in
his or her discretion may award
may award this these requests.
Award a lesser amount than what
was requested or didn't deny the
request in its entirety.
Thank thank you Jill lady for
that response because I didn't
have the words readily available
in front of me and that that of
uncertainty seems like a
of a great improvement then one
last question sort of equally
ignorant when we talk about acts
and omissions I was I was
unclear as to how the amendment
I guess whenever I think of of
action missions at the missions
to me is sort of
gentle lady one of those things
where you think well how did you
know was in a mission if you
didn't know what it you know my
sort of on the correct a logic
in addressing that particular
amendment or is it basically
missions in another sense of the
word question.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
acts and omissions of language
that you're referencing did not
change in the Senate amendments
so that language is still the
same as it was here on the house
side.
Thank you very much for that
response that does answered my
questions Mr speaker gentle lady
thank you.
Their next is the gentleman from
Lee Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will yield
Mister speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Lee just a couple
of questions Mr speaker gentle
lady looks like amendment
changed.
From two million dollars per
currents.
Two two million dollars per
claimant so.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
language that was adopted by the
Senate is that it is.
Only allowed for two million per
claimant.
Her excuse me Mr speaker and
gentleman per claimant per
currents.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady.
We.
We use for instance of.
Some civil rights violation that
occurred in a classroom for
example.
With the.
Thirty Clements.
One.
Mr speaker and gentleman I can't
think of it instance that would
be applicable to the classroom I
don't know if you have an
example perhaps.
I don't have a specific example
but.
Hospital Hey your.
Hello teacher having a bad day
the rating a group of.
Twenty five Hispanic students
and.
Preventing them from.
Finishing a project for school
and recess or somehow
restraining them from their
normal course of business during
school.
It looks like there is the
potential at least.
For civil rights violations
occur Mr speaker gentle lady
would you would you mind
introducing your expert witness
their place.
Mr speaker and gentleman so I I
don't think the instance that
you're describing or the example
that you're describing would be
a violation of civil rights but
I think to get to the point of
your questioning is that if
there was an instance where
there were several people.
That have their civil rights
violated than each of those
individuals would be allowed to
cool collected up to the two
million dollars so Mister
speaker.
Police called to.
A party that was getting out of
hand to his head fifteen or
twenty people in attendance.
Would have the potential to be
fifteen to twenty clients if
that.
If that particular situation got
out I don't.
Mr speaker and gentleman if
every one of those potential
claimants had their civil rights
violated then yes.
Mr.
I can certainly understand why.
Communities across the state.
Have had so much concern about
this legislation because it
would is so one Mr.
With a large number of people
present.
The.
Ruinous.
To a small community.
The move on.
This is so the legislature is
still immune from this piece of
legislation is that accurate.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
was not addressed in any Senate
amendments.
One moment to.
I'm looking at the.
Members and context inspection
tune.
And I believe there you are
correct of course the house
floor amendment left a
legislative community.
As.
Full force and effect so
apologize for the question.
This.
It appears the Legislature KM.
All rights thank you Mr speaker
thank you John Blake.
Listening on were from San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield thank you Mr speaker I
yield to the gentleman from San
Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker generally I
just wanted to get some
clarification on one of the
questions that Representative
Nibert asked if I understood the
question correctly.
I think you propose a scenario
where if someone brings a claim
under this New Mexico Civil
Rights Act and also in the same
lawsuit.
Earnings a cause of action New
Mexico tort claims act Mr
speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo the member that line
of questioning.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes Mr
speaker gentle lady at how I
understood the responses that
the the plaintiff could bring
both of those causes of action
within a single lawsuit but they
were only entitled to recover
under one of those causes of
action is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
that is the doctor's doctrine of
selection of remedies.
Mr speaker gentle lady but that
Dr no selection remedies that's
not anywhere in this text of
this bill is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe in in the context that
to the gentleman from.
Lincoln.
brought it up was in regard to
an amendment where he was
thinking would be similar to the
context of that from the tort
claims act.
Mr speaker generally okay I I'm
sorry I thought you were
pointing him to section
thirteen.
Representative B. which is part
of the amendments that were
added on by the Senate I thought
that's where you have direction
to did I misunderstand that Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe so.
Thank you so I I guess I look at
the.
The New Mexico tort claims act
in New Mexico.
So Rights Act is two different.
there is a law.
but the other question while
we're on this section.
Thirteen a that I don't think
it's been raised is what the
Senate at it is new language
specific to.
law enforcement claims that now
the claim has to file what we
would normally call in notice of
tort claims with the local
government agency is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct and Mr speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo if if the
claimant fails to do that than
paragraph be socially says that
it's possible that claim could
be barred and less that
government a governmental entity
had actual notice of that claim
is that correct Mr speaker and
gentleman that's correct it
would be barred.
Okay thank you Mr speaker
originally from Bernalillo no
further questions.
Next generation Chavis.
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
please Mr speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from Chavis.
Mr speaker gentle lady my
question was just as by
Representative Eli under section
thirteen in the state said a
written notice stating the time
place and circumstances of the
loss of injure or injury and
that does have to do with our
certified law enforcement
officers and Mr speaker could
you be more specific on that is
it of specific to just the New
Mexico state police our service
department source city policemen
our village police.
Game and fish oil the game
wardens does include help me
figure out who will this is
going to affect Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and lady it would
affect every governmental law
enforcement agency Mr speaker of
my question was who are those
entities.
Mr speaker and gentle lady those
are some of the folks that you
provided as examples.
But it was not inclusive of
everyone.
Okay so Mister speaker gentle
lady do you have any idea who to
the rest of that but be up as I
was just on some of them out
there because I want to be I
want these people to know what
may happen.
Mr speaker and lady that would
be every city county and state
law enforcement agency.
Mr speaker would it be for these
entities that to hire out as
security personnel and that for.
More.
You're the around us let's say
our court houses and things like
that that aren't certain that
art shares Department person or
city.
Police officers Mr speaker lady
now it would not apply okay
Mister speaker Representative
Scott did ask a question you did
not answer can you tell me who
your expert witnesses.
Generally we the.
Is Dorsey is not extra with
issues member is making Dorsey's
member of the staff of the house
of representatives she's not
here's an expert witness.
Mr speaker and and and gentle
lady that she is Meghan Darcy
she's a staff with
the house of representatives
okay thank you very much Mr
speaker of.
I also notice that on page one
line seventeen that the Senate
Judiciary struck the word
mandating and inserted
permitting Mr speaker gentle
lady are you comfortable with
the language that they inserted
in that particular spot.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes.
And Mr speaker can you tell me I
I love the ritual bill said
mandating.
Mr speaker and lady that is just
the short title where we are
making the attorney's fees from
mandatory too permissive.
Okay Mr speaker also saw that
there was a a floor amendment
that was offered and it was
passed by the Senate and it's
talking about
not included in the state kia's
community did solar water
conservation district land
grammar said of.
Can you tell me why they decided
that that language
needed to be included in the.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
gas so that is just a technical
clarification it was first
amended and staff and that it
was amended again in how excuse
me Senate Judiciary and then it
was Sen.
Did again on the house floor
again to clarify which of those
entities would be included
there.
Okay so Mister speaker
I'm just looking through the
amendments that were put on and.
In the.
Senate judiciary and it seems
like they're pretty happy white
and my opinion I also notice
that section twelve of the
Senate amendments that were put
on and Senate judiciary
and.
This is now not retro active is
that correct Mr speaker and
gentle lady that's correct.
You Mr speaker.
Section see under the amendments
from the house of from the
Senate Judiciary Committee can
you come to give me a rundown of
what that's going to be about is
talking about to.
When a claim for which munity is
been waived at that the New
Mexico Civil Rights Act is one
for wrongful death conduct
review that with me so I can
better understand a please.
Mr speaker and ladies so I
believe you're referring to
section thirteen C. and again
that is similar notice that's
included and the tort claims act
but what it's doing here is it
is
providing clarification about
the notice of the one year and
six month time period.
And with that Mr speaker and
lady that someone has died.
Mr speaker go down Mr speaker
and gentle lady if you would go
down to the last.
Excuse me the last sentence of
section C. of the new material.
Explained that last sentence to
me please.
And it reads Mr speaker and
gentle lady but if the person
for who state that the claim is
made has presented notice that
would have been sufficient had
the person lived and action for
wrongful death may be brought
without any additional notice.
Mr speaker and ladies so in the
event of a wrongful death which
is the most most areas what this
portion that you just read
really refers to is of I think a
good example would be if if if
someone was injured and in the
hospital there are notice could
be provided at that time but
then if that person and after
being in the hospital passed
away then the the notice.
The the original notice for the
injury claim what work for that
wrongful death claims because
then the circumstance and
changed.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
thank you for that explanation I
know that we're both doing this
relating back and forth because
we can't see each other and I
Mike and I do recognize you know
that they mention your name I
just it's really hard for me to
recognize people through all
these fuzzy shields that were
stand between plus the mask on
and makes a little bit difficult
here Mr speaker gentle lady I
also noticed that there was some
other.
Amendments put on by this by
this a Judiciary Committee and
the it was the house Judiciary
Committee that put these on that
were already address how do the
Senate.
Amendments.
Correspond to or conflict with
the amendments that were put on
by the house Judiciary.
Mr speaker and ladies.
We don't we're not discussing
the house
floor or committee amendments is
just really the Senate committee
that were coming back for kind
of currents and at that point
they do not conflict and Mr
speaker gentle lady I know that
with this the house amendments
from Judiciary Committee we're
already put in place that I
didn't know if any of the new
material that has been added
that the house of by the Senate
Judiciary Committee or the
Senate floor amendments would be
contradictory to any of those
amendments that were put on
there but the house Judiciary
Committee.
Mr speaker and lady no.
Right Mr speaker gentle lady
thank you for your answers
Mexico generally for granted
augments here.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from all those counties
thank you Mr speaker and and
gentle lady with the at the
amendments on the Senate side
working any additional entities
or individuals exempted from
liability.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
don't believe so I think the
clarification was made again in
the technical language where the
state test and other
associations were intended to be
excluded and were uses similar
to other language within other
states statutes thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady so they
are exempted.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes
thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and and so this bill is
focused on the victims can you
tell me how the victims rights
what is the difference in a
civil rights violation.
By the entities included and
liable and the ones that have
now been exempted.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
that's not addressed in the
amendments.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so if the victim has a
civil rights violation by one of
those folks that have now been
excluded to the amendment what
what do they do for how where do
they go for recourse.
Mr speaker and gentle lady they
could file under the federal
Civil Rights Act or they could
go file an individual claim for
injunctive relief thank you Mr
speaker and thank you gentle
lady and and and I know it's not
addressed in the amendment but
is that the case for those that
are also included
of those that that those if
you'd experienced a civil rights
violation from a law enforcement
officer that is currently
covered as well is that where
the current recourse is.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes
thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady so I just it it
just strikes me that we are
excluding certain folks from
being liable for civil
violations while we continue to
place the target on our law
enforcement officers thank you
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Is there for the debate the
gentle lady is moved to the
house concur in the Senate
amendments to House Judiciary
Committee substitute.
House Bill for the general ideas
urged the body to vote yes we
have a roll call vote the vote
is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
The clerk to call the member
without a recorded vote
Representative Maestas.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of forty three in the
affirmative twenty six in the
negative the house has concurred
to the Senate amendments to
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill for as
amended.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
messages.
Your introduction is so ordered
Cllr to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
concurred in house amendments to
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill seventy one as amended
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief
clerk.
This.
This.
We go to the next order of
business announcements.
And miscellaneous business.
Mr speaker is now being eleven
fifty nine AM I move we adjourn
until twelve or one PM House
second order Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent that the rules
be suspended and John show all
those present in this morning
session are present in this
afternoon session no objections
order.
Mr speaker.
Do Raul be suspended and that
the record show that the judge
has been read and follow the
rules subject to revision and
approval of the rules and out of
the business committee your
injection disorders.
You were going to start with.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go
back to the next order of
business third reading of
legislation.
No objections ordered we're
gonna start with item number
nine.
Is that Gail Armstrong Debbie
Armstrong.
Neither.
Okay of the representative the
gentleman from.
Dona Ana grant and Sierra let
the record reflect all action
necessary for placing Senate
bill one ninety three as amended
on final passage has been taken
down to explain the bill thank
you Mr speaker.
Yes the one ninety three is a
bill creates one point position
for rural equity on but.
Of the purpose is to work with
rural and frontier communities
but give this person direct
access to the governor's office
legislature state agencies
counties municipalities federal
agencies and rural utilities
services nonprofits in rural
residents.
This is been a bipartisan bill
Sir Mister excuse me Mister
speaker and has passed
unanimously are not the movies
including the Senate.
By the way there's money in the
budget sorry Mr speaker.
I stand for questions.
Would you like to the gentle
giants introduce your pages.
I thank you Mr speaker all of
that would you like to introduce
your pages well one.
here you go Mister speaker I
have Senator.
Not I was I was talking about Mr
speaker this is a Senator
Diamond and senator Gramm feels
there co sponsors.
The gentleman that you're the
all of our first term members
are unfamiliar with our house
page program so I should values
that the need for that joke on a
not a firsttime member we do
have debate the gentle lady for
Santa Fe Representative Lujan in
senators welcome to the house.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Dona Ana of you.
I feel gentle lady thank you Mr
speaker stands there and full
support of this piece of
legislation we got to hear it
and committee and I just want to
say with all the discussion that
we have going on about our rural
opportunities rural initiatives
through legislation I think that
this is a just some a whole.
The wonderful place to start and
to provide you an ombudsman
position for the state and you
know we have other other
opportunities like recently I
guess now in a memorial H. H. R.
HM one thirty three that is very
complementary to this type of
legislation and just other
pieces to so I just wanted to
stand in full support of this
legislation thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen I yield back
the gentle lady this for the
debate the gentle lady from
Catherine Sikora and Lancia.
The fourth member of the green
caucus.
Representative Gail Armstrong
thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Dona Ana grants
and Sierra be able to I yield
generally to the I didn't feel
yield to the gentle lady from
catchments of coral Valencia
thank you Mr speaker thank you
kind gentleman I just want to
rise and support as a.
Person who represents rural and
frontier New Mexico hi
I understand the divide and
hopefully this will keep us from
having that divide and be able
to make sure that everyone
understands and sits down at the
table and discusses what happens
in rural and frontier New Mexico
compared to urban and I stand in
full support and thank you to
the senators for a free in this
legislation and I did sign on to
this legislation so anyway I can
help please let me know thank
you Mr speaker and gentleman.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Colfax mora Rio
Arriba and Sandoval
Representative Roger Montoya.
Mr speaker thank you will the
gentleman from Dona Ana grant
and Sierra counties please yield
I will yield to the gentleman.
Thank you Sir all right to stand
in complete solidarity for this
really strong piece of
legislation.
The bipartisan nature I commend
Senator Hemphill Senator Diamond
the originators of this could
work as stated earlier there are
many sort of distant cousins
pieces of legislation that we're
seeing that target.
Equities for the rural areas of
the state.
My question is centered around
the ombudsman as a single.
Higher U. E. if you will to
manage the complexity the
jurisdictions between tribal
every corner of the state I just
wonder if you can answer any
question about.
I see a challenge there.
Can you speak to the.
Thank you gentlemen yes Sir for
so there's a in the budget is
ninety I thought there's ninety
five thousand dollars obviously
for one person I agree with you
Sir but gentleman on we have
room to grow with this this Mr
speaker gentleman I'm hoping
that that that person that is
selected work with the costs and
other boards throughout the the
region of rural New Mexico and
hopefully this will go into a of
a bigger
A better a better a way of of us
supporting rural New Mexico with
more additional people.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you so much for that answer I
just want to closing in in re
iterating on absolute support
for the work.
In closing Representative
Castellano and I introduced
house bill sixteen which was
converted into House memorial
thirty three I believe that if
this is passed that interim
committee work could serve as an
incubator for not only this
ombudsman but also a series of
bills House Bill ten H. J. R.
nine and a whole myriad of
others I yield back my time and
thank you for the good work.
The gentleman's further debate
the gentleman from Chavis Lee
and Roosevelt Representative
Anderson.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman for
grant.
See I think grant yield.
Are you Sir gentleman thank
thank you gentlemen I just had a
couple of quick questions about
you were built
one is is really of the this
which is.
Could you give me a short answer
on what is and
but Smith.
Well I can.
Give you the actual definition I
know it's in here.
But it's basically a Mr speaker
gentleman basically up.
It's a liaison to that that
basically a a person that
bridges of two parties together
and and tries to resolve issues.
Thank you very much for that
answer
then my next question on this
individual this with latest on
responsibilities is up are there
any requirements educational
requirements the
Residency requirements what are
the requirements for someone to
be selected as a New Mexico but
Smith question.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that'll be defined by
the DFA what with the
requirements will be and then
we'll go from there thank you
for that then my final question
is does the New Mexico on budge
then have any authority does it
does he.
Does he have any authority in
his job question.
Thank you Mr speaker
Representative the official
ombudsman is is a lieutenant
governor so that he will this
ombudsman will not have any
capacity other than just
basically reporting and and
trying to bridge those gaps and
and we reported all the agencies
that I listed earlier.
Thank you chairman of I to come
from the rural district here in
New Mexico and I have great hope
for the success of this new of
position of but sadly I also
have some doubts whether or not
of lacking authority
and no qualifications of.
whether or not of this will be
something will be bragging about
in a few more years gentleman I
appreciate your answers Mr
speaker that that concludes my
remarks thank you.
Next there's further debate the
gentleman from Coface curry
Harding we reserve San Miguel
and you.
Thank you Mr speaker does
gentleman from Daniela Grant in
Sierra County yield yes Sir I
yield to the gentleman from the
where the one chose counties.
All those calories.
Mr speaker.
I live in one of the most rural
areas of the state and as I have
brought to the attention many
times what we don't have the
various offices of the various
agencies left in our rural areas
I see this ombudsman this
somebody that you could turn to
they might not know the answer
but they would have access to
the governor and be able to
bring the answer they would be
able to turn to the people that
could solve your problem for you
and I think it's greatly needed
and I urge the body to vote in
favor of this bill.
This is really the gentle lady
from Chavis.
Mr speaker will the gentleman
from Dona Ana requests here
yield place I yield to the
gentle lady from Travis.
Mr speaker I act I come from a
rural area has born and raised
in a rural area southern Chavis
candied the.
Very.
Exact on where I was raised a
half mile from the city county
lines Mr speaker.
More often than not our rural
areas are completely left out of
the picture whatever comes to
any sort of.
Statutes that we are trying to
put in place.
Because we are so diversified
and so for part and.
The we're.
I mean but the village of lake
Arthur for.
Representative Rubio was raised
at the population there is just.
Very very low.
But you know what we're all
strong at the rural areas of our
straight State you Mr speaker
gentleman and ladies we do need
representation whatever comes to
anything that happens up here
because more often than not our
voices are heard because those
people that are running far
higher office know that the Rio
Grande corridor is worth the
funds come from and some more
projects are going to get done
it down straight there Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker.
This past year has been quite an
experience for anybody that was
in business up in our rural
areas.
And we have seen many businesses
that are going to be able to
spot what happened to this and
twenty twenty with those
emergency orders that will put
in place.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman I mentioned this the
other day.
We were really.
Kind of a he needs to dot dot
down.
You need to sit down Sir.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman as I was saying go.
We were worried about our fiscal
impact that we were going to
have to be dealing with that we
thought was going to be a
shortfall.
But thank goodness our rural
communities are rural areas of
the state.
This out of the hole.
It is due to the oil and gas
production into the
agricultural community.
That we had all this money that
we were able to spend on our
capital outlay projects.
Funding all these other projects
that have come through we
part of all of House
Appropriations and Senate
finance.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman's.
Is rural communities of our
state do lose their voice.
I think it's time that
everybody's takes a hard look at
what redistricting is going to
do.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
All rural communities for these
mom and pop's mom and pop shop
that's our state.
Mom and pop shops are located.
Are the backbone of those
communities.
It's not the big box stores it's
the mom and pops that are always
giving to the little league
teams are to the four H. clubs
are helping them out by.
Any means that they can that
somebody in those communities do
have the.
Have an illness where they're
put in the hospital there was
there to bring food or to help
plow the field that that happens
to be that farmer whether it's a
farm her or farm ham.
Help rural or accountable either
one.
That Mr speaker that's what
gives us our backbones in our
rural communities Mr speaker
gentleman I see that this had an
appropriation on can you tell me
what that appropriation amount
was ninety five thousand dollars
Mr speaker excuse me gentle lady
I five thousand recurring.
You Mr speaker.
This person whoever it may be.
Has got to be first in
everything that is listed on
here that person is going to be
this is heck Mr speaker
gentleman and ladies can you
tell me help that one.
Rural equity but will be
selected.
Mr speaker gentle lady I believe
well they're going to go to DFA
so DFA is going to set up that
and I'm sure that they'll
interview a person that will
have the skills necessary to
work with the cards and all all
the other
agencies that I made earlier so
that they can bridge information
I think this is a see that's
being planted and I believe that
it will further grow in the
agency will roll on but it's
been we'll go uncle.
Mr speaker gentleman.
How can we.
Make for certain that this
person does come from a rural
area because to be that's very
very important I it I know
there's good people located
throughout the whole state I'd I
do get that that are for.
Probably more than qualified to
take care of this but it's very
important to me that we do get
somebody that does.
Has grown up in and still
resides in one of the rural
areas of our state and to me
that's very important because.
Certain bill I've been getting
so many emails about.
And it has to do with the impact
that will that this bill will
have on the rural communities
and I went back and did some
checking on who all these.
Emails from from.
That wanted a certain bill
passed.
And they were all from Santa Fe
Albuquerque and I'm more
metropolitan areas but the
negative impact it was going to
have on our rural areas would be
devastating.
So I want to make sure no three
D. understand they're looking at
me like.
But you know what.
If we lose our for rural voice.
We have lost New Mexico.
There's common sense from those
folks that are raised out in the
country.
And we have people that do want
to see that our state does
become successful.
We're tired of our state be in
at the bottom of every ad list
that there is.
And this is one way to get us
started so Mister speaker
gentleman and gentle lady's
thank you all for presenting
this bill and I look forward to
help in anyway I can thank you
very much.
We can only.
No there's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from done the anagram
and so your yield.
I yield to the gentleman I'm
sorry I can't read the counties.
Chavis and Lincoln.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I just couple
questions you mentioned that
because a minute ago and and I
want to tell you that.
I'd come from a fairly rural
district myself and the Council
governments doesn't.
Good job representing the are
counties in the incorporated
areas but sometimes some of the
small communities are
incorporated they kind of fall
between the cracks and so with
this position assessed those
communities that really don't
have a seat at the table at the
costs.
Mr speaker and gentleman of look
I I have an experience that to
read because our my because
Priscilla you Senator has been
wonderful and she advocates for
all of our our county and and
her whole district so you know I
have an experience that I'm sure
that those happen though Mr
speaker gentleman again to what
all of you guys are saying that
it's it's very important for us
to to make sure that this is a
this is first of all this is a
step in the right direction
we're trying to create
a voice for all rural New Mexico
it is going to be a big
undertaking for one person but
hopefully we find the DFA will
full of find the right person
that that will make a difference
and and with that we hope that
we can grow this into more maybe
in quadrants or you know four
five so that we can have have
more representation there but
the idea is absolutely to have
more representation for sure for
the rural communities.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
you touch upon an important
point for us and that is you
know probably ninety five plus
percent of this chair of the
state is rural.
And we have vast areas that are.
Many many many miles before the
next incorporated municipality
and so we have a lot of land and
very few inhabitants of the lots
lots of parts of the state and I
have a very
unusual needs.
A water pump going down and and
Honda for instance staff
It's very difficult to find the.
Scrape up the thousands of
dollars to replace a pop it's
difficult to.
Get a million dollars to replace
a tank.
And yet that's exactly what's
going on in Honda New Mexico
right now and and of course the
capital outlay that that's
available to the legislature's
enough to to put that much money
toward are those types of
projects and so I'm hopeful that
this ombudsmen can show the
critical needs of some of these
really small unincorporated
areas of the state to the
governor's office and to assist
in getting some of the very are
critical needs of those
communities Matt because.
Notwithstanding the efforts of
that are and senator Burke but
toward the effort
notwithstanding the effort the
council of governments approach
toward the effort there are
still things that that those
smaller
unincorporated.
Areas need that that really
don't get the easily fulfilled
and I'm hoping that this person
can't improve fellows but I
think we're asking an impossible
task of this one person you just
pointed out maybe quadrants and
and I think the our our think
that's going in the right
direction because of.
None of us have had to have a
cover of the whole state.
And yet for me to drive just the
my district it takes all day.
It's two hundred fifty miles
round trip are you and I never
leave my district and and so.
Many of us have Dicks districts
like that and and yet we're
gonna **** one person to cover
the whole state that's going to
be of a pretty tall order of I
do want to ask you a couple
questions about the language in
your bill on page three of.
Winds twenty through twenty
three it talks about this
person's going to taken receive
complaints
from those areas about laws and
rules and I assume that you
mean.
The laws that we pass and the
regulations that maybe you state
agencies impose on those areas
and and on the activities that
are conducted in those areas
with that be your understanding
of Mr speaker and gentleman Mr
speaker Mr speaker and gentleman
yes that this.
And I believe the language says
that they're going to then the.
Try to resolve some of those
complaints which means I yes
coming to this body and changing
those laws are made adversely
affect those areas Mr speaker
and gentleman without the actor.
Let's try Mr speaker John.
And then of a further up and
further duty of this person
would be taped to come up to
this legislative body and to
look at legislation as it makes
its way through these bodies and
I guess weigh in on during the
committee process is is that
your understanding most Mr
speaker and gentleman that is
true Mr speaker John.
Well again I don't know how we
get one person to do all these
things and and I think of the
words that you spoke a minute
ago maybe needing quadrants I'm
not sure watering Sir it is is
going to
Even address all the all the
needs but certainly I'm glad
you're looking at maybe bringing
some more people on board
because I think it's going to
take us several people
particularly if you're adding
provided or.
Call it lobbying for lack of a
better word duties as well
because there's enough need to
keep our our people by to
counties and move the adjacent
counties busy probably all year
long without having to come in
Santa Fe and without going to
the southwest or the northwest
with the north please so thank
you for bringing this
legislation all supported
depreciated thank you thank you
Mr speaker.
Through the debate the gentleman
from Cibola and to the
committee.
Thank you Mr speaker okay from
done now I'm not.
The yield.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
mat the gentleman from Cibola.
Thank you.
Speaker you know I'm gonna drop
us a lot of New Mexico.
And you know in.
Mainly because of this pandemic
that we we had.
And we've had a lot of
suffering.
And a lot of people have not
been able to make any money that
would be the one to one.
Going to work.
But.
Thank you.
Speaker.
Is that a lot of these people
that have not been able to work
are still alive.
To me is more important than any
dollar hit in the world because
if you get into one of those
holds one of those areas I don't
care how much money you.
You can buy your way out of that
hole.
So you're better off a little
bit broke and.
But we'll Mr speaker.
To get my soap box here for a
minute I'm sorry I had to do
that.
In your introduction.
Mr speaker and gentleman from a
one hundred.
Is this but would have access to
the governor and the
legislature.
There are a entities and I'm
looking for the middle and I
don't find that can you show me
where it says that there is even
any accessibility General any of
these
By the government.
Mr speaker gentleman they can
report to the D. F. eight
secretary and so that's going to
be the route that they'll have
or the Avenue to the government.
They do not have full access.
Sir is there going to have.
I don't know that they're gonna
have the general us using Mr
speaker gentleman I don't think
you're gonna have the governor's
cellphone but I think they'll
have access directly to up Alcee
indirectly.
To her office through the
secretary of the DFA.
Thank you Mr speaker that's what
I was looking at because we are
in the same resentful axes and
I'm going through here wondering
how I can do that.
Full access to all the
legislators and full access to
the governor
we're we're.
So Mister speaker I'd like your
legislation I don't see one
person is going to be able to
do.
What you're asking that one
person can do and so it's a lot
a lot I mean you an individual
problems along that I come from
I mean we have hundreds and
hundreds of problems and I can't
imagine what would happen in the
this is like Albuquerque and
Santa Fe and maybe Roswell which
is really a.
The lan but it's not a
metropolis like Milan so anyway
Mr speaker thank you thank you
Dylan.
One hundred that thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you gentlemen this further
debate the gentleman from
Bernalillo Cibola McKinley
Senator San Juan and Valencia.
Thank you Mr speaker all with
the gentleman from done on now
red is you ever gonna do you'll.
Yes Sir Mr speaker I yield to
the gentleman.
Mr speaker the gentleman with
this person that you have in
mind would you be acting would
be a for a sub indices like a
mediator.
Mr speaker John that's a good
that's a good description.
Okay Mr speaker and gentleman.
The people that are having
problems dollar usable community
in my district Water New Mexico
they're having problems on their
water well system they were not
in compliance with the state
basically kind of Southern Dalem
and penalize them for not being
in compliance for some reason
another could this mediator
general manager of a problem Mr
speaker good he mediate between
legislative to do in the state
that the.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe that the gentle the the
person of this capacity is
serving as on bugs then would be
the person that will communicate
all all the parties and try to
bridge some of the problems if
if he or she is not able to find
a way to alleviate that issue I
would imagine that that person
would have
report to the proper
agencies to try to find it
issues resolved if not that is
something important to report to
the governor's office and the
legislature so that we can
address it.
Thank you Mr speaker finally
gentleman that's good to hear
because of the these people out
there in my community and I'm
just usual one of them because
there's quite a few problems up
to Mr speaker
and these people need help on
what you're doing here is right
now Mr speaker and gentleman
were are building a brand new
elementary school and we have
different water problems out
there and this is going to come
up racial and it's gonna be a
big issue in the community so I
ever I respect that a group of
you know you're trying to do is
go to
one more thing Mr speaker and
you gentleman what the
representatives and all senators
here and requirement the person
that you big really needs to
come from all rural New Mexico
they can understand the problems
of New Mexico is facing Mr
speaker volume gentleman if you
have somebody like result of
upgrade did not.
Yes it is not a great give away
but they don't have an idea how
we miss Lee works enough
Representative of Goldman made a
good point also in all of our
metropolis of we both represent
the same little city mental
abilities well she people she
metropolis.
And you know well we have all
kinds of problems and I did for
to the station and thank you
said Mr speaker and gentleman
of.
Really keep in mind of where
these people come from I don't
think you're gonna have an of
one person but whatever they do
will go from Mr speaker and
gentleman is that really needs
to come out to rural New Mexico.
What is that's close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative.
Representative Nibert.
Representative Nibert is yes.
Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio is yes
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Stapleton is yes.
Close by a vote of sixty nine in
the affirmative zero in the
negative.
Senate bill one ninety three as
amended has passed the house.
Next that item twenty two.
Gently from Bernalillo
Representative Roybal Caballero
are you ready on item twenty
two.
Yes Mr speaker I am will you
give me to that point the record
reflect election necessary for
placing Senate.
Taxation business and
transportation committee
substitute percent of bill
eighty four as amended on final
passage has been taken the
gentle lady to explain the.
Thank you Mr speaker and before
I begin I will tell you that
I've been having some issues on
the internet broadband I mean
the band with in an alkaline may
have to reduce my video but I'll
do my best and maintaining
decorum thank you Mr speaker and
my colleagues in the house today
I and of the cosponsored
Representative Andrea Romero
come before the body to
introduce Senate bill eighty
four which enacts the community
solar out.
And the community solar SB
eighty four on how senator
Sanchez our list the panics and
senator Linda Lopez and I'd like
to give a brief background on
how we arrived at this
Senate bill eighty four as
amended and
Any of my house colleagues may
recall we've been bringing.
Community solar forward over the
past few years and every year we
have been improving the
processes and arrived at the
best improve process with
senator memorial sixty three
which was passed last year which
are brought together a working
group process that included
over ninety stakeholders income
being between July and November
of last year composed of
utilities state agencies local
governments nonprofits tribal
representatives solar developers
and many New Mexican citizens.
And the process was wonderful it
was engaging and it involved
very deep thought and it
resulted in a survey in which
the stakeholders arrived at what
we are all proud to announce a
contest it consensus based
legislation which is before this
body and what I'll do is briefly
explained a few points on that
highlight what on the Senate
bill eighty four does first of
all it creates an initial
statewide program cap of two
hundred megawatts over the first
three years of the program Mr
speaker and after twenty twenty
four an annual cap will be set
by the public Regulatory
Commission as part of the
programmatic review their
programmatic review and
recommendations.
Thank you Mr speaker provides
that each community solar must
have at least ten subscribers
and to single subscriber cannot
own more than forty percent of
the facility's capacity.
Third Mr speaker it also ensures
that low income.
Excuse me participants
participate and then have access
and affordability as it offers
savings for these participants
and all participants from the
beginning so there be no upfront
costs and no penalties to cancel
the subscription and at least
thirty percent of each project
capacity will be reserved for
lowincome participation.
Mr speaker.
The bill provides that there be
a comprehensive evaluation of
the program conducted by
November first of twenty twenty
four by the public Regulatory
Commission it also states that
rural electric distribution
coops are exempt from
participation in the program and
are afforded an opt in or on a
power project or service
territory wide basis
He to do so.
And most importantly it insurers
tribes and pueblos have
sovereign jurisdiction over
their lands including the use of
their lands for energy projects
and infrastructure tribal tribal
nations stand to benefit from
community solar legislation
through the vast opportunities
of economic development by
lowering the disproportionate
energy costs the tribal
communities have experienced in
the past and with this Mr
speaker I will yield to the co
sponsor Representative Andrea
Romero for her opening.
Thank you is really from Santa
Fe.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady
I I'm guessing you yet yielded
just giving me the floor thank
you I just want to add I was
part of this interim process
attending many many meetings
that were open to the public all
involved in the process which
got is here today in which this
is absolutely a compromise among
the different parties Senate
Senator Stefanics herself who
represents this bill even just
this past weekend but with all
of the investor owned utilities
at their request and ask for
some small amendments to this
bill which we agreed to and no
longer oppose this bill so it's
in a different form than we had
it last year with all of the
parties meeting together I'm in
enjoying this consensus where we
are today we look forward of
course to the debate and and
ensuring that everyone in this
body understands the process as
to how we got here today why am
so encouraged and excited about
this bill is the opportunity for
lowincome participation from
folks in our community who have
not been able to access the the
solar energy because of the up
front costs that accessing solar
requires and so this allows that
thirty percent of each of the
product project capacity will be
reserved for those low income
customers and low income service
organizations and of course the
PRC will issue all the
guidelines to do that this is
really important to those who
seek to have clean energy the
access and be part of the change
we wish to see here in our state
utilizing one of our greatest
resources Garcia a symbol our
solar energy also with that
madams Mr speaker members of the
body look forward to a
discussion and I'm here to
answer any questions as well
thank you Mr.
Mr speaker in closing and before
we will you'll to questions I
just want to say that as a
strong proponent of community
involvement as a community
organizer myself I am extremely
proud of bringing forward this
bill because it exemplifies what
a multitude of stakeholders in.
Participants from across the
board including our
Many communities of residents
throughout the state can do when
we come together and advocate
for what we believe is the
strongest a representation of
what our needs and our wants are
for the state of New Mexico as
far as moving renewable energy
Ford and Mr speaker and members
of the house Mr speaker we stand
now for questions.
There is debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Strickler.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady with with gentle
lady from Bernalillo police
shield.
Speaker I yield to the gentleman
thank you gentlelady generally
we've we've we've heard the
This type of bill Senator you
know for several years now
was it for five years that you
were pushing this of this idea
gentlelady.
This account that I think it's
been at least five years.
I thank you gentle lady and and
since then pelos changed
Mr speaker gentle lady and the
big game changer was in twenty
nineteen when the energy
transition act which was passed
by the legislature
that put forward very aggressive
renewable portfolio program is
that why gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct.
Because of that the utilities
are are working diligently to
add one and solar to their posts
their portfolio and it's a
pretty aggressive timeline I
believe it's fifty percent of
renewables by twenty thirty it
is is that ride gentlelady.
Sorry I couldn't find.
Mr speaker and
gentleman I believe you're
correct.
And what that what the
utilities.
Are doing now from my
understanding of course are all
regulated by FERC and and
they're trying to and wind solar
is quickly as possible it is my
understanding that the rural
electric coop for example on the
way ahead of schedule is is that
what you is that your
understanding gentlelady from
Bernalillo.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe that I'm not quite sure
I can say there had a schedule I
know that they are
everyone is taking on the
opportunity
to create as many opportunities
as possible as it relates to
renewable energies.
Thank you gentle lady and I
think the the there the
challenge or the
the effort by and by our
regulated utilities they're
they're regulated by the PRC is
to implement large scale
renewable projects in those
should be when of course in the
northeast part of the state and
solar we've we've in many parts
of the state solvers give me a
being kicked off and and I know
in San Juan County gentle lady
we've got to solar projects on
the drawing board that we help
get gets implemented of each of
our hundred hundred thousand
hundred megawatts per per
project with the room to expand
I believe the two hundred
megawatt so that's a real real
important to the economic
development
Project in in San Juan County
and so what what the utilities
are trying to do is to these
large scale projects
hundred megawatts or more in the
reason for that gentle lady and
Mr speaker is it is because it's
a lot more cost effective is is
that your understanding gentle
lady.
Mr speaker and
Gentleman will you repeat your
question the megawatt facility
is a lot cheaper to put in place
then a a small wonder if I make
a lot of solar system so a lot
more efficient a lot more cost
effective
is is that your understanding
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and and
And gentlemen
no actually
what we have found Mr speaker
and gentleman is that
And I believe we discuss this
and in committee as well
Excuse me we found that
Five megawatts for example is
the cap for the largest
community solar facility allowed
under the committee so act and
so consequently the there's
there's just a very marginal
price difference which is around
ten percent and so now I make a
what for example is are ranging
probably
one.
Two one and I'm you may not be
able to
make co sponsor real quick for
the exact amount but it is by
far a much a far less than what
we had begun with when we began
introducing this bill has been
reduced to about a dollar thirty
six per cap make a what and I
can make a one is about a dollar
twenty five per megawatt project
and this was as far as the
latest data in twenty eighteen
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady will let me let me sharpen
the pencil that my my
information indicates that these
smaller scale projects are to
three times more expensive than
the large scale projects in in
the I think a big reason for
that gentle lady is the land
costs the land costs in these
rural areas or or pretty low and
when you need
you know thirty to thirty to
fifty acres in a metro area that
really hurts your your economics
so you know it but out in the
country and San Juan county
where we have a lot of federal
lands and Indian lands we have a
lot of options there and we
could put together a thousand
acres of two thousand acres
fairly cheaply and I think the
reason why the smaller projects
cost so much or land costs can
you can you add your thoughts on
that gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
gonna be able to the co sponsor.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman for the question sorry
I have confused as to whether or
not a task to yield percent
sales your mail to you thank you
thank you madam speaker I yield
to.
Thank you the vote of yes so
essentially what we're looking
at with the cost that you're
recommending from our analysis
there are are and this is
absolutely lucrative for
investors looking at the
community solar option so when
you talk about the benefits both
to the utilities and the rate
payers from this lower crock pot
cost grid system that helps
basically benefit the overall
system not only do they get to
keep the racks due to the
amendments that we agreed upon
in this bill which help them
meet that their ETA standard
they actually will allow
projects in rural areas to have
access to the same land to be
able to find that that access
again the utilities do not pay
for the community solar so that
was the some of your worry about
the added cost that's not part
of this bill but again with fees
for of the overall economic play
that we're looking at as far as
the benefit not only is there
increased electric system
reliability there's a reduction
in peak power requirements so
that reduces cost improvements
in power quality that obviously
helps everyone across the board
but there's reduction costs
assigned to subscribers customer
losses a reduction in land use
effects and right of way
acquisition costs and a
reduction in the ability to
cybersecurity for terrorism and
improvements in infrastructure
resilience Mr speaker and
gentleman so again when we look
at the the total economic
package there's a lot of
benefits here and land certainly
is somewhat part of the
calculation but in every
analysis that we've seen there's
no challenge to add to making
this economically beneficial to
both investors and across the
board for folks who would be
able to access this power.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady with those numbers
look positive I I know in San
Juan County we have a pretty
good example of a small scale
solar array San Juan regional
cut set sail on regional
hospital put in a at a one
megawatt facility they had ten
acres of land back in yeah this
is down four years ago I think
maybe completed three years ago
Maybe off a little bit but if
they they put in a ten acre
solar farm a one megawatt now I
understand from what you're
experts that there Spence more
efficiency so that one megawatt
system that was put in three
four years ago you could put it
on six acres so that I mean just
goodies trying to land usage and
so that's a positive and the
cost of that particular project
Mr speaker gentle lady was six
million dollars and which was
quite high and I also understand
from
either you are a representative
of from Bernalillo that the cost
of come down on a one megawatt
system two to three million
dollars is is that is it.
Is that right gentle lady
Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr great gentleman so
sorry is if I may
Mr speaker gentlemen the
community solar as you as you
understand cost less than
utility generation that's
currently delivered to customers
so not only does it provide its
energy directly to the customers
on the distribution system it
seems that where you are
discussing that additional cost
is not in our analyses we're
from all of our experts and I'm
happy to discuss them with you
they're at that's a really
expensive system and we're not
really sure why that would be in
your local area because of you
know the analyses that we see
are don't hit don't show that
same amount for the size of the
project that you're describing
Mr speaker John thank you Mr
speaker I could gentlelady from
Santa Fe I wish for use here
your folks three four years ago
were saves a ton of money and it
would of you know if you would
have improved our pay out that
that project is is very
expensive is going to call is
going to be a twenty years to
pay out your your project would
would costs may be one third and
it would pay out in you know in
seven years which makes it more
affordable what would further
hurt that that project is
the the hospital in this case
lost their there
a commercial discount rate
because.
The the sewer system operated
efficiently for thirty percent
of time and so you need you know
twenty four seven power so the
they had the city had to adjust
to you the range
to to make up that seventies
seventy percent differential
obviously had you have to have
sustainable power in so maybe
that project question would have
been better served in a
community solar environment so
you didn't have to have of those
those emergency nature not
emerging H. you just have to
have twenty four seven power run
hospital two hundred bed
hospital I mean obviously that's
critical so that helps a little
bit.
The the
in addition the PRC's gonna
govern this so they're gonna
Nation mixture
of help they need and that a
communist in a of a regulatory
attorney I believe that's going
to be added cost to the PRC is
that in is is that this is going
to be funded.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe or
if you Mr speaker a gentleman so
as far as the cost that we've
looked at Mr speaker gentlemen
the PRC basically provides a
mandatory comprehensive
evaluation of the program after
three years but as far as the
support that is required of that
and any fiscal impact that we
had seen originally in the bill
Mr speaker and gentleman at this
point has been resolved as far
as what I understand about this
and I all yields to fill in any
additional costs that I'm I
missed with with our with my co
sponsor.
Mr speaker will the gentleman
yield.
Yes I yield again for the second
time I think this is I think
what what it becomes part of the
entire public Regulatory
Commission
oversight and it's part of it
will become part of of the tasks
as they unfold and be part of
their budgetary process
because the evaluation and it'll
take three years we've provided
for three years for that to
occur so what we understand is
that all of these have been
provisions that have been
recognized and acknowledged and
will be rolled into on whatever
their their regular budgetary
all requests are and
and and what how their budgets
incorporate all of these I don't
see them I don't think with that
we were told at any particular
time Mr speaker and gentleman
that there would be additional
over burdensome costs involved.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady from Bernalillo
You you can't outlined the bill
that for example
you have to have you can go up
to five megawatts
you need a least ten subscribers
and and no one a subscriber can
no more than forty percent and
you're gonna need anchor anchor
subscriber don't you don't you
think so you're gonna need of of
a big client to make the same
facial.
Gentle lady
From Bernalillo.
Mr speaker and gentleman
that's a great question because
in this case an anchor client
in the community solar act can
actually be on it doesn't have
to be a huge large utility it
can be any of the groups that we
identified on nonprofit
organizations churches schools
on the local governments on
entities and
others tribal tribal entities of
courses they collaborate it it
could take that anchor client
can actually be anyone in and it
doesn't necessarily have to be
so the.
The key factor is what you just
mentioned Mr speaker and
gentleman and that is that we
did outlined that it would take
at least that there would be at
least ten
subscribers first solar facility
and that's really the key Mr
speaker and gentleman thank you.
Thank you thank you the gentle
lady thank you Mr speaker so let
let's say we have a a project
it's on the drawing board and
you've got a large retails store
you know could be a Walmart or
target or
of somebody that nature and they
wanted they want to take
advantage of this community
solar so they could be your
anchor
you know and and and be forty
percent subscriber and then the
rest of the the customers would
would be in the neighborhood I
mean is is is are you trying to
to help a geographic area I
mean.
As far as a new development I
mean I'm just trying to figure
out how this would work
you know from scratch.
Mr speaker and gentleman are you
asking that is a question them
it's a question is is that an
example in in it I mean I know
you've done a lot of studying a
lot of research I mean what is
your typical one to five
megawatt community service
community solar project it makes
economic sense to I know
Colorado does this to to certain
degree they don't have the ETA
like we did but
do you have an example of of a
of a Max five megawatt system
and and how you envision this
thing working of the same number
and the Bernalillo area
Albuquerque area.
Mr speaker and gentleman I guess
we can start from the premise of
the community solar facility
having at least tens of
subscribers and.
The facility would be within the
same utility service territory.
then you mentioned that
Forty percent of the generating
capacity of each community solar
facility would be then reserve
for subscription sized two
twenty five kilowatts or less
which make sure that access to
the on that there's access to
both the residents and to the
business owners in the in this
in this our facility area and
then forty percent of the
generating capacity would be
capped for use by any single
subscribers so we have a local
government and nonprofit as I
mentioned the schools churches
housing authorities any others
to Priscilla taking a community
solar development and that
that's kind of how it unfolds so
in this case a large
community solar
a large commercial
entities such as the one you
described Mr speaker and
gentleman generally would be
excluded from this scenario as
we mentioned again in in
committee you brought up a
really good question and then
and and again now but that is
basically how
How it would kind of unfold in
that particular scenario I don't
know if
my co sponsor would like to add
to that or we'll just proceed.
We'll proceed Mr speaker thank
you gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
thank you gentle lady.
well I'm just trying to figure
out how hello you got a five
thirty acres which is good
because this is you know usually
it's fifty acres thirty acres to
put in a five megawatt system.
And do you have is are there is
project on the drawing board
that
you can give us an example where
this would work.
From Bernalillo Mr speaker and
gentleman on the oil to the co
sponsor to describe
I think a favorite project your
commute it gentlelady.
Thank you thank you gently thank
you.
Mr speaker gentlemen so the five
megawatts is the maximum of
course so it doesn't have to be
that size so when we look at the
economics of the possibility
again when we think about the
anchor tenant that you described
would be capped at forty percent
it only requires ten subscribers
so again we're trying to create
the maximum sort of opportunity
for folks to opt into that and
of course just be able to
understand the process and know
that there's a long term
interest with that that's why
that incur tenant ability gives
us that
understanding that whatever
sizing is appropriate for that
area that the economics work the
subscriber positioning works and
so anyone can potentially take
over so as long as you have to
meet those just general
requirements again the five
megawatts is the maximum the
sizing will basically adjusts to
the economics of that area
knowing that they do need that
subscriber of positioning prior
to putting at.
Your I thank you muted.
Mr Lee the lady
it appears as if you're muted
and gentleman
and and also just continue I
think that we're all having or
some of us are having internet
it concerns today so we also
needed it wanted to mention
sheep ship
Representative Romero the gentle
lady did indicate that the five
megawatt is actually the cat and
then again I want to bring you
back to the fact that the PRC
has to establish all of the
rules we're providing the
framework for what we believe
needs to be our within within
the law on the statute and the
PRC will expand or make a lot of
determinations as it relates to
this bill thank you Mr speaker
and gentleman thank you thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Explain to the body have the
other rate payers are gonna be
affected let's say you put in a
small one megawatt community
solar system and you tied in to
you know PNM that serves
Albuquerque how the other rate
payers going to be protected
from this you know additional
cost to it are you stand alone a
so this you know this this
Polish community solar project
was a one megawatt small you
know six acres who's gonna pay
for that yet yeah this madam
hello ladies put how the the
those to the subscribers going
to pay for it of the gonna pay
for a hundred percent or they
have to pay little surcharge to
pay for the infrastructure that
in operation cost can you can
you kind of get into that aspect
of this gentlelady from
Bernalillo.
Mr speaker and gentleman I yield
to the cosponsored.
Thank you Mr speaker gentlelady
gentleman so essentially when we
look again going back to the
economics of of how this works
and ensuring that it bears
fairness throughout the process
we have been very very very well
clear about ensuring that if we
don't at additional cost to rate
payers it as the system
basically place through so if
you look at the community solar
subscribers they receive a fair
credit on their electricity bill
and that credit is equivalent to
the utilities generation and
transmission costs which are
significantly reduced thanks to
the community solar being
generated so the actual value of
this credit is set by the PRC
and evaluated after three years
to ensure that all subscribers
utilities and non participating
ratepayers are benefiting from
that system so when we talk
about how the externalities play
out because of this lower cost
energy's resource essentially we
look at the evaluative aspects
of that data to ensure that
there's no one basically paying
anymore because this system I'm
has been put in place in fact we
we would it also is assumed and
understand that those investing
in those being part of this is
because of the low over right of
that energy subscription and so
additionally and most of the
community solar facilities are
fully subscribed any
unsubscribed energy is only sold
to the utility at the avoided
cost as a last resort so in the
in the sense that one of these
systems it may go belly up as
you describe you know right now
when we look at the cost of
putting up a system of the
system you described you know is
is sort of in a what we would
consider like a foreclosure
situation if it was you know too
too expensive to continue to pay
for on balance that last resort
they were describing about that
unsubscribe Energy if something
did happen and of course you
know that we.
It costs would basically be that
last resort in in resolving the
issue Mr speaker a gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally from Santa Fe so going
back to your experts testimony
and and I believe the Energy
hearing
he estimated this gentleman from
from Colorado and and has good
experience with the community
solar and he estimated that a
one megawatt system using six
acres of land costs around two
point three million dollars and
and so we you have the
subscribers are going to have to
pay for that over time and what
is you know how long is it going
to pay out I mean my my utility
bill is is my of my light bill
is about two hundred dollars a
month on average you know that
that counts the you know the
winner and and highly education
in the summer you know running
air conditioning one not so
that's a lot of it's gonna take
a lot of the customers to pay
that out.
And all that Representative
years got go over the numbers
I'm not just good just at the
numbers as he is but you can I
get working you can understand
what I'm I'm trying to get at
that that's still an expensive
project for a small group of
customers.
Mr speaker.
I'm just going to put.
Mr speaker and gentleman if you
recall he also mentioned that on
the average project lifetime is
spending over
Twenty five years so that the
Serbs and the subscriber is not
really required just signed up
for the long term and that that
was a key factor in and in our
discussion as well as the fact
that also described the beauty
and community solar is that a
subscriber can actually
transfer of their subscription
it it's kind of the the way I
described it early on and it's
like having a subscription to
anything else you can take it
with you wherever you go as long
as you have your within a
jurisdiction of community solar
facility and utility
jurisdiction and then it can be
transferred so the burden does
not it is in it and if you are
subscribing thanks for there's a
lifetime in the subscription so
and I think I I think that also
the expert Mr speaker and
gentleman
mentioned and we have spoken
about several times now is that
we have twenty states and the
district of Columbia that have
actually
Been already in the in in the
Canadian solar development arena
and
they've they've actually not
experienced what you here
worried about Mr speaker and
gentleman in Colorado for for
example right now I believe the
expert mentioned that there were
ninety nine percent there was a
ninety nine percent for
subscription right and not only
that but they had a waiting list
yes as more access Mr speaker
and gentleman is created it
creates more affordability the
the the the value of whoever
whoever you defer to is the
numbers Representative he can
explain it best but its the
economy of scale the the
capitalist way the more there
are the cheaper it is it's and
it just
it's proven it's proving itself
Mr speaker and gentleman as more
and more states
are are
Racing community solar thank you
Mr speaker and thank you John
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlelady from Bernalillo and
in Santa Fe and I think the
difference between New Mexico
and those twenty other states is
if I don't have the energy
transition act which is very
bold and ambitious our renewable
portfolio program I've studied
Colorado and their their
portfolio standard is is you
know just less than ours and so
we were more aggressive than
anybody in our neighborhood
nineteen start which you know we
could be the New World of time
will tell if these projects will
be economical so
and I understand what you're
saying you know it's good that
those are other examples may I
have your full subscription and
I and I the gentle lady if you
were going up your **** about
service area a lot of people
moving in and out
what happens to that subscriber
does it just does it have to be
assigned to the new all our our
are discussed back into the
total.
Mr speaker and gentleman it can
be transferred.
This program so it can be
transferred to the new owner are
it could use it to go back into
the what I call the budget
indicated it you know somebody
on a waiting list to pick it up.
Okay Mr speaker and gentleman
yes thank you thank you Mr
speaker I generate that coach my
my my questions are appreciate
both you guys are we we've heard
this so many times and I do have
some concerns on the on the
economic shin and the cost and
you know we're we're sold out a
lot of numbers and and and I
think it's hard for me to keep
track of them but I hope
We're we're careful
and make sure that this small in
negatively impact the rate
payers in that service area
whether you know they have the
customer base and early on in
our Albuquerque for example I'm
I'm using the big city is an
example of those repairs act be
protected and in and I'll look
forward to arrested by on that
consumer protection aspects of
this so Mr speaker generate
gentle lady from Bernalillo
generally sample thank you very
much here is for the debate the
gentleman's way Representative
Scott.
One of the points.
Very well made for lack.
My colleague from San Juan.
The energy transition to
employers we have
to work to school.
Two hundred percent courtroom
three.
Energy generation by the year
twenty fifteen.
Most of our you to wear jeans.
Well.
Scrimmage.
So the question that I have
Mister speaker and gentle lady.
Is.
Thanks community solar projects
wine now.
Mr speaker and gentleman on a
will yield to the cosponsor just
give it a jab and then I'll
continue thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen and gentle lady so
when we look at the ETA
standards and the renewable
renewable portfolio standard
that we're trying to meet X. X.
excellent that we're ahead of
schedule in my humble opinion
but outside of the opinion when
we look at community solar how
it helps satisfy that our PS
essentially the statewide annual
program is capped at a hundred
megawatts so it's just a tiny
portion of the total renewable
energy generation that's needed
to come online to replace the
current fossil fuel generation
so these these community solar
projects albeit small scale will
help those utilities qualify and
meet there are PS requirements
and additionally those qualified
and utilities will receive the
racks from the community solar
projects of projects to meet
those obligations so even though
we are ahead of schedule we
still are not there yet this is
another tool in the toolbox not
only to create equity among
different communities that are
seeking to have this as an
economic development tool as a
sustainability tool is just
something else that allows them
to continue to build up that of
course renewable energy
portfolio but it'll it'll
obviously add to the to the
opportunity to meet that
standard Mr speaker and
gentleman and gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Santa Fe I believe the bill was
amended.
And we're now looking at.
Two hundred megawatts it is is
that correct your rather than
the one hundred Meg watch it you
just Christians for.
That's correct Mr speaker
gentleman my of my apologies yes
in house a
state government or I'm sorry
House permit
we mended it to include two
hundred megawatts spread over
the first three years so thank
you for that correction Mr
speaker John.
Mr speaker gentle lady there is
no representation here.
Yes will be cleaner stressed or
less emissions or in a
climate related sectors that
would have provided vantage's
over what the utilities are
doing to meet their mandates is
that accurate.
Mr speaker gentleman if I
understand your question
are you asking whether or not
community solar creates a
sustainability opportunity as a
renewable energy source or
am I missing where the clean
energy standard you're referred
to as staff.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
cannot support rural chair of
the two is that this is just for
me personally or wanting to
enter the market these community
solar energy developers or just
new providers of this service
wanting to enter the market
would that be correct yeah.
They're not going in in a
college or advantage to the
table with respect to the
cleanliness of the crime or or
climate change issues or
anything of that nature.
Mr speaker gentleman while of
course there is absolutely and
economic interest in the
investments into a project like
this and correspondingly the
opportunity to provide clean
energy with that based on the
work that we've done not only
through the inner but of course
the research that led to
understanding that this is such
a lucrative opportunity not just
for investors I'm in community
solar but for the state of New
Mexico community solar can
provide major economic stimulus
to our state in this in the time
that we absolutely need to not
only diversify but see those
results with that with this
opportunity it'll generate five
hundred seventeen million
dollars and economic benefits
out of the study that was
conducted at UNM it'll create
three three thousand seven
hundred and sixty high quality
jobs in various sectors over the
next five years and it'll
generate over two point nine
million in tax revenues annually
for the state so we look at the
economic benefit to even locally
counties in New Mexico could
benefit from the fifteen million
dollars in economic output and a
hundred seventeen jobs created
over what we see is a twenty
year period again on the lights
of life's the time of the of a
potential project so absolutely
Mr speaker gentleman this is a
huge economic opportunity for
New Mexico and those who invest
we do hope will have an absolute
return on investment based on
the numbers that we've seen and
those seeking to get into the
business into the community
solar business in our state
eight.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
I can certainly agree I can see
two hundred megawatts of large
regulated power dropped into the
middle of the utility grid would
call some.
Substantial economic development
but somebody has to.
where we start to diverge.
Yes.
I'm sorry.
Representative by the utility
companies with the tax benefits
benefits associated with
renewable energy.
They're able to put our own
recurring.
From these renewable energy
projects it's something worse
than the next four prices won't
last two around two three
seconds.
Research on these commotions
colonel projects.
The wrong from a low of about
one hundred cents per hour up to
about twenty cents per hour and
that is certainly consistent
with what was represented by the
gentle lady from Bernalillo well
believe she Representative cost
of the systems was only order
thirteen point six points per
hour to comport with the
information to our.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
our experts that you met in
Henrik right Kelly and he
believes that those numbers are
are are not consistent with our
analyses Mr speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady do you
ask your phone numbers.
Mr speaker I'd gentlemen again
Rick Gilliam has basically
looked at those numbers and he
thinks it's more like seven
cents in the way that you're
describing Mr speaker John.
Okay.
So our children St Onge we would
still be a.
With these community solar
projects we would still be some.
Three X. two X. to three X..
What.
Utility scale solar.
Thanks to the table.
That's the difference point
three act starts recent storm
and services for example would
you agree with that man's.
Mr speaker gentleman rather than
get into the sort of
hypotheticals I think thank you
overall what we've been worried
about and what I hear you saying
is that will community solar
bird and non participating
customers when we look at the
long run costs may be happy to
answer that question if that's
what you're you're making sure
that we've done the math on Mr.
You Mr speaker gentle lady I
haven't checked on the mass
communal average cost of power
is delivered to your home in New
Mexico in search for creative we
are.
Mr speaker and gentleman season
lightness.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
certainly care of.
Would be twelve point nine
functions according to the
international energy agency on
average so we.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Ward terms for ending a cent to
each for the consumer with
respect to the power generated
by these community solar
projects it would appear to be.
More experience.
On purely mathematical basis.
Generated and delivered to the
grant so Mr speaker and gentle
lady what does the community
solar developers make up.
The ability was was put in two
terms the cost of your on the
system how do they compete.
That's a great question.
Eight.
With the you too will be strong.
Our.
It is purely in terms of cost
right they manage to complete.
Mr speaker I made on.
If I may I think that we have a
really good example Mr speaker
and that is that
we look at the most recent data
that was provided to us in
twenty eighteen which was from
the look at a county electric
cooperative which signed a
twenty five year power purchase
agreement
to be able to receive
electricity from a three
megawatt capacity of the social
project and it was for four
point five cents per kilowatt
that was the most recent data
that we have and we compare that
with
a larger
What are they called power
purchase agreement.
for example it was compared to
say Facebook's
EPA power purchase agreement
with PNM which all receive power
from two fifty make a one.
AC solar plants for three cents
per kilowatt so the smaller
three megawatt PPA is only one
point five times on there's a
differentiate ation but again as
we stated in our Committee that
it's very hard because for us Mr
speaker and gentleman to make
final determinations are final
pencil to the paper on these
because there are a lot of
variable factors that come into
play as has been mentioned by
the previous
are prepared previous call again
in the questions so
The
Again Mr speaker and gentleman
is that it's it's to be able to
answer your question New Mexico
on very difficult to the point
to the penny but what we do know
is what has been provided to us
and that is that
The utilities solar prices don't
in any way affect individual
customers and let Tricity prices
are not coming down in that
manner so Mister speaker and
gentleman.
There's not a whole lot more
that we can get and put the
pencil to this on on your
particular question because
there'll be various variables
but what we do know is that the
cost is not the amount that you
have because we have these the
stated to compare with thank you
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The
if I may correct results was
just advised.
Utilities gross stores down to.
Since delivered to the grid and
so the question becomes.
Hello Mr chair for each maybe.
And I'm going to.
I'm going to presume.
Let me first ask questions.
This.
As defined in the legislation.
Is not a public utility is that.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
correct statement.
Mr speaker and gentle lady then
that this the.
Customer power to grant.
Would have.
Responsibilities.
True.
The regulatory environment in
the state.
The they would not have the same
responsibilities to that
regulatory environment in the
state is that the public
utilities would be required to.
Thank you.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe Michael sponsor would
like to speak I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen and gentle lady I I
would disagree with that notion
Mr speaker gentleman the PRC if
you look at the highlight of of
what the high level of what the
PRC is responsible for from a
regulatory standpoint not only
do they provide oversight review
and enforcement of consumer
protections and subscribers and
F. along the way every amendment
that we've made his strengthens
those consumer protections they
also ensure that the utilities
are fairly compensated for
interconnection and
administrative costs the
determined the subscriber bill
rates of the establish a process
for allocating the statewide
program capacity cap including
the different state procurement
codes regarding resident and
veteran president businesses
which is something that's
important to us including this
opportunity for them and
additionally they regulate
subscriber organizations I'm in
a in accordance with this piece
of legislation and all of that
rulemaking through the PRC needs
to be done by April first of
next year and within that time
frame as well there's a three
year review on any adjustments
necessary on the cap on the
racks locals at solar industry
impacts of bill rate credits
it's center so we really have
ensured that that regulatory
component is robust and strong
when you look at this piece of
legislation and all that has
gone into it to ensure that we
have that strong oversight
component to this bill that is
absolutely important to us only
as as mute as those are making
good policy but as those who
want to see this happening
fairly in our communities so
that said Mr speaker gentlemen I
would just disagree that the
that the regulatory oversight
isn't as robust as as any other
utility.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Santa Fe.
Your state would have no Sir.
Over the questions charge to
subscribers for one of these
facilities so from that
standpoint.
There would be no consumer
protection is.
Mr speaker gentle and I I don't
believe that would be accurate
as far as the consumer
protections that we're looking
at and of course but the PRC a
dozen ensuring those consumer
protections so there's both
ratepayer protections which
obviously will be part of any
sort of subscriber organization
and then looking at the again
the or oversight of how that's
enacted in the limiting of
process it it's ation Pueblo
good all of those components are
in our to be evaluated if you
look at the amendment that was
just added most recently that
we've specifically talk about
those consumer protections not
only for subscribers but for non
subscribers as to the cost Mr
speaker Jan.
Mr speaker gentle lady
to answer my question.
The PRC would have no authority
to regulate the subscriber.
Calls for restraint.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'll
bring you back to
Mr speaker the charge of the
public Regulatory Commission and
that is that they will have
oversight and it in the PRC does
have the oversight for consumer
protection across across the
board and so that this I
organizations will have to
comply as subscriber
organizations with the.
Interconnection and utility
rules etcetera placed are put in
place and approved by the PRC
so.
In the overall picture cancer
question there is consumer
protection and there is
oversight and Mr speaker and
gentleman the PRC provides that
thank you Mr speaker gentleman
to just be very specific to your
question about the cost to the
consumer it's the the
subscription cost is market
driven and the subscription
rates are not regulated and so
the the bill credit is Mr
speaker gentlemen so what as you
look at sort of why this is
economically feasible that
market cost is is part of the
part of the process Mr speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady that's
exactly what I was trying to get
out the cost of this power
as a consequence of subscribing
to a community solar facilities
a contract between the developer
of the project and the
subscriber for the power not.
Over
stream of the PRC like to move
on and for creating it.
To.
Curls net metering.
Wesleyan the legislation.
The.
The costs Representative Mercuri
is allowed to recover over.
From the.
Community solar developer.
Or should work when.
Would you describe the cost can
be recovered.
You too will need for the use of
their facilities.
Mr speaker and and and that will
Mr speaker and gentleman I
failed to mention that we do
have experts with us and that is
miss the latter Thomas from
Quarles law firm and Mr Britain
Gilliam from both solar and if I
may or we may take a moment so
we can confer with our experts
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you Jim will return.
Mr speaker gentlemen so if I
understand your question about
how those costs add up so it's
administrative costs it's all
interconnection costs and
distribution costs for that net
metered
Set up Mr speaker gentleman.
Okay.
Mr speaker gentle lady what did
you leave out.
Mr speaker gentlemen that to my
knowledge and to do that this
To.
Our.
I'm sorry generation and
transmission is
not distributed for net metering
Mr speaker gentle gentlemen.
Thank you she was hoping to get
their.
What is more understanding.
The solar facilities will yield.
Usable power radiated power how.
For only order issue or a course
sorry from nine o'clock to three
o'clock in the afternoon.
Is that the consensus view of
your experts call so.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I think the logical answer then
I can find is that as long as we
have sun than the Senate's
generating power I don't Mr
speaker and gentleman I can't.
I can't put that into ours
because as you know our hours
fluctuate so again as long as
their son we have power thank
you Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr generated absent the ability
to stop the rotation of the
earth which.
Your.
Your reserves more recent
wherein the neighbor.
Nine o'clock to three o'clock in
the afternoon what would your
courage.
Mr speaker and gentleman
somewhere
in that yes Mr speaker.
This group to awarded the point
of trouble right here is from
three o'clock in the afternoon
until.
To allow Russian.
Round numbers nine o'clock the
next morning.
That whole is going to be
relying on the utility grant to
four inch more would you agree
with.
Mr speaker and gentleman you
know I think we need to clarify
few thinks one going back to
when I stated earlier and that
is as long as we have
the sun is shining David powers
being generated and so in in our
approach to community solar
we're not approaching it from
the perspective of peak hours so
I'm really not quite sure
one in particular you're.
Us and perhaps we ask that you
ask it another way so that we
can get to what it is that
you're requesting so because
we're not dealing as I said with
peak hours or
at peak hours as they generate
power but we're talking about.
How
the sun on or solar generates
the most during our seasons of
the year which.
Well very and which also have
peak hours associate it to them
so I'm not sure whether we can
answer at this point or or
perhaps you rephrase that thank
you Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
support to our was trying to
make.
Is these community solar
subscribers.
During a brief period during the
middle of the day we'll spend
our major struck which
equivalently to Nancy role there
our bill.
And the other eighteen hours of
the day they will be completely
reliant or mostly reliant on the
utility grid.
And yet.
These community solar projects
or not called marketing to pay
any proportionally sure.
Of the generation.
Transmission facilities that has
to be installed and operational.
The utility company.
Doesn't seem fair to me it would
seem fair to me that these that
these
Net metering situations review
will should have to bear soon
proportion of the cost of the
transmission and generation
capacity utility is.
Is reasonable.
Mr.
Sorry.
The speaker on and on you'll see
the cosponsor thank you Mr
speaker gentlemen so if I do
understand your question
correctly on the net metering
question I think it's a bit
disingenuous to talk about the
only and as a nine AM to three
PM situation of course through
the seasons we know that the
links of the days are different
and in the summer
you know on a full
Sort of load not only does the
this the opportunity for
community solar reduce the peak
power requirements at that time
depending on where it is at that
time this this will help with
that so when you're talking
about net metering overall
subscribers pay the full utility
costs to be part of that program
Mr speaker gentleman and so when
they're using utility power
they're paying for it so as far
as Lee who what it gets the
benefit across the board again
not only does the subscriber get
the benefit what the utility
company gets the benefit so if
you think about if it's the
summer months you know the
utility peak load tends to be
during the day in which case
community solar is operative if
it's in the winter it might be a
different story Mr speaker
gentleman but overall when we
look at the budget and to the
utilities and to the repairs as
to what that might would be
overall there's a reduction in
that peak power requirements and
improvement in that power
quality Mr speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker gentleman again to
clarify and some
Cosponsored mentioned with you
know we're really not talking
about in net metering program
here we're talking about
community solar so how community
solar operates is at the rate
payers get a.
Credit to offset for the solar
production against the power
they use so they'll pay for
utility quite of prices for
power used including for
generation and transmission but
then it'll be offset based on
the rates determined by the PRC
so it's important to make that
differentiation because it we
need to be talking about
community solar thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady I
actually am talking.
Exactly about community solar.
What is very this might on an
accurate statement there with
respect to pay close our
generating capacity of this
equipment.
And I would ask you to move
forward as a California dot
encouraging which is very well
established as to when the power
of social workers available for
students when the power is
required so much torque.
Mr speaker and gentleman waited
a little bit more about net
metering and measuring.
Slower output is credited to a
subscriber will return your rate
of three of the.
Utilities.
Right is that correct.
One moment Mr speaker gentleman
what we confer with our experts
thank you on thank you.
Mr speaker and gentleman
Believe where and I following
the quit we're following the
question the line of questioning
you are correct so
that typically and net metering
is apple retail right.
This bill is not talking about
net metering so the bill credit
rate will not be full retail
rate that's that's exactly why
we didn't set it up as a net
metering bill so I think that's
important to to keep noting Mr
speaker and gentlemen so that we
don't get off track on what it
is that we are to intending to
do with community solar thank
you Mr speaker John.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo us on still on track
in the the politicians described
that is correct from the
community solar facilitator is
credited to each subscriber to
for utility returning all right
let us I believe.
Some more hours for
distribution is there.
Mr speaker gentleman yes.
Thank you gentle lady and.
If
the facility.
Is not fully subscribed.
What happens to the hello.
Mr speaker and gentleman as we
did as a described earlier there
is an opportunity to find
another subscriber and so that's
typically what we've seen with
these programs being ninety nine
percent subscribes overall so
there's Tippit and again they're
often folks waiting in a queue
to be able to be part of the so
there's not been a problem with
meeting that demand Mr speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes.
Senator Stewart.
Which utility is obligated to
time I have to take all of.
What is what is not fully
subscribed.
What happens to our.
Mr speaker and gentleman so we
talked about what it cost
earlier will just bring it back
to your attention devoid costs
as the price of the utility
would have otherwise paid to
produce the same unit of energy
itself or purchase it from
another source which is the fair
market based price so
essentially we've that's way
less than what the subscribers
would pay and there for the
community solar developers I
have a looked at how to create
fully subscribe facilities in
order to not have to go that
route it is a last resort and so
you know what we've seen with
the datas that this has yet to
happen and twenty in Colorado
our neighbor twenty nine of the
sixty nine active community
solar facilities are hundred
percent subscribed across the
entire program and on our our on
average ninety nine percent
point ninety nine point four two
percent subscribed so again the
sort of doomsday scenario your
talking about in this regard Mr
speaker gentleman just has not
happened as far as but there are
protections in place in the case
that it should Mr speaker John.
So
three years to come total
operators of facility is not
been subscribed it's going to go
out do you avoided to utilities
avoided cost for.
Well true to our heritage center
since sophomore northwards no
word manage does developer have
as a consequence of this
legislation to provide
subscribers for our.
Mr speaker gentlemen so again
they pay a very very low rate
the two two and a half cents
that you were discussing yes
would be the rate that they
would pay and again it's an
avoided cost situation so in the
case that a subscriber who
organization has to replace a
subscriber they have up to one
year to do so in this
legislation Mr speaker John.
So.
Mr speaker and gentle lady is
one year period.
In addition to more from this
rollover that's available to the
shore.
Community solar.
developer.
To
one subscribers.
To generate the for economic
help for.
Available to the consumer is
that correct.
Mr speaker gentleman what I hear
is yes there one of the same.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Jordan up.
I'm.
Leverage here but it's pretty
obvious
developers programs community
solar projects and your
significant advantage it's over.
The company with respect to law
only work consumer part
protections and hello this power
is billed and paid for.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo and senator.
If you care but you don't.
Will just join them.
And
with that I would like to
introduce for construction.
House more substitute.
For Senator just this
transportation committee search
to terror.
For Senate bill eighty four.
It has been passed out units on
the web the gentleman to read
the two oh two number and
described before sept.
Hang on just a second element.
General checking to make sure
everyone has it I understood
everybody get everyone may not
have it so we just met.
What.
All right it is being passed out
gentleman from Lee wanted to go
ahead with the job to number.
Mr speaker.
Well.
Two zero six four point one
zero six four zero point one.
For discretion we've already
described.
Yeah John wanted to go ahead and
described the poor substitute I
I realize you're gonna be
described now go to the gentle
lady Mr speaker this wallet is
multiple procedures it is very
simple.
Right.
Every time Shamar is mentioned
rural.
Words have been replaced with
renewable energy.
Which will allow all forms of
renewable energy to participate
in this arena.
By the start of the Sanchez is
so friendly amendment.
Mr speaker and gentleman this is
an unfriendly amendment I would
just like to reiterate to the
body that the utility companies
do not oppose this bill we have
made amendments and worked over
a year in the interim through
our house memorial to get this
legislation right to make sure
it fits for the people of New
Mexico and to ensure that all
folks were involved in this Mr
speaker gentlemen.
To change the E. eight.
All it we.
Concept of community solar this
and change everything about what
we've worked toward Mr speaker
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman I agree
it's totally unfriendly and
changes the and tire intent and
purposes of community solar
which is community solar thank
you Mr speaker.
R. Sanchez of explained that
this is totally unfriendly and
so Act and and explain the
reasons why Is there debate on
the force of.
I do not see at all there is
available for substance
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative not.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from wake county yield
my friend full terms County.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
The floor substitute yes
employee.
Expanding the types of energy
that can be produced from
renewable resources.
From solar to date the gamut of
renewable resources is that
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
yes.
For some.
Is identical in every respect
word for word.
Thanks.
The word shore has been
replaced.
With renewable energy which
would allow all.
Warms energy generation to
participate in this or not.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I believe in your debate earlier
you mentioned that.
The.
Solar panels.
I really only effective.
During
certain times that the seven
nine and your bill three or four
PM which limits the.
Substantial reduction of energy
from those panels.
Our other renewable energy
sources as constrained as solar.
There are renewable energy
sources that will provide a
longer.
Our production encouraging and
in some circumstances on
locations more reliable power
production per in all specific
reforms when jurors in eastern
New Mexico.
Yes Mr speaker and gentleman I
think all of us over here are
very familiar with eastern New
Mexico and the winds that we
deal with on virtually a daily
basis and so this amendment
would allow.
People to participate in
renewable energy production that
bail for some additional
benefits that would be enhanced
over potential solar energy
would that be correct.
Absolutely Mr speaker and
gentleman and that would
include.
Technologies that might not even
have been identified.
We would.
This.
The former for renewable energy
as long as it is renewable it is
welcome to participate.
Mr speaker and gentleman in that
regard you and I are both very
and conferences where some of
these ideas.
Are in the initial phases of
development and exploration in
the US department of energy is
prying to to develop these
additional.
renewable energy projects that
would not only be reliable for
seven hours a day or twelve
hours a day but would provide
twenty four hour a day renewable
energy would then not.
Mr speaker gentleman from Chavis
we don't know what to would
are they have not been explored
yet you can pump water uphill
when when's foreign order so
sure you can come question
Astrid or in order to reserve
for their or their our list also
reporters for this year to
generation.
Mr speaker and gentleman and
the.
Exact same.
Structure would apply to those
other sources of energy that are
captured for this solar.
Energy project that's before us
with the original bill would
not.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
exactly correct.
And so the purpose Mr speaker
and gentleman wants to allow
people who could not.
Invested or receive the benefit
of.
Renewable energy because of
their location of their all four
other limitations such as.
Maybe restrictive covenants or
something that would prohibit
the development of renewable
energy on their property.
They would be able to become a
subscriber or become a
subscriber organization and put
one of these M. and you're just
expanding the potential to a
variety of renewable energy
sources of power by the cell
number.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman from Chavis the
provisions of the original bill.
The provisions in this for
substitutes are identical in
every respect.
The house.
Robert organizations scrubbers
relationship would be utilities
it is article in every respect
X..
Wells other forms of renewal to
participate.
A long stride so where.
Mr speaker and gentleman the the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
indicated that the utilities
were on board with this and
after my conversations with the
utilities have been there I'm
sorry about.
A couple things number one.
The impact of the number of
megawatts that could be placed
on their.
Transmission or on their grid
and their ability to absorb that
and it's been cap by two hundred
megawatts under this legislation
so I don't know that they would
share how those electric
electrons get on their system.
They just want to know how many
are coming on to their system so
they can plan accordingly and
then the second thing that it
for expressed concern over is
the use of those electrons on
their grid and who how are they
able to capture those costs and
give you address those are your
breasts that are in some of your
question with the lady from
Bernalillo so the.
Amendment that you bring forward
or the substitute that you bring
forward.
Should have no.
Impact on the electric utility
companies who have indicated
their support or even their lack
of support for the underlying
legislation would would you see
is just as act as introducing
any additional concerns to the
utility companies are.
Mr speaker and gentleman I can't
imagine why there would be any
change of position from any of
the state coach with the
exception.
With the exception of slower
panel developers who
might use some competition from
other technologies.
Mr speaker and gentleman I think
you're you may have touched on
the of the precise issue
underlying all this but Mr
speaker and gentleman thank you
for bringing us forward I think
that we've heard competitions
good this really provide some
competition in this arena and
gives
potential subscribers
alternatives particularly in
areas that may have lasts online
and more when so thank you for
bringing to also Porcher floor
substitute thank you Mr speaker
thank you John is further debate
on the for service to the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Andrea.
Thank you Mr speaker before I
asked the gentleman yield Mister
speaker I had a member mind
quest for me to request your.
They're not we can remove
jackets it's been a request the
gentleman to remove their jacket
single objection so your.
Thank you Mr speaker and this
gentleman my friend from the
county of I will yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
we you and I have served on the
same to the committees for four
years now I believe both that
taxation and revenue and up on
the Energy that is that correct
and spectrum Mr speaker and
gentleman that is accurate and
the speaker John we've we've
heard this concept.
for several years every year
actually for several years that
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
involved in both committees Mr
speaker and gentleman from San
Juan that is also correct.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
I have I have a question about
your amendment but I need to set
that up with with and national
question.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
What is the advantage.
To someone who wants to do a
community energy source
whatsoever.
and guess what I'm getting at
is.
When community solar folks are
are are looking to get.
Into this market.
they're they're building a
small.
Utilities.
But what do they have to do for
transmission.
To be able to get that to their
consumers.
Speaker John or anyone who who
agrees to partake in community
solar.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
or distribution costs
associated with this legislation
transmission costs and utility
generation costs Kamal the are
not included just call students
for.
So follow up question to that Mr
speaker and gentleman is that
the very same situation that a
homeowner who puts us some sort
of a.
Our energy source on their home.
Such as solar.
And the access.
The excess power that is
generated then returns I heard
you state mention net metering
several times but that extra
energy then goes into.
The whoever the utility that is
operating in that area it goes
into their transmission lines
and they have to purchase the
excess.
Energy that's generated and
that's exactly what this does
just on a larger scale is that
correct the speaker John Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr chair click correct except
now the homeowner doesn't have
to have access to respond it's
exposed to the song or.
Enough room to build in the
winter.
So thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman out to get to you to
your specific.
Amendment.
It does appear as if we are
stated what favorite one source.
Of renewable energy over another
which this legislation.
Mr speaker general ledger survey
question.
So for our generation is.
So the original real.
So thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
to the point of your bill.
And to a point of a an energy
source that has been developed
here in New Mexico at our
laboratories and Los Alamos.
Are you aware of the small scale
nuclear generating sources.
Mr speaker and gentleman our
water flow which I think we are
opponents this four separate
reporters at that small modular
reactors small contract
renewable because nuclear
material has to be lost but yes
I am familiar with the girls so
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and I think I believe
that is unfortunate I think that
is unfortunate that that's not
considered renewal because of
the.
Because of two things the first
thing is that is a source that.
Can be dispatchable that is a
source that as we need it it's
there it doesn't depend on the
wind blower the star the sun to
shine to be able to
At the able to to have reliable
energy
Mr speaker and gentleman is a
reliable source of energy.
Mr.
Gentleman from San Juan
absolutely.
So the speaker and gentleman add
to that point with the.
This has been proven over and
over I believe in our military
and in our navy fleet is that
correct Mr speaker John.
Mr speaker and gentleman in a
number of naval research not
just more in a quite a number so
Mister speaker and gentleman I
am disappointed that your
amendment and in my opinion
doesn't go far enough I believe
that's what we're looking for is
reliable energy.
I believe that and and something
that a New Mexico and etcetera.
and and manufacturing of that
and and sell and selling that to
other countries
would be beneficial to us but
the speaker and gentleman for.
Local municipalities and
counties which Mr speaker and
gentleman that act and I noticed
in the amendment took place.
And House Energy Environment
natural resources
that was included that was the
second amendment to the bill
that the to the Senate bill that
came over.
And that amendment was adage.
And the energy committee that
you and I both serve on.
And then that the language was
struck.
In the state government
elections Indian Affairs
Committee but it was added back
in this language.
That in Indian nation.
Tribal Pueblo of municipality or
county could benefit from this
and Mr speaker and gentleman.
What I'm seeing.
From your amendment this is just
say let's level the playing
field is not pick a source.
And let's allow.
What.
Energy source works best for for
each individual communities this
is community.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Do all communities across the
state of New Mexico are they
able to benefit in the same way
from solar power Mr speaker and
gentleman is it is the is the
ability to do a large scale
solar project equally effective
in each community Mr speaker
John.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Utility scale solar is here from
animal.
So we're is participating.
Just earns win generators or in
the costs associated with chair
generation.
Transmission and distribution.
Utility scale.
Now the smaller projects don't
participate in all of those
cost.
I'm not sure answers your
question yes Mr speaker and
gentleman that is that is the
direction I'm going if I.
We have transmission lines in
San Juan County that because of
the war on coal that has been
That we see here over the last
several years that.
Power generation that was on
those established.
Transmission lines has has gone
down dramatically so there's a
lot of capacity available on
existing transmission lines and
San Juan County.
and so we have a lot of folks
who are looking to come into San
Juan County to put in place a
solar farms Mr speaker and
gentleman we've also been told
by those developers at San Juan
county is not as ideal as maybe
some other locations in New
Mexico.
And but they have to weigh the
balance of available
transmission.
available transmission lines to
be able to get that power to the
market with.
The cost.
To develop new transmission
lines to be able to get that
energy to market so weighing
that balance San Juan county is
in the game of the solar market
not because of its ideal
location Mr speaker and
gentleman selling county would
not be an ideal place for wind.
Mr speaker and gentleman not
nearly to the extent that
eastern New Mexico is with
respect to potential.
So thank you Mr speaker and and
gentleman.
With this bill the way it's
written today without your
amendment.
I believe it be hurting
communities.
In your in the eastern side of
the state.
Because it's not as ideal for
solar you don't see a bunch of
solar farms popping up on the
eastern side of the state what
you see is wind farms is that
accurate Mr speaker John Mr
speaker and gentleman yield for
so for.
We've we've we've collected to
form reach community.
And we are insurance surcharge.
Some of the renewable terminal
which these folks would not be
allowed to participate with soap
and water I'm much more which
each.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
To the point of.
The cost that you were talking
was a sponsor earlier.
And who is going to subsidize Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Our.
It has been stated that there is
that there's no cost.
To the remaining consumers would
not end up on community solar
but are on that grid.
Mr speaker and gentleman now.
Pays for the that person who's
on community solar the cost of
transmission the cost of
maintaining grid stability the
cost of regulations I wish that
it would that they are under
being under the PRC Mr speaker
and gentleman the only thing
that I see in here that is
anything has anything to do with
the PRC is that it says that the
PRC will administer.
The rules promulgated by the
community solar act that there
doesn't appear to be any.
Any your.
Any responsibility for grid
stability or any of the costs
borne by transmission.
Mr speaker and gentleman in your
area or on the eastern side of
the state in those communities
that might want to.
To participate in a community.
Renewable energy plant.
You are not able to participate
potentially because of.
That might not be an ideal
location for large scale solar
farm and then you will be
excluded.
From being able to maybe come up
with a small scale wind farms Mr
speaker and gentleman already
are you able to opt out on your
utility bills of the cost of
transmission.
And the cost of
of all the regulations including
maintaining grid stability are
you able to opt out of those
costs that are not now not borne
by those
subscribers community solar Mr
speaker John.
Speaker I would have to go back
and review the bill again but
also recall those costs are
going to be borne by people not
subscribing.
To these community renewable
energy facilities in a formal
Stricker the maximum cost in
order to non subscribers was
only ordered three percent.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
if you look at the amendment
that was passed.
In state government elections in
the Indian Affairs Committee.
is it does exactly what we are
quite you and I just talking
about the only costs that will
not be borne by the non
subscribers are the direct costs
attributable to the subscribers.
Excess energy is not a cost
borne by the subscribers so your
question about net metering is
exactly correct that those are
not costs that I as a an
electric at state electric.
Purchaser utility purchaser from
a community solar.
utility.
I'm only paying for what I've
agreed to pay for but all of the
extra.
Then goes into the grid.
And utility is required to pay
for that.
So and that but but even so it
gets worse than that Mr speaker
and gentleman that says in this
ammendment.
Unless.
The public interest.
Deems it in less than a year the
commission work to turn at the
public interest for non
subscribers to subsidize
subscribers.
only in that instance will not
be charged so so great even
those costs that they're bearing
directly according to this the
PRC can they can be petition.
To take even the direct costs.
That this subscriber should be
paying and pass it on the knobs
non subscribers if the PRC
determines its for the public
interest.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
That's the problem.
Mr speaker and gentleman is that
anytime we hear a bill about
renewable energy.
The public interest.
Is being determined to be the
end of our not the consumer the
consumer is not the public
interest in any of these bills
not a one.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
I I heard you say.
Thank you can't beat em join.
And our.
I'm not sure I agree with that.
Mr speaker and gentleman I have
a hard time with the underlying
bill I have similar problems
with your mental.
Because in reality those costs
which are not being discussed
throughout this entire debate.
Of the cost of the transmission
lines the upkeep and maintenance
the responsibility of the
utility to make sure that grid
stability is there that energy
is dispatchable.
Those folks are the same folks
who are those in those
connected community solar that
someone else is responsible when
they're not.
Selling solar to everybody else
on that grid.
Are they gonna have the benefit
in the evening.
To receive the power from the
utility.
And that power going back and
forth on the grid they have no
responsibility to pay a dime for
and every other subscriber of
from utility across the state
will be paying.
There share their fair share of
the cost to maintain a great and
to pay for the maintenance and
upkeep of the those you utility
transmission lines is that how
you see this Mr speaker and
gentleman Mr speaker and
gentleman act requiring that you
address or is absolutely act.
However.
This is a great however I do not
have the votes in Mr to slow
down Mr morning.
So all we could to try to make
it better for the community
solar east side of the state or
blowing slammed over solar
panels is a problem.
As your coverage.
Graced
the solution is reduced.
We're sorry what.
Resource.
Rural districts.
The farmers and ranchers in
those rural communities generate
a lot of Bill which we already
so it's what was participate
here also Mr rex home insurance
for me to try to do better for
my community it's like you.
Probably trying to get run over
I'd rather helpful on and see if
I can do a better job for my
constituents.
You Mr speaker and thank you
John I I do appreciate that
because this is unfair this is
unfair to your constituents
those this is unfair to the
communities in the on the east
side of the state who would like
to participate.
I think it's better than the
underlying bill because I think
it it does that Mr speaker and
gentleman.
I don't think it's fair in any
way to pass this legislation in
any form that causes current
utility subscribers who won't
potentially have the.
Bility to negotiate something
like this for their community.
And they're going to bear the
cost of great stability
transmission lines and
maintenance and so Mister
speaker and gentleman I I cannot
support your amendment it is
much better than the bill
currently Mr speaker and
gentleman can't support the
underlying bill that's the main
reason I can't support your then
it is much better than we did in
the current bill.
And I think that I think our
leader council's going to twist
my arm and try to get you to
vote for it.
But R. A. Z. the concept itself
the overall concept of what
we're debating today is flawed
including
all renewables especially since
it does not include.
Nuclear power small scale
nuclear power thank you Mr
speaker Mr chairman I do
appreciate your to level is
there for the available for
substance use.
The gentleman from Chavis Eddie
and our terms Representative
Townsend thank you Mr speaker of
well the gentleman yield I will
yield to market trends from
traverse city and Tero.
Yeah
with regard.
More than once the session.
About the need to diversify have
we not.
Mr speaker and gentleman almost
daily.
And Mr speaker.
The other.
alternative power supplies power
methods.
How are providers.
That might be.
Identified in your be all in
might be and then the identified
in the future could have very
different power brokers and they
could supplement.
The.
And and be more efficient than
just a single source being solar
today is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman one of
the primary difficulties with
soul.
Speaker pro does not coincide
with big difference.
So.
Some of these other technologies
stark or more dispatchable or
perhaps more reliable in the
evening hours senator rand on
the side of the state would
certainly be.
We're much more efficient than
solar emotional projects and
madam chair and
Would do you believe
Representative that if you had
a.
A more diverse.
A rate of providers.
That there is a higher
likelihood.
That cost.
To the provider.
Could be more efficient and be
more sustainable.
Madam speaker Roger and
gentleman from chair of rules.
I was trying to acquire eight
cost with the traditions.
So the more traditional
processes generally the last
calls she is program on occasion
but not sure and madam speaker
and gentleman there is not a
thing.
In this bill proposed.
Set the passed out that would
prevent a community from
building a solar.
System should they so choose is
that correct.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
is absolutely correct if that is
the most efficient solution to
the problem the lowest cost
solution to a problem it's
absolutely available in this
floor substitute and miss
Randall on even if they didn't
give it about how much it cost
and they wanted to have a solar
system could have a sewer
system.
Madam speaker gentleman from
chair of rules absolutely.
And madam speaker and gentleman.
If they wanted to be more
renewable twenty four hours a
day they are.
The system that incorporated
walk more than one type our
thank.
Miss madam speaker and gentleman
absolutely.
Two and a half nexus over to
order hash words went would give
you some reliable electricity in
many cases later in the
afternoon.
Absolutely madam speaker and
should they
want to
Have.
Three types of power.
Work for the power could they do
that as well.
Mr speaker or madam speaker
resurrection one I don't believe
there's any restaurants in the
bill to how many technologies
could be utilized at one
location.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
late
This.
Proposal.
Protects consumers.
But because it allows them to
diversify.
It allows them to look at all
options other than solar.
It allows them to.
Have competing interests come
the and say I've got a better
deal for you.
I think it's power lower cost I
can find a better.
more reliable longer lasting
power for your call you can be
renewable.
A longer periods of the day.
Might even be all day long.
And I.
I am
Right Madam speaker and
gentleman.
Why and the world.
And today when we talk about
diversification in almost every
sentence.
That we would not allow these
communities the small generators
to diversify into find a better
power.
More reliable power more
efficient power in very probably
a cheaper power to them am I
missing anything.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
charters competition is rural.
Competition yields.
For projects services at lower
prices than any other mechanisms
point.
In what describes all those
programs.
Yes while.
Competing technologies to
protest for.
And madam speaker and gentleman
a little bit later in this
evening I suspect we're going to
hear a bill that is the best we
recall SB a level playing field
standards.
And those that be all.
Could be complementary in my
opinion.
To yes by utilizing some of
those agricultural products
allowing those people to to work
on both sides the pants and I
see it.
Would bring many of our
committees more advantageous
opportunities than they would
have worked the single power
source as defined in the
regional bell and is that true.
Channel one that's absolutely
true.
Madam speaker and John.
When you look at the whole gamut
of of what we're trying to do.
And to.
and yes generate and fortify our
renewable industry.
We want to clean energy.
We want diversification.
And we want reliability.
And we want dispatch ability.
Those bills work in harmony.
That Original Bill the solar
Dale.
Does nothing to in my opinion to
work with just be a lever.
To enhance a clean energy.
Broad based.
Production.
Other than.
Taking a single industry.
And saying.
We're gonna to be the best.
We don't care you're more
efficient we don't care if they
cost more or less we're just
gonna choose you because
somebody tells.
So
Madam speaker and gentleman from
late your mail.
Your floor substitute I hope is
accepted I hope they've taken
the time look at the
contemplate how it might work
with SB eleven and contemplate
how it might enhance the lives
of many more New Mexicans
whether they're in agriculture
whether there
wind generators whatever they
are some not even contemplated
today but if you give them a
chance the drive of.
American ingenuity also find a
way to build a better than we
can all even anticipate today so
I stand in support of your
amendment and madam chair thank
you very much.
Is there further debate on the
amendment.
The gentleman from Lee County
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair this is my
calling from Lee County or
would you like to the gentleman
from way.
Madam chair
inside this committee
substitute.
Can you explain to me.
for typical I met a lot.
So we're facility how many acres
that would take.
Was represented by the gentleman
from San Juan.
Madam speaker and gentleman
that.
Six six grams per megawatt all
right do not have any
consolation personal.
Forty acres would get your I
want to work so.
Madam speaker and gentleman
that's what my research has
shown in and from.
The person in the engineering
still the workforce after
structure that's that's been my
knowledge as well
Madam speaker and gentleman
inside of your committee
substitute.
Well the renewable company be
paying property tax on those.
Madam speaker.
Gentleman I would presume yes
but I don't know that for sure.
Thank you madam speaker I just
and gentleman I just know that
we pass and some other
legislation that.
Removes property tax equation
from for renewables inflate and
then solar as well.
Speaker and gentleman in inter
Committee substitute
what happens at the on the last
on these projects with respect
to
the list photo cells and any
other.
Pieces and parts of the state
once it no longer works how does
your bill madam chair gentleman
deal with us
the disposal of those items.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
don't believe it deals with the
decommissioning of these
facilities are all yes the
original bill so we're
substituting for.
Those my concern madam chair and
gentleman that
we we've seen across the United
States and actually across the
world where no there's no
bonding requirements for these
facilities and so there is no
way to guarantee a property
clean up on these.
So.
Madam chair and gentleman is
Senator committee sub continues
to move Torrance and and yes
your committee so is
is approved tonight I would ask
the the that's something that we
continue to look at madam chair
and gentleman is it the original
bill and its and its order
the states of course madam chair
and gentleman I'd like to keep
that same concern with respect
to decommissioning and holding
these companies accountable to
ensure their cleaning these up.
Gentleman but I I do have
another concern.
Is this I see the way the the
the distribution system ever
transmission system working that
connects to these five five
megawatt facilities would hook
up to within your committee
substitute.
as I understand the bill.
In the committee substitute.
The R. this is the solar company
or the renewable in your
committees of would not actually
be required madam chair and
gentlemen to incur any of the
costs on the the public utility
to actually from that and they
would incur no cost whatsoever
of the maintenance and and and
continuing continuation of those
facilities would that be correct
madam chair general.
Speaker and gentleman yes yes
correct your statement also it
is reflective of the provisions
in the original bill also.
I appreciate that clarification
madam speaker and and gentlemen
so.
Speaker and gentleman I I kind
of the two minutes to well if I
look at this from a regular.
Business right maybe is the deer
G.
We use state taxes we encourage
state taxes madam chair
gentleman our madam speaker and
gentleman
And.
You know we pay our taxes
companies pay their taxes but we
also have a gas tax.
Speaker and gentleman that the
users of those roadways.
With that gas tax Madam speaker
and gentleman actually paid in
a pot of money that is allowed
that that allows us to keep or
maintain those facilities with
me correct madam speaker and
all.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
eight that is correct.
So in this case Madam speaker
and gentleman what we're doing
is a point to try to make that
correlation.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
We're we're we're allowing a
company to come in and live off
the graces of another company
this put the time effort money
and would that be correct manage
Madam speaker and I'll.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
is correct what's your Sir
Peter.
And identical in every respect
to the original.
Speaker gentle.
I'm I'm getting more more
forward with respect both
aspects of the bills that of
both bills now so this should be
Madam speaker and gentleman
like me buying a car.
Paying the insurance paying the
fuel and paying the monthly
payments on the car madam
speaker and gentleman but
somebody else getting completed
for use of that vehicle through
the last of that vehicle.
Speaker and gentleman I believe
that is reasonable analogy.
Madam speaker and gentleman to
Which location where a bunch of
other people and New Mexico.
And we got on the train in the
Dallas.
And.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
But we were riding on the
caboose car and so we're playing
around not a strict and
gentleman was the conductor.
And the conductor allowed us to
where people live.
Which is anybody knows late
transitions work back when is
that back then the way you would
like to determine where the
where this page one.
Madam speaker and gentleman it
took us twenty minutes.
To get off target and make this
our trip across the mountain
that then took us four hours
madam speaker and gentleman to
correct.
So I do appreciate the fact that
you're trying to jump on the
train and I'm willing to jump on
the train with you so we can
steer it the consequences.
Of the train moving in the wrong
direction our minimum ten times
the damage of making the right
decision up front Madam speaker
and gentleman.
Are you.
Thank you there's further debate
on the floors Committee
substitute thank gentlelady from
Bernalillo Sandoval and Santa Fe
Representative Lord thank you so
much madam speaker will the kind
gentleman and my new friends Lea
County please yield so time to
me I will yield to the gentle
lady from those various counts
yeah I got a bunch of and thank
you madam speakers so I I.
I'm in information junkie so
when you brought this up it
started me thinking about
innovation right because there's
more than just solar is that
correct.
Miss madam speaker and gentle
lady you are absolutely correct.
So they got me looking at a
whole bunch of different things
for example did you know and I'm
sorry madam speaker right in New
Jersey did you know that
bacteria is something that NASA
is looking at into the future of
energy source.
Madam speaker gentle lady I am
aware of some experimentation
going on with how would you I
was not aware of any bacteria.
For much for.
Thank you madam speaker reason I
bring it up is because you were
talking about and I got really
excited when you brought this
ammendment for because now we're
talking about.
Innovation.
And we're talking about
innovation in our own backyard
right because I was asking some
people about how this works with
the solar and somebody comes in
and it could be the person who
set this up
for the subscriber organizations
they could be somebody from
California correct Senator miss
madam speaker gentle lady you
are correct.
Thank you madam chair yeah those
kind of a concern because like
you know you know when I went to
college there was a whole bunch
innovation revolved around these
kind of things and I was
thinking with this we now have
the ability to bounce off of our
universities offer degrees in
renewable energy and the EDD
leaders and renewable energy
with this bill would you say
that be something that would be
good with your amendment there.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
So we're technology is
considered in most circles to be
a mature technology.
Yes Representative courage.
The so restrictions of your
previous.
Which and those cursor very
large words what.
Around twenty percent of the
Energy impacting with someone.
Improved much in the last few
years so.
Sure technology goals are very
steep curve forest Energy
improvements improvements in
price would you restrict levels.
And I think that's
approximately where we are with
solar technology today.
And thank you madam speaker
thank you Jim yeah I kind of
agree in the same way out I was
looking at this that the
bacteria it's now says actually
using that and they were using
it for on a spaceship and it'll
generate energy I'm gonna try to
pronounce it it's G. O. Baxter's
sulfur sulfur descends and it
produces three point nine watts
of electrical energy per square
meters no thank you know so
thinking about those things with
this.
Renewable energy right because
we could go and all kinds of
directions but this we could be
the innovators.
Or maybe back here because we
have we can put and take
Shallowater be done outside in
the deep inside I was also
looking at another form of
energy which is recycling radio
waves I mean I'm learning all
kinds of stuff I'm completely
fascinated with this excited
because I'm learning new things
about renewable energy so did
you know that recycling radio
waves is is something I'm
looking at for the future.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
your completely over my.
Speaker that's all been living
for this entire time to stump
you on something yes so I I was
you know we opportunity because
one of the things when I went to
college it.
There was always innovation
around those colleges and we've
done solar solar I don't once
it's been played out but but.
It's kind of tapered out with
their their technology and I'm
thinking at this point that we
should be looking for other
forms of renewable energy the
other one that I pulled up that
was completely fascinating is.
Salt.
Salt is another important and
I'm not going to quiz you
margins like no staff got this
Representative so it salt is
another way that we're looking
at.
Doing forms of energy so I think
by and limiting ourselves.
To just solar.
In this.
I know a stagnant loop of this
organization probably from
California because that's where
I was born and that's where a
lot of the so we're companies
are from it's going to come in
here and they're gonna set up
shop and they're going to set up
these
the substance of our
organization and then it's going
to be just more outside
companies that are already
established.
Coming here and reaping the
benefits of New Mexico could you
see that happening if it was
just solar.
Madam speaker gentle lady are
more strong believer in
innovation.
In on the strong believer in
public policy which for
innovation so we are strictly
limiting the original bill to so
we're order will turn ex.
We are limiting the ability to
provide.
And I believe allowing all forms
of renewables.
Which is certainly a better
solution.
And thank you madam speaker I do
too that's why I really got
excited and I was doing all this
research on all the things that
we can do you hear New Mexico
it's just took solar out and put
all these different forms of
energy because we can pass this
bill and as you know so let's
use broadband for example I know
we just spent a tremendous
amount of money and brought down
which I believe is going to be
completely obsolete you on
Moscow's put all of these low
flying orbital satellites right
we're gonna have the technology
and nobody's going to be able to
use excuse anymore I was on a
range of my cell phone because
of it ends up being cell phone
service satellites we will be
able to say that anymore but at
the same time it's moving
forward with technology I look
at broadband we're gonna take
all of these trenches lines and
it could end up being obsolete
and I would hate to happen with
this was solar which agree that
would be bad to just limit
ourselves to just that one
technology.
Speaker gentle lady.
Just for the.
Care C. overs are Roch.
What we need to develop this
group public policy.
Is the ability to provide
providers the the three strikers
the
solutions that we care or
matching to that.
To come forward as they become
law.
To to tyrants.
And thank you madam speaker I
think you I really do because I
remember when I was a kid we
thought by twenty twenty we do
slide around like the Jetsons
you know I remember that from my
era so I really support this a
lot I think if we.
As legislators on both sides of
the aisle want to do what is
best for New Mexico I think we
would add the words renewable
energy I think.
I'm going to try to think of
single reason why I just want to
make it renewable energy and
what is the best.
For New Mexico and for the
people of New Mexico and for our
constituents and the people that
we represent we're not here just
to represent the solar industry
we're here to represent our
people and I think that
renewable energy would be the
best term to put err on your
amendment so I thank you very
much for bringing that forward I
really appreciate your bill and
I truly believe that if we want
to do what is best for the
people and be innovative how do
manage and be the place that is
experimenting and learning and
trying to come up the best forms
Energy I think you've nailed it
with your amendment and thank
you very much and yield my time
thank you madam chair.
There's further debate on the
floor substitute the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Strickler thank you thank you
madam speaker thank you
gentlemen I was gentleman from
Lake County are yield.
will yield to the gentleman from
Sam Moore thank you gentlemen
You know I I think you're on to
something here gentleman
We have the
energy transition act it's our
politicians plan.
To
switch over fifty percent to
renewables and so by adding you
know not just over but but all
and nobles that helps us reach
that goal it is is that right
would that be.
Regional
Mr chair judge starts you.
Madam speaker gentleman's share
more of a big believer in using
the right tool for the job.
Maybe circumstances solar panels
are very likely to be the right
tool.
But in my community on the side
of the story we're always.
Isn't.
What you did was problem in the
spring.
So.
The right tool for the job
okay sorry and is much more
reliable.
So.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman from way well I think
what what gives us a lot more
versatility is is it on the land
costs that I mentioned earlier
my costs are higher so you're
able to
take advantage of some offsite
wind power to connection are you
know to to combine with your
your your solar it's it's a win
land and and we had us operated
nine this is not a gem of the
late.
Benchmark you madam speaker and
chairman certainly does M..
We've talked mostly tomorrow
programs and so.
So technologies that we are in
charge already searches
knowledge.
You for example sure.
One for example with the
Dodgers.
That is creating methane gas
special court yes normal course
of operations might be able to
use national radio to generate
electricity to run yes your
order sure all.
Requires virtually no land would
require your minimal amount of
investment and would instruct
provide renewable energy at a
cost not only competitive but
more than competitive in this
circumstance we're.
Utility bills.
The folks on want to enable.
Mr Stewart said.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gem of the late.
Well as we.
What this does is it adds a
little more flexibility there's
also need apparel resources that
could be on site that takes you
can use the existing land but
grant.
Where the committee community
solar
system is is located they give
you some offsite.
Low cost land areas to to bring
in your land
you know so we're very because
of high costs land are really
believe you're gonna have to go
offsite in our in the
surrounding areas where land
costs regional and then you're
gonna you're gonna transfer
those are you know those
lectures use Google lots to that
particular community
renewable Larry
so I think this we need
reflections only that that you
would name again I think the
land cost is going to really be
very detrimental and developing
a solar resources because the
people that are in demand that
have a high demand for this run
bigger states would would you
say are just all concerns there
John of.
Mr miss madam speaker.
Gentleman from San Juan forty
acres program or declined in the
vicinity of the urban areas.
And so what this does Madam
speaker John.
what this does is yes it gives
you other alternatives and again
all it all kind of bones
together with the energy
transition act because by twenty
thirty technically if all of our
missions goals are met and fifty
percent of all of our energy
lexical energy is produced by
renewables they were all going
to be a community renewable
community the whole state is is
that the way to look at it too
gentleman and madam speaker.
Madam speaker John from chair
one wall this bill.
Currently limited.
It's.
The use community facilities
community all coal renewable
energy facilities to a grand
total of two hundred megawatts
each there is additional virtual
down the road sure distributed
resources that might come into
play in advantages PRC insert
appropriate.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman well I think and and
I'll wrap this up I think of
with what the goals are several
portion the guidelines of the
ship of course
but of the renewable portfolio
standard requirement fifty
percent by twenty thirty we're
all going to be in this together
because of electrons are co
mingled with on the border
doesn't matter where they're
produced in the state they are
they all end up to the customer
and now we all benefit.
With with with those renewable
resources and hopefully then
speaker and gentlemen it'll
it'll be at original cost so
what are like your man and I
think you think you need more
flexibility I think it's our it
helps.
One of the developers and our
and with that I'd I yield.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from Eddy County
Representative Brown thank you
madam speaker will the gentleman
from we County please yield.
Yield to the soft spoken gentle
lady from Medicare.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman so I am standing in
support of your amendment it
really makes sense to me I
prefer to talk earlier about
innovation and how.
Sometimes technologies emerge
that we can't predict right now
but Madam speaker and gentleman
I wanted to inform the body.
That nuclear is actually
renewable form of energy.
So a few years ago I I watch the
news coming out of the national
labs and two national labs
announced that they
They are believe that nuclear is
renewable because Iranian exists
in the rocks on the seashore.
And as long as there are ocean
waves Madam speaker gentleman
this uranium will be except kind
of picked up where with motion
into the water sure this mask is
hard to.
Speak through
there is always going to be a
supply of uranium it will be
inexhaustible and in fact.
Let me change mask just a minute
madam speaker will be right
back.
That she was used which still
keeps them.
So Mister speaker John men does
that sound like a good idea to
in terms of waste volume.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
sure.
Know
the star number two years.
What was respect two five
megawatt small installations
achievements probably not a lot
of replication but I will.
Our records are just rural to
general one from Senator wall.
Mr Chairman.
The process to.
Nuclear fusion.
And that reaction because of our
shorts and a blue streak
deregulation's sure so if for
which project you could run the
planet for us years on the top
one which.
Of like missions what.
We.
On the.
We'll be down the road.
We have no one to help what
information will bring to the
state questions cover mobile
internet to work.
Mr speaker and gentleman so I
agree with you completely about
that
When it comes to land usage
we've heard that some of the
solar arrays would take up quite
a bit of space in contrast Mr
speaker gentleman of the small
modular reactors would take up
for little space can be cited
underground earthquake groups
of terrorists couldn't touch it
there a lot of things that can
be done with these very small
scale reactors and their passes
and that everything just shuts
down and something goes wrong so
as far as technology innovation
go I think this is the wave of
the future and foreign countries
foreign nations understand this
and they're the ones moving in
the direction of this technology
especially some of the poor
countries because it makes sense
long term it's a long term
investment that pays better than
just about anything else so.
Mr speaker and gentleman
so I was going to get the first
small modular reactor and the on
the in the confines of the
national lab there and I believe
it's going to be supplying
electricity into Utah so I just
want the body to know Mr speaker
that there's just so much out
there in terms of renewable
energy technology.
And I just think we should box
ourselves in to one another that
looking back a few years now
we're gonna see is obsolete.
And that concerns me greatly and
of course the people who get
hurt are the.
The consumers who rely on it and
find out it's potentially
unreliable and that's why there
are a lot of energy commentators
who referred to solar and wind
for that matter not as
renewables but as unreliable.
And if anything we saw that in
Texas recently so.
Wanted to share those thoughts.
Mr speaker thank you very much a
gentleman thank you for your
time.
Is the overview data sources.
The gentle lady from ana Jareth.
Our representatives up.
This within just Mr speaker
Mr speaker will the gentleman
yield.
I will yield to the gentle lady
from chair.
And by the way just for those
that are listing Act grew up
west of lake Arthur I did not
grow up in a big municipality
okay so I do want to get that
cleared to Mr speaker I've been
reading.
Your floor substitute in regard
to the rich original bills and
then I went back and the
amendments in the ritual bill
and so they were consistent with
your with your tier amendment is
secretary is everything cope the
Senate crept through their Mr
speaker and gentle lady are
certainly intended to be an
option.
Mr speaker it's.
It is.
I guess my question to you is
where is the big change here and
I can probably already tell you
but maybe you want to the forms
of the body where the changes
are in your floor amendment
versus the.
Regular bill that has been
amended on the Senate side.
Mr speaker gentle lady very
simply.
Every place solar which
mentioned in.
Original Bill it has been
replaced with for renewable
energy.
Everything else in the bill is
exactly identical.
So Mister speaker gentle.
Gentleman from Lake County is
the if I have five pages marked
right and you can see how I'm
more about pages I had sticky
notes all over from that
correspond to the regional bills
that did go back and correspond
to all the amendments that were
put on it in the on the Senate
floor and and send it to the
state.
tax business and transportation
committee okay so I've gone back
and done that and at the first
one that I find is on page
fifteen is that correct.
Those changes to a current
starting on page four.
Members on this at Africa Mr
speaker gentleman on.
I'm gonna redo part of the new
wording that is something H.
fifteen Mr speaker and
gentleman.
And on your floor substitute.
Starting on page twenty online
twenty four is yes or the
generator is a community
renewable energy facilities
excluding and ladies community
renewable energy project.
As those terms are defined in
the community renewable energy
act in which case the renewable
energy certificate certificates
are but the distribution
cooperatives to lose electric
distribution system.
The community renewable energy
facility is inter connected.
So basically every time we see
one of those changes it is going
to say do community renewable
energy facility is that correct
Mr speaker and gentle lady you
are correct.
Okay and Mister speaker at it
like you said there's instances
all through this which makes it
very specific what we're talking
about here is that correct.
The speaker gentle lady that's
really the reason why we have to
make this more search to to
Representative series of
amendments because the way.
Let.
For service to to read it's
clear that's the only change we
made to the original bill.
That Mr speaker gentleman I also
want to point out to the body
that even though those changes
were made with.
Your conversation that you had
with Legislative Council you
also included the amendments in
here so everything with the
amendment is exactly the way
that this bill should read with
the exception of.
Community let's see where is
that at community renewable
energy system T. is that correct
Mr speaker and gentle lady
Legislative Council was
instructed to wait until the
bill.
Stressed out of the last
committee.
Was all much before we started
preparing for supposed to.
Well Mister speaker I guess that
brings me to a problem I don't
understand if we are trying to
be very specific in what the two
prisoners were talking about
earlier slide this would not be
acceptable because your floor
amendment does encompass.
That man makes the changes that
were put it on put on it in the
Senate side.
With the language that was that
it that includes the words
community renewable energy
facility.
And makes it a all encompassing
bill is that correct Mr speaker
gentle lady unless for some
reason which are unaware to
yield so we're developers an
advantage over other developers.
You know.
No information on one this would
be on trim line.
Well Mister speaker gentleman
from late I guess that's what
I'm so stopped of this because.
It does point out to those
developers that want to do these
projects very specifically it
leads them down that path where
they need to be going Mr speaker
and gentleman and with the
inclusion of the amendments.
And I'm trying to read the and
these amendments to the person
from the Senate tax business and
transportation committee
happened on March supports.
And.
That.
You have a clue to.
In your opinion Mr speaker
gentleman from lady has any
thank been left out that might
hinder these companies that want
to go in there start these.
Of.
Community development solar
community development programs
yes Sir.
Mr speaker gentle lady not to my
knowledge.
Mr speaker I don't understand
what the problem is Mr speaker I
I do hope that the two
presenters take this into
consideration because it does
very specifically spell out.
What will happen with the
changes.
From the Senate side with the
inclusion of the language that
does include a community
renewable energy facilities
making it very clear where this
can be done where there won't be
any all that to these companies
trying to find this particular
service.
To those particular individuals.
Mr speaker also I do want to
point out to the body that.
Probably my second year up here
that's been a while ago.
That these issues also came up
way way back then that would
have been in two thousand and.
Six two thousand seven they were
discussed at that point to.
Mr speaker here we are today.
And if we're going to get this
project going if we are
generally trying to go.
To a more sustainable if you
want to call it that even though
it's going to take exploration
like we are currently doing to
get the solar panels up and
running.
This is the way to go Mr
speaker.
Thank you very much speaker
gentle lady just warm charcoal
come round.
This would allow our nor to
participate in this program Mr
speaker I'm going to interrupt
you why not just call it
recycled all felt that Mr
speaker.
Is further debate on abortions.
See non generated from what you
are Representative guiding us
thank you Mr speaker I move to
table.
We have a motion to table it is
a roll call vote R. A. R. vote
in the affirmative and before
substitute will be tabled if not
we'll be back on or substitute
the vote is now up.
Thirty seconds to the close
electronic portion of the order.
But the remaining members that
are and what trying
Representative Anderson.
No.
Present Anderson both no
Representative Cadena.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Chandler yes.
Representative Dow.
Representative Dow is a no
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Hernandez both no
Representative lane.
David lane both no
Representative Ortez.
Representative Stansbury.
Representative Stapleton.
Representative Thomson yes
Representative Thomson both yes
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend both no.
Yes Representative enabled yes.
What is now closed five hundred
thirty eight in the affirmative
twenty five negative four
substitute is table Germans we
stalled for.
Thank you Mr speaker obviously
disappointed I thought.
More member made to bill.
Certainly for.
My constituents over on the side
of the street.
Really that's all one percentage
point thank you Mr speaker with
that are you as for the debate
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
the R. Representative locust.
I'm sorry Mr Mr speaker did you
call on us.
I called on Representative Lewis
all.
I cannot hear you.
Let me speak up there is further
debate the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative Lewis.
All right we'll skip past for we
will come back the gentle lady
from Santa Fe Representative
Lujan.
I will try one more she's got to
be the charm the representative
from Bernalillo see what we can
we score San Juan and let's see
here Representative Garcia.
Yes Representative month here.
Well you know go back to the
let's try that will go back
thank you gentle lady from Santa
Fe Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr speaker one of the
the young lady from Bernalillo
and favorite but yield.
Mr speaker will you thank you.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
and and thank you to sponsors
This is Ford I think that this
is really an important piece of
legislation that we have before
us today and I want to commend
you and all the work that it
took X..
It truly took the effort of our
community coming together and
I'd like to say that I was I was
part of the effort.
Working with limited workgroup
to working with our community
members and really all the
effort and the hard work and.
All the all the information that
we got and and and really.
Really what it took to bring
together really good piece of
legislation like we have here
today I just wanted thank you
for the hard work and and you
know I believe we said it's been
two years and and making and I
think that.
When we come together that we
did
I know this that is the type of
legislation that we got thank
you so much Mr speaker I just
wanted to staff and.
In full support of this and
thank you sponsors again.
Mr speaker thank you doctors are
you back thank you there is
further debate the gentleman
from Dona Ana Representative
Ferrary.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady east from Santa
Fe and Leo Santa Fe and Rio
Arriba and the public in Burley
up
I I just and so excited to like
Representative just before me
said mentioned that this is
really an important bill and the
solar energy industries
association
instead that our state obtained
only five point almost five
point five percent of its
electricity from solar even
though New Mexico is designated
as one of the top three state
with he solar the best solar
energy resources so I think this
is really
at an equity issue to for our
state that not only are do we
need to achieve more solar
production but we need to make
it more equitable community
solar program will offer equal
access to solar power for anyone
with electric bill and as I
understand that I know with all
the changes but anyone including
low income residents especially
renters residents and multi unit
buildings and municipalities and
nonprofits and businesses that
don't own their their roof is
that correct gentle lady Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes that
that is correct.
That's great and and I think
that will make make it more
equitable for everyone to be
able to save in their solar
bills and different things that
people need you know as our
demand for electricity is going
to grow I think it's going to
make it so that will be have a
more stable
production available for
everyone as we have electric
cars and use of more efficient
electric appliances and things
like that but also it can
stimulate the solar market for
smaller in state solar
developers and in comparison to
larger utility scale projects
and then we have the potential
to create hundreds of clean
energy jobs and
Mr speaker and gentle lady's
this the state currently has
just over two thousand solar
jobs and I think this is going
to create.
And I'm an opportunity for
more economic development and
and for jobs and important jobs
for our communities and then
also we can have this economic
development and stimulus for
tribal nations farmers and
landowners in rural communities
and small towns Mr speaker
gentle ladies do you agree with
that.
Mr speaker gentle lady
absolutely we agree with the
exactly the components that
you're discussing which is why
we so strongly support this bill
and been working so hard to get
it through the finish line.
Thank you and Mister speaker and
gentle lady I think it's going
to be
Really
important that this community
solar program will be able to
create smaller local distributed
energy sources that contribute
to a more resilient electric
grid and especially when
renewable energy is paired with
energy storage that has been
talked about a lot advances in
behind the meter storage it is
just becoming phenomenal and
where we are even seeing where
storage can recharge in an
electric car electric vehicle in
like three minutes so you know
the opportunities for electric
vehicles to be charged at home
and then to go for thousands of
miles which you know is unheard
of
right now but in in.
The near future to be available
and the national
Renewable energy laboratory the
spatial distribution of solar
bill pay X. compared to non
the R. or.
To compare to conventional power
generation systems I should say
will deliver power from a
concentrated point or central
location and that reduces the
vulnerability of energy supply
you know when there's damage
from a single event and it
increases the overall energy
system resilience and I think
the community solar program is
going to be not only equitable
it's going to be sustainable and
it's going to make it so that
we have that power available on
a local level so with that I
think it's really important stat
we support this legislation that
has been worked on for many
years and has gotten better with
each
you know I'm here and and all of
the different input as
the previous Representative
spoke about how that she has
been part of that so with that
Mr speaker and gentle ladies
thank you so much for bringing
this bill forward and working
with the senators to work on
this also.
The gentle lady from Dona Ana
thank you Mr speaker.
This matter haven't been debated
for three hours I move that the
debate sees.
Action that is closed.
John ladies are the sponsors of
Senate bill eighty four as far
as three times amended do you
wish to close.
Mr speaker we do very briefly
I'll yield this is been a long
Debate we know but it's been
also long type for us so we'd
like to offer some brief closing
remarks and I yield to the co
sponsor.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady thank you body thank
you to all the advocates all the
folks who have put in many many
hours of their lives and
dedicated their time and effort
to seeing this come through we
are so grateful and our
communities thank you in advance
for this incredible opportunity
to tap into one of our greatest
New Mexico resources with that I
yield Mister speaker gentle
lady.
Thank you and thank you Mr
speaker and I to resonate those
words and sentiments of thank
you across the board to everyone
as my co sponsor state it I also
want to thank the body for a
very intriguing debate today
it's always very invigorating to
hear everyone's comments
community solar opened solar
excess solar energy to access
and affordability to solar
energy.
To all communities across the
state who otherwise are strapped
by the high cost of energy with
little or no hope to participate
in the just transition to a
renewable energy world we look
forward to community solar being
able to offer that opportunity
to everyone and thank again
everyone who has spent countless
hours in many years in the scene
just to this finish line and
with that Mr speaker I now move
Senate tax business and
transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four three times amended
do now pass we're in final
passage of Senate tax business
and transportation committee
substitute for Senate bill
eighty four three times amended
the vote is now open.
Thirty cents to close.
But the remaining members
without a record.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative black.
Representative Brown.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Dow.
Representative you fell.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Harry Garcia yes
Representative Harry Garcia both
yes.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lord.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative night for.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Ted up the.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Zamora.
What is now closed
Representative yes.
Representative Castellano both
yes.
Anyone else all right the vote
is now closed by a vote forty
four new fermented and three in
the negative Senate tax business
and transportation will be
substituted for Senate bill
eighty four stress amended has
passed we we passed the sense.
Members will go to the next item
item thirty three the top of the
page Senate bill two hundred and
four Representative this gently
from McKinley San Juan ready.
Yes Mr speaker.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
several to one two hundred four
on final passage has been taken
it is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution the
gentle lady from McKinley San
Juan Representative Johnson to
explain the bill thank you Mr
speaker Senate Bill two zero
four is sponsored by Senator
Padilla.
It is the rural
telecommunications act this bill
will benefit children families
businesses the elderly and
communities to northwest New
Mexico who are still in need of
high quality and reliable
telecommunication services and
internet connectivity.
This bill amends the rural
telecommunications act to report
access to sacred wind
communications to become a
recipient of the State rural
universal service fund support
by the PRC.
Of which they were not afforded
because they were established
after the year two thousand
five.
Before two thousand five the PRC
and stall the process for
providing funding and support to
rural telecommunication
companies throughout the state.
This bill will ensure fairness
cut waste and improve
connectivity five fording sacred
when the same opportunities
alongside the current rural
local exchange carrier covert.
Most importantly this bill will
greatly improve the connectivity
expand and provide innovative
broadband services on Navajo
land in northwest New Mexico the
Navajo Nation and the eastern
Navajo agency at thirty three
Navajo chapter membership
endorses this bill.
Hi Representative nineteen
chapters and house district five
between McKinley and San Juan
counties.
Currently sacred when has
established service to nine of
those chapters the goal is to
see as many were all chapters
and communities receive
connectivity for the purpose of
health care emergency services
education and so much more.
As I am sure you my neighboring
colleagues Representative remote
and rural chapters and
communities.
Sacred when works hand in hand
with our communities and the
Navajo Nation appreciates the
mutual respect.
During the regular session of
twenty nineteen I introduced the
same bill house bill three
eighty five it passed the house
Senate committees with unanimous
bipartisan support we just ran
out of time.
We think Senator Padilla for
helping us carry this bill this
session Mr speaker I now stand
for questions.
Thank you gentle lady there is
debate the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Rod Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentlelady yields I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
I'm actually not real clear on
what this fund is I know we've
heard.
This in the past but this up.
This bill is not has not gone
through any of my committees
this year and I don't remember
the debate on this Mr speaker
and gentle lady could chew up.
Please explain to me what the
purpose of the state rural
universal service fund is what
is the purpose of the fund.
It isn't the that we all pay.
On our telephone bills every
month to support our
telecommunications services.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady but it's called the state
rural universal service fund
but.
What what does that part is fun
paid for.
To pay for infrastructure for
telecommunications services but
we reform debt and twenty
seventeen to pay for broadband
services.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady so it's it's to help
expand broadband.
services
Mr speaker Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
We've passed a couple of bills
and I can expect one I think the
make sure I'm not wrong.
But we have a sitting on the
calendar the number one item on
the counters is Senate bill
ninety three.
and that bill is to expand
broadband access.
And I and I see that your
expertise his name is on that
bill so I'm trying to figure out
this to these to interact do
these two bills interacted in
any way Mr speaker and gentle
jelly.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
not the bill that we are
stressing that discussing this
evening but that bill.
Is about building the broadband
office and
And the network service and this
bill is the dollars that go into
that office and the broadband
service.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady
We also past in our junior bill.
I believe it's a about a hundred
sixteen million dollars I
believe which was written into
the junior girls for
For broadband of services and
for paying for for broadband.
across the state so so Mister
speaker and gentle lady
How does that I'm trying to see
the global picture I I when I
see broadband and I see
broadband and I see broadband
I'm trying to figure out what
the the the puzzle how this
puzzle fits together and I'm not
seeing it at this point so.
I'm trying to understand we're
going to be voting on things and
it appears that we're somehow
interconnected and I'm trying to
see how that is so if you can
maybe help you with that Mr
speaker generally Mr speaker and
gentleman the chair bill was one
hundred and thirty million
however they need as one point
three billion.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady okay so this is just a
piece of the pie Mr speaker
John.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
this bill is only one piece of
the pie before.
There was no way to regulate
that sacred one
telecommunications because they
were created after the two
thousand five.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady
And this you don't have to
answer is advancement at maybe
you have the answer was that
money in the junior bills is
that recurring dollars for
broadband or was that just one
time dollars one time infusion.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
not additional.
However it is not recurring
funds.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I I understand I
prying Bill questions that the
the boilerplate answer is going
to be it's not this bill but I
we are spending in this arena
and I'm trying to figure out.
How and why
so Mister speaker gentle lady.
This fund the the rural
universal universal service
fund.
How is it financed how dollars
going to that I I understand on
on bills but what is the right.
And it and how is that across
every.
telephone company across the
state.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is
of the that we all pay.
On our monthly telephone bills
and insert twenty seventeen it
was reformed.
And that was also Senator
Padilla is billed to re focus
the money on broadband
telecommunications services.
Okay thank you I think our
Representative yeah I know we've
that the I know the
representative by the centre has
been at the forefront of our
trying to identifying broadband
problems and state so I I do
appreciate that
What.
Do we know what is the surcharge
of what is the fee and does it
very in in utility and phone
bills across the state.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
usually doesn't very but we came
PRC flexi or percentage to chief
deputy million.
So thank you Mr speaker and at
Mr speaker gentle lady the
SO the PRC is one whose
administering this or is the one
regulating this.
so Mr speaker gentle lady B. the
C. it's self do we know what
that fee is or do we have any
idea what that percentages.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
could be as little as sixty
cents or it could be as much as
a dollar eighty.
Thank you
the speaker gentle it is that is
that on on cell phone lines is
that on.
Is that on a regular land lines
as well.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
everything that the PRC
regulates.
Okay Mister speaker and gentle
lady at.
What I'm not sure that's exactly
correct that would be even on.
utility bills Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman or
telecommunications is concerned
okay thank you Mr speaker
general so table potentially.
Of the Xfinity those guys pay
into this fund.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
not the purview of this bill.
Thank you I understand I'm
trying to understand how to have
a have money to pay.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
federal government.
Regulates internet and cable we
do not.
Okay thank you are Mr speaker
and gentle lady from.
What is the current balance not
Fund district in general.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
ranges from six million to
thirty million our rate is
capped at thirty million.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady
The expenditures of this fund
House somebody apply.
So eight the current companies
that are able to access this
fund.
How did they do that and and
what maybe that's the wrong way
to ask this question when they
want to access this fund do they
have to bring projects for for.
I'm trying to I don't know how
this person's work Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman any
regulated telecommunications
company would now be able to
apply to this Fund with this
bill sacred when would now be
able to apply to this fund.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I I guess what I'm asking
is they can apply but the
application doesn't have to have
a specific project as I have to
have how does this how how do
you apply for this Fund
stringently.
Mr speaker and gentleman two
thirds of the funding and the
application has to apply to
technology and broadband and two
million per project program
excuse me per project thank you
Mr speaker generated and for to
apply for two million for the
project.
How much does the project have
to cost right you're not paying
for the entire project are they
were they paying the entire cost
that it.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
would be one way to.
To develop a project these
projects are very expensive so
this would be one way one
resources to help them.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady that maybe ask the
question a little bit different
way
if somebody applies for a
project as the entire project
gets funded by this fund or is
there some dollars that come in
from the company as well.
Mr speaker and gentleman this is
only one tool to accomplish
broadband broadband development
it could be resource matching
from for example the Navajo
Nation and other entities.
Okay I understood Mr speaker
generated at that it could be
matching dollars but it doesn't
have to be matching dollars Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker
yes.
Yes Mr speaker director
gentleman correct okay thank you
Mr speaker and gentle lady
how many companies are
currently.
Are able to our our.
Under this fund are able to to
access this fund miss
regenerated Mr speaker and
gentleman at the moment there
are eleven companies.
So thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady so high
As as I'm as I was reading FY
are it appears that.
That one company.
is excluded and and that that
company is sacred wins what is
the reason that sacred lands was
excluded.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
It was because they were created
after two thousand five.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so.
Other other telecommunication
companies were able to do this
but there was a deadline to be
able to
to be able to apply for these
funds.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
legislation was created.
By the date.
In two thousand five by that by
the time the date was an act.
So thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady these eleven
companies
that have.
Receive money out of this fund.
Do we have an idea of during
that time.
Are how much money has been paid
out of funds those eleven
companies.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
varies however the PRCA the PRC
price utilize the money to
service the entire state.
The real companies Mr speaker
and gentleman thank you Mr
speaker gentle lady I.
I think from your earlier
comments I think it's able to
finally figure that out the
speaker gentle lady I'm just
wondering how much money has
been distributed regards the
sacred winds has been excluded
from Mr gradually.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
varies however on an annual
basis it's been capped at
eighteen million.
Before two thousand seventeen Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
generally what was the cap
removed or get it is the new
number after two two thousand
seventeen.
Mr speaker and gentleman in
twenty seventeen it was reformed
and it grew to thirty million at
that time.
Senator speaker and gentleman
and that is the cap now.
Thank you Mr speaker and
generate and so Mister speaker
gentle lady to of the Fund I
believe you said was also
captured around thirty million
so it can be completely depleted
every year Mr speaker Mr Mr
speaker and gentleman yes
correct.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady this fund.
in any way.
Is it is it subsidize all
through the through our general
fund and the speaker jelly.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is
not subsidized by the general
fund it is the fee that we pay
every month as mentioned awhile
ago thank you Mr speaker John
thank you miss general that was
the answer I was hoping for that
that that the species that are
paid.
Three telecommunications.
That the fees that are going
into this are completely are the
here
Full source for the for this fun
so the speaker and gentle lady
Once again I know you answer
this for me before but now I'm
trying to put it in context.
What is the maximum or what is
the cap that the PRC can put on
this the.
two people in their in their
Telephone bills Mr speaker John.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman it would not be
appropriate for us to say at
this time it is at the
discretion of the PRC.
Thank you Mr speaker enjoys of
for now that.
Are they can be here
Process through to cell phone
bills and land line bills that
the PRC has full discretion on
the what that he can be Mr
speaker Mr.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes you
are correct.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
this is not a question the staff
thinking out loud here the PRC
becomes another department under
the administration wondering if
telecommunications will still
end up.
In that department I I don't
know and it's not part of this
bill so.
Thank you Mr speaker July one
one last question or to ask
questions
As the.
Since this is under the PRC
currently has a PRC taken a
position on this legislation.
Mr speaker John either this year
or previous year when I was
introduced.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
are neutral at this time.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
of the speaker gentle lady
I did receive a note from a
member that that.
That are sacred winds was
actually has been in the state
since before two thousand three
so that is that is that
incorrect information speaker
gentle.
Mr speaker and gentleman we are
not going to talk about and
specific company in this bill we
were talking about the need for
telecommunications.
Services thank you Mr speaker
and gentleman I do appreciate
that we don't want to talk about
a specific company but at this
point there's only one company
that is excluded that I'm aware
of are there other companies Mr
speaker and gentle lady that
currently are operating in New
Mexico that are excluded.
Mr speaker and gentleman can you
repeat your question please.
The site sacred wins is there
any other company that is.
Currently excluded that is
operating in New Mexico but is
currently excluded from
accessing this fund.
Mr speaker and gentleman we
don't know that at this time any
company would be eligible for
this opportunity at this time
after the still.
Okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady just a I think.
Like I said one of one of my
members brought to my attention
they believe the second ones
that have been in the state
prior to the legislation so.
If that is the case I was
wondering why they might have
been excluded this speaker and
gentle lady appears at the fund
is kind of agnostic.
As to
How or who potentially could
correct.
Apply for these funds it does
appear as
This year broadband is that very
big push within the legislature
both chambers both parties
Mr speaker and gentle lady
However is.
As was stated earlier that that
sacred wind Seguin's was not.
Able to access this because of
the date to Senate right Mr
speaker I think the state would
appreciate yes I think that's
exactly why we did liquor reform
which years because.
just trying to get into business
after a certain date and after
everyone has had an opportunity
to are to reap the benefits from
the industry and so I would say
the speaker or who is currently
sitting in the speaker's chair
would agree that just excluding
somebody because of the date is
not a good way to do business in
the state of New Mexico so I
appreciate the answers to my
questions and I'll make sure on
that date that secret when
seconds Mexico thank you Mr
speaker and gentle lady think
programs.
There is further debate the
gentleman from San Juan.
Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr chair will gentle
lady from McKinley healed.
Mr speaker I yield to my brother
chin I am from San Juan County
representative Allison.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I cash today's.
Senator introduces field because
of I support this bill whole
heartedly because it was in
highlighted one of the dilemmas
that was highlighted by the
pandemic and.
My area and parts of rural New
Mexico are finally being brought
into the into the twenty first
century.
Yes because of that that I
support this bill.
Thank you today's so she
changed.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
should not.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Harding curry
quay Roosevelt Colfax son
together and you Representative
Chatfield thank you Mr speaker
does gentlelady yields.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady how are
your customers affected by the
inconsistency of treatment that
you receive.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
Without.
Without and without including
sacred when it's been very hard
to deliver telecommunications
and broadband throughout rural
communities in our in in our
area in northwest Mexico.
Or other companies like it.
What are the consequences to the
company of being treated
differently.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
cost.
Is unrecoverable to regulatory
costs and it could be ten times
more.
Which reduces their inability to
to innovate Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think you have to the additional
well but then I got a little
confused by it so is if it's
okay I'll just ask again the
what why are you treated
differently.
Mr speaker and gentleman simply
because of the date they.
They became they they came into
business and have.
The date of that
telecommunications Act.
So other than this bill
allocative you deal with this
situation around a secretary
when responded to the situation.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
have had to be very creative in
and of and conduct business in
innovative ways to deliver their
services and they have delivered
services and are beginning to
deliver services in some of the
toughest areas in our rural
communities.
Mr speaker gentle lady of
providing with uniformity how
would things change how the
company changed our services to
your community change.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
will have the.
Capital to.
The more innovative and expand
their services and provide
innovative and high quality
telecommunications and internet
internet services in our area
is.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
the ladies thank you for the
specialized.
There is for the debate the
gentle lady from Travis
Representative county Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
for the gentle lady your place
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady.
Mr speaker
As I stated earlier Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
I do live about rural part of
the.
Scamming I've always lived in
Travis county I live in the very
rural parts not in the city.
Mr speaker a long long time ago
our rural telephone carrier out
there is very innovative in
their thinking and whenever they
were laying new lines.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
thought this was very innovative
on their part a lot of people
were trying to concern about
what they were doing.
Whenever they late these lines
because they went underground.
Thank you ladies fiber optic in
their.
And people are both what is this
for.
And whenever they whenever the
telephone cooperative said
because one of these days
everybody will have the
computer.
And you know what.
With that fiber optic that they
put their and other innovative
techniques that they used.
That community down there cotton
with wavy west of lake Arthur
Brady budget that might be
listening.
They were the very first in that
particular area that had
internet access and they also
had.
Access to all the television
stations that were originally
came more Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Whenever this whenever we're
trying to.
Discuss this legislation here is
that any company I'm not gonna
name names I understand there.
That are they going to go in
there because I know that
broadband is a big big bank
right now.
It's a helpful to lots of areas.
Well there will they be
innovative enough to.
Go down that path we're.
Whenever they do.
Try to get everybody connected
that this Senator patients will
be included in the package Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes
that is very possible.
Mr speaker that's very good to
hear because I know that having
internet access is very
important especially what we
have just experienced this past
year whenever nobody.
Could go anywhere because of the
emergency orders that were in
place Mr speaker gentle lady.
We'll just provided that may be
coming into that particular area
what I have to get
authorizations from the other
part of the state the Navajo
Nation I'm just throwing
something out there before they
can proceed with getting
everybody the services that they
need through this
telecommunications bill.
Mr speaker and madam.
Gentlelady yes they are already
there and they would have to go
through any regulatory process
as any other company what.
Okay so Mister speaker I I know
that.
It.
The nation is that we and I did
not they would have to go
through other some other
governmental entity to be able
to get this communication like
your.
we have they're going to do it
that that was my concern on that
part of that.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Will the is this company going
to provide service that is not
going to be the the set was
interruptions.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
With the responding to your
first question I wanted to let
you know that the president of
the Navajo Nation regulatory
relief indoor since this bill
and supports this bill and works
very well with us great when.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
they will be subject to all the
quality regulatory requirements
as any other company.
And Mister speaker I know that
this is that they have been
treated quite differently than
the other.
Telecommunication companies and.
Have you responded to.
To the our state over this
unusual treatment.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes.
And Mr speaker gentle lady what
was the response that you.
Mr speaker and gentleman gentle
lady Mr speaker gentle lady this
is the reason why we are here
and this bill will clarify.
With the PRC how to treat our
the company such as sacred when
and other companies.
Okay so Mister speaker and
gentle lady was this in any way
change.
The fund support to the other.
What does say there was fourteen
other.
Telecommunications companies
well that have an effect on them
but all.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is why the fund was increased to
thirty million and twenty
seventeen to accommodate the
The teller companies.
And the gross Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Okay and Mister speaker gentle
lady of if it's your bill does
get passed.
And.
They're able to start what is
our time frame that we're
looking at here.
For completion of all of this.
And Mr speaker gentle lady
development that's okay.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
And I'm you know I could be
sixty days are whenever this law
maybe you know an act.
Okay Mister speaker as far as
the completion date on this I
know that there's lots of
variables especially if they're
just like down in our area we
have some.
I would like to say rain storms
but it's been I don't know over
here to have since we've had any
rain down there the sometimes
the door blows that they can't
see to work a we have just
absolute raised and weather with
no moisture not now there's lots
of variables in that but Mr
speaker.
I'm just very very concerned
what this company's be being
treated so different from the
others Mr speaker gentle lady
from McKinley and San Juan I do
appreciate your answers here and
Mr speaker I do yield.
There is further debate the
gentleman from civil McKinley
Bernalillo Socorro San Juan and
by eight Representative Harry
Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady from San Juan
McKinley County jail.
Mr speaker I yield to my good
neighbor Representative Harry
Garcia.
The.
Thank you Mr.
Chair of the gentle lady
this is just a question what's
the question again.
this company that we're trying
to work within what we're trying
to do here is not just benefit
the native Americans in my
correct this to budget all rural
New Mexico my correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes you
are correct this company
services a large community in
large part of northwest New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and the reason I brought
that up is you know a lot of
people do seem to think that
this is just are providing
service for
native Americans and that the
wrong impression you know I do
represent ten years
Representative not only is the
lack of money and this left on
and
you know I didn't care for by
what we're trying to do here is
to benefit everybody in rural
New Mexico is a correct
assumption then Monday.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes you
are correct.
Mr speaker.
Gentlelady to verify a question
that you're asking.
When taking which came into
existence that actually came
into existence in two thousand
six my correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes you
are correct and the act was in
place in two thousand five.
Of.
Thank you madam.
Of generating does it just takes
me a message that they were in
existence involvement check
doesn't matter it just so to
clarify some there funding on
Madam Bob Mr speaker and gentle
lady I really appreciate to ring
in the station up goes up if you
live all rural New Mexico and
really really tough to get in
there any connectivity's for
kids with school.
Excuse me for a school you know
somebody's before you don't even
have cell phones or do or any
kind the land line in this will
be a big being approved for use
in rural New Mexico so with that
being said thank you and thank
you for bringing this it's the
legislation up I don't forward
to supporting it
Mr speaker thanks for the time
made me speak.
There is for the debate the
gentle lady from Santa
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady from McKinley yeah.
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady I have
said here and and listen to the
debate and those things that I'm
confused on.
I was elected in two thousand.
And we.
At that particular time those
major discussion on making sure.
That are native American
communities around the state
inspection of the western part
of the state had access to
telecommunications.
And at that particular time.
So when I was already in
existence.
And they you know first freshman
they ask us to support what they
were trying to do at that
particular time to to provide
us money for lack of a better
word of light that came out of
our junior fund to help get
access.
telecommunications service
native American communities and
so my questions then.
Is.
There were a lot of money.
To support this.
And you can tell me as to
whether or not those dollars
were used for matching dollars
cost of last year we got back
then was that it would help
provide.
Service.
To our native American
communities.
And so can you give me a little
bit about our history because
some.
Issues around how it's been done
and having access to both spots
of dollars that are now
available.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
gentle lady we cannot tell you
about at the history of sacred
when at this time however we do
know that it took several years
for them to become a fully
functioning company and build
their company.
David do you tell me what they
because I know at the time at
least that's what we've been
told over the years.
That those dollars what let me
back up what's the difference
between the state.
universal service fund.
And the dollars that are
available.
From the edge thank you right
dollars.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
state universal dollars are the
dollars that we collect that we
talked about earlier and the
federal E. rate dollars are for
broadband purposes such as
schools.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
the bill that you were referring
to was in two thousand three or
quest.
No it was not it was with
several wins because I work
directly with them but be that
as it may it was state grants
and I don't have a problem with
that well what I'm trying to get
clarified its price of.
because.
What.
The fact that the dollars that
we're supposed to be used under
the richest ministration.
Was supposed to propel provide.
Services to our native American
communities.
And I'll send over the years you
know for us freshman back then
it was to take dollars to the
native American communities.
Lawsuits and to so my question
is are these dollars there
you're looking for a request
from the universal fund what
this does be used to connect
with the dog dark fiber that is
she supposed to already be in
existence.
Our telecommunications for
native American communities.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it is
possible and all options are on
the table.
It is possible to how many
dollars.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it
would be will for whatever
projects that would come to
appropriations.
The lady we don't we don't know
that at this time.
So right now you're telling us
you don't know where the dark
fiber.
Lee is.
And you don't know what areas.
It is.
And.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
That is not the purpose of this
bill.
However that is an option for
the rest of the state and it is
on the table what is the purpose
of the bill if it's not to
connect telecommunications to
our native American communities.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it is
to provide an understandable
regulatory process for this
company.
So will this company have
access.
If this bill passes.
Then does this company have
access to this universal service
fund.
Mr speaker and gentle lady yes.
So.
Please you said quest for I
think you sent question to the
mom bell.
Mr speaker gentle lady at quest
was I believe in two thousand
three okay so you're saying
that.
Those companies are already
there.
Whether it's called CenturyLink
request this kind of the same
animal in the sense so will they
have there will there be a
bidding process once they have
access.
The universal service fund.
Mr speaker and gentle lady they
will be treated like any other
telecommunications company.
I'm can you tell us how that.
Currently.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it
will depend on the demographics.
Of the need the service area the
customer service and the cost
per project.
Okay gentle lady.
Can you tell me if any of these
dollars will be utilized.
For matching with federal
dollars.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it is
possible.
Okay gentle lady.
Your experts
will eight dollars.
We utilized a tired and and
anyway anyway to match with the
right balance because when you
answered the universal service
fund project telecommunication.
Those dollars that are taken out
of our our
The over twenty miles of dollars
that at a that dollars are taken
out the same way unless that has
changed longer barrel dollars
and everyone in the country pays
a small percentage of that part
of money.
And those dollars are access.
Based on the number of of
On the re launch.
Free breakfast our programs so
what will these dollars to be
used for access or master of
dollars to provide the services
in the schools that that is
needed.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it is
possible usually it is a
government entity that budget
implies however this company
could then apply as well.
To a project Mr speaker and
generally.
As I understand it the right
dollars they have the applied
for by individual schools and
it's based on the special
programs there are there not to
change negative in later
American communities but I know
it works for serve the region.
Is based on.
On numbers as to how those
dollars come answer these to
these communities.
Mr speaker gentle lady would you
repeat your question I just.
You know I'm eighty nine in New
Mexico has a nice school
districts somehow I think they
have that many school just.
And so eighty nine from but
anyways that the school or the
school district has to apply for
the right dollars.
Right dollars.
Are some pretty substantial
dollars.
What this gentlelady.
Yes my question first and then
I'll tell you what I'm going.
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is for broadband this bill is
about telecommunications and
parity for a company.
Dollars.
Are not broadband eve ry ro
dollars or to provide that
particular service in school or
that school district and the
only way that that can come in
is it has to come in by way of
application.
And what we're talking about two
different.
Please go they both won supports
the other.
Generally the structure to
address the speaker all Mr
speaker I apologize Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
On what this is over the years
of the legislators.
You know we keep hearing.
About the service.
That a lot of these communities
don't have access to.
My concern is is I don't have
any thing to really cool what
I'm about to say what adventures
say during my tenure Mr speaker
and gentle lady as a legislator
the we've probably put billions
of dollars into trying to get
service and maintenance rural
areas.
This legislation.
Will pass those dollars are not
squandered by different
companies like I feel that they
have been in the past.
Nineteen years Mr speaker and
gentle lady there should be some
kind of continuity of service
provided maybe not all but many
of these communities.
And.
One year we look at that and and
some of those companies have
taken the service to.
Reservation our.
Property but not in two.
The
The.
And some dollars after dollars
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
And my concern is to make sure
we're going to go down this
billion dollar rolled again that
we get something out of our.
Of our taxpayer dollars because
Mexico could not receive these
dollars.
Right cell phone
landline.
We're not paying into this
bucket.
And so
I would really like to know you
know maybe we can do what's
right now but I think you're
for knows that
these dollars.
The lady are connected like they
should be.
Because.
Right.
Because my brother was one New
Mexico's top salesman in the
western United States.
And those you right dollars Mr
speaker and gentle lady work
flowing into New Mexico like
crazy.
And.
It makes no sense that these
dollars have not been utilized
like they should have so
I'm just you know want to make
sure that.
The access fund is use for what
it's supposed to be utilized for
and that's my question the line
of my question is not that I
don't support Mr speaker
generating the service going
into these rural communities.
Is just making sure that those
dollars are used like they're
supposed to be utilized and they
right hopefully within the next
three to five years in your
schools have the service many of
those schools in rural New
Mexico the service that they're
supposed to have and and and
that's why I'm asking the
question because I'm not do it
has spent.
Saying that we are we've got
dark fiber along I. twenty five
but it's going nowhere.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from McKinley and
settle on you Mr speaker I yield
to the gentleman.
Thank you.
Mr speaker assessment clarifying
questions that they go with
respect to the some of the
analysis the done out there.
The.
Mr speaker
I guess I need some
clarification.
The the fiscal impact report
very crisply clear says that
there's only one company in the
state of New Mexico that this
bill is that.
And that the same programs
communications Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman at the
moment that is true but this
bill will reform that
telecommunications Act.
Mr speaker I understand that and
and let's one piece of the
puzzle but right now.
Every analysis that I've read so
far.
Very specifically calls this one
company out and and the reason
Mr speaker the that these
companies this company is called
out in some of the reports is
accurate some of the reports is
just wrong
so the reason Mr speaker that.
according to this the secretary
wins.
September when communications is
not able to access have access
to those these funds in this the
fact is because of the date that
it was incorporated Mr speaker.
And then according to the
reports it's two thousand and
five and Mister speaker.
You do your research on on that
from the secretary of state's
web page Sir Schaper wins when
communications was actually
incorporating instead of New
Mexico in the middle of two
thousand four.
Mr speaker if you go to dun and
Bradstreet it gives a very
similar day so.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady I
guess where I'm going with this
is is is all of the now also so
everything that's out there is
talking specifically about
secretary when.
I don't have a problem that.
But my question Mr speaker is.
Is there a corporation for two
thousand five one and they have
their stuff together we're
thinking of the other paperwork
ready and for the spinster
Mr speaker and gentleman the act
was passed in two thousand four
and it wasn't actually the rules
were actually promulgated and
for two thousand five and the
business was and getting up and
running.
Mr speaker.
This but I have never gone back
and read the act I'm reading
this bill and I'm trying to read
all the stuff Mr speaker those
provided to us by all the people
that work up.
And the third and fourth floor
and provide us with information
to be able as intelligent
debates and so according to the
US
for Leslie Act was very specific
that if you don't have all your
acts all your stuff together you
can apply for this or Mr speaker
is that very specifically should
be as with most action most
things that are implemented with
respect to business protocols it
is based on the date that you
are operated and based on the
date that this company was
incorporated Mr speaker.
They they fall within the
ability to get this so there
must Mr speaker of Dan deadline
at some point in time that the
can probably missed Mr speaker
would that be accurate.
Mr.
Mr speaker and gentleman there's
been several three iterations
like most companies when they
first start at and also.
That P. Garcia did not recognize
the date from their start at.
Mr speaker and gentleman and
that is what put them after that
qualifying date two thousand
five.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
What we just do this for rules.
Committee or something to where
instead of enacting legislation
that doesn't exist Mr speaker
for any other company in the
state of New Mexico what so ever
why didn't we just go through
this with rules and direct PRC
to allow them to back up.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
attempted to do that but we
decided to go this route so that
any rural company can have the
opportunity to apply for this
fund.
Mr speaker and gentle lady at
the I appreciate that answer but
the point being.
That this legislation will make
sense to open up business in New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker this this
bill backtracks to allow a
different company that has been
in business now for fifteen.
Seventeen years Mr speaker we'll
go back and take advantage of
all of something that was
enacted in two thousand five and
so Mister speaker I still
believe that they should have
been dealt with rules and
direction from the legislative
body to the PRC thanks for us
and then we can come in Mr
speaker Wesson Act that makes
sense something that actually
makes New Mexico strangely
enough looks like about a state
wants to do business with
people.
So Mr speaker was that I still
feel very strongly that they
should have been a rules bill I
I don't have an issue with Mr
speaker what we're trying to
accomplish from an overall
standpoint but if we miss the
following day or what ever
happened with respect to the
multiple change that happened
with safer wins and I'm not
gonna go through their history
that everybody can find on the
internet.
Mr speaker I just I I.
We should clean up our past
before we make the legislature.
With that Mr speaker gentle lady
like I said I understand what
you're what you're trying to
accomplish I I think this is a
very bad way to accomplish
cleaning up.
Legislation so with that Mr
speaker and gentle lady are you
about.
With one last person on the
board there is for the debate
the gentleman from Chavis Lee
admiral Roosevelt Representative
Anderson.
Thank you Mr speaker I'll try to
be sure of because we've we've
had.
Lengthy discussion on on this
bill so will the gentle lady
from McKinley San Juan you.
Mr speaker I yield to the kind
gentleman.
Representative of.
Senate Bill tool for has just a
wonderful title
and and that the rural
telecommunications act
and I listen this evening with
with a lot of interest because
as you know there are many areas
in New Mexico that are deficient
in their.
Of broadband
Access.
Connectivity the ended
telecommunications for lack of.
you you did a great job this
evening Representative talking
about public safety
of education deficiencies that
result from the lack of this but
I was interested this evening
that I never heard the word
economic development and that is
because.
I think that of that two must be
one of the objectives of Senate
bill two oh four could you
comment on that Representative
please.
Question.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for your question yes this
bill will create as a result of
this bill we will be able to
create economic development we
will be able to participate and
distance learning telehealth.
And at.
Create economies where we never
have been able to before Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Thank you gentle lady and and my
my addition to that of on
economic development is instead
of that is of a result of the
improved
of telecommunications.
Anywhere in New Mexico where of
the improvement is being and she
so I just wanted to confirm that
that that too is a priority and
and certainly don't diminish
other quality of life
considerations essential to
considerations but I I think
that when we try to deal with
the state that's.
Forty seven or worsen.
with of a stagnant economy of
currently shut down for COVID
reasons that of economic
development has got to be at the
forefront of of.
Our state investments every day
of because otherwise I think
we're we're captured in in sort
of the end of the pack in terms
of economic activity so up I'm
gonna really just close to and
say that I see this.
Senate bill of two oh four is it
is a statewide initiative.
And
I was gonna ask you a final
question on that.
Since.
You you you have lived I believe
a long time in your legislative
district neighborhood.
And how would you characterize
Hello communication broadband
of.
Of.
Development in your legislative
district these last five ten
years do you have a short answer
that gentle lady Mr chairman.
I mean Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman as I mentioned in my
opening statement hi
Representative nineteen chapters
in northwest New Mexico.
And out of the nineteen chapters
sacred wind has been able to
develop telecommunications in
nine chapters so I would like to
see the remaining ten chapters
be developed and more so my
neighboring chapters we have
thirty three chapters in eastern
Navajo agency and wouldn't it be
wonderful to develop
telecommunications and internet
connectivity in all those areas.
Thank.
And the Navajo Nation has
endorsed and so has that
president of that the store
number HSD thank you Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Well thank you very much for
that representative I hope
district I will enjoy improved.
Of telecommunications as oil I
hope other areas of the state
that are working hard to secure
improved access in terms of
telecommunications broadband Mr
speaker that includes my
questions thank you lady good
luck.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close thank you
Mr speaker thank you for the
debate we will continue to work
hard and we will invite you to
northwest New Mexico for a grand
opening days
I now move I do pass on Senate
bill two zero four.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill two hundred four the
vote is now open.
Thirty seconds members.
Is about to closed.
At the vote is now mostly close
the electric electronic portion
of the vote is now closed well
the clerk called the members
without reporting the.
Representative Ferrary.
Representative Gallegos.
Representative okay both both
yes.
Representative Harry Garcia yes
Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes.
Representative at a.
Representative editable yes.
Representative Andrea Romero yes
Representative Andrea Romero
votes yes.
Representative small yes
Representative small boats yes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of sixty six in the affirmative
and one of the negative Senate
bill two hundred four as duly
passed this house.
We will now go to item thirty
six Senate bill two hundred
eighty one.
Representative set up are you
ready yes Mr speaker waiting to
that point.
Absolutely
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
several two hundred eighty one
on final passage has been taken
and that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentle lady to explain the
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker US Senate
bill twenty one The contract
renegotiation for some
businesses act which is a simple
bill which allows businesses on
the tail end of their needed
repayments were in good standing
at the beginning of the public
health order but were negatively
impacted by the pandemic were
forced to close or reduce their
their workforce to be allowed to
renegotiate agreements by the
end of the year and while many
businesses were able to move
online or to remote work a lot
of our businesses have sensitive
information for our
manufacturing and did not have
that option this bill is a
protection for our businesses
and in and for those for
investing in our local economies
and sometimes eight dollars
investing we are local workers
it has been passed unanimously
in every committee on the Senate
will at and on the Senate floor
likely because it's a clear sign
to businesses The New Mexico
standing by those investments
and that is that.
There is debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
rattling thank you Mr speaker
will the gentle lady I see
through the processing grant
last the general senator from
you yes I yield to the gentleman
from San Juan thank you Mr
speaker thank you generally from
Santa Fe.
I want to ask this is new
material for me I I noticed this
phrase qualifying into do is use
a couple of times would you just
help me Mr speaker generation
Santa Fe understand what is that
all thank you to you within the
context of this bill.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen of coal mining entity
is the company that entered into
the contract.
Mr speaker gentle lady and so.
I think maybe just give a little
bit of context for me and other
members would you mind just
give me an example of you know
maybe
and industry or or any specific
contact with this that's what
apply thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen yeah so we there
are definitely companies that
are utilizing me to funds and we
to contracts to us it based with
the New Mexico and you know a
lot of times they have sensitive
information so they go there
please cannot take that
sensitive information home with
them to work on it it has to be
done in person and so when the
public health order always came
forward and you know in person
work was significantly reduced
only for you know necessary
business a lot of them have
reduced how to reduce their
workforces and in our leader
contracts there is a because we
to is about creating jobs in New
Mexico with they were forced to
reduce their workforce because
they could hold on to those and
so as a result of the of the
COVID pandemic other questions
are so it really is those that
have to do a lot of sensitive
information or manufacturing
facilities that may need to do
things in person.
Mr speaker gentle anything from
Senate ethics in that so we're
talking about I was assuming
private in the nonprofit
entities that are that entered
into leader type agreements with
either local or state or county
governments is that correct Mr
speaker yes that is the case
this really is a cover for those
that didn't have protections
built in it's a statutory
mechanisms for protection on you
know many of the the pro project
participation project
participant agreements go
through the state and the local
communities and so those already
have a.
Correction built in through
their the protections COVID
other situations that are beyond
the control of the company but
there are some that entered in
directly with the local local
communities and this really is
just covering to make sure that
all of those that entered into
league leader agreements in good
faith and we're bringing jobs
New Mexico are also protect.
Mr speaker gentle lady
I'm not familiar with really how
we to words and so when you say
that they're protected I'm just
not quite following long
protected from what and we've
reference COVID.
so could you just maybe bring up
to the speed limit on that thank
you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen so what that what many
of these propped up sorry I get
to work with project
participation agreements already
have built in or what they call
business climate change
provisions that are through the
state if they if these
participants of these businesses
entered into these with local
communities instead they're not
protected under those
necessarily and so this is a
protection to make sure that you
they're not covered by those
business climate change
provisions of which comment it
is can is considered part of
that that provision then this
would also protect them through
a statutory change.
Mr speaker gentle instead of it
thank you for the clarification
I'm curious about the
subparagraph B. as in Bravo
talks about this these
qualifying these they've failed
or exceeded their obligations.
so if they build their
obligations to me as a as a
contract where that means
something like a very important
to contract.
but I'm wondering if that means
something different we talked
about having some of the walls
the obligation let me reconfirm
with my with my witness on this
it is Scott Scanlon was a
registered lobbyist to safely.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman there what it means is
both they're in the process of
filling their obligations under
the agreement and so their
assessed for often times these
agreements are mile markers
along the way and so while they
may have been built you know as
of March first twenty twenty
prior to comment right now since
then they may have had to reduce
their workforce or close down
some of the facilities.
Mr speaker gentle under Santa Fe
would you mind just just showing
me in the body and if if we
spell the past this tonight what
would this do to these type of
providers thank you Mr speaker
thank you Jim and they would be
out of they they they would not
be within their contract anymore
and then they would have there's
a clawback provision within
these leaders contracts and they
would be forced to pay back
potentially hundreds of millions
of dollars depending on how much
the invested in the community Mr
speaker gentle in Santa Fe and
some of these businesses there
talk about are these any of
these New Mexico businesses.
I mean Mr speaker gentleman this
is a statute that I mean it's
it's leisure is right to summer
within the state's summer maybe
outside investing into New
Mexico there was an article
about the reference this back in
January in the Albuquerque
journal so this maybe but this
is really doing is providing
coverage for those that may have
PPA of our participants he's got
this large participant
project agreements that that
that that did not include the
business climate change in their
so really can be any business in
New Mexico or outside is an
elite agreement Mr speaker
generals and Senate business is
it fair to say go that of
supporting this bill would would
help support New Mexico families
that are working in our state.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman yes I would say that.
Thank you generated Senator
appreciate the clarification not
being familiar with lead on the
news announces that so I
appreciate the dialogue are you
back to speaker thank you Mr
speaker thank you general.
There is further debate the
gentleman from requests yet I'm
going on a Representative us us.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
what the plans are made from us
on topic please yield thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentlemen
from all those counties ideals.
Thank you.
So how many do you know how many
of these up participating
businesses were affected.
During this comment.
thank.
Mr speaker gentle if I get a
little clarification to me would
be impacted by the legislation
or in general well impact of the
legislation because that they
were affected by the COVID
restrictions.
So Mr speaker gentlemen so there
are those that did were able to
again if their project
participation agreement was with
the state and they're local to
spend their local entities
county or or this polity then on
then they would be protected
under the the business climate
changes provision and so those
already have a mechanism that
they do not they would not
suffer call backs from their for
businesses that may have entered
directly with the locality the
baby I need to this protection
this this you know to anyone
just a single to one to make
sure that their investment is
protected from the call back I
do not have an estimate of how
many businesses that is however
that would ensure the all the
businesses that entered under
going to be to agreements and
we're good standing prior to the
pandemic we're treated equally
and well.
Mr speaker gentle lady so what
you're telling me is that there
are some businesses that also
the cracks and that's what this
legislation for thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen for
summing it up better than I did
yes that is true.
Mr speaker gentle lady so when
they when you talk about
negotiations with specific
negotiations what will be have
up with between.
Because of the situation.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen again there are
benchmarks that a lot of these
businesses have to me in order
to fulfill their contract
contractual obligation Andrea
and so that can be you know they
may have to make adjustments to
the number of jobs you know
resetting those numbers can be
for the for other facilities all
those pieces of investing in our
State Building businesses would
be an option in that contract.
Thank you Mr speaker going so
I know the project we're
catching County that was up.
Was a song and it got caught up
in the next and are you know
they say they struggle to keep
have jobs there and in Texas are
so small our.
A very sparsely populated area
and so they have a sawmill there
it was.
Just about to get started my
understanding are.
Mr speaker gentle lady that up
they were trying to employ
twenty five employees and forces
some L. and between I guess or
some federal regulations that
have strict lemon causing
troubles and in allowing them to
operate but COVID came along of
course with the restrictions
that definitely kept him from
being a business so
now they did my understanding is
they are financially and very
very
I guess they they have a lot of
financial burden and stress and
so my question is I know that
workforce solutions has a
participate program where they
will be part of the labor and in
participation in training do you
know anything about that and how
that works out with the leader
program.
No Mr speaker gentleman I I do
not know how that would interact
with this this is really about
renegotiating those contracts
for jobs.
So
Mr speaker gentle lady so and
the negotiations that we're
talking about so I mean all
these people able to let's just
say I got halfway through there
there in the middle of of of
their project and this project
for some reason do you know
these are the benchmarks like
when you're building up a new
facility this is saying
construction we have these of.
They're basically is going to
lots of construction you get you
get to this point twenty percent
then you get a draw on the
twenty percent get another drop
I don't understand how how that
works exactly we see their
benchmarks and other benchmark
for what.
Mr speaker gentle no as I
consult with my my goodness.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you a
gentleman yeah I I was just re
confirming most of the because
leader that is primarily a job
of creating a program those are
employment benchmarks so that
these that these companies for
vesting in New Mexico and
receiving leader funds are
building X. number of jobs I Y.
date and and and you can
continue one word.
I'm sorry Mr speaker so that
they I didn't hear that last
part I'm sorry thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen so
these are employment job
benchmarks that they will create
X. number of jobs by a certain
date and then again the next
time the check and buy another
date thank you for Mr speaker
generally thank you for
informing about the about that I
just didn't realize I thought it
was based on production but I
guess it maybe they go hand in
hand being that production in
the the the more production you
have the more people you need so
I'm assuming that's that's what
they're they're doing so when
when they get into these Lida
make order contracts is it is it
set how many
how many employees I guess in
the contract itself are you use
the name I'm gonna employ
hundred people and it's going to
take me so many years of so much
so many months to get to that
point is that what you're
talking about a job Mr speaker
gentle lady at yes Mr speaker
gentleman I believe so.
Okay so as as I grow them I'm
obligated to come up Mr speaker
gentle lady to fulfill that now
what happens if I don't if I
don't reach the the hundred
employees the state for for
instance what happens there
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen yes so this is this is
what this this would address so
again if there are business
climate changes that are be on
the arm.
Role of the businesses
themselves than their that you
know some businesses are are
protecting that what this would
do was allow them to re
negotiate the numbers and and
those benchmarks on that are
necessary for the but if they
are unable to hit those marks
then they then the locality or
or what have you
the the the the that entity that
they entered into the agreement
with with then be able to
potentially call back and and
then you know take back those
Leader funds that could cost a
business millions or hundreds of
millions of dollars and gets.
Mr speaker gentle lady first of
all I want to get ahead of
myself the asking questions
because I want to make sure that
I understood this it in both my
committee but you know I I'm
gonna tell you that that that
I'm very very supportive of your
legislation many businesses that
have have struggle because of
COVID and so I'm glad that
you're trying to help those at
the top of the cracks like we we
talk about that are struggling
you know on one of those
businesses and Silvercity as the
little toe our brewery and a few
years back they they got a up.
One of these leaders are project
contracts and to build a brewery
and so they're one of those that
I I don't know where they're at
in their contract I'm assuming
that they completed at.
And so they but I will tell you
that's a restaurant a brewery
and it was very very difficult
for them because they had on do
the restrictions that had closed
a the the restaurant and so
there were open and closed and
and and you know sometimes
twenty five percent fifty
percent not the take out and so
it was difficult the local
municipality did the best they
could to try and.
Keep them and help them open in
our downtown area I don't know
if you've ever been in so the
city of you know full downtown
area but it's a very narrow
street and main street and so
there's there's your your
parking right alongside the curb
to curb up to feet tall and so
it makes it tough to to park but
anyway the the city came through
and conger the loft and help
them so that they could transfer
by.
I went to the to the restaurant.
Little into inner about halfway
through and and they had they
were allowing only people to
step outside.
And you know it was it was that
I I went outside and said the in
in the little outside patio.
And I had asked what you know
they had they were I was at the
same time when the governor had
opened in second or nine but
they had lost a lot of the boys
and they had to come back so was
a sad thing to see
thriving business I if you would
go down there and on a Thursday
Friday or Saturday at even a
Sunday it was a it was a
business that was doing very
very well and so you know I
appreciate everything that
you're doing for them.
This is a great bill and so I'm
sure you're gonna have a lot of
support and and so I'm I'm
wondering why Mr speaker gentle
lady or not why but how how it
works and I'm gonna go back to
that to that
the participation of project and
how it's tied to lead up in in
helping them was wages I know
that workforce solutions budget
so budget so many dollars to
help businesses such as this
when they're trying to start a
train people and so the put so
much money it it aside and then
your business shares in the cost
of training new people and so it
sounds like this is what what
this is doing I don't know
exactly how it ties in but I
know that they do do projects
like that and so I appreciate
all the legislation that this
legislation and I just I intend
on supporting your bill thank
you Mr speaker gentle and thank
you Mr speaker thank you done
the same for the debate the
gentle lady from Valencia
Representative Kelly fart.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
kind lady at these young thank
you Mr speaker I will yield to
the gentle lady from Valencia
thank you thank you so much
thank you for bringing this Tory
I just have a couple quick
questions just for my own
comprehension of what the bill
does so my first question is
yeah so what.
we renegotiate this without this
legislation why do we need to
have this legislation to do the
negotiation.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so yes so often
times of those entities that
enter into a participant a
project participation agreement
do so through the state and if
they've done it through the
state as well as our local
entities county or what have you
then they are protected because
of the Covid restrictions under
the business climate change
provisions however for other
businesses that may have entered
into elite agreement directly
with the local entity they may
not also have the same
protections many businesses were
able to have that already in the
contract originally but because
COVID was unexpected and and of
that test instead inspected that
there are businesses that do
fall through those cracks and
have not been able to be correct
protected under that.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
I'm sorry I'm having some
background noise behind each so
I just wanna make sure I
understand correctly budget we
do have and companies
associated.
The coach's options in their
contract we also have companies
that do not have that option is
that that when hearing Mr
speaker timeline thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
yes that's correct and this
would be a statutory thanks to
provide thank you Mr speaker
can't manage question is do we.
Okay and I see it during the
during the cycle but I do where
do we have anything I would need
to as far as negotiations going
on Mister speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I I am aware of
anything like that at this
moment thank you Mr speaker
thank you kindly because that
would be another thing that I
think this body needs to
consider
does it does very similar to
what we did as in the same to my
colleagues over here talking
about the that and you know when
I first got elected meeting have
lead.
So we had a jobs council two
years ago and that's to keep out
of that job comes up and I'm
sorry I'm asking is having
problems with one second and so
And.
I appreciate about the lead at
the clawbacks Mr speaker kind
meeting
where that Google wanted to come
to New Mexico Mr speaker
penetrating thank you Mr speaker
thinking the lady yes I've heard
of that but I heard heard that
before thank you Mr speaker.
Respect the state again but
close to two million dollars to
move here thank you Mr speaker
thank you generally I don't know
the exact amount but that sounds
about right.
And Mr speaker you don't happen
to that money when Google
decided to pull out and not come
to New Mexico thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady
out I will a missing it was lost
I will.
You're pretty them no Mr speaker
and I think we got it back and
that's the great thing about the
difference Lee is a great thing
that happens in our state
because we because what we do
have those clap Paul Baxter was
into it Facebook which is in my
which is just outside of my
district Mr speaker kind lady
the state games Facebook and I
can't remember the exact dollar
amount but I believe we gave
them ten million dollars Leda
funds Mr speaker kind lady
do you know the tax revenue that
we got the first year that
Facebook was in construction
Mister speaker primary thank you
Mr speaker thank you did only no
I don't mistakenly we got over
two million dollars in tax
revenue from building a Facebook
and that was just the first year
right Facebook has they're now
looking at doing six data
centers I think they're working
expanding right now so it is
investment well we're stance if
we are its initial investment
was ten million dollars we made
at investor basket back in just
the first year alone I'm so
supporting it is vital to our
state Mr speaker period when
sure great yes Mr speaker gentle
lady I would agree.
Mr speaker one of the great
things I I teach that we
actually spent right and this is
why I go on and on because I
want the question understand
yes so many checks and balances
that go into making sure and
that that the entities in the
current companies getting these
funds are are less while that
they're doing their due
diligence a few years ago we
have an empty solo cups Act
right in the land we have the
funds I was going to make
fabrics manufacturer and we even
did a she urged.
Read and we did that help you
know so we had you know
everybody connected on the
development there is a big deal
Mr speaker probably do you know
what happens next plant that
we're going to do building
behind no I don't thank you Mr
speaker gentle lady Mr speaker.
Bent and never opened because
they can secure funds.
Not secure the call backs.
And that's what makes us so good
for the state because we want we
want these companies coming to
New Mexico.
Invest in these companies but if
they can't provide the assurance
they can do the promises that
they can't keep their contract
we
have not given us plans
Representative years later Mr
speaker timely do we actually
over the different manufacturing
plants in in that same facility
which is kind of plastics.
Recently closed but they brought
thousands of tax dollars not
hundred thousand tax dollars to
our state and provide hundreds
of jobs Mr speaker highlighting.
And so I just want to say I
appreciate your bill I
appreciate everything that
you're doing it making sure that
these companies state here in
New Mexico I also want to remind
the body to Mr speaker penalty
you know I I everything I talked
about our out of state companies
but we also interstate companies
that benefit from lead and Mr
speaker kind lady we have
another small company and
forensic accounting that they
had a choice there already in
New Mexico.
The state of New Mexico is going
to move to Texas.
And they'll ask for two hundred
fifty thousand dollars to the
state New Mexico owned company
New Mexico grown company each
and you will find state chose to
stay in New Mexico a year after
they don't they're friends party
city bought them out.
And they've doubled in size and
that is an investment worth
keeping in state New Mexico so
we have always supported it's
something that we need to keep
and when you have companies and
manufacturers who for no fault
of their own there are crisis
because of their own that is
worldwide.
Need some extra crimes and
action to go she good question
how are to keep those contracts
viable and keep those jobs here
in New Mexico I support that so
Mister speaker Pam maybe I do
support your bill Nye send
supported.
But before I do let you go I do
have one quick question just for
my own clarity and date thank
you have on this this
legislation Mr speaker kind
meeting and it's it's on page
one money.
The cost
per project participation
agreement on after January one
two sixteen and stand that so
basically in a contract that was
negotiated after that date is
eligible for negotiation.
December thirty first twenty
twenty one.
Contract minus reading that Mr
speaker explained that second
date to make.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady let me reconfirm
something with my witness on
that thank you look.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I that is
specifically because they have
through that date also to
renegotiate their contracts we
wanted that those needs to match
up that on that that's the end
date quote unquote because
that's what what they have until
to renegotiate it okay Mister
speaker and I do appreciate that
clarification I read that as a
contract existing after that
date it makes more sense so they
have until the end of this year
to come to to sit down at the
table many questions or contact
Mr speaker kind made is that
correct that's correct the tail
end of this year that's correct
thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
thank you Mr speaker thank you
highlighted to say that that
clarification and then online
scene the pop identity was
forced to close Mr speaker.
Situation if we have if we have
to go to the contract and they
have closed.
Can.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady let me just
reconfirm on that I just wanna
make sure I'm saying the proper
the correct response thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady yes it is if they
needed to temporarily closed
during the public order and so
that was something the gentleman
earlier had referencing and that
would be that context Mr speaker
thank you can I and I appreciate
that I know that the department
as they go above and beyond to
make sure this call backs are
are taken care of they go above
and beyond to make sure any
money that we get to these
companies either in state or out
of state that we call plaques
are displaced we do not give
money to
I'm just anybody we make sure
that that
the that will best match is well
worth that and we've invested in
New Mexico companies we've
invested in our state companies
I know for me in my district
every investment that we've ever
made has produced jobs is
produced tax revenue and so I
just want to thank you for
support for during this piece of
legislation I'm sorry that you
have to because of the crisis
right now we have to do
everything we can to make sure
that it's that companies want to
come to New Mexico and the
companies that are on the very
edge right now of expanding that
we do everything that we try to
help them because of this crisis
is over I hope to be out
partying I hope to be out and
all these companies I hope to be
out doing all the things that we
wanted to and we need to keep
people and get back to work so
thank you Mr speaker thank you
kindly.
You Mr speaker thank you
generating.
Members as the chair of.
Debate the germane ness of the
bill of the merits of the bill
we have further debate the
gentleman from Santa
Representative Jason Harper.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
kind gentle lady from Santa Fe
your thank you Mr speaker thank
you John I do you.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady I have a handful
of questions for you on your
legislation.
but I'd like to first just give
a little context to these
questions.
and and maybe piggyback off of
some of the discussion we just
had from the general E. from
once you County.
so I passed two bills one my
freshman my first freshman.
Session I'm very proud of the.
First though
very much hope my community here
Representative Rio Rancho by
performing the public
improvement district act.
The second.
Was to make clawbacks mandatory
for all we are projects.
And I it I'm super proud that
legislation
and the impact that it's had on
strengthening Lita.
Mr and and gentle lady.
Are are you familiar with
A company called shot solar.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John I'm not.
Speaker gentle lady I I use this
company example
in the most of my discussions
around that legislation is
occurring at it was a company
that was started.
and makes it also in Albuquerque
received.
It was around four hundred or
five hundred million from the
Obama administration.
Are received a ton of money from
the state I think was up sixteen
twenty million dollars.
And in the end of they ended up
folding sadly I know we all
looked at manufacturing or
manufacturing in Mexico
And the state was only able to
photograph just a very small
portion of that because the
contract was structured in a
way.
that they could get mature those
funds back.
Speaker and gentle lady and
really that's the heart of the
legislation is before us is how
do we deal with these clawbacks
Mr noted we.
Are you familiar with the
language of health products are
structured right now in our for
statute have mandatory how to
structure thank you Mr speaker
thank you don Santa I'm would be
happy to hear I guess
specifically what you're looking
for in this yes up by all means
speaker gentle lady we yeah so
it's very brief from
and I was just this over and
over as we're going through the
process nine years ago.
Why are we putting a formula
where we requiring all of it to
come back and the answer it
again was that will there may be
companies that are here that
have a maybe a five year PPA and
maybe just in the last year they
they fell below the job
requirements
should we then call back a
hundred percent of the dollars
that was given to the company
that installed fared
And and so we we decided that
would be.
Proportional was the word to use
the language of the proportional
the the mouse was caught up be
proportional to what was not
kept in the contract.
speaker gentle lady and and I.
I think that's the right way to
do it
in L. drill which was important
here your legislation just a
moment
maybe just an example of after
that was passed and signed into
law.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
first success of that club Act
was what the gentle lady from
once you mentioned there was a
group a company that was owned
by Google called Titan
aerospace.
Mr generally and and they were
looking at using the more you
already missed four point drop
iterations.
And at that point
the state has already spent more
than a million maybe two million
dollars and fixing up the
airport.
for Google for tighter space and
they never came Mr internally
that the from Santa Fe the
gentle lady from our.
Was just almost under the great
news is we got all that money
back so essentially we're able
to get Google to give us a
couple million dollars
introductions to the
are more organised labour court
because least these contracts
were restructured.
So.
You can tell this is very
important to me and and that's
that's why I'm asking some of
these Mr asking two questions
later legislation here.
So.
Speaker and enjoy from.
Santa Fe.
You're looking at renegotiating
these contracts right as the
language that's in here
In light of the proportional.
Language in the current
clawbacks.
Why is it important that they
renegotiate why can't they just.
You know whatever the
proportional amount needs
Our.
While that work in this case Mr
speaker and gentleman are are
you saying that
Why would it work for them to
have some amount clawed back.
Is that what you're asking Mr
speaker that's generally that's
exactly right.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen as we gently before
had mentioned as well as you
know the pandemic was a
worldwide crisis that was
outside of the control of these
businesses and so this
legislation make sure that many
to to to be casual about it we
have their backs essentially and
that that this again is a
renegotiation and so both
entities both that the local
municipal are looking to sell
your that that the county and
the business would be able to
come to new terms but especially
right now as businesses are
starting to to to revive and
look you know to to improving
of their their margins are their
their their futures I really
don't think that a clawback is
is that is is that I think a
call that would be a detriment
to businesses in our state and
would send the wrong message as
well.
Mr speaker and jelly from Santa
Fe I I completely agree with
even though this far back would
be.
Proportional to just what
happened this year so one of the
the whole hundred percent coming
back.
I think this was I agree with
you this is beyond our control
it just doesn't make sense that
they would have to.
Pay back a portion of that
funding for something that they
really don't have control over
so I.
I appreciate that response
speaker gentle lady.
So why was the so so we have the
the two dates we've got the
December thirty first twenty
twenty one I I I get that date
it's the time for negotiating
contracts etcetera but you tell
me why we chose to cut off.
Those ability for those who are
January first of two thousand
sixteen white.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
don't give me one by one we can
provide with us on that so.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman from Santa head to
reconfirm that yes we want to
make sure that they were of
businesses that have been really
into a mature contract that had
been established would say much
later if we want to get some
flexibility so that they could
go through the December thirty
first twenty twenty one
renegotiations.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa Fe thank you I appreciate
that answer I I had assumed that
because this was essentially
five years right when that five
years B. two thousand sixteen
that just most we The New Mexico
should contracts were about five
years lengths and this would
capture everyone speaker and
gentle it is that is that not
the case thank you Mr speaker
thank you don't settle at that
that is the rest of the answer I
just cut myself off but yes that
is correct hundred percent.
Okay
thank you Mr Mr speaker and.
In a late so
And I'm I believe this questions
or answers asked what I'm do you
know how many roughly how many
businesses right now are are
under appreciated was that we
funds in the state thank you Mr
speaker thank you don't know I
don't know the top of my head
what number the ones that as a
mature years that we're in
agreement with the state are
already protection be protected
because of the business climate
change provisions that had been
expanded to include a comment
about the ones that are you know
the Michael the cracks are with
a local entities directly I'm
not sure that number.
Mr Joey my my understanding is
right now we have about twenty
to thirty businesses.
That are getting Lita and I
think even though
there are there are local
leaders funds and those are
often used by our state is the
vast majority of businesses are
also receiving state funds and
the contract is really
negotiated with the state and
and that they help they work
together that's the state and
local governments work together
in a package.
I'm so I I think that's that's
about the right ballpark we're
looking at.
So and then just clarifying
question Mr gradually this
legislation does it affect just
stateLee to projects was also
state and local media project
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen about.
Excellent
so so that Mr speaker and gentle
lady if
the local if this passes for you
know as part of renegotiations
to the local governments
Past initiate ordinances
supporting zero projects I'm in
certain conditions of the
contracts were in those
ordinances.
do they need to re issue.
post those ordinances.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gonna let me reconfirm on that
one.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen percent of all I
believe that they would need to
do it's a renegotiation of the
contract and so the terms are
within their that would be
worked out with again the local
agents in the businesses the
business that entered into the
contract.
Yeah so the speaker generally
that's that's what I was
thinking and and I believe those
terms are in the ordinances so
sounds like the local
governments will also have to.
Three
After this is been renegotiated
so have to
you know issue new ordinances do
you think that so looking at the
December thirty first deadline.
do you see that as a potential
issue to have the local you know
city communities are counties
re passed those ordinances in
that time frame.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen I believe it is
possible within that time frame
that you set out partially
because again it's a contract
renegotiation so how much of the
the the ordinances would have to
be redefined would rely would
line there and again these are
these are individual these these
are this is not the vast
majority of the the companies as
you mentioned earlier are needed
budget here is I should say so
you know again these are these
are the close ones but I I don't
believe this is going to how the
deadline which is currently nine
months away would be in too much
of a difficult to use us for for
that's the best.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
would hope so unlike the
Legislature were were in session
once a year maybe a special
session.
these folks me pretty often so I
I would hope December thirty
first would be enough but I
guess it really depends on how
quickly these contracts
renegotiating.
The speaker and and generally do
you.
And I mentioned
the Economic
Development Department would be
involved in all these
renegotiations Mr generating.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen let me check real
fast.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John and representative of all I
was just confirming that it is
since the agreement is directly
with these local entities guess
EDD would have an involvement in
their however it is primarily
with the local entity Anders.
So so Mister speaker and gentle
lady I I'm not sure you're
you're expressed pride right on
that
I know there is an agreement
with local entities but like I
said earlier I think the state.
That is the the lead on
almost always projects they have
the most dollars right compare
least local entities and it's
usually a partnership between
two and I think it's ET her EDD
that really I takes the point of
the spear on those negotiations
have you
Do you know have have you had
communications with
the department
well this impact
but all their their workloads
third budget
they given any indication of how
much time this might take them.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen no we have not but
again the ones that are and
again this is I'm looking at the
FIR now that quotes from the EDD
and they mention that just and
as you mentioned earlier it does
provide for local governments to
engage the presidency through
PPA and the Majority Leader
project transaction of all the
state EDD and a local fiscal at
at agencies
but not all of them and so again
that's kind of where that
exception occurs not really is
those that would be impacted by
this legislation because the
ones that are already involved
with the state are protected
under the business climate
change provision and so those
ones already are protected this
is really the ones are fall
outside of that agreement with
PED directly.
Yes thank you Mr joy from Santa
Fe I'm I'm a.
Yeah I'm looking at the screen
of the FY are as well and yeah
it does.
yeah I'm I'm I think I feel the
same way which is your your
Center were majority of with a
project transactions involves
the state department.
And local fiscal agent.
But it doesn't say all it says
the majority.
So Mr speaker and and generally
You mentioned that there is and
most of these PPAs our existing
was between businesses and the
state locals mostly a bump that
there's something that already
takes care of this issue could
you maybe just clarify.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Mr speaker thank you don and I'm
sorry to go back it'll cost for
the question about
administrative implications and
that's the last line the FY arch
where does say that there will
be an additional administrative
implications for EDD yes so any
any business that enter into
thank you.
You speak my language.
Any any of business that entered
into elite agreement with both
the state and local entity is
protected by the business
climate change provision and
what that was is is it allows
businesses the flexibility in
case things outside of their
control and during the course of
the the the public health
of the pandemic they have added
COVID related problems as is
just a quick related
troubles to it to be included in
the business climate change
provision and so those
businesses that are in a
contract with the state and
local entities are protect.
Yeah Mister chair and enjoy from
separate thank you for that yeah
I'm looking at yes I are it does
define.
The business climate change to
be something beyond the control
of the the parties.
May affect the ability of the
party to share to the job
creation numbers.
And they can request specific
modifications to the job target.
if
the EDD and the town you Mr
already agreed that yes there's
been some visit business climate
change impact on that business
so.
I think you and I would would
definitely agree that COVID has
fallen was in the the definition
of something that would affect
job numbers that was beyond the
control of the business so.
Mr really.
So so it sounds like the vast
majority of businesses already
take care bye this and do you
know what.
Are there any that really don't
have this language in their
contracts that.
That need this legislation.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John actually one one of them
that that it would be included
as safelite and they are in Rio
Rancho so they have in
particular sensitive material
our natural information that
they deal with that they that
there was going to take home but
their office solidity has eight
hundred fifty full time
employees at their center and
that as of April for I'm sorry
March first of last year they
had they were only required six
hundred so they were not they
were above that threshold but
currently they're back down to
two eighty five and so again
they have the need that time to
rebuild.
So Mister speaker in New Delhi
from Santa Fe so you're you're
saying that we know of at least
one that would be safe flight
that would be impacted for the
past this bill.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John yes and I know that again
as I mentioned earlier ET your
girl had article I think it's
early January that identifying
this is a potential issue for
businesses throughout the state
so I know of one at this moment
but again there may be others.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
so my my oldest
At the end of his eighteen a
senior this year and the.
It's gonna be graduating going
off to college she actually
works at safelite for for about
a year she had a first job at
little Caesar's
and then of course so in while
working the counter little
Caesars managing options so I'm
very impressed by your customer
service then the card said.
Call me and you got poached well
Caesar's to go work at safelite.
now those are really cool your
coach for extra money for my
son.
And the what what safe I did
they did shut down shortly and
they gave all of their employees
some money even though they had
they were working during that
initial for the shut down and my
son is a part time employee
actually got some of that
funding so I have a lot of
respect for for for state for
for doing that sadly they then
three months later.
they went all of their non full
time staff go and so my son was
out of work for without work for
awhile.
So I was gonna support your bill
until I heard this helps the
full.
I'm just kidding.
And I'm lucky going to the mask
you just can't.
Thank you Mr gently
Right so so I guess
That was my really my main
questions figure drawings it
looks like EDD has this business
climate change.
Language and all of its.
Contracts always PTA's so I I
was wonder if we really needed
to do this Mr gently you you you
contend that there is at least
one and maybe a few that don't
have this language in their
contracts.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
down yes I can at least identify
one if not more and that would
impact on its own hundreds of
jobs.
All right Mr speaker and gentle
lady I will I will ask for your
legislation in the thank you
very much for for the time as I
said I I take a lot of pride in
and having been the one that
made sure clawbacks for
mandatory and that when.
The state.
Taxpayer dollars are used to
help a business.
That business keeps its promises
or or has to return that money
New Mexico should not be left
holding the bag
it's it's it's not fair
but in this case with with COVID
I think this temporary provision
is this is warranted so thank
you Mr speaker and thank you
gentle lady for for the time I
really appreciate this
conversation.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John there is further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Rod Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker is a gentle
lady I yield thank you Mr
speaker I yield to the gentleman
from San Juan thank you
misstatement E. um I might have
to have have you slow down I
just love this like in your area
I missed part of the debate I I
hate to say in part because I
was studying New Mexico
preparing for the next debate
but so I apologize in advance Mr
speaker and gentle lady just I
ask transgressions that may have
been asked previously so Mister
speaker and gentle lady does the
gentle lady yes I believe asked
that yes thank you Mr speaker
order already repeating
questions that you've been asked
several times this evening so
miss regenerating.
Briefly I do understand.
That the reason that that that
we're we're seeing this
provision today is because a.
People who has taken me to
funds.
Are in a position where maybe
they are not able to have
complied.
With the arrangement of the club
Act out provisions that are in
place we're going to accept it
and that is I'm sure that is
correct is that correct Mr
speaker generally thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen test
if that they those were because
of the COVID crisis.
Thank you Mr speaker and I I
know you're saying because of
the COVID crisis on on my side I
think it's a little bit of a
governor crisis that we're
facing as to why maybe we're
still not back to work at
however the building that
whatever the reason Mr speaker
and gentle lady are it is not
the fault of the companies that
are
That have taken these funds and
are now work
in this situation so Mister
speaker and gentle lady do you
have any idea how many companies
were talking about that that are
are facing the situation at
today Mr speaker and gentle lady
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen a number of of we go
back the business is that
entered into lead agreements
including the state are already
protected for those that that as
a general you mentioned all
through the cracks though those
are the ones really to protect
so I know the least one that
would affect hundreds of jobs in
Rio Rancho but there are many
there may be others across the
state and this would provide
protection to those as well.
So thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady
So.
so you're talking about a at
least a hundred employees that
are in the situation that are at
a at a job where where they've
taken these funds but you don't
have any idea how wide spread
this is Mister speaker gentle
lady thank you Mr speaker thank
you gentlemen no I don't have
the full number of that I do
know that again it would be
those that accepted leader funds
through an agreement directly
with a county or municipality.
So thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady
I've noticed that this that that
the link which says to provide
for contract renegotiations.
I'm it seems like there's
several different ways that we
could have gone here maybe.
just something that says that it
would not have been held against
that.
Specifically.
Our contract renegotiations
white why is that the past and
and is that the right house Mr
speaker gentle lady thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen yes
so a number of businesses were
operating in good faith and and
were operating either at the
marks that they had been sent
through their contracts with
these local entities and one the
pandemic first hit and now you
have have come to school so in
leader contracts there are
benchmarks are of of the the
number of jobs created in the
latest in in in those agreements
and so by allowing them to
renegotiate the contract that
means these businesses were
already operating you know to
the fullest extent within the
the the realm of the intention
of Leda's as of the gentle lady
from eight in the gentleman from
Santa spoke about you know they
are acting in good faith and and
and they're doing the work in
the providing the jobs they just
have this this this crisis that
happened outside of their
control and and now that we want
to allow them to renegotiate
that so they can rebuild and
bring back hundreds of jobs.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I just one last question
and and and I'll let you go here
but project participation
agreement could you kind of
describe what that looks like
you know leader project Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John and I'll keep it very broad
but if you are looking for
something in particular please
let me now but really it is the
the contract that the local
entity and the business
themselves coming to come into
agreement and the terms of
release the terms of that
contract right so it's the
number is the benchmark still
looking ahead its the it's it's
what what the the county it was
agreed to provide those are the
things that are outlined in the.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I do appreciate that I do
support data and I and for years
we try to protect that fund
because of how important is to
attract businesses that pay
higher wages and we definitely
don't want to see someone who is
a business to is in compliance
for has been in compliance up to
this point that they a loose
anything out of this so I I
appreciate that and Mr speaker
and gentle lady I will be happy
to support this legislation
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close thank you
Mr speaker thank you everyone I
want to thank my colleagues for
the conversation and I now move
that Senate bill two eighty one
do not.
We're on final passage of Senate
bill two hundred eighty one the
vote is now open.
Thirty seconds the vote is about
to close.
The vote is now mostly close the
electronic portion of the vote
is now closed will the clerk
called the names of the members
what I recorded the
Representative Eli.
Representative Ely is a yes
representative Sarinana.
Representative Trujillo.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of sixty five in the affirmative
zero in the negative Senate bill
two hundred eighty one has duly
passed this out.
We'll now go to item forty
three.
I don't forty three.
This is Senate bill sixty six
are you ready on that.
Bill.
Mr speaker would you give me to
that point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
Senate bill sixty six on final
passage has been taken.
It is now subject to debate
amendment or substitution.
The gentle lady from Rio Arriba
Santa Fe and Taos to explain the
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I'd like to thank everybody for
allowing me to join senators so
it's in June the increasing
Santa C. six people are this
chamber I thank you for this
chamber in two thousand nineteen
and I'm here again I think this
could be the year I think this
bill is one of the most
important bills that we have
before us in the fifty to
session and this bill amends
almost speaker Mr speaker point
of work the wrong bill is on the
board.
I'm sorry and I apologize for
thank you the gentleman from
Bernalillo you're now
recognized.
No Mr speaker I just want to
make sure that we have the right
Bill number and the right along
I understand a point of order is
was in order but thank you for
the correction will get a
director on the board for those
folks in the chamber.
Everyone one item forty three
Senator sixty six.
The gentle lady from real
reverse of the penthouse has the
floor to explain the bill.
Thank you again Mr speaker.
As I was saying I think this is
one of the most important bills
facing legislators during the
fifty fifth session this bill
amends the small Act and the
bank and summer lawn Act of
nineteen fifty nine and I I just
want to tell
Everybody is small story I'm
always amazed at the ups and
downs of being a member of this
body which I so love.
Monday evening I went home
thinking that we didn't have a
bill anymore.
Built into the Judiciary
Committee asked for a an older
up thirty six percent APR rate
on installment loans and the
House Judiciary Committee had
just voted out a substitute that
created ninety nine percent APR
on all installment loans.
And you I knew the vote would be
close to this body for at thirty
six percent cap.
all installment loans in the
house but but I also knew that I
didn't have the votes.
For a ninety nine percent cap on
all levels so I really went home
that evening thank you.
Anymore and the I woke up the
next morning joy cometh in the
morning or maybe I may be a
necessity is the mother of all
inventions maybe that's a better
answer and I got of the phone
with with people that we're
working on this bill and I said
well what we can do what how we
gonna do this and the we came up
with a compromise and the
compromise that I think will
make this work for this body.
In the continual dance of
legislation.
So starting about six o'clock
that morning we came up with
that idea how about a ninety
nine percent cap.
Installment loans of less than a
thousand with that one year
payment plan.
And the thirty six percent cap
on installment loans over a
thousand dollars so that was
just kind of a compromise and we
said maybe that will work for
this body so.
So currently of for those of you
who don't know the current rate
the current rate is a hundred
and seventy five percent.
I doubt that anybody anybody in
this house would take out a loan
for a hundred and seventy five
percent so what we're trying to
do here is is.
Is really help I think the
people probably didn't get the
hardest by COVID the people who
take out these these loans that
sometimes they just can't afford
but they do it out of
desperation and
And then I was working in the
photos calling people up and
seeing how they could and I we
were getting closer but then
today.
One thirty a group of women got
together and they said is this
all we can do for this bill this
is all we can to for this bill
and I'm so grateful I am so
grateful to my colleagues.
In this house and I want to
recognize the five women who
really got together this
afternoon and and to talk about
is there something we can do to
make a better that would make it
more appealing to this house and
those people were of chair petty
Lundstrom
in a day Hochman Vigil and
during the eagles and myself and
the we called a meeting in
fifteen minutes we were all
together talked about it was
said yes we think we can improve
that we talked about all the
finer points of this bill and I
think we come up with a bill
that will work for this
legislature but most importantly
work for the people of our state
and that's what we're here to do
and
for right now I'm gonna close my
remarks and the and stand for
questions.
She's going to.
Yes Mr speaker I'd like to
recognize that petty Lundstrom
was going to
speak at this time.
The gentle lady from McKinley
San Juan Representative
Lundstrom.
Thank you Mr speaker and good
evening everyone
I also want to congratulate the
women that came together this
afternoon to look at this very
important piece of legislation I
I know for myself I've been
working on these kinds of of
bills for at least the last
twenty years and lots of the U.
S. co sponsors in the past and.
I thought this year maybe I
wouldn't be doing it but but I
did I did the offer to meet with
the ladies today with my with my
colleagues and that was
A great success for us I think
that when you get everybody
together and you get to talk
about these things to come out
with a bit of a better product
and that Mr speaker as the
gentle lady said this so this
bill amends the bank installment
loan act and the small loan act
by reducing the maximum annual
percentage rate allowable for
loans and when you see this on
the FIR it says from a hundred
seventy five percent to thirty
six percent well I'm not
legislator over ten years ago
that really thought I had a
great win at a hundred seventy
five percent and I realize now
that needed needs to change it
needs to change but it cannot be
as dramatic as of the thirty six
percent building because the
bill simply would have trouble
getting through.
So with that Mr speaker I would
like to move my amendment
please.
I have a house floor amendment.
But I'd like to discuss to
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill sixty
six.
And the number on that amendment
is point two two zero nine two
one point one.
Thank you gentle lady let's just
make sure everybody has the
amendment.
It was passed out on the floor.
Thanks Liz online for the
members who were caring
virtually.
The gentle lady to explain the
amendment thank you Mr speaker
and and members basically what
this ammendment does is it
strikes the house Judiciary
Committee amendments to through
nine.
On page six line nine hystrix
thirty six percent and insert in
lieu of the following this is
what the gentle lady had
discussed earlier.
That we're looking at it ninety
nine percent APR for a loan in
an amount of one thousand
dollars or less.
Thank you waited pursuant to
twelve CFR part ten twenty six
known as regulations C..
Subsection.
Provided that the long show not
have a long term longer than
twenty four months alone should
not be refinanced by the lender
and the calculation of the
permitted annual percentage rate
show include finance charges as
to as defined in regulation Z..
And then for loans that are
above a thousand dollars they
would be at the thirty six
percent right.
the rest of it is you look at
item three four and five are for
technical changes that we have
to do based on on the amendment
that would be stricken and the
and the changes that would be
technical in terms of the bill
of sale if you look on page two
of seven E..
Well less than and equal to
ninety nine percent for a loan
in the amount of one thousand
dollars or less so as you can
see throughout this amendment
basically what we're saying
Mr speaker and members is that
for those loans are thousand
dollars unless it be ninety nine
percent APR for twenty more
twenty four month term.
And anything above that would be
the thirty six percent so with
that Mr speaker and members I
would yield to comments or
answer any questions on this
ammendment.
Thank you gentle lady will now
go back to the floor sponsor the
gentle lady from we were us at
the budget house.
Thank you Mr speaker our.
And.
The state gentle lady is this a
friendly amendment this is most
definitely a friendly amendment
Mr speaker thank you.
We will now.
Debate the amendment there's
there's just is up on the board.
Folks want to get my attention
just text me a raise your hand.
Of the gentleman.
From Lee Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker to.
Which won't be responding to
each.
Cannot be repaid.
Mr speaker Mr speaker and
gentleman R. where are we
debating the amendment are we
debating the bill Mr speaker.
The.
We're on the amendment.
All right the gentleman from Lee
The gentle lady from McKinley
San Juan as the floor it I
assume you yielded to the
gentleman yield Mister speaker
gentleman.
Story Mr speaker sorry gentle
lady I believe are asked wrong
person to yield.
What.
All the reform which.
Can be repaid.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen in terms of that I'm
gonna have to turn it back over
to the gentle lady in terms of
something that cannot be
refinanced or repaid so if we
could Mister speaker I'd like to
ask the the sponsor to respond
to that.
Away from really wasn't the
correct house if you could
respond to that however that's
not the crux of the amendment
but if you have an answer for
the gentleman please.
Gentleman the Mr speaker I have
to call my I. expert witness on
that would you mind.
Thank you the thank you Jim.
Representative and thank you
Representative Scott I just like
an existing line it would they
would either have to default or
their task to find other
alternatives.
Mr speaker if I may generally
what happens with these kinds of
products
it is it's not to the benefit of
the lender not to work with the
customer is generally to the
benefit of the lender to try to
we work this in a way where the
payment structure is something
that is affordable what we're
trying to do is to make sure
that there's not that cycle of
debt where an individual is then
marketed to take a greater debt
rather it is to we work and and
to restructure the existing
loan.
But
it would be my understanding
that that is a requirement and I
can't imagine Mr speaker and
gentleman any lender that is not
going to be willing to try to do
that because they want their
money back.
Certainly.
Sure a lender willing to work
with someone to pay.
Hello.
This morning which.
Yes the leader does not have the
ability to refinance the loan
and the less the.
The
The land do if you will is does
not have the ability to pay all
school loan.
Eight.
In a circumstance where there is
no option.
But
when.
Options might be more
appropriate in that
circumstance.
Mr Mr speaker and gentleman in
in general refinancing is a
technical term of actually going
in and restructuring and
recalibrating the terms for the
long I thank you Mr what we're
what we're hoping to stay is
That assistance that technical
assistance.
I did that would continue as the
lender has that responsibility
anyway
I don't read it that way Mr
speaker and gentleman that
they're not allowed to assist in
re calibrating if necessary.
No members there's a lot of a
conversations on the floor let's
be sure to keep our masks
properly I'm here or we are
closed and all generally.
Speaker gentle lady.
Sure why Taylor's potential.
For significant confusion where
it restricts alone shall not be
rich Lerner just for the winter.
And the calculation of three
permitted annual percentage
rate.
Show includes finance charges
and senator.
Mr speaker well disorders the
gentle lady who.
Is this we're going altered one
subject so I do have some
concerns.
The.
US Russian direct.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you so much.
All.
There is more debate on the
amendment the gentle lady from
done got out Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
from McKinley County you your.
Happy to yield Mister.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady has a so much there.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
I so much appreciate the
thoughtful conversations and
consideration that went into
crafting that amendment Mr
speaker gentle lady
I just wanted to offer some
comment and then ask you a
couple of questions Mr speaker
gentle lady as we prepare long
night.
The like many in our body I
watched Senate bill six sixty
fifth as it moved through the
other chamber and eventually
arrived and house judiciary
where I'm honored to there that
the vice chair and Mr speaker
gentle lady through that
process.
I was increasingly worried and a
little bit frustrated that some
of the committee pointed at New
Mexicans that have often found
survival by act that these
emergency resources.
With the in my mind a bit
offensive
along the way we heard a lot of
lectures that New Mexicans
should not ever go and access
their provide for secure loans
like that and Mr speaker and
gentle lady it was really
frustrating for me to hear that
kind of committee because I was
imagining and thinking of my
loved ones and communities and
neighbors and family and friends
that in desperate times haven't
returned to these kind of
resources.
Speaker gentle lady I've heard
you talk about what Lente like
this looks like in your
community Mr speaker gentle lady
might you share that with the
body help people navigate the
financial landscape and what it
looked like when they're turning
to secure report that like that.
Mr speaker gentle lady are
internet connection is a little
unstable but when I would make a
comment on is that this kind of.
Lente product is something that
I believe is necessary.
I know that there has been
a number of times in my
community which just happens to
be bike for capital the
community with.
The highest number of lenders
very familiar with how the
industry works.
Thank you.
There is a great need to have
these kind of this kind of.
Cash available.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady that certainly been what
I've seen in my life in growing
up in southern New Mexico the
borderland and bending a lot of
my professional life learning
from and listening to system
impacted women often working to
survive trauma in and out of
potentially toxic relationship
trying to figure out how to
bring the best for their kids
instability to their little and
every single day Mr speaker
gentle lady
it felt hurtful to me when I
heard the folk act the need loan
described in ways like they just
didn't know what they were
getting into or or that they
they couldn't they couldn't do
basic math or that they could
that they didn't know that they
were making this deal with the
devil and Mister speaker gentle
lady I've heard that we just
need to teach the people how to
use money and I think that when
I know a single mom Mr speaker
gentle lady on a hustle on a
struggle I have to say certainly
when she's fighting every day to
figure out how to get what she
needs for her kids she knows
where every single penny is
going Mr speaker gentle lady I
like that in front of the
supportive and help you get your
eight I also heard that credit
unions are available and for
that I'm grateful I've been a
member of the credit union Mr
speaker gentle lady are college
I know they're they're important
reflected in our community I
heard from the sponsors that
people in need could just go to
a church and after handout and
maybe for some folks I know that
people think that raised me are
so generous and if they have
something to give they certainly
well but that's not always
possible and then I heard people
should just go out there family
and friend for money I'm one of
my constituents get to and from
home you Mr speaker and gentle
lady you can ask people no money
for money and in so many ways
when we honor the fabric of our
communities.
That might be true I would
really sat with me Mr speaker
and gentle lady that is today in
New Mexico we have almost six
hundred thousand of these kind
of loans out in the world if all
these resources are already
available to credit unions and
the generous churches and then
family and friends yet we have a
hundred thousand loaned out
there that help me there's a
need we haven't met.
The speaker gentle lady are they
are they get to wrapping my
point today I know that there
have been a lot of frustration
pointed at members of the body
we've been told those effective
have talked about how we
actually show up for our
families struggling with poverty
I know you are gentle lady and
and the there's so many
colleagues in our body we try to
learn this every day we know
that our commitment is to change
the underlying causes that make
family so desperate in the first
place but in the meantime with
so many New Mexicans out there
relying on this report we also
know that we can't pull the rug
out on people Mr speaker gentle
lady I know collected the whole
that we've been misled that we
may not understand the issue
I've been told you obviously
don't know the implications of
your actions New Mexico Mr
speaker gentle lady I've been
told I through your computer hi.
And with that I would also just
have to date Mr speaker gentle
lady working in collaboration.
With you all in the house today
has been one of my proudest
moment in public service.
We each from different
communities we were raised in
different families.
But we know that every day in
the body we can't just stay and
do what down good we have to do
the work of figuring out what's
actually going to be good be
good for the family we represent
the Mr speaker gentle lady are
thank you for coming to a
conversation with the extent
that that pretty thank you to
sponsor Representative that add
up and our fate all during April
and Representative Hochman Vigil
and so many of our champions in
college Representative Lewis who
has fought for indigenous
families and families of color
with a pragmatism almost
unrivaled in this body.
Mr speaker gentle lady this is
the right move for New Mexico
because we are dramatically
dropping the rate on everything
over the thousand dollars and
we're making sure we carve out
room for this microlending so
that what someone get the of a
broken broken break down car on
the way to work they might be
able to pull the money home and
the cash so that they can take
their kids to school and get
back to that job or when someone
needs and health care and
potentially need to pay for that
in a way that confidential
private the at the market for or
someone thinking of action but
is you know off the walking into
a new job and had a way to
repair it that Mr speaker gentle
lady they can invest in their
own futures and they can be
trusted.
Make decisions that are right
for their family you Mr speaker
gentlelady with that I
appreciate you again and I ask
my colleague the please support
this pragmatic approach we
understand the different way
poverty rolled through our
communities and this amendment
is thoughtful of what that looks
like thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you.
For those folks keeping score at
home normally.
Folks for Shabbat and there just
is by their name on the board to
talk on the bills and then
during an amendment folks raise
their hands the speaker calls
people who raise their hand so
we're gonna do that now if you
want to debate the amendment I'm
asking my members to raise their
hand within our within our zoom
room and I will call you to
debate the amendment next on the
amendment generated from really
all Representative Liz Thomson.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from
McKinley yield.
I sure do thank you Mr speaker
thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so I'm not.
First I want to thank you the
six women who got together to to
make this into a Phoenix from
the ashes I truly appreciate
that I am not thrilled with
ninety nine percent as I'm sure
you are not either and probably
very few people are but it's is
that it and the I'd like that
thirty six percent over a
thousand dollars
but my question is and and maybe
I'm just a little too steamy
but.
Is there anything that would
prevent someone who lets they
needed four hundred dollars from
taking out a one thousand dollar
loan to get the lower percentage
rate and then immediately paying
back the six hundred dollars
they don't need is is do you do
have a sense of whether that
would be allowed.
Madam chair and I mean Mr Mr
speaker and gentle lady you know
thank you doctor thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady I
think generally what happens is
just like any any other loan
product one has to qualify you
have to be able to demonstrate
the ability to pay and if you
would qualify for that level I
don't think there'd be anything
that would prevent you from
getting at and how you use it as
your personal business.
Okay so I'm put it out there to
the public if you can do that
get the thousand dollars and.
Alright back just as fast as you
can thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady thank you.
There is for the debate on the
amendment the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Georgene Louis.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
lady yellow.
Yes well yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you lady I do appreciate this
ammendment.
You know I do actually have been
saving a lot of messages.
X. excuse me and I'm actually
wait in incentive for one of my
bills being heard so I'm sorry
I'm not on video but I've
actually been receiving a lot of
messages about this and you know
it really makes it difficult
when we have.
Legislators who have experienced
how hard it is to survive.
As a young mom trying to support
my daughter alone I know how
difficult things can be I
strongly believe that New
Mexicans must be able to access
funds in emergencies we've seen
how.
Especially it's important during
the COVID nineteen pandemic and.
Although we have to hold
predatory lenders accountable
and put an end to the cycle of
data there with high interest
rates we have to ensure that
people in need of cash in
emergencies have somewhere to
turn.
And I I want to thank you lady
and the other legislators that
have come to an agreement so
that we can insure that when
people are in need.
To access funds in emergencies
that that that there's someone
to turn and you know I just.
You know how hard people in New
Mexico are trying to take care
of their families and it's
difficult situations especially
right now but even before the
pandemic and for us to be able
to try to help I think we're
doing everything that we can to
try to help in these situations
and.
Lenders have to go through so
much first to be able to
determine when consumers can
afford to repay their loans they
can't act as predators they
can't create debt traps that
space and unacceptable burden on
people so I I think what you and
the others have done is a good
compromise again to ensure when
people are in need of emergency
funds that they're able to
access it there so
I also want to just comment on
some of the the other comments
maybe you know where people can
turn to family they can turn to
charge that's not always the
case.
Especially in New Mexico.
And
if you have never had one of
your constituents crying on the
phone with you thank you are
out.
Because we have constituents
especially now crying about
situations that they're facing.
And we need to be able to
address that and I'm totally can
you know come back up the cycles
of poverty.
We have to set benchmarks and be
able to accomplish them and I
think that this is what the
amendment is doing so thank you
for the time gentle lady and I
appreciate this ammendment and I
urge the body to vote for it
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
We're still on the amendment the
gentleman from Bernalillo Cibola
McKinley support San Juan and
Balenciaga Representative Harry
Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from McKinley in top one
usual to me thank you Mr
speaker.
Madam chair thanks for this
ammendment of a couple of
questions that I have one
question is.
These people your previous loan
companies basically because the
back but you know we're not.
Is that correct.
Mr speaker gentleman that is
absolutely correct.
No matter Mr speaker in a ten
gentle lady up you know I
personally solid deal here a
couple of months ago
as a representative of I'm going
to look deeper than the money Mr
speaker madam the.
Chairman we'll go to the deeper
fixing cars.
These people came up to me and
asked me if I could help of give
money to very one other levels.
They did not have the money
madam chair Mister speaker that
was heartbreaking you know I
don't want to personally borrow
money because I just don't
believe that but we went to a
local company and and secretary
Dr Lee told me no one spoke with
the situation before it the.
Mortar and then Mr speaker in
the chair will not to borrow
money.
I think we're gonna need more
money under those circumstances
if you don't have a credit
rating.
So I took this long to fully.
They borrowed seven hundred
dollars as we needed to upgrade
opens and that was so
heartbreaking to read and
that's being said you Mr speaker
and madam chair.
This is completely the been
there what do people do with the
families.
You know there is a lot of
issues
Mr speaker and gentle lady of
people are we money for no
reason but these hard times
nowadays these institutions are
not there people are really
going to be in a bind so how do
you address somebody uses that
can be made my husband my sister
my brother are you facing what
do you what do you tell me to do
and madam chair and Mr speaker
and gentle lady I'm glad you
brought this up.
To lower the interest rate and
not to meet these little
companies go away because if you
will way the problem we have
facing of knowledge in the bill
a lot greater.
What is did you know that is
just keep that in mind Mr
speaker gentle lady in all not
all people are gifted your is
lucky as we are to have a we
have some people are struggling
from data daily to make ends
meet either the pizza delivery
the proposal on the table for
the category level.
And those are hard recent things
thank you Mr speaker madam chair
thanks for the time thank you
Sir.
There's further debate.
We generated on the end of
Representative guidance.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady lady from McKinley
and San Juan yield I'll be happy
to yield Mr speaker.
Thank you gentle lady antebellum
Mister speaker I just rise today
in support of this amendment and
I just wanted to explain to the
body today that you know this
bill really was looking like it
was going to die and we have
worked for years to to make sure
this we print it
We we make sure that we Kerr
predatory lending.
Mr speaker gentle lady when I
first started nine years ago I
had a similar experience of
somebody telling me.
That the reason we needed this
bill was because women.
especially single mothers just
need better money management
skills.
And.
The.
For you are working hard every
day to paint every penny and
generating Mr speaker.
Women.
Have been raising families alone
and they had to make make
choices hard choices and this
bill doesn't cut the legs out
from under them we are trying to
make sure we cover.
The the bad actors but we also
want to make sure that there's
resources and
services available for those who
need it and so I just wanted to
stand in support of the work
that was done today and to R.
Sanchez who has worked hard to
resurrect this this bill I have
never seen anywhere anybody work
so hard so thank you for read
the the collaboration that
happened today thank you Mr
speaker.
thank you gentlelady.
Next we have the generation
Bernalillo Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
to the gentle lady yield from
McKinley County I'd be happy to
yield Mister speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker I to rise to support
this amendment today this
afternoon a group of five women
got together with the sole
intent of problem solving for
this bill and what happened was
pretty incredible what we did Mr
speaker gentle lady I don't want
to belabor the point that part
of the maintenance we stood up
for New Mexican families and for
people that need it these types
of resources when they need
access to them during a crisis
or any other time where money's
tight that in such a way where
we're not going to open them up
to predatory lending practices
and that's what we do in this
bill Mr speaker gentle lady with
this amendment we make sure that
we are curving predatory lending
but were also maintaining access
to microlending and and smaller
loans which many people find
themselves in need of I have
many times throughout the lives
I know that that's happened to
me it's happened to members of
my family I also want to
compliment the gentle lady from
McKinley County and her
expertise and coming together
with all of us and making sure
we crafted a solution that that
brought all of the issues
together and put together a
pretty good bill that
that listens to the needs of New
Mexicans without really having
unintended consequences and and
for that Mr speaker and gentle
lady I rise and support the
amendment thank you for taking
my added revisions on it by
keeping that language and we're
making sure that we maintain
access to lenders and that we
don't unfairly curb US supply
in relation to the demand for
these types of plans so thank
you very much is an honor to be
part of this process and I also
want to compliment
Representative Herrera the
gentle lady from
what it County forgive me if I
get that incorrectly she worked
incredibly hard to resurrect
this very important piece of
legislation and it was
incredible to watch her her
fight.
In her spirit so thank you Mr
speaker delight.
The generated through the debate
the gentle lady from Valencia
Representative Fajardo.
Thank you Mr speaker whether
kind maybe from McKinley please
yield.
Be happy to yield Mister speaker
thank you thank you so much
to questions on the amendment.
so what we're doing is we're
going microlending is a term I
keep hearing so it's my
understanding correct me if I'm
wrong train lady is that if I.
Need to borrow.
Nine hundred dollars.
Then I can be financed at ninety
nine percent is that correct
remaining.
Yes Mr speaker gentle lady the
terms would be ninety nine
percent APR four thousand
dollars less and the B. for
twenty a twenty four month tour.
Thank you.
To borrow twelve dollars Mr
speaker kind lady then it would
be thirty six percent is that
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady that's
correct.
And Mr speaker.
Maybe during the landing.
Mr speaker gentle lady we do
have installment lenders in the
in New Mexico we do have a
number of storefronts so would
be existing lenders that are in
the state in New Mexico.
So Mister speaker how may we
heard a lot of testimony that
credit unions.
Support of this bill Mr speaker
kind lady as well as your
amendment with the thirty
percent thirty six percent
what's involved with the
negotiations that you had this
afternoon Mister speaker crime
lady Mr speaker gentle lady no
not not from my perspective I
think they.
Provided a lot of input with the
working group of the primary
sponsors particularly
Representative Herrera and
others but in terms of my
participation now I have.
Hey maybe we lost you have had
in the past Mr speaker gentle
lady.
And they provided a good good
resource.
Mr speaker and I am sorry what
needs rest for a little bit
would you would you mind
repeating that.
Sure I'm yeah we have to the
body but gentle lady but will be
in the state of New Mexico that
would be responsible for for for
providing this product.
Mr speaker time I am sorry I
missed most of your answer
because the the internet was
going out I do have some more
questions I I will reserve for
most of them for it for the bill
itself I'm so
I think that's all my questions
for now Mr speaker primary thank
you.
As for the right generation
cents billion Representative on.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady from McKinley and.
I want you.
You Mr speaker.
Thank you generally thank you Mr
speaker I just want to stand
they are.
Alongside my fellow.
Sisters.
Yes yes in do the work today to
get this ammendment completed.
And I just wanted to.
Say thank you for the work that
you did in.
For your voices.
We stand alongside yours
It does I think.
The stories that we share in
this body.
As.
Sisters this this house.
Come across very strongly with
your efforts that you you may
today and I just want to add Mr
speaker that.
I was as a young woman did have
any credit didn't who had some
knowledge of financial knowledge
and education.
Did participate in taking.
A couple loans that really
helped me when I was in some
tight spaces because.
I was independent and I get.
Rely on on my family to help me
out.
And.
I was able to pay back those
loans it took me a little bit
more time I I became more aware
of what these these loans were
what was what it was about what
more importantly it really
helped me in the time of of need
that I that I needed.
And I know it helped other
family and other friends and I
am quite aware of the predatory
aspect of what these on state
but what your amendment did.
It was to.
Help us to get to a place where
we can have this conversation in
person good legislation
hopefully we get district and I
just wanted to stand in support
with you.
And like I said about my fellow
sisters in this house that did
the work and sure.
Their integrity and their
background and what makes us
very special here in this house
which I am very honored to serve
alongside with.
And I just want to thank you for
that and seven supported your
amendment
Gentlelady Mr speaker with that
I yield my time thank you.
Here is for the debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Allison.
Thank you Mr speaker well as a
lady from McKinley county jails
I'd be happy to yield the Mr
speaker.
Thank you ladies thank you Mr
speaker I really appreciate this
ammendment and I sincerely
appreciate the five ladies that
got together to collaborate.
The practice of predatory
lending is very abundant.
Specially in the border towns
that hi Representative content
area of border towns and it is
always said very heartbreaking
whenever we go to visit family
on the Navajo Nation that the of
store fronts that border the
reservation the parking lots in
those areas are filled with the
stock trailers and vehicles.
Of the people that have
forfeited on the loans that they
had taken out high high interest
so I'm very very glad to see
this and members at this bill
going forth to help my people
with that of I would ask the
body to support this amendment
and the spill in general I thank
you madam chair and I thank you
for the sponsor thank you Mr
chair or Mr speaker.
Thank you John exceeded the
gentleman from Bernalillo and
Sandoval Representative Ely
thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan yield.
Happy to yield Mister speaker.
First
gentlelady before I begin I just
I I have to say that I think
this is the best the legislature
has to offer yes these kinds of.
Rematch and hard fought
negotiations to come to a
compromise is not just the best
that we have to offer
legislature in keeping with that
I do understand that there are
going further negotiations with
the other side of the aisle over
the number so the ninety nine
percent that we're talking about
instead of a thousand dollars
that we would be talking about
eleven hundred dollars are you
aware of that and gentle lady Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman I am
aware of that.
And Mr speaker gentle lady what
did the agreeable and then we
can walk through the process
would be agreeable for you to
change the amendment and every
place incense thousand dollars
to say eleven hundred dollars.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
talked to my colleagues the
workgroup and we've all agreed
it wouldn't be just my decision
we all agreed and we think it's
a good idea Mr speaker and
gentleman up primarily because
we actually we're looking at
fifteen hundred dollars and we
we brought it down to a thousand
so it's not at inordinate amount
by adding another hundred
dollars.
Mr speaker gentle lady then
here's what I would propose and
I'm looking at the clock I have
talked to Legislative Council
Service and they have said when
I originally talked to them they
said believe it or not thirteen
to fifteen minutes which was
about three minutes ago so
whatever that Matthews is
important that's when we'll have
a point to version of your
amendment on the floor but as
long as the body agrees what
could we referred to your
amendment with eleven hundred
dollars and will for to it as
the point two version of four
amendment number one this is the
Senate Judiciary Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill sixty six someone just
reporters the point two version
of floor amendment number one
would that be acceptable Mr Mr
speaker and gentleman it would
be our our workgroup has agreed
to that we think we we don't
have a problem with that.
Mr speaker gentle lady then
that's the way we'll do it I
think I'm making the clerk happy
as well this one will have a
clean version hang on just a
minute Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady as soon
as we receive the point to
version the clerk is informing
that we will put it up online
and we will have it available to
the members of the public to
review thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady.
Thank you John other is debate
on the amendment to the
amendment the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative last.
Thank you Mr speaker would
generate from McKinley San Juan
you I'd be happy to yield Mister
speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker Joe April
McKinley San Juan I just want to
rise and support and thank the
the gang of five for their
leadership tremendous leadership
in N. as in a virtual sessions
are to get together and put your
minds together I was a what what
was about to be a really big
problem either the bill.
Dieted we stay at whatever is
now one thirty five or more.
For we are we move forward with
I want to deal with the
practical reality what's tough
Mr speaker joyful.
Can the San Juan is there is
tremendous unintended
consequences for this bill.
Consequences that that we cannot
quantify.
We don't know you know how many
of.
How many stores make close how
many less loans there are how
many how much less access to
capital folks have how many
folks may lose their job because
the car doesn't work may lose
their apartment because he
couldn't could make the ranch or
other.
Struggles that people go what
goes through and then what we
certainly can't quantify Mr
speaker showing up on the case I
want to just is the extremes
that people may go through to
make ends meet to borrow money
from whomever or or you know to
call up that the ex boyfriend
and you know.
Do we need to borrow money
that's that's reality.
And so I want to just thank the
fiber you thank everyone
involved and I must say that the
arms I think the.
The demographics of the group of
five is more closely aligned
with the folks there struggling
out there dealing with these
realities and I'm glad that
you're cognizant of that and not
just dismissive of the
unintended consequences that the
bill.
Before this amendment is passed
what would what do so I stand
and support and I appreciate the
the G. R. T. reality with the
extra hundred dollars a thousand
dollars thank you Mr speaker
gentle Republican San Juan very
much.
Okay is there further debate on
the amendment for the amendment
to the amendment.
Representative cast at a general
Sierra Sierra Torrance Jewish
debate on the amendment yes Sir
Mr speaker thank you all the the
gentle lady from McKinley and
someone please you'll.
Be happy to yield Mister
speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
I just really want to my heart
we can come to some kind of
agreement that can help people
that are struggling and this
time of need I know that you
know when I was younger we I
have a lot of hard times growing
up and you know being married at
a young age and it was tough and
it just like I say one to one
market we can all come together
in a consensus and and make
things happen for the betterment
of the state of New Mexico and I
just wanna let you guys like
everybody else and I think you
guys.
Thank you Mr speaker yield.
This just in a place we have
the.
Point two version so we're going
to just.
Hold in place for a minute or
two are gets up loaded to the
website.
Okay ready the points to version
of the amendment is now on the
left side to the yes the folks
wanted to quick second to look
at it be sure Council Service
prepared correctly and then we
will.
Receipt.
Okay I'll go to the gentle lady
from McKinley said wanted you
had an opportunity to review the
point two version of the next.
Yes Mr speaker or what I can see
it it looks fine board we've
just change the number of from
one thousand to one thousand one
hundred okay so the amendment
has been moved to choose from
the management.
we have the point two versions
dedicated.
the.
General San Juan has moved the
amendment.
Is the scene of further debate
on the internet all those in
favor of an adoption demanded
please signify by saying hi.
Thank all those.
Not a single may that's easy
call the eyes have it house
floor amendment number one to
Senate Judiciary Committee says
two percent or sixty six as
amended was adopted.
Generally speaking in San Juan
you still have the floor.
Want to thank the body Mr
speaker I want to thank the
workgroup today you know that's
what this is all about is
working together and are working
on legislation to make it better
all when when something comes
from the other chamber we we get
to do our part of it and it also
gives us some time also because
of the twenty more twenty four
up month period to receive the
data and the look at all those
reports from the financial
institutions division if of the
body remembers that was a bill
that was carried by
Representative Lewis and we're
still we're still waiting for
that information also to be
aggregated aggregated and I.
I just want to thank all of you
and I'll turn it back to the
up and the response of the
speaker.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from of the Lancia
Representative so hard thank you
Mr speaker well maybe from.
I'm sorry.
Your.
To add to my to the gentle lady
thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you prime age so you need
to refresh my memory so.
Two thousand nineteen.
Two thousand nineteen we we we
had similar legislation come to
the body do you recall that Mr
speaker primate.
Mr speaker kind they yes we had
I think was at H. B. one fifty
that was presented by our
Representative little state
called for really
a study of that how these loans
are given out I'd also like to
remind of this body and and you
generated that right now the as
we we do track we do track loans
right now through the through
the F. ID financial institutions
division that's part of the are
you know regulations and
licensing department so they
have they put out every year we
have the eighteen and nineteen
are the two thousand eighteen in
two thousand nineteen statistics
on how many loans are made.
How many loans are defaulted on
they do the F. ideology tracks
that so I just want to remind
everybody that it was about what
you're looking at is is about
six hundred thousand loans made
a year small installment loans
what you should know I think
it's pretty amazing at at high
rates that about seventy percent
of the people Hey off those
loans and then another thirty
percent go into default which
was a question we have.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
Gary I'm everybody was talking I
have really hard time hearing
what you're saying and these
levels of tax receipt last is
making it extremely difficult to
see and so I'm trying to also
looking as well so Mr speaker
kind nineteen
so we do so back in two thousand
nineteen we we we had a
production.
And.
We have a lot of people come to
the table.
I would call it a compromise Mr
speaker kind lady and we got a
bill HB one fifty.
What to call.
Compromised.
Was that a bill that and that
David somebody favored one
letter over another or anything
like that Mr speaker payment how
would you describe what came out
of that and that built.
As well Mr speaker and kind lady
I I was really tend to get
better information that
information will come up the
we'll have the first report of
some that legislation on April
sixteenth yes and Dr but that
doesn't mean we already don't
have a lot of information on how
small moments where they the S.
ID has a whole series of
regulations and frankly lenders
several series of regular
lessons that they have to abide
with us to be part of that to be
certified business small loan
installment company for the up
to the state of New Mexico.
Hi Mister speaker primary so why
don't why are we not waiting for
that data.
Mr speaker time lady
These times have been very hard
for a lot of people and I think
any time you can lower rate from
one seventy five down to ninety
nine or lower rate from one
seventy five and the thirty six
I think it's what we should do
here this is been a very
difficult year and families are
struggling and we and the reason
we put that those that ninety
nine percent back in as we know
people need these loans somehow
we've got to work with lenders
so that there is so that people
have a place to go so I I think
I think the times dictator what
we should do I think it's I
think it's the right thing to do
for moving in the right that
direction and and this will only
give us more information.
Mr speaker.
Give it more information is that
is there data reporting and
dispel.
In this bill what we just we're
tracking we have to track the
data through the financial
institutions division it's
included in this field shows you
all the things that they have to
keep track of it shows you all
the things that the lenders have
to keep track of and help the
reporting as special the other
bill one fifty will be
actually do for data that we'll
be able to look at.
Mr speaker kind I appreciate
that because I think that the
information next that's going to
come out to me to be one fifty I
don't it's our state.
Very important data it's going
to be data that you can argue
with.
We.
Debate this is a concrete
information my problem is that
we table after months of
negotiations there is a
compromise next.
And I would say pretty much
everybody I'm sure
compromises.
Some everybody needs something
more and they didn't get
everything they want.
What this bill is there's a
certain group it will be with
the compliance.
They give something that.
Back to the table and said we
want more we don't want the
data.
We want more.
Legislature.
We don't keep our word.
And that's a problem.
The
community sees as
people see.
As
I know that we are not a
provided the keeps our word.
We are just two months away from
the data.
So we decided that we're gonna
do this anyway.
Because we don't compromise in
this body.
Mr speaker kind generous.
Another question so if.
Need twelve hundred dollars.
How much is that interest rate
Mr speaker paneling.
Mr speaker County alone Senator
of thousand dollars are at the
interest rate is thirty six
percent.
And Mister speaker hi my name's
Chris going to loan me that
money.
Mr speaker kind lady LA
installing company of which long
is that running with good credit
Mr speaker.
Testimony I'm most times we had
in our change we've also had
testimony and she worry that
that I was I listen to and
you've always testified Mr
speaker kind lady and I've heard
this from day one.
The credit unions we're going to
step up and then that money Mr
speaker kind mania is a no no
longer involved in this
conversation.
Mr speaker comedy of course they
are and they're saying that
they're going to step up and
they're going to do more
outreach and that was part of
this whole bill process where
where they wanted to do that and
then the that's what they said
they made commitments to do so.
And why do we need legislation
to force
at credit unions to make loans.
Mr speaker kind lady this that
this bill has nothing to do with
credit unions.
Mr speaker.
Because they're your expert
witnesses and the committee Mr
speaker kind lady Mr speaker
kind lady they are this bill
isn't about credit unions it's
about in some companies
under the small small loan act
and.
The credit unions understand
what the problems are credit
unions are having long
conversations with advocates and
building and seeing how they can
restructure their loan programs
and how they can do more
outreach to people and I think
that's a good thing for New
Mexico Mr speaker in your agree
that is a good thing for New
Mexico and also the most at
thirty thirty six percent as of
great thing for New Mexico I
think that's something that you
should be doing and that's.
To create legislation.
To do.
Is dishonest I'll be on it
because we should be doing that
already.
And.
Once you we we really tried the
session to make sure that during
the day we're not.
I see the motives and certainly
and we're not going to be in
cheating are the the the
integrity of members and percent
goes on the floor this acting I
don't think that you mentioned
by the generating some your
raise this on us I study
opportunity to make sure
Representative understood.
Thank you for that and you're
correct that would never implied
that to the timeline each but I
do think that the there is a
misleading always come to this
body this year there's this lady
Mr speaker kind right we have
built this body.
Testified that says one thing
it's clearly written in black
and white has entirely not yet
they're in contention and even
when we pointed out these bills
get through which is shameful
this body to do that but Mr
speaker hi my name.
The problem is.
Yes we do be doing without
legislation we don't need to
legislate.
My concern people who don't have
bank accounts.
What credit scores.
Who are in desperate need of
this time and we've all heard
stories members of this body we
had people testified that when
they've been desperate had those
they've had to get the exams.
We are taking
away from people and the most
dire time we had it in our
state's just.
The group that had worked on
this scale accepted that
together so that's what it was
about.
It's also the equivalent of G.
R. T. and gentleman.
So.
Mr speaker telling you could.
I don't could you explain that
Madam it's the equivalent of G.
R. T..
That Mr speaker kind gentleman
let me consult somebody.
Yeah.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman G. R. T. is about
eight percent nine percent so
that that's what we have in our.
Mr speaker gentle lady is G. R.
T. charged on the loan.
Mr speaker and gentleman now it
was just it was just a number
that was added on to that
amount.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank
you.
Okay seeing no court.
Gentleman we are you refinished.
Jacque Jacqueline is lost
connection remained in the
second to reconnect.
Mr speaker I I did not lose my
connection I was done with my
questions.
Okay.
All right one licensure okay
seeing a further debate the
need.
Generating granting Dogo in
Sierra thank you Mr speaker will
the gentlelady yields.
Mr speaker and gentleman yield
to the crime lady thank you I
know there are quite a few
minutes are made on the house
side have you also spoken with
this to sponsor on the Senate
side and will he be concurring
with the amendments we've made
on the house side.
Mr speaker kind lady on the
error of the amendments that
been made on the on the house
side and we still say.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so in
this negotiations the Senate
sponsor was not involved and has
not occurred to accept has not
agreed to accept the
concurrence.
Mr speaker kind lady know they
were involved in the in the
first amendment and they knew
that work what we're doing.
The compromise I mean in the in
the big com that is where you
went from the thirty six percent
for loans over a thousand
dollars and ninety nine consent
rates for loans under a thousand
dollars and the addition of our
twenty four months cost.
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
just procedurally because I do
not know what happens yes the
Senate does not concur with the
amendments and the state a
strict about what happens.
Mr speaker kind lady of this
this bill would probably go to
conference like a lot of bills
and in this house will go to
conference and the conference
will decide that it's just ours.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady so it puts me in
a predicament because it's not
even a year ago that we agreed
to wait for the study and so
we're just less than a month
away from the results of that
study and so thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen.
Senior for the debate gentle
lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I'd like to
thank everybody that worked on
the spill I'm deeply
appreciative to all the work
that's been done and I on I
would like to thank both sides
of the house and all the work
that's been done in the Senate
and now I and the past Mr
speaker you're on final passage
of Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute Senate bill sixty six
as amended the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to close.
Users are close by but if you
need to in the affirmative
sixteen in the negative Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill sixty six as
amended has passed the house.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo Mr
speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business.
Third reading of legislation.
This is.
The next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
no objections so ordered.
Gentlelady from McKinley and San
Juan Representative Johnson.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
I
move that we go to the next
order of business messages.
We are on a motion to adjourn
seen ADA.
Jackson so we're all just
kidding just kidding said three
messages.
Yes.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed house bill two hundred in
return same here with.
And that the Senate have have
house bill fifty five as amended
by the house and further amended
by the Senate what by the Senate
with emergency clause House
technician revenue Committee
substitute for House Bill to
ninety six as amended by the
Senate with emergency clause and
request the concurrence of the
house and Senate amendments
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief clerk
this is winter.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed house appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
House Bills two and three as
amended by the Senate and
request the concurrence of the
house and Senate amendments
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief
clerk.
Message we entered message from
the Senate Mr speaker I'm
directed to inform the house the
duly rules and gross copies of
Senate bill two twenty two
Senate bill three forty one have
been reading for provide by the
officers of the Senate in open
session and request the
compresses signatures of the
offices of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief
clerk.
Mr chair message from the Senate
Mr speaker I'm directed to
inform the house that the doing
enrolled in gross copies of
Senate bill twenty.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
seventy five as amended.
Senate bill seventy seven I've
been reading for five by the
offices of the Senate vote
session requested signatures of
the offices of the house
respective submitted Lenore and
Lara host Senate chief clerk.
Mr chair.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
I move that we go to the next
order of business committee
report.
No objections ordered where to
eat.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee term is been
referred to Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill two seventy nine has had it
under consideration reports and
recommendations that if you
process respectfully submitted
ever Armstrong chair.
Move adoption Ron and option of
receivable Committee report and
Senate Judiciary yes since you
percent abilities and I also
agree with the signify by saying
aye I.
A three point Dr.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee tomorrow is
that right for Senate bill three
sixteen as amended has had it
under consideration for things
recommendation that a due
process respectfully submitted
ever Armstrong chair.
Move adoption we are adoption of
the will be important Senate
bill three sixteen as amended
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
The state reports that.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee chairman been
referred Senate bill three
seventeen has had it under
consideration reports saying
with recommendation that it the
prospect is that if ever
Armstrong chair move adoption
rate options able to Newport
Senate bill three seventeen
always very consistent I just
saying hi I think this was may
reports that.
Mr speaker Education Committee
members been referred Senate
finance committee substitute for
Senate bill seventeen I've had
it under consideration for CENIC
recommendation that it to
prospect Medici Andr√©s Romero
chair unanimous consent of the
Greek restaurant together act on
a single drug research in the
journal so direct on individual
hearing a judge declare to the.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill forty
two passed as amended.
Senate Education Committee
substitute for Senate bill two
eighty nine as amended due
process respect was but a G.
Andr√©s Romero chair Mr speaker
move adoption of the committee
reports right of action at the
work reports and Senate finance
committee up to percent of the
seventeen Senate by us substance
and before his equipment and
sanitation Sir Senator to eighty
nine is that it also favor
please signify by saying aye.
Eight hours was nay reports are
not.
Mr speaker appropriations
finance committees name is been
referred Senate bill two twenty
three I had it under
consideration are point things
like nation that the past mended
respectfully submitted Patricia
A. Lundstrom chair.
Option.
We are adoptions we will
committee report on Senate bill
two thousand twenty three as
amended all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
I
think three point about.
Department.
Three bills and happy St
Patrick's day and a toast to
Tommy boy and Marie Bryant.
We'll miss meeting with you all.
In our traditional House
Judiciary sympatric state
celebration.
Members take note are the
generally from McKinley and San
Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker there will
be a major democratic caucus
meeting tomorrow at eleven
thirty we will send you the
information thank you members
take note are there any other
assets gentleman from civil and
McKinley German Opel.
Thank you Mr speaker I am very
happy to announce the house
labor and there is a military
affairs will not meet tomorrow
will not meet tomorrow happy to
announce that.
And we're also happy to announce
that the lack of the meeting is
because you pass all the bills
that were sent to.
and there's another else's
generated Bernalillo
representative Thompson.
Thank you Mr speaker and I'm I
will follow up that good news
with the good news that consumer
public affairs will not be
meeting tomorrow thank you.
Gentlelady have Representative
Lord is very upset about that we
provide a memorial or something
to.
Can we take the
in order House memorial anything
to put on the agenda
Representative Lord.
Mr speaker I've maybe I'll make
a deal with the Senate if they
pass all the house built I will
hear one of their bills in my
committee tomorrow if they can
get it all done before eleven
thirty tomorrow.
Okay members say no the Johnson
Rio Arriba Sandoval and San Juan
chairman led to a thank you Mr
speaker continuation of good
news is that the house
agriculture water resources
committee will yet again not
meeting tomorrow appreciate all
the members of focus and and
tuning in but we will not be
meeting tomorrow thank you Mr
speaker members.
Representative Jennifer San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker house
Republicans we meeting tomorrow
and because in practice at
eleven thirty.
Members take note any other
announcements.
Gentlelady from burning.
Mr speaker I move that the house
stand in recess until one PM
tomorrow afternoon.
Is it taking motion thank you
members forget day out of only
got two and a half days left
we're getting close.
Appreciate it was hard work
