And we will take that surely.
Gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you for that will that will go
to the next order of business
committee reports no objections
so ordered to repay.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to who has
been referred house bill one has
had it under consideration for
the same with recommendation
that it didn't pass respectfully
submitted Patricia A. Lundstrom
chair.
Move adoption the direction of a
favorable committee report on
house bill one all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
Pose was named Canadian forces
to.
The gentleman from earlier.
Thank you miss that we go to the
next order of business third
reading of legislation as well
as unanimous consent to spend
rule eleven dash twenty dash one
to allow for the consideration
at this time of house bill one.
No objection the rules stated
for the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill one on final passage
has been taken the gentleman to
explain it the bill thank you Mr
speaker has been one is
in total we are appropriating
three point one two million
dollars.
The but in the following ways
nine hundred and fourteen one
hundred dollars from the
Legislative cash balances for
the legislative expenses of the
second special session.
The legislature.
Includes a hundred and twenty
two thousand three hundred from
the house of representatives.
A hundred and five thousand four
hundred dollars for the Senate
in two hundred eighty six four
hundred dollars for the city
council service for session
expenses.
This is from the general fund
for expenditures in fiscal years
twenty two and twenty.
For staff and its operational
expenses all finished boxes as
follows.
And fifty thousand dollars for
the house chief clerks office
and three hundred and fifty
thousand dollars for the Senate
chief clerks office.
Mr speaker contingent upon a
certain transferred to be
appropriation contingency fund
being made pursuant to other
legislation this special session
will include appropriations bill
includes appropriations from
that fund for expenditures in
fiscal year twenty to twenty
twenty five as follows five
hundred thousand dollars to the
administrative office of the
courts for pre trial services
and monitoring one million
dollars to the department of
finance for administration.
Funds pursuant to the federal
American rescue plan act of
twenty twenty one that I sent
for questions.
Senior debate tournament close.
Right now move that house bill
one.
Yes Sir we see Jareth gentleman
who were a little quick.
There is debate the gentleman
from Chavis Eddy and Otero.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
Thank you
which is back in just.
Go through the funding a little
bit.
in more clarity on the our money
that rescue money coming what's
it being used for.
And how much it was again you
were you were reading faster
than I was I just want you to
back up and go through that or I
understand.
Speaker and gentleman
the representative referring to
fight is five hundred thousand
dollars for pre to the
administrative office of the
courts for pre trial services
and monitoring and one million
dollars to the DFA to administer
the are the funding that we will
appropriate the session.
And is that why is that in the
bill isn't that different for
that to be in the female we
haven't done that before have
we.
Speaker of the things that we
have done it before the reason
it is in this bill is because
you know if for whatever reason
what the funds are not
appropriated during the special
session
we feel strongly that the public
safety problems that we're
seeing across the state border
particularly in my hometown
because of the attention that
the that the need to be able to
make that investment
particularly in pre trial
detention which we know has been
a problem as reported by news
outlets and others there's a way
to ensure that that funding gets
appropriated to that specific
purpose regardless of what
happens over the course of the
next several days here in the
special session.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
I would suggest to you.
That we might on a line item
that I I'm not opposed to
helping with the funding of the
crime problem that you have in
Albuquerque I I completely
understand that and support the
effort.
But I don't believe it ought to
be part of the Phoebe of the
female has historically ma'am
the bill that is.
funds this body and and and this
legislative process and we have
not painted yet.
With
other directives.
I will tell you Mr speaker and
gentleman
Probably is not totally
pertinent to this discussion
but.
I think that it was about ten
days ago I was in a meeting in
Albuquerque New.
The crime problem in Albuquerque
was such a great importance I
get it and it needs to be
addressed.
And they talked about the impact
of the state police.
Actions that have been recently
and how the official within the.
But as I left that night going
home I just want them to
Moriarity and there were seven
state police cars.
Directing the traffic of the
movie set.
Paul Albuquerque was running
down from the lack of a better
word so I think there's some
issues that we structurally need
to address.
I would.
I will vote for the the bill
portion of this I do not believe
it's it is correct to have these
five of.
Creations in the bill.
And if they remain in their I
cannot support it because I
don't believe it's a cracked
process for appropriating.
So hi I hope you understand it's
not that I'm not.
supportive of the means to
address the crime problem in
Albuquerque quite to the
contrary.
But I don't believe it ought to
be part of the bill thank you Mr
speaker.
The debate the gentleman from
civil and McKinley chairman of
course.
Thank you Mr speaker again the
or I just don't have a bill.
Again I.
Listen to the gentleman from
Travis county.
And I am having a problem trying
to figure out.
What we're going to do with that
one five zero zero zero.
And the what do I tell my people
that poem that we did with this.
I'm sorry for the sentiment for
million.
I yield to the gentleman.
So my question is how do I think
for the speaker and gentleman
from Bernalillo.
What we're doing with that one.
I zero zero point zero.
But the like of my people that
come.
the speaker gentleman are you
referring to the last section of
this.
Yes Sir so one million dollars
of them speaker and and
gentleman is for the DFA to
administer these funds the other
half a million K. to help
support the administrative
office of the courts pre trial
detention services which are
services that deal with folks
that are within the judiciary
judicial system before they go
to trial so you know these are
folks at home or just maybe on
on ankle bracelets a one on.
Okay that I'm just really
confused Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo.
One million dollars for costs
related to the administration
thank you.
reporting of funds received by
the state.
Four million dollars for yes.
From the paideia face costs for
administering this one Mr
speaker and gentleman that would
be the total cost for
administering in my
understanding the thinness of
the article funding which is a
little over one point one
billion dollars assuming that we
as a body appropriate part of
that in the next few days and
assuming that we as a body
appropriate the remaining of
that article funding in the next
thirty day session.
Okay.
Figure.
Okay is for the debate the
gentleman from Valencia
Representative Baldonado.
Thank you Mr speaker religion
from Bernalillo please yield to
the gentleman thank you Mr
speaker thank you leader
a little more on that the the
pre trial services for the
administrative office of the
courts Mr speaker.
It's not real detail there in
our in our bill what are we
talking about ankle monitoring
with what is monitoring the Mr
speaker and gentleman Mr
chairman that is my
understanding includes
monitoring folks on those
bracelets you know other types
of pre trial detention programs
that might be out there in need
specific community.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I know that we see a
lot of this conversation lately
with with free trial Services
monitoring is is this focus
solely on on on the metro and
counting up here is is
That money unical statewide Mr
speaker Norman the speaker and
gentleman no this will be
statewide.
Mr speaker and gentleman the on
that is is it is we have these
that's five hundred thousand
dollars over to AOC is that the
determination as to where that
goes is there any sort of
direction from us.
How that's going to be
distributed or is it simply
based on on their decision
making in that in that
department speaker and gentleman
the speaker and gentleman this
would be in general for pre
trial detention services and
which are in the way of
different programs within the
AOC all I can tell you the LFC
and then the.
specific appropriating
committees on the house and
Senate side
we have of of metrics that they
have to follow that the actual
agency has to follow for how
money's invested so.
There will be some of the way
for the agency within the bounds
of what the legislature sets up
for them.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you Jim that's all the
questions I have.
And as for the debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo yield
thank you Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Of my questions also concerning
section three
It is my understanding.
That there is a success.
That we will be hearing in the
next couple of days and it is
based on spending of the funds.
I I don't understand why this is
separate.
From from that bill Mr speaker
and gentleman especially since
what we're going to be doing
here.
We'll be changing.
reversions of hello hello monies
we reverted through twenty
twenty five Mr speaker and
gentleman what's we're
specifically talking about the
bill to fund.
This legislative session for the
next two weeks that's for for
folks who are listening in if
there's anyone if there's a
paying attention at all.
We're talking about the bill.
To pay for the costs of this to
make up to ten week session.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
I won't talk about the spending
of one point five.
Million dollars.
Bill.
That's and it's going to cost us
fifty thousand dollars a day
approximately to cover the
expenses of having this special
session for the purpose of
redistricting and we have
another vehicle we have another
bill.
That will be presented by I
believe by chairwoman of
Lundstrom that has I believe the
expenditure of up to four
hundred
million dollars.
for the of the funds so I'm not
exactly sure what we're trying
to sneak this into the.
Into the bill so the speaker and
gentleman what I guess the
question I have is is there any
reason.
I switch this expenditure which
is not appropriate for covering
expenses.
Of the special session is not
just incorporated.
In two.
Into the bill that we're gonna
be doing in the next several
days.
Speaker and deliver the question
is this I Senator and as you
know once this is scientific
community and this allows us to
get much needed money to be able
to see to make sure that these
programs are working the way
that they're supposed to be
working on the one million for
the FAA is as early as well
that's to help administer these
programs can make sure that the
DFA has the staff and capacity
to ensure that the money's spent
the way that it was intended to
be spent some speaker and
gentleman with that not happen
if it didn't go through the
other bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman is
there how how is that any
different.
With that except for we would be
passing it today.
On a vehicle which is the bill
which is totally inappropriate
for this expenditure one point
five million dollars I don't
know that we've ever had a few
bills this expensive.
it just it doesn't make sense
and I'm not sure.
It appears to me and maybe
the specialist it appears to me
that the reason we're doing this
is because it's a convenient.
All.
For this appropriation not
because it's the right place for
this appropriation to go through
can you can explain why I'm
wrong Mr speaker and gentleman
the speaker and gentleman all
all I can say is you know public
safety is as it is of concern to
me and several others and many
of us if not all of us in this
is a way to ensure that the AOC
gets funding.
This immediately as soon as a
society
correct this is a vehicle I mean
every bill as a vehicle and
hopefully this vehicle gets
through the legislature and
signed by the governor as soon
as possible so that these funds
can be disbursed some speaker
and gentleman at this point
what you're suggesting is that.
This is one out here.
Because I don't see an emergency
clause.
This is bill that's the reason
we're doing this right because
it because it's the final bill
it has the effect of the other
bill.
With an emergency clause which I
believe maybe there's some
concern that the emergency
clause on that other bill would
not take place and gentleman
this is a gimmick this is a
gimmick.
To ensure that something that is
a priority for someone once
again because of this.
Someone budget.
And it appears that the metro
area budget the most and the FAA
because what we're talking about
is one million dollars to
administer five hundred thousand
dollars.
So I I don't understand that
we're going to spend.
Two dollars.
One administration for every
dollar spent in appropriated
dollars.
The service.
I understand that we're talking
about is one hundred million
dollars to minister potentially
the billion dollars that we're
going to get provide additional
once again I'm not understanding
why at least that portion for
DFA does not.
The other bill.
We're talking about crime.
But I am talking about.
Bill spending.
Dollars.
Monies that we haven't even
necessarily even.
We pulled into the general fund
so Mister speaker and gentleman
once again.
Not believe that the bill that
will be coming out of
appropriations for spending on
the money's is not the more
appropriate place for for this
one million dollars for the FAA
to administer was that not the
more appropriate place Mr
speaker and gentleman.
I
don't I mean I I think but as
with any bill that I introduce
you introduce or any member of
this body introduces I mean I I
think that any of those bills
could be the appropriate place
for anything that we want to put
in there and we take a common
practice in this chamber Mr
speaker and gentleman to
not only right legislation
legislation the committee but
also amendment dissolution in
committee and on the floor
because you know every so often
some of us think that maybe a
specific amendment to the
Pacific bill is where that
policy change has happened so if
it is appropriate sure and is it
appropriate in any other bill
sure I was so so Mister speaker
and gentleman so.
I believe the way this works is
we vote on this and it would
just be soon it would be a
million.
Those dollars would go
immediately.
because.
Bill has to go into effect
immediately to pay for the
expenses of the legislative
session.
And I is that correct Mr speaker
and gentleman.
That is correct Mr speaker.
Speaker and gentleman anyone of
us who have a priority in our
community.
That we believe is very very
important.
During the coming and every
future session.
Would be appropriate for us to
put whatever our individual
priorities are without having it
vetted.
Without having proper debate
without having to go through
multiple community committees in
both chambers Mr speaker and
gentleman.
one.
Why would we not just put
everything.
You Mr speaker and gentleman
this is a total misuse of the
process.
We can make an argument about
the crime issue.
But a million dollars.
To go to DFA to.
Administration to appropriate
funds the.
That we haven't even voted on to
Sweden to take into the general
fund Mr speaker and gentleman I
I I'm not understanding the
million dollars for DFA continue
to explain why it's so important
to have this in the bill as
compared to having it in the of
the appropriations bill that we
we see seeing in just several
days was.
The mail on the head
we we need to make sure that
this money gets out immediately
and then to specific departments
starts ramping up to make sure
that they invest the money that
we're going to appropriate the
most efficient impactful way
so that's why it's in here and
you know I would hope that we
can build on this we can get it
out as soon as possible so that
is when it comes to that agency
and that they can ramp up
you know there's staffing and
and and their process so Mister
speaker and gentleman if we want
to pass the spending bill that's
going to be coming our way in
the next several days and we put
this San Juan which that bill
talking a matter of days
fantastic with an emergency
clause.
Why is that not the direction to
go that that was where we would
do this.
And every other situation so why
is not quite what we're doing
today is.
You are correct that is an
option.
Speaker and gentleman that's
another option which is the way
that this legislative process is
supposed to take place I don't
believe if the if the tables
were turned your service side of
the aisle would be very happy.
We're doing under a Republican
administration is putting money
into the DFA Fund fund those
dollars are not even there yet
to be administered to miss
genesis really smacks of of.
It opportunism.
And just using this vehicle this
is the right appropriate vehicle
and the legislature.
Think about it in these terms.
If the tables were turned.
Republicans were using this just
put whatever it is we think
needed to be funded in the bill.
It would not be accepted.
There would be an outcry I don't
know how I can vote for this
there should not be.
Any problem with.
Bill is.
For the expenses of us here for
a special session which we have
to do we have to be here to re
district we have to be here to
do this work.
This is probably use of these
funds especially considering.
The minority office asked for
twenty five thousand dollars so
we can hire demographer to use
for the very purpose of what the
session is supposed to be for
which is for the purpose of
redistricting and we were denied
being able to hire a
demographer.
To be able to do the work what
the session is supposed to be so
we're talking about twenty five
thousand dollars to do the work
that we're supposed to do over
the next two weeks and we were
unable to get that money to hire
that person and instead we're
talking about one point five.
Of million dollars to go for
other purposes that has nothing
to do with this session and I
would I would challenge the
media to go back and look and
see how many times this has
happened for some other purpose
what this bill is supposed to be
which is to cover our expenses
while we're here so I'm just
honored to the body to vote
against this not because we
don't need to pay for this bill
and not because of this one
point five million dollars
doesn't need to be appropriated.
Yes thousand patients not come
through this should not be
passing in this fashion and and
this.
I just can't even explain how
disappointed I am for for this
use of political opportunism
thank you Mr speaker next in the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from Bernalillo you'll
Thank you very much in the
scan to see everybody back Mr
speaker
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo my first question.
Relates to section three as
well.
Any documentation from.
The.
And from DFA the backs of the
five hundred thousand and one
million dollar request.
Speaker and gentleman you know
we actually just today concluded
our legislative finance
committee process and we heard
over the course of the process
from the administrative office
of the courts.
Two can live about some of the
gaps in the programs including a
pre trial detention aside from
that many of us have not all of
us have heard from our
constituents has to ensure
public safety in our own
community is just another could
be problem it's happening
everywhere in this country and
soul yeah there is a back up for
for the for this particular
request.
I would I would also.
Committee Mr speaker and
gentleman that.
I think this is just part of the
investments that we will need to
make up house bill two which has
been introduced.
One investment in the committee
session Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Even more investments and not
just from the op.
From the federal infrastructure
bill as well as a general
appropriation act which which
madam chair laws will be leading
the next legislative session so
those back up for these request
and I would invite you to look
at the record for those
specifics.
Mr speaker and gentleman
Shades of those back up.
As I look at the legislative
website I understand that that
this meeting just occurred but
there's no notes on the votes
there's no back up there the
fiscal the FIR is insufficient
with respect to the data that
you're requesting there's
nothing in here that backs up
they are the the the there's no
documentation Mr speaker and
gentleman that is from AOC for
from DFA shows what this
information of the requesting is
the money that they're
requesting is.
The fact and gentleman that you
asking us to vote on
appropriation of the totals one
point five million dollars with
no backup.
It's great Mr speaker and
gentleman and.
The.
Appropriations committee got to
see some of that information I
got to hear from AOC and from
DFA.
But we don't have anything.
This is totally insufficient.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I like and then standing of of
how.
We can vote on that point five
million dollars without.
Back to shows this is what we
need to somehow me additional
points we.
For something Mr speaker and
gentleman that.
Jones warns.
Much needed one needs to get out
immediately.
In and I'm concerned with that
Mr speaker.
Is.
These funds.
Mr speaker.
I.
Jones.
To me.
This is also gonna deal with
infrastructure money.
It's going to be dealt with in
the thirty day session.
Confessions at how we're
appropriating now on a concept
that we don't even have the full
depth of.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
forget some that offer this as
we continue this debate.
Documents Mr speaker the
come from male scene DFA and go
through those numbers for all
seven members in the room maybe
we can get to a point where we
can understand that Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
yeah I mean if I could go to a
website the the LFC does a very
good job of publishing these
newsletters and studies I don't
know if you've attended an LESC
meeting speaking German I would
highly recommend if not because
they are truly.
Informative.
I I would invite you to do that
I would I would invite any
member to do that because you
will gain a great deal of
information.
I will say that the
Of the.
The comments I made about
transportation what not really
are related to.
Which is in the hopper as well
as a during the session when we
will be investing even more are
the funding into infrastructure
projects across the state and
then the federal infrastructure
bill as well which is going to
designate quite a bit of money I
should clarify the one million
dollars to DFA will not only
cover the distribution and
implementation of article
funding it at election we cover
all of the other federal sources
of funding including the federal
infrastructure bill so
we're getting a bang for our
Buck for that million dollars
based on how much the DFA will
be implementing each and every
one of our communities.
And gentlemen I appreciate the
words.
There's no paper.
There's no paper that came Mr
speaker and gentleman this bill
that you brought in front of us
to give us a chance to analyze
it as quickly as you're asking
us to analyze.
There's no documentation there
is no time in this debate.
To sit there and go.
Funding for Mr speaker
legislative finance reports.
We
a typical bill credit I'm a
freshman and I've only gone
through sixty day session every
other bill that I went through
have reports from everybody.
It was affected by.
I have no Mr speaker and
gentleman I have known FIR
defends the five hundred
thousand dollar request I have
no FIR that defends the million
dollar request.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Next.
Sorry when I said thank you.
My apologies I'm gonna get down
right one of the things I don't
mean thank you Mr speaker I'm
done.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'm I'm
waiting for a response it gives
me the ability.
To look at the numbers and sit
there and say okay yep Mr
speaker that's what that five
hundred thousand dollars is a
good idea yes that million
dollars is a good idea right now
this document doesn't give
anybody in this room and then
Senator the probation or L. LFC
submitting the information to
vote on this.
So with with respect to that Mr
speaker what I'm asking for is
before we continue.
That that we get that
documentation that backs that up
German if you ask a question the
gentleman from earlier was
answered it if you don't find
the answer satisfactory
we're not going to just wait on
the debate until you get a
different answer I'm used to the
answer you received is the
answer the gentleman wishes to
give with the you like it or
more or don't like it is are you
Sir.
Mr speaker I appreciate that
answer and then based on that
answer Mr speaker I make a
motion to table this bill.
Mr speaker I make a motion to
table this bill.
General emotions out of orders
already motion before the body.
Mr speaker as I understand the
house rules I'm allowed to do a
call to table.
Mr speaker I have been advised
to.
I'm asking you.
The third.
It's not my intent to cut off
debate.
The prior to.
Fast food opportunity for call
for motion.
Okay the there's further debate
the gentleman from the
Representative Scott.
The gentleman.
Just a couple of questions.
The first one the first.
This
is is
is a recurring expense for.
Admissions.
Sure.
What is thanks for.
Sure this.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe that is the case and
that's part of the reason why
this is in there.
Expenditure.
Recurring.
Sen.
School for.
Correct so it is for twenty two
and twenty three and it would be
expected to be absorbed by the
the budget in the out years
hopefully.
That is really to allow each of
the chambers to to diversified
staffing in the sense of
bringing other types of
professionals with extensive
expertise in I think the I think
we needed both majority and
minority offices we disorder
here about the need for the
demographer for example and
grant and that's probably a once
every ten year higher we want to
give the chambers the ability to
build up our expertise for the
benefit of our members simply
for the benefit of our
constituents.
It was.
For additional
question is but.
Opportunity
hard to answer that because I
think is is you know.
Each of the probation tunes and
and each of those policies are
different and so I would hope so
but that may not be the case
about two twenty three.
For for.
Right project were significant.
Expenditures are just for
swimming or normally willing to
project.
Mr speaker and gentleman here I
guess I could say so.
Thank you for the.
No one current.
This position is to work.
First solar's.
Each
this
is for districts.
M. one is.
If you will one forward.
As part of the federal
infrastructure bill and any
other federal money that might
be coming our way.
So.
The solution
with professional.
Looking at.
The future.
For this purpose.
Hopefully that's enough you know
this is fluid and so is the
federal Congress passes the
other infrastructure bill that
they're debating you know that
could be another chunk of money
for New Mexico and they might
very well come back the the
administration might come back
and ask for more money to
implement it.
Read
more.
Two hundred thousand dollars to.
Sure.
Sure if those funds.
This gentleman these funds are
meant to benefit the entire
state as you know the AOC has
programs
control the tension programs
throughout the state and so
these these will benefit every
corner of the state that needs
those services.
Cool for this expenditure.
Sure to answer your questions
thank you Sir.
Next to the gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln
representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo county
the new Majority Leader yield I
don't.
Thank you Mr speaker budget
development.
I.
Mexico the thoughts and I won't
repeat to those of all of the
money that I would like to
present on a few things.
I'm afraid that tomorrow we wake
up we're going to see a headline
that says that the special
session of possibly two weeks is
going to cost taxpayers three
point one.
Plus million dollars.
I think the taxpayers have a
right to ask why is it costing
them so much money for us to to
to do redistricting because
that's primarily what we're up
here as well as the other I am
on the call I deal with the
federal monies of the come to
our state.
But that seems like a high
number.
That's going to be a headline.
I think we're going to have to
count to our constituents for
that headline.
But as we read the bill we sent
the.
Over fifty percent.
Thanks for fifty percent.
Does it go to this body at all.
Look at the numbers.
It was percent is going to DFA.
Six percent one point.
Ten percent actually come into
the house and nine percent
almost ten percent of the
Senate.
Number nine percent Legislative
Council Service then we have the
seven hundred thousand dollars
of Representative from Lee
County talked about.
But the.
Some people waving headlines is
what this is going to cost
includes things that they
wouldn't.
Expect to be a free bill.
And that concerns me greatly.
Of.
Mr speaker and gentleman the.
Some people's state of the the
maybe this is out of the
ordinary.
I haven't been here that long
but to your knowledge Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Is this the first time that we
put sociais to hide owns into
the feed bill to fund out of the
food bill.
Speaker John and I don't believe
this is the first time I believe
we did it in the twenty two for
the twenty twenty one regular
session to pay for security and
also for medication services and
delivery serves me correctly I
think it was also done in my
very first and second special
session back in twenty fourteen
twenty fifteen sixteen so it's
not unprecedented at all it's
it's happened before.
I would also Mr speaker and
gentleman of the if that is a
president it's a dangerous
precedent because.
People and you know we hear the
word sunshine and transparency
of this stuff in in the feed
mill is not the.
Same to reflect that sunshine or
the transparency the maybe we
call upon because of work
feeding bill means we're taking
care of ourselves.
We're not taking care of others
at this point in time we are
funding.
These proceedings for funding
part time here in Santa Fe for
the next two weeks to the tune
of three four one four million
dollars
difficult questions regarding
the of the of the amount the
million dollars.
How many employees are how many
independent contractors are
going to have to be required to.
And administering accounting and
reporting of the funds received.
Speaker and gentleman
is the service we correctly I
believe that DFA.
We'll have to staff up I don't
have an exact number with me but
as you know it's difficult to
hire people and we actually know
for faxes and difficult to hire
people for government positions
so
you know I think we go to that
issue you know DFA will
certainly have that can have
that number for us but it's all
staffing keep in mind that
they're also processes in places
such as people it's processing
claims that have to be.
To ensure that the taxpayer
dollars are well spent and spent
in a way that reflects the will
of the legislature that to me is
probably most important part of
this I want to make sure the FAD
executive.
With whatever they need to
appropriated implement the funds
that we are going to appropriate
in the next few days here and in
the thirties session and insure
that taxpayers get the most bang
for their Buck.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
of the land you just use the I
don't necessarily see on on page
of armaments page four line to
them
like that those funds are for
administering accounting and
reporting of.
I didn't see.
The other things that you may
have been talking about.
Gentleman administering
accounting and reporting I think
would taking everything I said I
mean efficiencies and
transformation and
implementation would all be part
of administering those funds in
accounting those funds and then
eventually reporting use of
those funds just to the federal
government but to this body.
Mr speaker and gentleman what
would those be temporary
employees.
Permanent employees because it
looks to me like this is a
specific.
Line item for administering
accounting or reporting for
specified funds one those once
those phones are so spent.
They no longer exist in these
accounting functions would no
longer be related with the.
That is correct it would be to
make sure that money gets out
now keep in mind I don't think
it's as simple as of writing the
check out to specific community
for specific project as you know
some of these projects will take
a long time to complete if it's
a if it's an infrastructure have
a project Mr speaker gentle and
On C. could take years and so in
terms of administering an
accounting and reporting of
those dollars it's not going to
be a one time deal it's going to
be
time intensive and I think it's
going to take up seven months in
some cases and several years in
those.
Mr speaker and gentleman these
funds are going to be basically
six months in length from the
moment this passes until June
thirtieth of twenty twenty two
is that correct.
you Mr speaker and gentleman
yeah I would assume so.
Because that's a time Mr speaker
and gentleman that sometime
during that these funds would be
available so one million dollars
being.
Given the FAA for basically a
six month period of time to to
do these functions.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
that that's a concern seems
Amanda that the process that we
have generally for agencies to
put these types of dollars in
their administrative budget.
And as I understand it that's
what's actually what's going on.
This next week so the figure out
how to spend some of this money
and and do some other accounting
this seems to be part of what
we're doing generally there
today and then again in one
month and that should not be in
the bill that is meant to pay
for and fund and services that
we are.
Required to expand in connection
with this special session so
with that I would urge my
colleagues to.
Vote for this one at least take
this portion of the bill out so
that the a hundred percent of
the bill goes to percent of the
house and the Legislative
Council Service so we can tell
our constituents exactly what
this special session costs for
taxpayers thank you Mr speaker
and gentleman thank you.
Thanks to the generally from
Eddie.
Thank you Mr speaker with a
gentleman from Bernalillo please
yield to the gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Could you tell us please what
the effective date of this bill
is.
Mr speaker so it is it is it
signed by the governor.
Mr speaker gentleman how do we
know that.
Mr speaker enjoyed it because it
is funding all three branches of
government and it is considered
a general appropriation act.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so I I think
there's maybe it maybe a couple
of different effective dates
that could apply here and I
think that's leading to some
confusion especially when
there's a contingency in the
bill Mr speaker and gentleman so
section three of the bill is
what troubles me the most.
I'm pretty sure that the no at
least in the Republican caucus
is against the feed bill money
needed to support our staff
during the redistricting special
session but section three isn't
rather puzzling and troubling.
Mr speaker and gentleman so it
says here in section three that
contingent upon the transfer of
federal funds received in the
state treasury.
In the corona virus state fiscal
recovery fund pursuant to this
rescue plan
this money within go into the
appropriation contingency fund
Mr speaker and gentleman could
you please tell us what the
appropriation contingency fund
is and for how long that phone
has existed.
I don't know how long is a six
and four but that so I came at
the recommendation of the
legislative finance committee as
we were drafting the bill
basically to ensure that when
money moves from the federal are
funded the dozens in the General
Fund goes into this contingency
fund I believe I get more
flexibility perhaps his way I
understand it but it's been a
common practice in the past and
and that's why it's in there.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I do
apologize but I'm going to ask
you to answer that one more time
I hear your voice is really
muffled and I really didn't
catch much of what you said so
the question is what is the
appropriation contingency fund
and if you can find out how long
that frontier has been in
existence a specific Ellen and I
are finding out how long it's
been missing existence for this
part of the bill was written
that way at the recommendation
of the LFC eighties socially is
a way that they moved money from
the Feds to the state and
instead of just sitting the
general fund the contingency
fund as I understand it gives us
more flexibility but I don't
know how long it's been in
existence for although we are
glad to find that out for you
According to folks I don't see
it the fund exists within the
general fund okay thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman.
So could you tell us please how
much we're talking about in
terms of federal funds received
already in the state treasury
under our phone.
Speaker gentle lady I would
assume we received
most if not all of the are both
funds because that legislation
was passed I believe back in may
I could be wrong about that
there might be some that are
done through a reimbursement
basis perhaps of the federal
government is not on the right
here.
Mr speaker John and my question
is how much money are we talking
about.
Speculating
funds New Mexico to the tune of
about one point one million
dollars I believe some of that
money has already been expended
So I don't know exactly what
remains of their but it
certainly still the vast
majority.
Mr speaker John so it did I hear
one point one million or billion
of the security I wish I could
take my mask off the quite
frankly I'm not comfortable so I
will try harder no one else has
had a problem here in the San
all certainly now if that helps.
One billion with the.
Thank you thank you.
My ears are a little bit tired
tonight so maybe it's just my
yours and not your vocalizing
but Mr speaker and gentleman so
we're looking at a lot of money
and according to section three
of the bill DFA is going to get
one point five million dollars.
For me to get the exact language
See here.
Basically for monitoring I think
and and accounting.
Can you tell us if the FAA is
already or has been already.
taking care of of those
functions.
With the money that's already
been spent
and and LAT DFA is the.
The government that administers
I think all the expenditures
that we make as a state so
let's functions already
happening.
In preparation for the entire
amount of opera funds whatever
else comes after that you know
they they will need to ramp up
and and so that's why this
particular sections in there.
Some Mr speaker and gentleman so
it is in your state and I
believe that DFA has already
been accounting for of the funds
those already spent.
But I would assume so I mean it
you know I I've not would be a
state but
if it does a wonderful job of.
Meeting of the New checks out
and ensuring that capital outlay
projects and funding our
communities for the most part
they do a pretty good job of
anything they are overworked
underpaid and and over loaded
and so sometimes it takes a
little bit longer to get things
done but.
Current law they should be
already administering those
funds and I was just going to
make sure that they've got the
resources necessary to do.
accounting because at the end of
the day it is a taxpayer dollars
this.
That an answer about the fund
created in nineteen ninety one.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you.
Mr speaker gentle and is there
any doubt at all that the
transfer of funds will occur
into the appropriation
contingency fund respect at the
economic picture question I
didn't hear the first part okay
Mister speaker and gentleman is
there any doubt at all that the
transfer of funds will come into
the appropriation contingency
fund.
Ministers.
The house bill the bill that was
introduced earlier here we have
to pass.
Thank you.
So Mr speaker and gentleman so I
I just really
I think like most of us and many
of us here would like to have
seen of simple food bill.
When it gets down to the nitty
gritty of funding the special
session and not having these
additional
Appropriations contingent as
they are in the bill.
And so with that Mr speaker I
and I do have one other question
I I probably ought to ask first
I'm looking on page four of the
bill.
And it talks about expenditure
in fiscal years twenty twenty
two through twenty twenty five.
And I'm wondering why we're
going out so far in the twenty
twenty five.
Jeez my
House flooring down here can you
repeat the question my
apologies.
Mr speaker and gentleman so on
page starting on page three of
the bill it says the following
amounts are appropriated from
that and they are transferred to
the appropriation contingency
fund.
For expenditures in fiscal years
twenty twenty two through twenty
twenty five and my question is
why are we looking so far ahead
to twenty twenty five thank you
Mr speaker jelly apologies again
for the interruption I believe
that's the deadline for opera
funds to be fully extended okay
thank you appreciate that.
Mr speaker I have an amendment
to believe it it's available.
The gentle lady I.
I've seen your amendment I think
it needs to be amended or
restated.
is is my understanding is going
to strike section three I
believe that'll be a friendly
amendment but the the amendment
there's a words and insert an
emergency clause which is not
the right way to do an amendment
we need to actually have the
emergency clause itself.
Offered in the amendment
so we need to do is take a beat
to make sure we get a correct so
please hold this to.
Hold in place we have the
director of the council service
himself making a rare appearance
on the for the house to draft an
amendment in real time ladies
and gentleman.
Mr speaker I don't know if this
is in order but Representative
Rehm from Bernalillo is willing
to speak while we're doing the
paperwork I I read the we've got
to them and I'd like to get that
done because my guess is that
Representative reams comments
are about money that is about to
be removed from the bill okay
sounds good I.
I'm ready for some help.
Representative Brown University
visited by the master bathroom
self.
In this corner of the house.
Can be in any of the twenty
years provided service.
The drafters who's not afraid of
any bill.
C. Aug.
Aw.
Gentlelady from any.
Thank you Mr speaker I have a
house floor amendment.
Do I do.
Gentlelady reform.
Mr speaker this is house floor
amendment number one to house
bill number one.
This can we get a version of it
we we go because we wanna make
sure you get it for the web
site.
Okay good so generally these
move house amendment number one
to house bill one gentlelady to
explain the mentor.
Mr speaker and members of the
body these are the amendments on
page one point sixteen.
After the semi colon restrict
the remainder of the line
straight lines seventeen through
twenty one in their entirety and
insert in lieu thereof declaring
an emergency.
On page three point sixteen
through page four point twelve
straight section three in its
entirety and and certainly there
of.
Section three.
Emergency it is necessary for
the public peace health and
safety that this act take effect
immediately.
That is the amendment.
Okay.
Right so this strikes out the
appropriations for the other two
branches of government and
declares an emergency and all to
add gentle lady the reason we
need to add an emergency clause
is because the great folks that
work here I would like to get
paid we would like to pay them
eighty on it is on the way if
the deal doesn't.
Have either an emergency clause
were having the designation of
the general appropriations act
which means it appropriates
money in all three branches of
government.
It doesn't take effect until
ninety days after the
adjournment of this session so
the bill needs to either be
general appropriations act to
take effect immediately which is
why the bill previously had
the funds for the other two
branch of government or the
super emergency costs so this
has emerged because it takes the
funds away above of rugged
gentleman here before we go to
the gym a friendly it was just a
friendly amendment.
This is a fairly amendment.
Okay there's debate the
gentleman Chavis Eddy and Otero
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that I need to do all
the just make a statement that I
appreciate you accepting the
amendment and I look for this
for your bill thank you Sir okay
is there further debate on the
amendment.
Is there objection to it.
Say we want to just like give it
thumbs up if you like it.
Okay with these injection we
have an adoption the house floor
amendment number one to house
bill one gentle lady some of the
for.
Mr speaker I just want to thank
everybody thing I just want the
staff to be paid of their
amazing people and we wanted to
get the language to straight so
thank you to everyone who
assisted senior further debate
the gentleman to close thank you
Mr speaker I move that house
bill one do now pass with an
emergency clause.
Just a moment with her on final
passage of house bill one as
amended with an emergency clause
the vote is now open.
Is about to close.
Sixty five any from anyone the
negative house bill one is
amended with an emergency clause
has passed the house.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business announces miscellaneous
business no objections so
ordered.
Hi there any nonsense.
Any miscellaneous business.
Gentlelady from Valencia.
Mr speaker I just have one quick
question for you.
And you know how we're supposed
to wash your hands to keep them
clean over the holidays.
Senator.
Mr speaker how are we supposed
to wash your hands and keep them
cleaned over the holidays are
generally help with the Santa Fe
Tizer.
I appreciate the gentle lady and
worried about what that might
result in I.
We'll we'll give it a little
more time thank you generating.
Only from Bernalillo
Representative Lewis thank you
Mr speaker the house state
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee will meet
tomorrow at one thirty in room
three one seven and we have the
agenda on the golden rod to Care
house bill's three four five and
eight thank you members
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker the
appropriations committee will
meet tomorrow.
After that suit at one thirty
three thirty.
One thirty thank you Mr speaker
and three oh seven and house
bill two will be on the agenda
and house bill two will be on
the agenda okay we'll we'll get
that published the gentle lady
from McKinley and San Juan
Representative Johnson.
Thank you Mr speaker we will
have democratic caucus meeting
immediately after floor session
in room three zero seven.
Thank you generally members say
there are other other aspects.
Okay so members will be back
here on the floor at nine AM
for a meeting of the committee
of the whole house.
To receive a presentation for
the citizens redistricting
committee.
Please be prompt.
we will the.
Get it from them in the
committees will meet in the
afternoon.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
house stand in recess until nine
AM tomorrow morning thank you
everyone for a productive first
day we'll see in the morning.
Stay safe.
