Madam chair creditor is still
trying to get a lot of the okay
thank you you can we can hear
you though.
I have a quorum.
Okay thank you we just go around
and do quick introductions
Representative Lord.
Yes thank you madam chair this
is Representative steep lord
from the east mountains district
twenty two.
Thank you Representative
Thomson.
Thank you madam chair I'm
Representative Liz Thomson
health district twenty four
northeast type of Albuquerque.
Right
well let Representative had a
group though I'm not sure if you
can hear us.
Yes hi still logging on vice
chair Romero thank you madam
chair Representative Andrea
Romero from northern Santa Fe
county house district forty six.
Okay and I'm chair doing Ferrary
reps for house district thirty
seven in Los crucis kind in
north east part of it.
And Representative Pettigrew.
Okay he's still logging on.
Senator Sedillo Lopez do you
have
Representative Chasey is.
We can't hear you you and your
cell.
That the constant refrain isn't
it I thought that Representative
Tracy Chasey was going to be
here I spoke to her this
morning.
So I mean I'm prepared to go
forward but I didn't expect you
to be here.
Okay
Rob do you see
Representative Chasey there or.
Representative Hochman Vigil is
she supposed to join you to.
I wasn't sure about
Representative Hochman Vigil but
I did did think that reference
Representative Chasey would be
here I I'll texture right now
okay.
There are.
So I'm texting right now.
Okay.
It was super helpful when
somebody sent me the link on
email because I was like poking
around the website trying to
find it and somebody sent it
came across the that might be
helpful.
Just madam chair I just texted
her that robs sent it and so
hopefully she can find it that
way.
Okay that's good.
It's also on the golden rod but.
None of us pay attention.
Representative Chasey is in the
participants.
Okay can you elevate her to the
panel.
Please RT have madam chair okay
great there should.
Nibert.
Representative Chasey
Are you.
Still getting on or we can't see
your video.
They are okay I'm actually here
okay great.
do we have Representative
Pettigrew.
I'm yet.
I received a message that he is
still working on logging on
madam chair okay I hate to miss
any of this so we should
probably wait just give them
another couple minutes.
Yes.
The madam chair I'm sorry for
the delay.
All right we all had to scramble
right after floor session so
would you like introduce
yourself Representative.
Name is Randy Pettigrew I am
from the southeast part of the
state Lea County and
Representative parts of
Lovington Hobson unison jobs.
Okay great and senator and
representative for your bill do
you have any experts.
Leave this.
Okay thank you for.
Of people are the experts okay
will here
the.
I'm sorry I just left this
This is Senate bill forty three
prohibiting life without parole
for a child.
If you present your bill.
Thank thank you madam chair so
the The New Mexico courts have
been asking the legislature to
address this question for twenty
years since Justice Boston
twenty years ago and refuting in
reviewing an eighty one year
sentence for someone who is
convicted as a juvenile he he
thought that this was an
appropriate case for the
legislature to come in with a
policy decision so this bill is
an answer to the court's request
for us to do something about
juveniles who are treated
differently in the law from
adults this bill does two
important things it bans life
without parole as a sentencing
option for children and then it
creates early parole
opportunities after fifteen
years for those serving long
adult sentences.
If parole is denied hearing the
hearing will happen another
opportunity for hearing will
happen every five years unless
mandated to happen earlier by
other provisions of law so for
example if they get to thirty
years then the hearings occur
every two years after after
they've been incarcerated for
thirty years.
So.
This this is an important bill
for our juvenile justice system
the Supreme Court has said
automatic mandatory life without
of a sentence of life without
opportunity for parole is
unconstitutional there are very
limited circumstances that the
Supreme Court said this might
happen under New Mexico state
law it is possible for a judge
to sentence H. A. someone was
convicted as a juvenile for the
two little life without possibly
parole so this this bill just
addresses that.
The policy question of fifteen
years was something that we
address last year so this this
bill went through the Senate and
went through one hearing
committee hearing last year and
then it was on the floor of the
house never got a hearing on the
floor so we need to address the
policy question the original
bill had five ten years a parole
hearing after ten years of
incarceration and a hearing
every two years after we heard
from victims from the attorney
general's office and from
individual dust we responded by
changing changing the length of
time for incarceration before
there's a pro hearing to fifteen
years and because of the concern
of traumatizing victims every
two years we changed the two
years to five years and so this
was negotiated last year
this year.
The dust association of well I'm
I'm sure you'll hear for the
from them but that's a summary
of the bill madam chair and I'm
ready to answer any questions
about the bill.
Okay thank you
Representative Chasey did you
want to add anything in the
introduction.
Madam chair what I would like to
do is add some information after
after the public comment.
Before you did it okay Sir of
course all right we'll go to do
public and if you'll take the
survey that will be put up.
And if you can vote whether
you're in favor of Senate bill
forty three or opposed.
In walking distance.
No.
What.
A lot of.
All right this got.
Okay
seventy people.
Of fifty seven are in favor and
thirteen are propose.
Okay will take the opposition
first we're going to limit it
to twenty minutes each side so
and one minute for each person
you'll see the timer so for
those who are in opposition of
SB forty three please raise your
hand those in opposition.
Okay and please stays close to
the one minute.
Diana lose.
Madam chair members of the
committee just returning dina
lose New Mexico District
Attorney Association president
the association opposes Senate
bill forty three.
In part we are in agreement with
the portion that renews the life
without parole provision we
agree with the Sanchez on that
point.
The association does not agree
with eligibility and fifteen
years.
We are in agreement for it to be
amended to twenty years I bet
not fifteen there only two
states West Virginia and Oregon
and the district of Columbia
that have fifteen year juvenile
eligible for parole this is for
the most serious of friends
series useful offender first
degree murder is what this
applies to you.
Thank you.
Madam chair.
Thank you next.
In his address because state of.
You're right.
Yes we can hear you.
Okay I'm I am opposed this bill
passing
My children were in the library
back in two thousand seventeen
when thank you to it opened fire
So.
I wanted to touch on the lake
the bill keeps coming up very
traumatizing all the big victims
over and over again imagine
little need to pass the time
comes for the parole hearing for
the violent offenders to trying
get released we start to try to
heal and then bam it's just
again like a ton of bricks the
heinous acts these violent
offenders Committee reprimanded
stated
I don't understand how the life
of the violent child offenders
more important in the life of
the victims are left to pick up
the pieces that are left of our
lives I'm still trying to
comprehend what city a Lopez
stated that another life should
be ruined the violent offender
made a decision to ruin their
own lives when they committed
the heinous acts no one made
them make the choices and
decisions they made victims.
Need to be talked about more and
changes need to be made on how
to help victims lives the new
lives that were aired okay if
you can complete your thought.
Basically I was just hoping that
the bill does not pass
we're not in agreement with that
think about the victims before
thinking about the violent
offenders.
Thank you.
Next.
Right.
Good afternoon or good evening
members of the board of in the
committee I major re I am not
speaking on behalf of the
district attorney's association
in opposition to the current
form of this bill I echo the
comments that I analyst has
previously stated I would want
to ask of this bill does another
thing that we are not contesting
is for example the library she
never consecutive sentences for
over thirty seconds in that case
and if this passes in its
current form all those victims
will never even have a chance
for their sentence to be served
so it's extremely lenient second
chance given the second chance
or actually the dependence of
the violence and juvenile
offenders but not for the
victims and I think that we're
trying to compromise with twenty
years California has twenty five
years for a violent juvenile
offenders eligible role why do
we want to be the lowest in the
country and the time period when
crime is so high in this post
completely against what we need
to be doing in the state of New
Mexico thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Thanks.
I was there I helped carry
Walter Walter I'm sorry Wonda to
her final resting place I I I've
cried over her her her
motionless body while I was in
that casket this bill every time
it's brought back to our
attention the families are
absolutely re traumatized and I
understand compassion for
children but what I don't
understand is how help
compassion list this bill is to
the victims and so I just
support implore you all to take
that into account
the victims can never returned
and never returned back to
normal normal because of the
behaviors and actions of
killers.
Thank you.
Next Christina is out.
Yes we can okay so my name's
Christine as well I'm a
registered nurse I lived in
Clovis New Mexico for the first
thirty years of my life
very close to Wanda Walters who
was killed by Nathaniel to it
and that library shooting.
And I just I wanted to voice my
this complete opposition to SB
forty three these children as
everybody keeps calling them
sixteen or seventeen year old
and a few years they are going
to be you know the eighteen to
twenty year olds who probably
would have done the same type of
thing I don't think the few
years I think they knew what
they were doing it was
premeditated you know I think as
legislators that hopefully I
would think you would take into
consideration
you know the law abiding tax
paying people who care enough to
join these webcast you know to
state their opinion and side
with the general public the
victims instead of the criminal
so thank you.
Thank you next.
Crystal meth.
Members of the committee thank
you for hearing me today.
my question for you is why do we
favor criminals in the state why
do we want to be the most
lenient state for criminals why
do criminals get a second chance
for premeditated heinous crimes
I understand rehabilitation but
I also understand justice and
the victims are getting at and
it's unfair.
Please.
Listen to our our cries are we
need to conceive a community for
our children for our families
and
Giving leniency to violent
criminal offenders.
Is not acceptable these people
are going and stealing a piece
of bubble gum they're taking
lives they're hurting children
the hurting families a long term
effects and.
Approving this bill.
It's just a devastating blow to
victims please reconsider
approving this thank you.
Thank you next.
Yes although that is.
Hi there I'm actually I'm I'm
for this that this bill is going
to be so highly for the people
who lost their loved ones my
daughter was killed not by a
minor but she was jailed by.
I'm assuming an elder person but
if it was for a minor you know
what these people have no
consideration I have teenagers I
have my team there's no they
know exactly what they're doing
why there are there are fifteen
fourteen they're not children
they are adults going to be
about they know exactly what
they're doing it's premeditated
and I just should consider
getting this bill passed because
these kids do not need a second
chance.
You get a second chance with
their children thank you all so
I'd like you guys.
Thank you.
Thank you next.
Jenny B..
Good afternoon can you hear me
yes you can.
My name is Jenny was there and I
am the mother of Jacob Daniel to
Serra who was murdered August
sixth of twenty twenty by a
juvenile who was twenty eight
days short of being eighteen
years old.
So I am opposed to this bill
because I don't think it's right
that he only have to serve
fifteen years and then get to go
on and live a carefree life
afterwards whenever my son is
not going to come back in
fifteen years and get a second
chance at life he knew exactly
what he was doing the day he
killed my child it was
premeditated any need to suffer
the consequences he does not
deserve a second chance I don't
think it's fair that victims
rights are not protected but
criminals are you're sending the
wrong message even pass this
bill thank you.
Thank you next.
Gamble.
yes I wanted to strongly urge
the committee to please pass SB
forty three all I like the bill
because based on the scientific
fact in research behind it it
doesn't give any people a free
pass and not that you could ever
try to earn back
a chance in society but this
bill would give any man or woman
that chooses to make the
difference over proving years of
time us serious college
education character traits that
cannot be faked over that amount
of time it gives them a chance
it doesn't give anyone a free
pass to give them a chance to
earn that chance and I would
please strongly urgent to pass
this SB forty three thank you
very much.
Thank you and for the next
people who speak it we are in
opposition of.
Taking up people who want to
speak on this and I opposing
this bill so the next person.
Nicole Chavez.
Good morning good afternoon I'm.
Madam chair and committee
members as the bill is.
And today as we speak I am an
opposition of this bill my son
Jaden was murdered by a repeat
offender his murder is in there
for a fifteen year sentence and
a thirty year sentence and this
would let him out with the
parole hearing in fifteen years
I strongly oppose this bill as
it is today because I do not
believe that when a judge and a
jury has given consecutive
sentences that it should ever
show concurrent and give this
monster and opportunities for
parole after fifteen years for
two murders to live should have
two sentences thank you.
Thank you next.
Madam chair that was the final
hand raised in opposition okay
thank you now will go to those
who are in support of SB forty
three if you could please raise
your hand and we will go for
twenty minutes so if you want is
you know.
State quicker than you know the
full minute you're welcome to do
that okay.
Karen what what.
Madam chair members of the
committee Karen would walk with
the national association of
social workers New Mexico state
chapter and we're in strong
support of this bill it is
unconscionable that someone is
not given an opportunity for
parole this bill does not give
someone an automatic parole it
gives them a macro hearing
people can change and can be
rehabilitated we thank the
sponsors for bringing this bill.
Thank you next.
This pattern that.
Thank you for hearing this for
our this afternoon madam chair
committee my name's of discarded
I come to you today as a private
citizen who grew up visiting a
family member and president who
was convicted
as a juvenile and
Himself did not have opportunity
for parole until his fifties
when a lot was changed and other
state.
the impact that the opportunity
for him to have that.
In his life and for my family
Is is and there's there's no
words to talk about it I
understand the rate of of
families from from their
perspective and but there are
families on both sides and this
opportunity as stated people can
change people can grow and the
opportunity for that it's
something that everybody
deserves thank you.
Thank you next.
Campos.
Members of the committee my name
is Lucy let composed I'm a
policy manager apple features
New Mexico this does not pass
the young people face no
consequences it does not change
the fact that children will
still face incarceration it
simply ask that you have a
chance for parole states across
the country are passing legal
reform legislation that takes
into consideration the unique
needs of young people and we
believe this bill aligns with
those considerations please vote
yes on SB forty three thank you.
Thank you next.
Regina Griego.
Thank you madam chair for this
opportunity to speak to you in
support of SB forty three my
name is Regina Griego I was born
and raised in Albuquerque I am a
retired engineer and an author I
am also a victim of violent
crime that took the life of my
brother and other family
members.
I know that nothing will bring
back my family I've made peace
with that.
A child languishing in prison in
this case another family member
when they can lead a productive
life is just one more loss for
me.
I want you to know that the dust
and the victims advocates do not
speak for all victims.
Children should not be given
life sentences and everyone
who is serving as an adult adult
sentences for crimes committed
as children deserve a second
chance it is just a second
chance.
To go before parole board and
show that they are ready to be
released children changed
dramatically and they are when
they are full once they're fully
adult please vote yes on SB
forty three.
Thank you next.
Salazar.
Chairman members of the
committee my name is Derek cells
are.
And I grew up in Espanola New
Mexico have been working with
you for more than five years I
stand in support of SB forty
three.
Then you were incarcerated have
given your trauma multiple forms
of sex or sexual violence and
other and what adverse childhood
experiences.
Young people of color who
misused L. G. B. T. Q..
Plus and this on the spectrum
and used to suffer from
substance use disorder R. O. are
over represented in the cable
system.
Are you need this avenues true
rehabilitation but also need
avenues to escape of course
duration I believe this bill
does is exactly that please vote
yes thank you.
Thank you next.
Mali General.
Members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
in favor of SB forty three my
name is Molly gill I represent a
national nonprofit organization
called Sam we support SB forty
three and laws like it across
the country the fifteen year
standard established in SB forty
three is not an outline here it
is not beyond the pale or out of
the norm last year six states
across the country consider
establishing provisions like
this that also used a fifteen
year mark so many other states
are considering reforms like
this it is the law and the
district of Columbia and I will
say also that is longer than
what the model penal code which
is approved by experts across
the country calls for that calls
for a period of ten years
incarceration for juveniles who
commit serious offenses we hope
you'll pass the bill and thank
you for considering our opinion.
Thank you next.
Allison hi to me.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Allison
Hotmail I'm an appellate
attorney with the law offices of
the public defender I'm here to
express the public defender
support of Senate bill forty
three by providing an early
opportunity for parole and
explicitly ending the
possibility of life without
parole sentences for juveniles
the bill will do it twenty four
states and DC have already done
this bill would bring New Mexico
in line with current brain
science and psychology which
recognize that use are different
from adults in important ways
including decision making
impulsivity and response to peer
pressure use are also more
capable of rehabilitation the
bill does not allow for
automatic release but instead
gives you the opportunity for
review the parole board with its
specialized training can
determine who has been
sufficiently rehabilitated for
release it's time for New Mexico
to enact this reform thank you.
Thank you next.
Sonya are.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Sonya bird and I'm a member
of the A. U. W. a New Mexico.
And our membership K.
Will be around six hundred and
and I'm speaking.
From our position that this you
should support this bill.
I'm I'm a little.
Next is why
the Supreme Court has said it's
unconstitutional and yet we are
still using this in our state as
one other person mentioned
twenty four states and DC do not
have the taken that course and
do not convict juveniles that
without to life without parole
and a few more states don't have
any juveniles incarcerated for
that
and the this this bill gives us
at a process for.
Thank you for the procedures.
During the parole hearings and
how to deal with this thank you
very much thank you next.
Douglas carver.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Douglas
carver I am deputy director of
the New Mexico sentencing
commission and I will be brief I
wanted to let the committee know
that the sentencing commissions
legislative committee discussed
this bill and decided to the
support this bill by a vote of
eight to to with two members
abstaining because second chance
I just patience is important
especially given what we now
know about brain science and
emerging adults thank you madam
chair thank you members.
Thank you next.
David Schmidt.
David Schmidt.
My name is David then I am the
former director of the New
Mexico council on crime and
going to as such the primary
author of our current children's
code with two women aged and the
eligibility.
For a doll adult life without
parole and the death penalty
when the death penalty was
repealed for adults and replaced
with life without parole
children in the Burton.
Became eligible for the sentence
of life without parole and was.
Have the option to our
children's coat however life
without parole has never been
used in New Mexico.
House bill forty three would
clarify the previous there in
the wall and the lemonade the
possibility of life without
parole you're at.
Thank you next.
Merry cross.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is merry cross and my younger
brother was himself a victim of
abuse at the hands of another
under each person he turned to
extreme substance abuse and
began to respond in anger
committing a serious offence as
a minor I believe that we can
have both compassion for victims
and the person who's committed
the harmful Act I personally
experienced hope and
reconciliation which is how I
know that it's possible my
brother's matured into a very
different person than he was at
the age of fourteen he's going
to understand that although he
can never change this past he
seeks to honor the memory of his
victim by serving everyone who
comes into his life yes a
particular passion previews who
are in compromising situations
and uses his story to help Here
hope and provide guidance he's
channeled his passion by earning
a bachelor's degree he works
with habitat for humanity and
Services fellow inmates and is
well respected among that prison
staff thank you for supporting
this bill it creating a
meaningful pathway to
redemption.
Thank you next.
Have yet local.
Members of the committee thank
you for giving me the
opportunity to speak in support
of this bill my name's have yet
Rolf on number research and
policy analyst with New Mexico
voices for children we support
and promote policies that help
all New Mexican families with
children thrive according to a
study published by the New
Mexico sentencing commission and
CYFD ninety nine percent of
children in our criminal justice
system have expired have
expressed at least one adverse
childhood experience any
shocking eighty six percent have
experience four or more the
second chance bill gives
children with experienced this
kind of trauma the opportunity
to move beyond the troubled
childhoods and create a positive
future we believe that this bill
is a big step forward in making
our juvenile criminal justice
system more just as a whole
children accountable in age
appropriate trauma informed
waves and shifts the focus away
from the punitive aspects of our
criminal justice system to the
unique rehabilitative potential
of our kids we urge members of
this committee to give this bill
we do pass thank you.
Thank you next.
Dennis brown.
It.
Thank you very much for the
opportunity to speak I'm in a
fairly unique position because I
am both.
A bit.
And also a parent of an
offender.
My parents were killed at eighty
years old
By three juveniles.
They were sixteen sixteen and
seventeen at the time.
And I'm I'm supporting this
bill.
After.
Much complex much research.
A lot of rating at the end and
brain sciences and and new
information about the is the
Would you mind brain and
development and I believe that
if we just continue to
incarcerate individuals without
any chance of reconstruction
retribution and and and.
Gross.
We are just going to be
releasing.
Damaged broken.
Adults in into our society.
Hi.
Thank you very much I appreciate
your time thank you next.
Emily rose.
I'm only rose can you meet
yourself family.
Emily you're muted.
Okay maybe we can come back to
her.
Jessica brown.
My name is Jessica brown and I
am speaking in support of Senate
bill forty three my husband was
given a life plus forty one and
a half year sentence at the age
of sixteen and two thousand and
nineteen we filed a habeas
challenging the length of his
sentence the attorneys that were
working on his case the district
attorneys the victims and the
judge all felt that his sentence
was unconstitutional
his sentence ended up being
amended by the judge however he
still received a life sentence
as the judge stated that this is
an issue that needs to be taken
up by the legislature and
You know these these people need
to be given the chance to prove
that they've changed my
husband's been incarcerated
twenty eight years and he's done
so many things to better himself
and I hope that he's given a
chance to come out and show that
he can be a productive member of
society this is just asking for
a chance thank you.
Thank you next.
Diane may catch.
Good evening thank you SB forty
three provides the possibility
of a way forward to people who
have made horrible mistakes
resulting in devastating
outcomes while they were still
children without the possibility
of a path forward hope is
stripped away and behavior that
is adaptive and positive is not
incentivized providing an
incentive for adaptive behavior
and personal growth will make
prisons safer for both
individuals and for the
correctional staff while
providing a second chance to
some individuals whose actions
as children no longer to find
the men and women they have
become it's important to
acknowledge that youth and
adults are different and never
sends a child to die in prison
thank you.
Thank you next.
Gamble let me hear.
Yes we can hear you.
Thank you.
Good.
and just wanted to encourage
everyone to say thank you to
everyone who has worked so hard
to bring this and so that we can
all share our comments today
I want to encourage you to
support Senate bill forty three.
Just because of my personal
story as a youth I need some.
Very terrible decisions that I
can't change and I did her a lot
of people it resulted in the
felony conviction.
Thanks to.
Justice system that did feel
that I deserved a second chance
I am now thirty five years old I
have four children and and
working with kids in my own
community and we're teaching.
My own children in these groups
of people to just have
compassion and that's why I
support Senate bill forty three
thank you.
Thank you.
Next.
Carissa maybe.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Carissa
McGee and I return to descend
over seven years and I am an
advocate for grocery populations
I think the committee hearing
this bill I strongly support the
second chance bill because I was
a high profile juvenile offender
who committed a serious violent
offence and I was sentenced to
twenty one years and adult
women's prison facility it was
because I have a light at the
end of my tunnel that I use my
twenty one year prison sentence
to redeem my choices and improve
my behavior the light at the end
of the tunnel was having a
parole The and encourage me to
use my perspiration to become a
better person I knew one day I
would be a member in the
community again and today twelve
years after more crime I am
thankful contributing proud New
Mexicans innocent ending my
sentences without the chance of
parole in providing an
opportunity for them to regain.
Another place in this community
after fifteen years is given all
of our communities hope brighter
future thank you for supporting
Senate bill forty three.
Thank you next.
You need to I'm you yourself but
the number.
The number.
Please send you.
Okay we'll go to the next
person.
Sarah Yarborough.
I need your cell.
Steric you mute.
Yes.
Okay I would like to speak in
favor of Senate bill forty three
if you don't forgive people you
will never heal the offender is
not the most important that is
what we're not trying to focus
on the victims or their families
more important to
you are not the worst thing you
ever did in your life.
I'm everybody deserves a second
chance.
My Sentinel is in prison and he
has regained his self he is very
respected from the prison staff
and from everybody he is truly
sorry for what he did.
But if these victims don't move
forward and learn to forgive and
get on with their lives they're
never going to heal.
Thank you Senate and chairman.
Have a blessed day.
Thank you and this will be our
last public comment in favor.
Erica Sanchez.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Erica Sanchez and the
director of policy and advocacy
at New Mexico can an
organization that partners with
young people impacted by foster
care and juvenile justice to
improve their transition to
adulthood we stand in strong
support of this bill for the
many reasons already stated
thank you for allowing me time
to speak.
Thank you.
That includes our public
comment.
And Representative Chasey I
think you wanted to say few
words and then you also have
We have two experts with us to
madam chair and I think
it was it would be the reason I
wanted to do this now I think
the public comment will help
them tailor their remarks.
What what I wanted to say is
that
I did work on the repeal of the
death penalty bill for ten years
and we were able to pass that in
twenty two thousand and nine it
was not a partisan issue there
were Democrats who voted against
it and all Republicans who voted
for it but we also had.
Gauged for years with victims
families and I never presume to
speak for victims families I
learned that they have their own
pasts each individual but there
is a national organization
called murder victims families
for reconciliation and I worked
very closely with them they were
advocates for the repeal of the
death penalty and they did tell
stories of.
Their own.
House to.
Really as much as possible which
was to
Look.
Look beyond the.
The sentence for the.
I know the.
They fell from Santa Fe that it
would be the family of a new
deal the young girl who was
killed by activists in South
Africa.
Actually became.
Advocates for.
Reconciliation that works for
that and I I do I do see it I
just want people to know it's
not that we don't you're you're
paying and your concern we also
believe in redemption.
This particular bill is is born
out of not only the
developmental stages of a child
we could not but also the
inadvertent
Of the repeal of the death
penalty and David Schmidt who is
the former director of the.
Office.
To.
Mexico council on juvenile
crime and delinquency brought
that out in the public comment
but when what the death penalty.
Really narrow statute there
weren't a lot of crimes that
people could commit to be
eligible for a death sentence
where it the prosecutor could
work to charge it there were
several products when we
repealed the death penalty what
we did is we made fellow seven
crudes the only crimes for life
without possibility of parole.
These crimes are what we're
talking about today we're
talking it's under thirty one
twenty eight dash five.
Activity in certain instances it
is
The the crimes are the killing
of a police of a peace officer
engaged in unlawful discharge of
duties.
The second one is murder with
intent to kill in commission of
or attempt to commit kidnapping
criminal sexual conduct of a
minor for criminal sexual
conduct.
Murder with intent to kill by
the defendant while attempting
to escape from prison.
The defendant while incarcerated
within ten kills a person who's
incarcerated or who is lawfully
on the premises.
The defendant well incarcerated
merges an employee at the
prison.
The six murder for hire and the
seventh is murder of a witness
to a crime or any person likely
to become a witness on the
program.
So this is what our criminal
procedures contemplate that this
these are the programs where
there's a number of people.
So.
We need to change that in our
statute otherwise there is a
huge on disproportionally in our
statutes the second really want
to make clear because it sounded
as if people thought that it was
an automatic and of a sentence
this is only an opportunity to
go before a parole board.
And with that madam chair I
think we can have
Mr this could talk about
sentencing and then she can
introduce the next experts.
Thank you go ahead
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Chasey and
Senator Sedillo Lopez for Carey
bell
I will keep this short I just
wanted to point out a couple of
the sort of technical aspects of
how criminal sentencing laws all
work together that helps to
understand better what the
reality is for this bill one of
those is the fact that
there's been a lot of focus on
the crime of first degree murder
because part of the bills
focusing on the life sentence
and that is the primary offense
that receive that sentence and
also thinking back to the Senate
floor debate as well I wanted to
make sure people understand that
first degree murder it doesn't
mean just one thing that is not
only deliberate intent murder it
also includes felony murder
which is if anyone dies during
the commission of any other sort
of you know dangerous felony and
so that does not have to be
intentional at all certainly it
is it is there's the con it's
the consequence of undertaking
dangerous behavior but it's
significantly different from
deliberate intent murder and in
fact most states are many states
I should say I haven't done
account had treated that form of
murder as not first degree but
second degree murder so the fact
that New Mexico treats that as
first degree murder sort of
makes our first remember broader
than it is in other places it
also includes accessory
liability which is a pretty
common scenario for juveniles
especially because they tend to
be acting as you know it with a
partner or group when they are
because they are more subject to
peer pressure which is part of
that psychology that we're
starting to better understand
now and so accessories and up
without first degree murder
conviction even if they didn't
undertake any of the actual
violent behavior I had a claim a
handful of years ago who
received at thirty five and a
half year sentence.
For committing a burglary with
he was in his teens and he was
there with someone who is over
the age of eighteen and with
accessory liability for some of
the things that that the adult
person he was with did he ended
up with a thirty five and a half
year sentence when all his own
actual physical actions were was
to to steal a laptop out of
someone's house so
I you know just want to make
sure people understand that when
we're talking about these really
long sentences we hear these
really got wrenching
heartbreaking stories about the
loss of life and you know
extremely tragic acts of
violence but this bill is not
just about those cases this bill
is about a lot of different
scenarios and added initial
sentencing a judge is going to
every to feelings are fresh the
child hasn't had a chance to you
know learn and grow yet and so
would judges going to be looking
at someone who is not yet
showing Moores who is not yet
showing rehabilitation impose
that link the sentence this
gives the an opportunity for
someone to step in you know a
decade and a half later and see
okay now what are we looking at
now what kind of person are we
are we dealing with so that's a
pretty good segue at that point
to turn it over to president I
had one other thing I wanted to
mention which is youthful
offenders who is not the first
degree murder scenario it's
other types of felonies we do
have a little bit of a gap in
our system I think this bill can
fill which is that youthful
offenders when they're convicted
of their crimes there's a
there's a fork in the road and
the judge can either provide
them amenable to treatment which
means that they get a juvenile
sentence or say you are not
amenable to treatment you're
going to get an adult sentence
there are a lot of cases where
when that as somebody who was in
their late teens maybe when they
committed their offense there's
so little time left before their
twenty first birthday that the
only reason that they're found
not amenable to treatment and
given it to.
Sentence is because they just
don't have enough time left
before their twenty first
birthday when they age out of
the juvenile system to do the
treatment they need so this is a
not yet again this bill gives an
opportunity for that subset of
youthful offenders to be in a in
a the you know four walls for
public safety purposes for
longer than than that would
allow get some some treatment
through the the prison system
and still have that potential to
not serve their entire sentence
if it turns out that was not
actually necessary so with that
additional piece I'll turn it
over to Preston ship who is with
the coalition for fair
sentencing of youth and national
organization and he's going to
speak about it to the juvenile
specific considerations.
Thank you Mr cook and Mr Shipp.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee members it's a
pleasure to be with you this
afternoon and just very briefly
because you've already heard
quite a few of the things that I
would want to draw your
attention to.
But yesterday on Twitter sister
Helen praised job who came to to
come to the the public
awareness income became a little
celebrity with her book and film
called dead man walking sister
prince John tweeted about this
bill.
She said quote every person is
capable of radical change.
And this is especially true of
young people.
And that that's not a political
statement really yes not
partisan statement that's a
moral statement and I think that
that gets that why this this
sort of legislation we've seen
such a dramatic national trend
away from these sorts of extreme
sentences for kids making sure
the young people do get a second
look this bill Senate bill forty
three is modeled after
legislation that passed in West
Virginia in twenty fourteen so
eight years now in West Virginia
not no not a known to be
particularly lenient state but
eight years this this
legislation has been working
very well for the folks in West
Virginia and that has emboldened
other states Wyoming the Dakotas
Nevada Arkansas to follow suit
and and and abolish life without
parole for kids when L. heiau
passed its bill just a couple of
years ago we were dealing with
Senate president Larry Obhof who
initially was a little bit
skeptical he had some of the
same questions you know with
this affect public safety in on
the rights of victims and when
he looked at the brain science
and when he heard about the the
almost zero rate of recidivism
for former juvenile lifers one
study put the rates of
recidivism at one point one four
percent when you heard about
that and heard about how this is
measured reasonable proven
reforms it's working well all
over the country when it came to
the Senate floor he took the
microphone and he started
talking about the first step
back saying that the that was
going to be part of president
trump's legacy that he believed
in second chances it was the
first step it's not the only
step and suppress not Paul said
you know we have work here to do
this is a nation that believes
in redemption that's why he
supported that bill and now a
couple of.
Years later we have in Michigan
we have Republican vice chair of
the Senate Judiciary Committee
chart vanderwal who is has
introduced a bill that would
make all juveniles parole
eligible after ten years that's
in line with the brain science
and so this this bill it does
exactly what what we have seen
work in many many other states
going back to West Virginia all
the way in twenty fourteen I'm
happy to entertain questions we
certainly appreciate our bill
sponsors for putting that fall
within all of the people who
have spoken out all the
advocates and family members
supported victims really
appreciate all the work that's
been done on this thank you so
much madam chair.
Thank you Sanchez was there
anything else before we go to
the committee.
No madam chair just of valuable
for questions.
Okay thank you
we have of Representative
Pettigrew I think your hand was
up first.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you presenters for your bill and
for all of the comments from
from the.
From the public with respect to
this both sides are very
passionate and have good reason
to be and you know this is this
is something that needs to be
fought for.
Madam chair
I find it interesting that I've
I've been the one that.
Was asked to to play seven olive
branch to the
Sponsors of the bill.
And
Currently since Tuesday the
negotiations of been out there
between the governor's office
that comes advocates the DA's
Association.
Senate Republicans and there's
been no agreement.
And I passed out I had
Legislative Council send out an
amendment and madam chair of
like to.
The amendment two two two six
five seven point two for
consideration.
Okay I'm sorry I have not seen
this.
Madam chair a
this amendment was emailed to
each and every one.
Of of you Representative Chasey
Senator Lopez representative
Thomson yourself madam chair
representative and and vice
chair Romero and Representative
Lord I believe that
misbranding and Brad also
Mister Riley also has that same
email I don't know how to do
this this is what I was told to
do so when I say this what I
told get the amendment emailed
out to everybody so if there's
another way that I'm supposed to
do this madam chair please let
me know but
Everything moves through the.
The
council service was at the last
minute was difficult.
Share yes it went to Senator
Lopez that would have been Linda
M. Lopez I don't have it in my
email box.
Senator up I will for that over
directly at the will of the
chair.
That would be fine it is from
Sean Dolan.
And it was see see to.
at your end Senator Sedillo
Lopez I I see it okay I see it
if we came at four forty seven
I'm sorry at my mailbox my email
box is so full I I didn't catch
this and and they will ask me if
they could have an amendment and
we said we would accept it
because of this being a last
week and
it was for forty seven today.
I wonder so we could forward it
to be because it's I I don't
have it in my the address I use
for provided email I don't is an
ability to guide us okay M. as I
can do that right now and would
that be to your at Gail it Gail
Chasey dot com.
Your MSN.
I can't hear you you're muted.
the first with Gail Gail Chasey
okay.
Madam chair here will I will
explain the amendment.
Okay can you wait just a moment
while people get okay you.
As everyone found it.
Madam chair I'm just wondering
if we got it at four forty seven
if the analysts have had any
opportunity to
Update their analysis.
I don't believe they have.
Madam chair I do have it now.
You madam chair I do not have
it.
Okay I will go back to it and.
He did you just call.
And Representative Romero would
that go to your Andrea Andrea
Romero okay see it I think I got
it now it you know
Representative.
The deal Lopez you're not
commuting.
Thank you Representative Romero
My NM Legislature my Andrea
Andrea Romero dot com and work
as well okay I send it to your
personal one.
Okay.
I think this is simple enough
that we can do it without
analysis.
Okay should I go ahead go ahead
and explain your.
I'm in it please madam chair a
committee members this this
ammendment does three things.
Once again madam chair this was
agreement made with respect to
negotiations between the
governor's office victims
advocates Senate Republicans and
the DA's Association so this.
With with this you have you have
no opposition from either side
with respect to that from those
I'm sorry I forgot to have you
move
your amendment.
Sure thank you for helping me
through this madam chair I
moved.
Committee amendment one.
Two Senate bill forty three the
number is triple two six five
seven point two.
Thank.
I have a second.
Madam chair we just moving it
for discussion on adoption is
that correct correct I'll go
ahead and second that okay thank
you.
Thank you I sure for that that
second this amendment does a
three simple things on page
eight line fourteen.
It strikes the word fifteen and
inserts the word twenty.
The second item on page eight
line seventeen instructs the
word whether and inserts the
word when.
And then on page eight again
line eighteen strikes the word
consecutively.
Madam chair committee I I stand
for for questions.
Are there.
Any I'm.
Questions on the amendment.
The representative I understand
madam chair that he said it's
the result of an agreement
between some groups that could
explain the rationale for those.
Madam chair the victim advocates
Our concern with the was the
stacking pieces but without the
second piece of this for
multiple offenses
Personally I've I feel like a
longer term would be and in
place but this is is consistent
with with other areas and this
is the agreement that was that
was agreed upon between like I
said the governor's office
Victor Matt advocate groups.
Senate Republicans in the dust
and so this is something that
all four of them felt like they
could agree with so that's the
reason the fifteen year was
changed to the twenty year.
In the term whether Madam chair
in in committee so when insurers
that the
When we get to that spot right
there.
It takes a consecutive peace out
so that makes.
And the weather in the win with
respect to that ensures that
that each crime is considered
independently.
Chairman representative I guess
I don't understand.
What the effect will be.
To change whether to when.
Well this okay.
It there's a parole hearing only
with the offenders serving
sentences for multiple crimes.
Yes this would.
Chair and representative very
specifically this
Makes the multiple crime peace
be to be looked at.
Consectetur concurrently.
And so
To the fence is a multiple
crime.
Consideration would not be
considered served at the same
time.
Grammatically I don't understand
how this works but I.
I think perhaps the our expert
on the sentencing process
should.
Try to eliminate that for me.
Before I know I I this friendly.
Madam chair before we go to the
to to your ex for consecutive
sentences will remain separate
as a judge has given for
separate crimes or convictions.
So I'm that that's the
explanation that I'm getting is
what for for the the change in
the words whether to win and the
removal of the work consecutive.
Go to the expert
to
This Travis cook thank you madam
chair and Representative and
thank you Representative
Pettigrew
so the practical effect of this
amendment would be that anyone
who any of the offenders who are
serving a lengthy sentence as a
result of shorter sentences that
are being served back to back
would not actually have their
total sentence reduced by the
grant of parole instead they
would only receive her role on
whatever sentence they were then
serving if they even got a
hearing although from the way
that I'm hearing the amendment
and I don't have a copy of it so
I'm I'm I'm sort of
interpolating but what it sounds
like to me is that someone who
is serving consecutive sentences
would either not getting hearing
at all or would only get a
hearing as to that the sentence
they're actively serving at the
fifteen year mark and even if
the board felt that they were
parole date at that parole was
appropriate they would never the
less stay in prison to serve the
remaining consecutive sentences
and it's unclear for to meet
whether that fifteen year clock
would then restart for parole
review on the subsequent
sentences.
Sedillo Lopez speak for herself
but madam chair I would prefer
to have this discussion either
in the Judiciary Committee R.
before we get there because I
think there are some legal
consequences that are not
readily apparent.
Okay.
And madam chair madam chair I
feel that this amendment
undermines the entire purpose of
this of this bill
most people buy it is my
impression that most people
don't get paroled in at the
first hearing most people who
have committed violent crimes do
not get paroled at there's for
the first hearing so twenty
would likely be really twenty
five
and then if that was denied at
that time it would be thirty so
thirty is what you get with a
life sentence so it does not
give any kind of a consideration
to two juveniles and their
unique brain the the science
that shows that they have unique
capacity to change.
In addition of this issue of
concurrent and consecutive the
whole purpose of having that
line is so that people get a
chance so judges judges
sometimes of.
The crime is so heinous that
judges decide to sentence people
consecutive please and that
would be a way of getting around
this this opportunity for
redemption after fifteen years
because a judge could
essentially give a life life
without parole sentence by
sentencing somebody to ten years
ten years ten years or twenty
years twenty years twenty years
and
And the purpose of this whole
Bill would not be served.
Thank you madam chair what do
think.
Our expert from Tennessee that.
No other state does it that way
because would cease to be a
meaningful opportunity for
release as stated by the US
Supreme Court.
So I think we really have to
look at this
These these three separately and
perhaps discuss them after this
committee.
Thank you.
Madam chair and and committee
and.
Presenters I I
I was asked to carry this
ammendment.
This is based very specifically
on the press release and the in
the interview that the governor
did with respect to what we also
on the newspapers this morning.
and
This gains and I understand the
and yes from from the from the
bill Sanchez this came to
support our it will what it does
is the opposition from your from
the DA's Association loses the
opposition from the from the the
governor's office before for and
it loses the opposition from.
For continuing on down the road
and madam chair and and
committee members.
This is where.
The intent to change.
To make.
Agreeable changes to everybody
or not opposing changes maybe a
better term was decided was best
done.
Madam chair and and
representatives.
I will.
I support this amendment.
From an overall standpoint I
don't have a dog in this.
The overall concept of the bill
I I'm I'm opposed to my dust are
opposed to my judges are opposed
to.
And and so this is something
madam chair like I said I found
it interesting that I'm the one
that was asked to bring the
olive branch out because that's
usually not as most of you madam
chair and committee members know
this not normally my style.
And so but with that.
Representative your yes you're
supposed to just take questions
at this point okay
Representative Lord.
Madam chair I was just waiting
to have questions on the bill
itself I'm waiting to see what
happened this ammendment okay
thank you Representative vice
chair Romero thank you madam
chair like to move to table.
Thank you will take roll call
vote.
Representative Lord.
I apologize could you repeat
yourself Representative work.
Passed away to the New.
Representative Pettigrew.
No to table.
Representative Thomson.
Yes.
Representative Lord.
I was waiting can I wait to the
very end to to make my bill.
No I'm sorry Representative we
go in order of committee members
and and vice chair and chair
okay no to table.
Vice chairman.
ATS to table.
Madam chair for our yes the
table.
Read into the motion to table
passed.
Okay thank you.
What is the will of our
Representative Lord we're going
back to the
Discussion on the bill.
Sorry I was muted I don't
meeting itself restraint I'm
madam chair thank you madam
chair and representative to do
have a lot of questions on this
I'm I went looked up.
first degree murder.
I apologize as a comeback Care.
So if I look you in the first
degree is any kind of willful
deliberate and pre K. to
killing.
And the commissioner temp to
commit a felony or by any act
greatly dangerous to our lives
to others
and that was one of the things I
wasn't aware of the product
which is surprising that we
would do first degree murder in
the state.
With things that are first
degree murder
Has there been any attempt to
amend those things that are not
actually willful deliberate and
premeditated killing I I have a
reason for us to ensure.
Madam chair I would defer to the
chair of judiciary I I we have
three years and this year yes.
Thank you but I'm sure I don't
understand the question.
Okay I'm madam chair
representative so where the
felony murder I am totally aware
that it is intentional it is the
willful deliberate premeditated
killing of somebody that part I
understand.
That's not what does that what
family it's.
That's.
I'm looking at murder in the
first degree I'm.
On thirty dash to dash one.
The let hi Kim Chavez Cook
answer these questions there
should be better off and I
would.
No problem thank you madam chair
and Representative Lord do that
the answer to your question is I
don't know of a bill in recent
years that has been brought
specifically to do that I know
that there has been discussion
of a bill to do that and there
have been many law review
articles encouraging people to
do that because there is from
sort of legal scholars a pretty
broad consensus that second that
felony murder should not receive
the same penalty as deliberate
intent murder and I will tell
you that I stayed on the
committee that was created by an
appropriation last year to the
sentencing commission to review
that criminal code and look at
eggs precisely issues like that
it's a committee of stakeholders
from all parts of the criminal
system and that is one of the
issues that has come up and I
can't tell you what direction
it's headed and but that is
definitely a known issue to be
thought about that's about as
specific as I can be right thank
you thank you madam chair
representative I. **** the
seriousness because I was quite
surprised about because I'm
fully aware what murder in the
first degree is the willful and
deliberate premeditated killing
of a person but it's interesting
that felony murder is also
included there second from FY
surprising to the it does help
me with the bit bigger picture
on this bill so can you explain
to me on I think some page two
what is a useful offender.
Madam chair a youthful offender
is somebody is fourteen years
old and charged with first
degree murder or fifteen to
seventeen years old charge what
serious followed by alleged
offenses that are enumerated in
the statute and people in this
group will have an immediate
bility hearing to decide whether
they can stay in the juvenile
system or or if they need to be
transferred to the adult system
sentences adults and has the
some of the testimony showed if
the amine ability hearing is too
close to the time they would age
out often their sentences adults
because there's just simply not
enough time for them to be
amenable to rehabilitation and
treatment.
Okay Madam chair representative
I'm understanding it the the
general range I understand those
differences between between
fourteen and seventeen so after
seventeen if somebody commits
first degree murder they are an
adult.
What I'm understanding.
They're charged probably has
serious youthful offenders and
of if they're charged with first
degree murder there likely to be
charged automatically under the
statutes has it sentences in
adult.
Okay that was.
That so it in the end for
clarification madam chair
representative so if somebody
was seventeen and they willfully
and deliberately did pretense
premeditated killing they would
be considered still a youthful
offenders Act correct.
No if they were seventeen madam
chair they would be
automatically sentences in adult
okay food felony murder has you
pointed out right thank you so
what about sixteen Madam chair
representative somebody of
sixteen and did first degree
murder would they be considered
youthful offender.
No they would be charged would
be a serious youthful offender
and automatically sentence as an
adult.
Okay.
Okay so I guess my other
question I have is on page three
where it says life with parole
it's it's I was confused at
is it try to trick anybody here
this is Mike with pros thirty
years but then I was
understanding that it was
fifteen and going to twenty so
can you explain to me if
somebody is a useful offender
and charged wife without parole
our life with parole sorry that
is at thirty years am I correct
on that on page three.
Madam chair that's exactly what
we're trying to change that
would only apply to adults.
Okay after the passage if this
if this bill were to pass that
thirty years would only apply
to.
People who were sentenced as
adults.
So as it stands right now
disability change madam chair
representative twenty percent
beginning would be to fifteen.
Yes.
May I may I add to that I'm
sorry I don't speak out of turn.
Yes please please refer to my
witness has meant much more
years of practice experience
thank you madam chair and
senator and Representative Lord
do that the answer is a little
more complicated than yes or no
so I just wanted to explain that
indirect response your question
when they would be eligible for
a hearing would become after
fifteen years under this bill
but the court and initial
sentencing would still be
sentencing them to a life
sentence with the pets with that
that carries a thirty year term
it's just that they're parole
hearing availability what
happened at fifteen years
instead of thirty.
I thank you for that thank you
madam thank you just ahead thank
you madam chair I I really
appreciate the clarification
because I was conflating
sentence with just the sentence
would not change the sentence
would still stand.
Current I thank you madam chair
so.
I.
So when I'm looking at this.
Were you they do have a
bachelors in psychology and I
have studied and their chemistry
of the brain I'm I also
understand that there are some
children.
I'm sandy John who do commit
wilful murder I mean you can
just go on Google and find
plenty of instances where
somebody has committed murder
and then I was trying to tie it
in no saying about Syria
focusing in all different kinds
scenarios I was listening to air
just trying to listen to both
sides.
I guess where I think we have a
huge issue is so in New Mexico
we have got.
So many missing in and
indigenous women.
And I was trying to think.
About our crime in general that
we have so much crime here.
I'm trying to imagine because I
was looking at the right which I
know they said they were sitting
on the hard thing about
statistics is that it depends on
who does this statistics and how
it's done because I'm looking at
KOAA TV and talk about report
repeat offenders are
statistically more likely to
commit a violent crime and more
times arrested first time
arrestees committed violent
crime twenty three percent of
time all people have been
arrested eight more times at
seventy two percent time so we
do have high rates of recidivism
I'm also thinking about the
governor's call about how we
want to not be softer criminals.
And.
At.
Trying to put all this together
especially with their missing
and indigenous women I really.
Want to see is Mexico and more
were direction we're taking
seriously and then includes
fourteen year olds because I
would hate for a fourteen year
old to.
Kill somebody in our state and
maliciously and intentionally
killed somebody in our state and
then be released and then I have
to tell you guys a.
Quick personal story I've had to
look in the are these past
couple days and it's a very
emotional draining of women
who've lost their children we
had a Vigil I have a brother
helped a mother I spoke with the
mother today who's lost her
child and I cannot imagine.
The pain they feel I just.
I can't imagine.
To have a useful person fourteen
killed their child maliciously
intentionally and I'm not
talking about accidental and I'm
not talking about.
this happen in a second Graham
talk about willful and direct
murder of of so many New
Mexicans and and including our
indigenous women.
It's troublesome to me that we
want to let anybody go back into
our society that has willfully
intentionally kill people
because having studied
psychology part of it is also
study.
people especially anti socials
and social pass and all that
that will continue to commit
crimes and also we studied a lot
of serial killers and they start
murdering animals and sometimes
people at a very young age.
It's heartbreaking I I can't I
can't
I can't vote for this bill
because it has been heart
wrenching to see these parents
and also I I don't want to put
our people of the New Mexico at
risk with people who have
decided to an intentional and
willful murder and I guess the
way I look at it is that.
The person who was murdered
really has a life sentence is
there dead and that's for life.
So.
I'm just telling you that it's
been a struggle emotionally to
look these moms in the eyes and
talk to them and for that reason
and and I I want us to be more
serious than a crime and I just
want to yes more serious with
our indigenous women that are
being murdered in the state so
for that reason I will be not
only for this bill and thank you
I I yield my time.
Thank you Representative are
there any other questions from
the committee.
What is the will of the
committee.
Madam chair looks to move in the
past like to move to table.
Okay the motion for to table
takes precedence we will take a
roll call the.
Thank you.
Representative Lord.
Yes to table.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew.
No.
Representative Thomson.
Yes.
Yes.
I'm sorry yes.
The table in motion now to
table.
I'm sorry all right.
Vice chair Romero.
to table.
Madam chair for our no to table.
So we'll go back to.
Madam chair representative had a
group I.
Miss heard the motion I
apologize my my vote is yes to
table okay will correct it it
still does not pass with at
three to two vote of.
To not to table so we will go
back to the motion of I do pass.
And is there a second.
I will second madam chair.
Thank you okay we'll take a roll
call the.
The motion is to pass
Representative Lord.
You know to pass.
Representative Pettigrew.
No on a do pass.
Representative Thomson.
Yes and I'd like to explain my
vote.
I share Romero.
Just like to explain my vote.
Madam chair for our.
Yes you do pass and I'd like to
explain my.
To to pass carries.
Okay Representative Thomson do
you live
here in this this I I have cried
over this the bill more than
once I have friends who who
What were the victims of a
violent crime and they beg me
not to pass this but I also work
with kids and I know how how
different they can be as the net
as adults I have to I had two
nephews who were adopted in came
from really bad situations and I
saw how much how much damage
they work their no fault of
their own and and that one of
them has committed suicide and
the other one continues to
struggle with the things that
happened to him so I I I just I
believe in kids and and what
makes me I'm at and I I've never
lost someone to a violent crime
but I can't imagine the in that
that is but I'm I'm I'm really
struggling with this but and I
hope that people can can come
to.
Some some dealing with their
grief but I don't think that
locking kids away and throwing
away the key is is going to be
helpful to our society and and
probably in the long run maybe
not even help to the victims
families so and I I hope this
bill will be thoroughly vetted
in judiciary and if if
amendments are needed maybe
that's the place to make I don't
know we didn't have time to have
our analysts really and go into
depth about the the amendment so
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Is Terrel mera.
Thank you madam chair thank you
see you those sticking with us
from the public in and for all
of the comments and and the
input and you know the fact that
this has been so thoughtfully
I think crafted what we've
learned from coming it coming
over from the Senate and and the
dialogue that was had there I'm
I'm very grateful to have
learned so much in this process
and as a sovereign state as well
and and see what some of the
other states have done in
particularly following the
science and following you know
how we move forward as a state
and and seeing the you turn that
the that the Supreme Court of
the United States has made on on
some of these things I think
it's important that we as the
Mexicans show what values that
we have here when it comes to
criminal justice reform
incarceration and moving forward
so I'm really grateful again for
the thoughtfulness I know these
are challenging votes and and
challenging because we try to do
our best to serve everyone as
best we can and I just
appreciate how this is been
brought forth and and the time
given and and hopefully we can
continue the process of of
making you know as much right as
we can in our criminal justice
system so I appreciate you and
and thank you for bringing a PO.
Thank you and I just like to
COVID also thank you to the
Sanchez in your experts in New
all of the public comment that
was so heartfelt and I just
think it's important that we
aligned with the U. S. Supreme
Court decision and the New
Mexico Supreme Court to prohibit
cruel and unusual punishment
might think that would be you
know having.
A juvenile sentence for another
half of their life that they
might give
already experienced but this
doesn't mean that they get out
on parole after fifteen years is
just means that they have the
opportunity to for the parole
board to
have a lot of information and
evaluation whether or not this
person does deserve to be maybe
stay in another five years or
even after that but if they have
reformed and would be given that
some people have called this the
second chance but also I think
it's important that we not
violate what already is at the
US Supreme Court U. S. Supreme
Court and the New Mexico Supreme
Court also so thank you very
much
For bringing this forward and
it you should have a good
discussion in the next committee
Judiciary so thank you.
You madam chair thank you
members of the committee.
Okay thank you this is our only
bill tonight so thank you
committee and
I don't think we've had any
other bills referred so we won't
plan on Saturday and less you
know some of the Senate bills do
come through and we do need it
your them so that they can be
continue on their
For the need to the house floor
so with that will just keep in
mind Saturday might be keep it
available but will let you know
tomorrow if there's anything as
they're referred you read out so
thank you and good evening
everyone.
Well committee is now in recess.
