Members local as close we have
an important.
Please rise for two days
indication offered to us for the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative rebelled coming
at all.
Good morning.
I'm on it.
This morning to offer a very
special prayer.
It's called the prayer of the
farm workers struggle.
And it was written by a such
Travis.
That is.
Show me the suffering of the
most miserable.
So I will know my people's
plight.
Free me to pray for others for
you are present in every person.
We take responsibility for my
own life so that I can be free
at last.
Grant to encourage to serve
others.
Foreign service there is true
life.
Give me honesty and patience.
So that I can work with other
workers.
Reinforce song and celebration.
So that the spirit will be alive
among this.
Let the spirit flourish and grow
so that we will never tire of
the struggle.
And that is remember.
Those who have died for justice.
For they have given us their
life.
Help us love even those who hate
us.
So we can change the world.
I'm in.
Thank you generating with the.
Gentlelady from grant Hidalgo
and this year Representative
Sweetser please lead us in the
pledge of allegiance.
The gentle lady from Eddie
please leisure and saluting and
New Mexico's flag.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker good
morning good morning members so
I move that we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business no
objection it is so ordered.
Well the funny thing is that we
meet our calendar.
For today we don't have Senate
bill two.
So
We will take a.
House Bill.
Four nine was which the Public
Education Commission maps.
and then we will recess subject
to the call of the chair.
The yes for sure with the
schedule in the pieces for the
Senate the gentleman from Chavis
Eddy and Otero yes thank you Mr
speaker good morning I have had
I don't know if you're aware but
the archive videos are not up
and there's quite a bit of
concern out there about it hi
I'm aware I am concerned because
one of the missing videos is
where we saying my daughter
Happy Birthday.
so I learned about it and we
have tech support working I
spoke with director Burciaga
over the weekend on this issue
they're checking the company's
called Sliq SO like you they're
the ones that manage the storage
we don't know what happened is
the short answer but they're
aware of it
our operators here today are
aware of it as well of the we
have no well I have no idea what
happened but I certainly want to
retrieve those videos
for sentimental reasons but also
it's important for the public to
be able to go back and look at
those archives so they're
working on it thank you Mr
speaker.
So
Of course is the Senate has
acted in committee on house bill
two there were some minor
changes to that bill so that
will come back to us for
concurrence
committee chairman Lundstrom and
I were aware of the changes
they're minor but we will need
to concur this specifically the
language for the orphan well
program is important to get that
right because there's a lot of
federal grant money that can be
leveraged that we need to get
the language correct in the
bill.
so will need to access to concur
in the Senate members house bill
two House Bill Levin remains the
Senate we don't know what's
going to happen with that and of
course we have sent a bill to
which we are questions the state
Senate
that also have to Congress for
action but we don't know when
the Senate is going to.
Get back on track so to speak so
when we recess after axing on
the Public Education Commission
maps travel recess subject to
the call of the chair and maybe
that we can come back around
four thirty or five o'clock this
afternoon if there if they take
action on house bill two
well we will make sure to give
at least ninety minutes notice
to the majority and minority
offices so that they can get
word out to members you know
what I can just walk back on
without notice so we'll we'll
try to get at least an hour and
a half noticed everyone's that
we can all reconvene it may be
that if there's no action in the
Senate today that we will recess
subject to the call of the chair
and come back tomorrow I think
we're just gonna be a little
flexible I I'm I don't like this
anymore than anyone else and I.
I wish we had more certainty
about what was happening and any
other chamber what we just don't
so we'll have to be a little
flexible.
In the meantime.
for those members who are in
town please feel free to visit
any of Santa fe's provide give
shops jewelry stores restaurants
and other small businesses to
the rundown we certainly
appreciate your contributions to
economic development here in
Santa Fe.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya thank you
Mr speaker just a this may be a
little relief for this
announcement but of house of
house Republicans will be having
a caucus meeting immediately
following the floor session and
Mr speaker as a safer Smith
sentimental values I thought you
might want to keep those
archives because I believe I I
apologize you to you for being a
sorry so be on one of those so.
There was also an online
gentleman that I did want to I
did want to say anything yes of
course that the.
that says there is well.
Is it is expressed most
important recording if ever the
the the proceedings the for the
house the gentle lady from
Chavis Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
eight seven hard did I have to
announce the passing the Lee and
is from Hagen in New Mexico.
The government's family is very
integral part down there they
are wonderful friends to my
family.
She and her husband Sonny no
kids go miss club between Hey
come in and like our third.
my heart goes out to Sonya and
one a.
At the passing of their mother
and Mr speaker if I could could
I have a moment of silence
please certainly remembers
please rise of from a science.
Thank you very much.
The the entire house sends our
most sincere condolences to the
government so I am going please
please send of my personal
condolences as well generating
the gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker of more or
less in session it was announced
that there be a Judiciary
Committee meeting after we
adjourn from the floor this
morning I assume that sense the
Senate has enacted we have
nothing to discuss and there
will not be as a judiciary
meeting until a subsequent time
is that correct that's right
with the judiciary will not meet
until we receive Senate bill two
thank you for that
clarification.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Barreras.
Thank you Mr speaker
Last night a family of four was
leaving the river of lights
exhibit year old town in
Albuquerque New they were struck
by an off road vehicle and a
seven year old boy who was
killed his father is in the
hospital so I'm asking if we
could please have a moment of
silence for the family thank you
absolutely generating.
Thank you.
The gentleman who Santa Fe
Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr speaker
condolences to all those
families that are suffering loss
today.
I'm going
in the absence of
Of lights.
I have to say my daughter
today's my daughter's eighth
birthday and I want to.
State
Recognizing her eighth birthday
today
she will
Name is Alessandro Alisa Sierra
Sierra is her.
Sing Sing today we celebrate and
uses the light there so.
And and and.
In the right direction.
Like to those in the darkest
moments so this is it for me to
say this at the end of of after
hearing all the
sentences overcome of the
Mexican fans today.
So if you all join me in wishing
the other on the some of the
olive as we've all come to know
her and.
I'm very happy eighth birthday
Mr Mr speaker.
They are.
Are there for their since the
gentle lady from McKinley in San
Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker caucus we
will have a democratic caucus
meeting immediately after the
floor session in room three zero
seven thank you members signal.
Are there other announcements.
Gentleman from.
Jennifer Leo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business reading of legislation
no objection it is so ordered.
The gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan are you ready on
house bill nine.
For the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill line on final passage
has been taken the generating to
explain the bill thank you Mr
speaker house bill nine is the
twenty twenty one educators
earlier made a mistake for the
record reflect that all action
necessary for placing House
state government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House promote our
final passage is been taken the
gentle lady to continue the
explanation of the bill started
before I rudely interrupted her
thank you Mr speaker house bill
nine the twenty twenty one
educational redistricting act
also was processed through this
year's see presentations and
committee hearings throughout
the state the purpose of the
selected map is to create a
major native American district
and district I because in that
district the charter schools
serve native American students.
PTC
consists of ten districts
throughout the state and of the
ten districts to do not have
charter schools and districts
eight and nine.
With that Mr speaker I stand for
questions.
There is debate the gentleman
from Chavis and Lincoln
Representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan County you.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady.
The bill that is before us of
course
the substitute that we pass term
here in state government.
And that made one change and.
Mr speaker and gentle lady if
you would like I could explain
that one change and then I have
one additional question thank
you Mr speaker Mr kind gentleman
yes please do explained that
change since it was your request
yes Mr speaker and gentle lady
of the original bill came before
us.
Of rules will be between
districts state and money and
the original bill have district
nine building in the north and
district Hey being in the south.
The current commissioner from
homes would have been in
district eight although
currently that commissioners and
district nine.
Yes in district nine.
Regionally the the commissioner
from from all school who is
serving in this from day in the
original bill would have been in
district nine so we made two
changes number one we applaud
the numbers so the line is in
the southeast corner and the
district date is in the north
northeast.
Half of them of New Mexico.
The other change bill with
Rossell Independent School
District the line went through
rules will hand carved up the
rose one point of school
district and to the best of our
ability we tried to retain of
the line so that all of the
calls one dependent school
district was in district eight
and that the dexter your money
and like all through school
districts also in Travis county
of course district nine the
other draw the line somewhere
but I didn't think it was good
to draw a line through that
particular school district so
those are the the two changes
that we made and house state and
government Alexion with Indian
Affairs Committee.
Mr speaker and gentleman in my
my question involves an issue
that was discussed madam bones
the.
Maybe the area around the house
to ask him my my question is I
have heard.
That there may be a change in
its desirable there but I don't
know what the status of that is
I I I don't know as a problem
until after we met in committee.
Mr speaker kind gentleman yes we
did have a request for change by
Representative lane and he
wanted to bloom Feelin as tech
as a whole so we moved them feel
into district ten.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Changes not reflected in the
house for over in the.
House state government subsidy
to but it is reflected in the
house for substitute for the
house state government so on
substitute for House Bill line
for house bill money Mr speaker
kind gentleman that is correct.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
what we're voting on.
Is the change around rules rules
M. the change around outside one
filled and the original bill as
presented with those to the
exceptions is intact Mr speaker
kind gentleman yes that is
correct.
Mr speaker and gentle lady thank
you for allowing me to buy that
explanation and and making sure
we understood what occurred up
in the the northwest corner as
well
again I think the.
These districts are very large
because there's only ten of them
but the it's a.
The other ones that are in
charge of charter schools is as
has been mentioned so have a
news do some work that is
necessary.
Appreciate your willingness to
not only address the concern I
have with also the concern that
the gentleman from San Juan
County have thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady thank you
Mr chairman generated we do have
the floor substitute passed out
of so at the we now would be the
appropriate time if you wish to
move adoption.
Thank you Mr speaker I move
state house government actions
Indian Affairs Committee house
substitute for house bill nine.
A service of the motion would be
to move house floor substitute
number one to house state
government which is meeting
Affairs Committee subsidy for
House Bill nine.
so with that motion.
The to to number members is two
two one seven two three point
one has been yes we are a debate
of that substitute.
I believe the comments from the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln were related to the
floor substitutes are will go
back to him but we do have
debate on the floor subs to the
the gentleman from Chavis Lee
and Roosevelt.
Iterators and.
Thank you Mr speaker I had a
quick question of the gentle
lady relative to I believe what
I heard was.
The lack of a charter school in.
The district eight four nine.
as as presented is was that
correct because I believe that
to be incorrect.
Thank you Mr speaker and
thinking kind gentlemen.
Would you like to explain which
charter school is located in
eight or nine thank you thank
you gentle lady in the southern
part of Law School appeal Walker
from airforce base is a middle
school charter school Sydney
good terrace middle school
setting terrace middle school is
I believe.
The number one ranked middle
school in New Mexico can I just
it is part of the wise one
dependent school district and I
know charter schools are either
part of a school district or not
this particulars successful
charter school has been a part
of the Rosalinda Business School
District from inception and I
simply wanted to bring that to
the chairwoman's attention thank
you.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman thank you for that
updated information.
Okay is there for the debate on
the floor substitute.
Is there objection to it.
Having none.
House for substitute.
Four houses state government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill money his adopted.
Is there further debate on the
bill.
Hearing in the gentle lady to
close thank you Mr speaker I now
move house state government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill nine.
Forty two pass.
We are on final passage.
I was going to update the title
on this on the board for one
second.
We we are final passage of house
floor substitute for House state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill nine the vote is now
open.
Zero negative house source of
sin for House state government
which isn't in universities of
for House Bill money has passed
the house.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business are there
any more announcements.
Gentlelady from Valencia.
Mr speaker as have a quick
question for you.
What do you call a snowman that
lives in the topics.
gentlelady what kind of.
The Senate generally
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Chavis the end result if I could
try to top that I might ask the
question do you know why you
don't play poker in the jungle.
Maybe she does.
What was very very scared with
the answer to be made to that
was that was good
the gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya thank you
Mr speaker the little change to
the Republican that caucus
meeting we're gonna meet
immediately following floor
session in the leader's office.
Very good.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker
that announcement anybody who
grew up in New Mexico.
Grew up with a rich cultural
tradition of music.
and this week is the one it
isn't easy singers of all time
passed away he said that the
demand is
I don't at all of us it is about
a one point or another seeing a
song with anymore did.
And because we're gonna be
coming back to this chamber at
some point.
Because the other chamber has
not yet concluded the business
was hoping to one hundred
seventeen when a song.
All of us it is started in a
minute all of the to help me
with the chorus of that's okay
Mister speaker.
The gentleman is saying.
Does it was us to be able to
read them in the I have.
You want to.
Because as soon.
Is hang
on those.
Does it.
Thank.
The general present one Mr
speaker I believe that because
of of what we just experienced
just now I believe that there is
no argument to come from the
Majority Leader about seeing
Happy Birthday to every member
on the floor going forward.
General general interest in one
of the requests or point of
order and will take note in the
future.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey yes Mr
speaker.
In view of that tradition that
we're establishing I would like
to for us to return to some last
minute this.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
immediately regrets the decision
and just.
Okay so I see no further
announcements.
Once we process Republicans
leader's office Democrats to
room three oh seven.
we will stand in recess subject
to the call of the chair and
Maybe four thirty.
But as I said we'll get word out
to the leadership offices about
ninety minutes in advance and
gentleman from Bernalillo.
I move that the house stand in
recess subject to the call of
the chair junction sort of house
in recess subject to the call of
the chair.
