We teach you appears to the
police station violence we
suffered through the age of the
Stonewall riots were our modern
world water fight for liberation
began what trans women of color
continue to experience violence
especially murder at such high
rates it is appalling that we
would continue to allow the
alleged perpetrator of violence
to defend themselves by claiming
they panicked because of the
sexual orientation or gender
identity of their victim that we
would say the chair surprise
revelation that all of our
sexuality or gender would
determine our worthiness to live
without madam chair I would like
to turn it over to our expert
witness Marshall Martinez.
Marshall.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee it's
good to see you all again after
a couple of weeks my name is
Marshall Martinez I'm the
executive director of equality
New Mexico a twenty seven year
old statewide LGBTQ civil rights
and advocacy organization.
When I came out my senior year
of high school to my mom and
stepdad I was told that I was
loved I was told that nothing
could change that and I was told
that they were proud of me for
being honest and authentic.
But that is the middle of the
story not the beginning.
I grew up just outside of
Alamogordo New Mexico a mostly
rural community in the southeast
issue part of the state.
I was about to be a freshman in
high school when I found the
words and understanding to
describe what I had always known
about myself that I am gay I
spent the summer and early fall
thinking about how to tell my
mom I will never forget walking
home from the bus stop
practicing the conversation in
my hat to tell my mom on a
beautiful October day in
southern New Mexico.
When I walked inside the house
the news was on and I stopped in
my tracks.
A young gay man in Wyoming had
been tortured left hanging on a
fence and had died.
His name is Matthew Shepard.
All I heard was the game man
died of his wounds today in the
hospital.
The news of this murder the fear
instilled in me by this
atrocious crime stopped me from
coming out to my family or my
friends.
For three years in fact I kept
this secret and didn't tell
anyone I didn't even tell my
best friend my own mom.
In fact I didn't do so until my
senior year.
That entire time I believe that
my humanity my worthiness of
being protected from violence or
my access to justice after that
violence would be decided upon
based solely on my sexual
orientation.
And in fact that is the message
that is sent by allowing the so
called panic defense to be used
in court it says to young queer
and trans people in all thirty
three counties of New Mexico
that we are simply living our
authentic lives may be deserving
of violence.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you more for okay we won't
go to the to a poll.
So the audience you can vote in
support or opposition of SB two
thirteen.
Okay so it looks like nine
people in support a hundred
percent and zero in opposition
so now we will go to the
audience just in case somebody
didn't vote if there's anybody
there who who wants to speak in
opposition.
Okay I don't see anybody in
opposition okay in support.
Go ahead and raise your hand.
And just a reminder and we will
have the clock running it it
probably will give you a couple
of seconds after one minute and
then I believe it will cut you
off so please watch the time
and and now let's go ahead with
it our.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Bennett
power I am the chief public
defender for New Mexico
the public defender's office
approach is built like this
because we feel like we need to
be the guardians for the rights
of defendants and we had some
initial concerns with the
language of this bill and
potential for breath but.
There's two things I want to say
first of all.
Isn't patients throughout this
bill have had an effect on me I
understand our responsibility
also to protect the LGBTQ
community which is our community
and secondly that my
understanding is that there may
be amended which could address
some of our concerns and if if
that's if that is what ends up
happening there and we really
support this bill and appreciate
the Sanchez and Mr Martinez and
all of all the advocates here
for being thoughtful in how to
accomplish their very important
mission thank you madam chair.
Thank you next we have Janet
Williams.
Hi I'm Janet Williams I am
president of the Santa Fe
chapter of national organization
for women and we strongly
support this bill thank you.
Thank you next we have Fernando
Trujillo.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is that in a
little kilo and I'm a policy
associate with bold features we
stand in support of SB two one
three the LGBTQ plus community
has historically been subject
not only prejudice to ask then
but also by this that sometimes
lead to death in my home town of
Espanola myself in an older
sibling were subjected to
ostracize ation and even
violence when we came out in one
instance something as simple as
a talent show turned into an
opportunity for people in the
audience to lash out as mice
that as my Cydney beautifully
performed on a things with going
out here even myself as a gauge
you Connell from a rural town
have had to deal with violence
from my own community during my
own coming out experience as
those around we found out about
my identity I can't even walk
down the street holding my
partner's hand without the risk
of a confrontation and have to
always be cautious of my
surroundings I know there are
those who do we hired just for
the simple fact that I am
attracted to the same sex and
for not following the gender
norms by transgender relatives
are disproportionately affected
with violence sexual assault and
sometimes death reaction someone
sexual is expression I
identities in every be allowed
as defense in court the support
SB to the eighteen.
Thank you Charlotte led to.
But Daniel.
Go ahead Charlotte.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee and sponsors my
name is Charlotte mother when
you know I work with Julie on a
coop I am here today on behalf
of Planned Parenthood of the
Rocky Mountains New Mexico we
ask you to stand with us and the
Sanchez in strong support of
state Senate bill two thirteen
thank you.
Thank you I'm and I and Sanchez
I understand there is an
amendment.
I will move the I will move the
amendment for discussion okay
thank you madam chair before we
move forward I think I think we
have the second Anna who's who's
in with us as a panelist I think
she has her hand raised for
public comment.
You know and then I'll talk
about the thank you for that yes
I didn't catch that with her
being.
West go ahead that the need yeah
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative you guys
accidentally promoted me today
but thank you for the promotion
madam chair members my name is
Benny staff are not I am born
and raised in Misia New Mexico
and thankful to be living in
Albuquerque I am the policy
director pulled futures but I'm
speaking to you today is that
where women I am one of the many
where people that was plastic
come out to their family and be
met with joy and welcome and
love but that is not the
experience of all my queer and
trans siblings my first partner
when she came out to her family
her mom told her that made her
wanted to commit suicide.
That is part of the violence
that swirls around our queer and
trans loved ones physical
violence emotional violence
ritual violence can confront us
every day our sexual orientation
or gender identity should never
be allowed to be taken as a
defense of violence against us
we encourage you to support this
bill and to support all the
beautiful where trans and gender
diverse New Mexicans in our
state thank you.
Okay now let's go back to the
amendment.
Thank you madam.
Representative Garratt asked
that that didn't see it was.
Was there and she called it a
promotion I'm not sure that it
is a promotion.
While she might change her mind
about the.
Thank you.
I also wanted to to give a quick
thank you to to benefit the
spoke in the public comment with
the public defender's office we
we worked with the public
defender's office to track this
ammendment and what it does is
it make sure that a criminal
criminal defendants or a
criminal defense attorney can
still use other affirmative
defenses it has a difference in
their case it clarifies this
bill is only taking away or
intending to take away the gay
panic defence and that's what
the amendment that's.
God give us the two oh two
number just to make it that's
the only one but just to be
official yes the to to number is
going to be two two zero eight
six seven point one.
Okay are there any questions or
discussion on the amendment.
Okay is there any opposition to
adopting the amendments.
Okay seeing none you have an
amended bill and now we will go
to the committee for questions
and I have
Okay then we get to the right
screen I have Representative
Lord.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you to Representative today so
here's what I want to say I
really do love this element is
support this bill and when I
read it because you know we
didn't know was coming on until
the last minute.
And it still surprises me in
this day and age that.
I can't believe that somebody
could use a panic defense for
defence it's just that just
completely blows my mind in this
day and age that we would step
somebody could still say well I
totally freaked out because.
I just.
I don't know it.
You have to understand so my mom
by Dr I was born in nineteen
nineteen and she was a lesbian
and so she how she fought the
fight the fight the whole time
just by being.
Very tough.
And she had to be because you
couldn't come out and that error
at all.
And so.
You know I remember back in even
in that there was a one time she
went to go buy a car and they
told her she needed to come back
with her husband basically
patted her on the head and she
said first of all I don't have a
husband second well this doctor
show over to you.
And she was just tough and fears
and kind of pave the way in her
own way.
And I very much support this
bill and I thank you for
bringing it forward because I
just am.
I'm shocked that anybody could
use that defense so thank you
for bringing that forward a
hundred percent support bill and
I think it's great think it's
all I have madam chair.
Thank you Representative Lord.
I'm seeing no further questions
I will entertain a motion.
I will I will.
I will.
Also
it also I think we're all kind
of a.
Trying to move through the
molasses at these days and this
is nothing compared to real life
where you're on the floor in I
mean I I'm in person where it
gets really crazy this time of
year so so we have a motion by
me in the second by
Representative Lord and Alice at
as amended to thirteen as
amended
and Allison if you could take
the role please.
Representative Barreras yes.
Representative Lord yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes.
Mr Mero.
Mr Merrill.
No Sir we have Representative.
All right madam chair Thompson.
Your muted.
Thank you usually I don't do
that we have in our in our
health committee Representative
Matthews we're always giving her
a hard time about being muted
and usually I'm trying not to do
that I did it today so if you
could please excuse
Representative Romero and it's a
four two zero two passed
congratulations as senator and
representative Representative
Romero did you what I have been
announced I pardon.
Sure that I've made is yes I'm
apologizing to committees that
once I I hear you and I hear
you're the committee so so we
will mark you so we have a five
zero two passed.
Was on the floor onto the floor
thank you madam chairwoman and
thank you committee members I
can't wait to meet you in
person.
Your I apologize Madam
center if you said
representative I forgot to say
Senator and I apologize.
And no and no offense taken my
friend I can't wait to meet your
representative the great day.
Thank you Representative
were you waiting did you have
something to say are we waiting
could by madam chair in closing
I want to call us back in
gratitude to Senator Stefanics
for leading the way.
In our state as an openly gay.
Senator and also to Senator
Candelaria and Senator Hamblen
and Senator had a meal what an
honor to support this today and
thank you for having us.
Thank you.
Okay we will we will move on to
Senate bill two twenty
And that is Senator serve on
tests is he here.
I do not see him just just gonna
ask is anybody
has he asked any any one to
carry the bill for him.
Any member.
I'm.
And I'm gonna see if I can
locate them so so take a couple
minutes did someone say
something.
No madam chair I I had just been
looking at this bill I didn't
know if you had so I'm happy to
reach out as well whichever
works let's give it a shot thank
you.
I just got a text that he is I
Cherry Senate Judiciary and I do
not have his cell phone so let
me let me at that is there
anyone.
Any any Representative Romero do
you have his cell phone I do I
can give them a call I apologize
in in house Judiciary.
Just wanted to give a call now
if you want to walk forward if
you want just want to share his
contact with me I can give a
call if you want to.
Instead of doing three things at
once if you want to do only to.
So just an update I called him
he didn't answer which I kind of
expected since he's Cherry
Senate Judiciary but I did send
him a text to see if he's going
to be able to make it or if
someone else if you have someone
else that can present and just
announcement that I'm personally
very excited about that how's
your joint house joint
resolution one which is the
money for early childhood
education past Senate finance
committee for one point two five
percent point seven five.
Early childhood and point I for
K. twelve so I'm a co sponsor on
that bill this is a long time
coming so I'm going to savor the
moment and and we'll wait for a
second to hear it if we to see
if we hear back from Senator
survive yes.
and if not we will call it a day
and I'm not sure whether we will
meet on Thursday to reconsider
our to consider Senate bill two
twenty and if we get any other
referrals
From from from thank that have
crossed over from the state so
so hold on for a couple minutes
and unless someone has a great
joke to tell we could do jokes
this morning.
Madam chair I was just gonna say
this is not a joke but I was
just gonna say I don't know if
it's because we're in the final
week or because I am really
really tired but everything is
making me cry when you said that
your bills your your resolution.
If I wasn't hearing
Representative address I'd be
crying too well I know I know
how how important it was to you
know how much work went into
that so congratulations.
Now we can get through the
Senate floor we will be able to
help our youngest.
People it's exciting for me.
Okay so a few days ago I saw I
saw someone in my neighborhood
walking a penguin and I was like
what the pain when
you're being to the zoo you need
to take up and went to the zoo
yes yes I'm again walking the
same path paying when
thank you taken to the zoo he
said I did not taking them to
lunch.
In almost spread out whatever
she was drinking I saw her
fighting it's not have it.
Read out so.
When I tried to handle it she
kept interrupting me and was
like no you didn't when are you
serious and all that let me
tell.
I I almost spit up my food
because I'm having
thank you for that.
Representative.
Also for the record madam chair.
A joke on the floor the other
night about why don't you play
poker in the jungle.
because and then why don't we
play poker in the jungle because
they're too many cheetahs.
And I tried to tell the joke to
my family they were like to
additional live in the jungle
and I was definitely told.
So we have to fix such okay.
It's like that's not right it.
So there we go.
Okay we've had to grow nurse.
I'm looking at my analyst to
come through for me.
Julie.
What what.
I don't know.
My son's favorite joke.
What do you call it what does
that have on hand.
What do you.
What is it.
Do you call a cow was no lips.
Anyway no when you call.
No legs.
I don't know this one.
ground beef anyway see these are
all very bad animal jokes.
The other one what does.
that's the that's the cow with
no less.
These are all my sons he's
almost eight just you know.
Okay.
One for you this is what I like
my all time favorite joke of all
time imagine that.
So there were there were these
three pieces of string hanging
out.
And the first ones that I'm
gonna go into the bar and have a
drink.
And so he goes into the parties
that that deal with the
bartender says we don't serve
string in here and so he gets
real dejected and walks out and
that's the second guys I know I
can get it during the second
string so he goes in and he
stepped down on the bar stool
and the bartender says I thought
I told you string that we don't
service string.
In this bar and so he walks out
dejected and the next day kind
of balls himself up in rules and
stuff around in the top of his
head and you go there.
Down in the bartender says are
you streaming you says no I'm
afraid not.
That's a classic.
Okay so I did get a call and
that the senator wants us to
roll the bill so we will be.
Yes this may be our last meeting
so thank you all for perfect the
analysts and not and and Alice
Alison stepped in
I'm not sure she was she said
yes I'll say that when she was
asked if she would step in to be
committee assistant she's done a
fabulous job our our analysts
are wonderful so committee
members can we give them a round
of applause.
Yeah.
Was Madam did you see the role
that bill I'm sorry did hear
that part.
Yes the the sponsor is is the
sharing Senate Judiciary so and
I've got a bill stacked up in
there so I'm glad he's tuning
through but so we will we may or
may not see you on Thursday be
ready for an announcement on the
floors but specifically if we
get more bills or and what we
decide to do with this one so
thank you all it's been
It's been fun and it's been
revealed but has it been real
fun.
Okay thanks we'll see thank you
all really.
On the last couple of days here.
The.
Thank you guys so much.
Thank you.
