This.
This is.
The.
This
The.
I.
The.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded response.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
I'm here Representative Deborah
A. Armstrong is here
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative Baca.
Representative bash.
Representative bash is here
Representative black.
Representative Bhumika.
Yes Representative will guys
here Representative Brown.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Castellano is
present in the house.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Cook.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Dow.
Speaker it off your speaker
Egolf is here Representative
Ezzell.
Representative Ezzell is here.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Percent that Representative
Miguel Garza is here.
Representative Harper.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Hochman Vigil is
here Representative Johnson.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lane is here
Representative Lara yes here
Representative Lara is here
Representative Lente.
Here Representative Lente is
here Representative Lord.
Representative Lord is here
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lewis is here
Representative Lundstrom.
Share Representative Lundstrom
is here Representative Madrid.
Your Representative Madrid is
here Representative McQueen.
Representative McQueen is here.
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya is
here Representative Roger
Montoya.
Here's Representative Roger
Montoya is here Representative
Nibert Representative night bird
is here Representative Ortez.
Here Representative Ortez is
here Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew is here
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Rehm is here
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
Your Representative G. Andrés
Romero is here Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here Representative Rubio.
Representative Scott.
Representative Scott is here
Representative small.
Here Representative small is
here Representative todos us.
Here Representative Terrazas is
here Representative Thomson.
Your Representative Thomson is
here Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend is here
Representative Zamora.
Representative Zamora is here
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative Gail Armstrong is
here Representative Baca.
Representative Baca is here
Representative black.
Present a black is here
Representative Brown.
Representative Brown is here
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield is here
Representative Crowder
Representative Crowder is here
Representative Dow.
Representative Dow is here.
Representative Alcon is here
welcome Representative Alcon I'm
glad you're here.
Thank you.
Representative is here.
Representative David is here.
We don't have a quorum.
Welcome back everyone gentleman
from Bernalillo thank you
speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
No objections so ordered members
we are going to let me tell you
a few the bills are gonna start
with items.
Two and three and then we have a
few other items to consider this
evening I'm gonna get some time
during the conversation at those
two bills for the.
Floor leaders to confer about
the rest of this evening and
hopefully not just this evening.
Not this evening and tomorrow
morning's agenda but we'll see
how it goes
there was those two items.
Now two and three and then
during those conversations we'll
see what else we have to
consider.
Hopefully just this evening that
if not this evening and tomorrow
morning the gentle lady from
Chavis.
Mr speaker thank you very much
ladies and gentlemen if you will
look on your desk you will find
a new cap.
And the new T. shirt from New
Mexico military institute of
national champions ladies and
gentleman and these are gifts
from general is
and I'm sure at this point Mr
speaker along with myself we
also have Representative night
bird and Representative Anderson
and the we restated Institute
colts and Broncos the best of
luck in this in the upcoming
seasons Mr speaker if the new
one of the the the gentleman
would like to say something at
this time if you would allows
the Mr speaker I would
appreciate it Jennifer Chavis
and Lincoln Mr speaker thank you
I don't know if I need her to
yield or not but anyway general
grows old from New Mexico
military institute was here
today delivering these gifs and
certainly we we recognize them a
few weeks ago but if they didn't
have the staff quite right quite
ready at that time so we do want
to recognize them and allow all
of you to have a moment of of
the national championship for
effort that they gave this year
so where with pride.
Mr speaker the gentleman from
Chavis the end result Mr speaker
thank you very much I too am
delighted to be here.
With honoring this this occasion
this historic moment for New
Mexico Mr speaker on December
seventeenth two thousand twenty
one.
The New Mexico military Broncos
defeated Iowa western.
Let's see thirty one to
thirteen.
In football that's a real
economic.
The twelve and one Broncos have
had a very successful season and
Mr speaker.
Representative is a all night
bird and I appreciate your help
in securing the state flag
before over this capital on
December seventeenth two
thousand twenty one so tonight
we honor them and this flag will
be presented to fly over New
Mexico military institute next
December seventeenth two
thousand twenty two as a memory
of this historic event thank
you.
Thank you gentlemen.
Generated for granted all go
into Sierra thank you Mr speaker
I just want to make sure the
body is aware of the exciting
things that are happening for
students across the United
States these states have
recently announced the into the
mask and it mandates for
students and schools Virginia
Rhode Island Pennsylvania New
York New Jersey Oregon Nevada
Massachusetts Illinois Delaware
Connecticut California is us is
changing their requirements if
they're not vaccinated they
still have to wear a mask but
the other states are simply
declaring that indoor public
spaces no longer have to have
mass mandates and I saw an
absolutely joyful at U. two
video today of students in the
classroom hearing the
announcement they are not going
to have to renounce the more
they're jumping up and down and
cheering and hugging their
friends and hugging their
teachers and then my heart broke
for New Mexico students it is
time to in our emergency orders
it is time to let students take
the mask off thank you.
Members say no the gentleman
from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr chairman that we go
to the next order of business
third reading of legislation no
objections toward gentlelady
from Bernalillo are you ready on
item number two.
Thank you Mr speaker will you
get me to that point for the
record reflect option necessary
for placing House Bill sixty two
as amended on final passage has
been taken the gentlelady to
explain it all thank you Mr
speaker house bill sixty two as
amended establishes a matching
grant funding requests Advisory
Council I'll now stand for
questions.
His baby jump San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady you can rush through that a
little bit I didn't catch
exactly what the your bill does
Mr speaker and gentle lady so
this gentle lady from.
Bernalillo field.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen of house bill
sixty two does two things number
one it sets of a grants Advisory
Council and number two a
matching grant Fund.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I think that's exactly what
you said the first time Madam
speaker and gentle lady the
fund of what that is is there a
dollar amount is there is where
is their money going into this
fund.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman yes the matching grant
fund will be established with
there's a million dollars in
house bill two to provide start
up funds for the matching grant
fund local communities
municipalities and political
subdivisions of the state will
be able to apply to DFA which
will be overseeing the matching
grant Fund.
To secure match requirements so
that they can
better compete for federal funds
when perhaps they were unaware
of the opportunity and not set
aside funds in their budget for
applied for capital outlay.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
and gentle lady so of the
purpose of this grant Fund is to
help local governments who do
not have a a.
Program within their.
Full within their local
governments subdivision to be
able to get the professional
help to write a grant for to to
write
to apply for a grant.
Mr speaker and gentleman on the
matching grant Fund is actually
just
An entity that municipalities is
let's say for instance the city
of Farmington for should bay
from across a federal grant
opportunity that requires a ten
percent match for a five hundred
thousand dollar
emergency vehicle.
Equipment at because they were
unaware of this grant
opportunity in the past they did
not set aside the fifty thousand
dollars that is required to make
the match so the municipality
would then be able to apply to
the matching grant fund for
fifty thousand dollars which
would be contingent on them
receiving the federal grant.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so part of the job of this
The new grand board would be to
Mr speaker and gentle lady to
Besides being able to help them
with that application
potentially but more of
something that you stated that I
is that state would be more
aware for this this grant
committee or board would be more
aware of what grants are
available and so with with there
be a place a website or
something like that for
the list of potential grant
opportunities exist with
something like this set up.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen so actually we did
hear this bill last session and
last session there were three
components and one of the things
that I think you're recalling is
the grant division or bureau
that would've been set up within
DFA for now DFA who's actually
moved forward with that and
last during the special session
we appropriated nine hundred
thirty five thousand dollars to
DFA.
For activities related to grants
administration.
Out of those funds at DFA has
had already been in the process
of setting up a grants division
that would work directly with
the state agencies and ideally
local communities to help them
become more aware and provide
them with training and services
so that they could more
effectively compete DFA is doing
that on their own and that is
not part of this particular bill
but you're remembering that from
last year.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so the grand council that
would be a put together we're
with the underfoot Department
would they reside.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen the grant opportunity
council would it be it within it
would be managed set up staffed
by DFA.
But the role of the council is
distinct from the services
provided by DFA the grant
opportunities council the point
of it is to provide advice and
guidance.
To our
Bureau so that they have a
better understanding of exactly
what services trainings support
mechanisms are necessary for all
your municipalities to be better
able to compete for national
federal grants.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
and gentle lady is this only
available to
of two government agencies or
would non profits that exist in
New Mexico
be able to use this service as
well.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman the
Grant opportunities council
would be working with DFA the
matching grant fund would only
be available to
local governments and political
subdivisions.
Thank you Mr speaker in July so
so a church that did something
that was.
let's say home visitation or
something like that that a.
A government that that we offer
Incentives for if there if there
were other federal incentives
out there for two that would
contribute to that potentially
through a grant.
They would not be able to access
these funds Mr speaker and
gentleman that is correct.
Thank you Mr grandson lady so
The.
The composition of this of this
Council.
I have not I've been trying to
catch up here he read to that
quickly we were not provided and
advance what we were going to be
hearing so when you are.
Speedily going through your
introduction I was trying to
find the bills so I can see what
it did so I'm I'm just summon
some my questions may be.
Elementary that's because I'm
not read the bill so so what I'm
what I'm wondering is this grant
council it'll consist of how
many people.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman it will consist of
thirteen people would you like
for me to identify the thirteen
members yes that be great and
and if if they're being
appointed by someone that would
be great as well.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so the council
consists first of the director
of the local government division
at the FAA.
then the following members
are appointed.
by the governor.
And.
They include three county
representatives one from each a
small medium and large
population County.
Three municipal representatives
one from each small medium and
large.
At three representatives of
other political subdivisions.
To grant to professionals who
have experience writing for
administering grants.
One staff member from a council
of governments.
At and one local staff member
of.
A member of the New Mexico
congressional delegation.
And in addition the governor can
invite the state director of
rural development and the
director of the New Mexico field
office for USDA to participate.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
and gentle lady is
facility cost for this or are
they being provided at the
expense of the different
entities.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman the non
so members who are not paid with
public funds are entitled to per
diem and mileage.
Thank you for that than the
others who serve in a government
capacity that there's there's
nothing besides their current
salary that they would be
receiving Mr speaker and
gentleman that's correct.
Mr Clinton ladies what what is
the anticipated cost
for for these and how many well.
One answer that question first
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman the anticipated cost
is less than ten thousand
dollars.
Thank you and miss begin gently
how often will this council
meet.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
a wonderful question I believe
that they can set some of their
own rules but let me confirm.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
council shall meet regularly at
the call of the chair.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady to get up and running
though do what is the
anticipation for them too
because they'll and they'll be
called together finally start
meeting and I would imagine they
would be a little more at the
beginning.
So could you maybe explain how
U. S. have you see that taking
place certainly thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman as I did
mention DFA was appropriated
nine hundred and thirty five
thousand dollars at last the
special session for US support
for activities related to grants
administration and so
hi.
I am sure that there will be
additional activities.
Necessitated at the beginning of
the of this process.
Thank you Mr Genevieve is there
an anticipated.
Outcome what what we believe
that because already as you
stated we did something last
year.
And those efforts I would
imagine.
Or somewhat successful for us to
be looking to to add to that.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so the legislation did
not pass last year so we are
continuing with the efforts to
ensure that New Mexico is
getting more of the available
competitive federal funds if you
recall New Mexico is one of the
lowest states particularly in
the region that brings in
competitive federal dollars and
so this.
The bill seeks to remedy that.
Thank you Mr green gentle lady
is there any.
for lack of a better term means
testing for the state for the
government
subdivisions who would be
applying to this because I would
imagine Mr speaker and gentle
lady some of the larger
communities have the bed grant
writers or even even a grant
department.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that is a excellent
question and in fact we do want
to make sure that our matching
grant Fund is giving priority to
projects that provide services
to rural and frontier
communities and other under
served populations.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
does sound I was looking at this
it looks like it didn't receive
any real opposition along the
way so the the small
communities.
More needy communities would
have a a real.
Maybe a fair playing field some
of the largest community so
thank you I appreciate you
answering my questions
gentlelady.
There's further debate the
gentleman from conference for
her to quit was a seven million
you.
Thank you Mr speaker doesn't
gentlelady yields.
Mr speaker I will yield to the
gentleman from all of those
counties so Mister speaker.
Delay the.
I'm glad you brought this bill I
appreciate you bringing this
bill for a while in my life I
had the joy of working for
twenty one state and federal
agencies all of which I wrote
grants to.
One of the things I wonder about
is that most of those requests
were never ten percent they were
usually almost always twenty
five percent state match seventy
five percent federal match.
Most of the projects that I see
in our.
Local communities.
Our.
Seven hundred thousand couple of
million really for
infrastructure and the types of
things that our communities need
do you think the need is met by
this bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I think that this is
an excellent start and we will
have data after the first year
to see if we need to increase
the amount of money in the fund.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
one of the other things that I
noticed was there was lots of
directors and not too many grant
writers
Requests take hours and hours
and hours and they're always
written in the old we hours of
the night when you just said and
you you current a new record in
you lord Smith and you.
Run numbers and I don't think to
current riders can do that for
very many communities.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman and just as a point of
clarification and reminder the
grant writers that aspect is
within DFA and that they are
currently setting that up so the
grant advice opportunity council
does not right requests for the
communities.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
with do we have some place
other than the school of hard
knocks and I went to that
teaches people how to bring some
of this information together.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman you know what that's
actually what we're trying to do
so between DFA setting up a
grants administration and a
bureau of people who are experts
in writing grants and working
with local communities that is
one way that we envision
increasing support the other way
by having the grant opportunity
council is so that we actually
have a body that's in constant
communication with our local
Communities also people who are
in the know about what federal
grant opportunities are coming
down the pike so that we can
continue to improve our
processes and trainings and
Services for our local
communities.
Mr speaker gentle lady almost
all of these requests will not
give you credit for money you've
already spent the state.
Of fiscal year ended July starts
in June.
Federal fiscal year October it's
really hard to spend money
simultaneously when you have to
love matching.
Fiscal years we were able to do
it
he got a really.
Get up move any order.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
I
would have been lovely if we had
passed this last session and
would have had a jump start.
That's true but it's always the
same they this never overlap
sometimes of usually that's
three your money so you can do
it that way but also it might be
three or money but if you don't
spend that this year you don't
get any next year so it's always
a challenge to I think it's a.
It's something it takes a lot of
mileage to be able to to to
so.
Something about triage how do
you decide who gets help who
doesn't get help I mean there
there's you're going to have an
outcry.
From communities across the
state of their needs of thinking
of the things the request I got
in the house bill junior and and
for our capital outlay funding
and I'm already being
the grant writer I'm always
ready so you can work and we go
to to really fund some of these
needs that I know are are.
The truly needs but they're
they're bigger than than what
our budget was on on house bill
junior high said house built
this house bill junior capital
outlay the the the amount of
money is not enough to solve the
real the true problems of some
of these small communities are
water problems sewer problems
for all problems all these
things of which.
Can be funded partially by by
state money and probably federal
grants so your thoughts on them.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman to the first part of
your question.
the bill requires the department
to work with the council to
develop eligibility and
prioritization criteria for
projects so they will be setting
up the rules and forms required
for the matching grant funds.
Sorry Mr speaker and gentleman
and I don't remember the second
part.
So Mister speaker gentle lady I
I assume the rules are that they
would be a subdivision of the
state.
They would have their audit in
order.
And
Maybe an assessment of the.
The need is that it was
assessment of any part of that.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman it should be and one
of the things as we were
crafting this bill we wanted to
Provide the structure in the
framework without actually
setting the criteria in the bill
so that will be established by
DFA with advisement from the
council.
Mr speaker gentle lady would
there be anybody anyone there to
do an assessment of needs of one
of the things that that I've not
seen by writing RFPs and in
reviewing bids and.
And offers and.
All those things requests some
people have the greater need and
some people are the better
riders so I think there would be
a.
maybe room there for someone to
look at look at the.
The amount of need is that is
that something will be dealt
with.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
certainly the whole what we want
to do is we want to make sure
that the communities that need
the support the most are given
that through grant writing
training through access to
information through the matching
funds but that's one of the
reasons that the Advisory
Council is comprised of those
thirteen members that I
discussed previously.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
truly I think the the members
are are appropriate I think
they're they're the ones that
should be on there.
hi I kind of wondered if to
grant writers grant writer
trainee or trainers
might not be in the but I I
applaud your efforts in the
thank you for bringing this bill
thank you gentle lady
that's all the questions I have
there's further debate the
gentleman from Lee.
Thank you for speaking to you.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the gentleman from Lee.
Could you.
I'm curious about the mechanics
of this process that is.
This world Becker proven for the
reason that.
Understand the penalties.
Sir can use land grants
virtually.
The.
To to would be eligible to apply
for these grants is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman you are
correct that it is
political subdivisions
and.
Local governments.
Speaker gentle lady was the
process initiated is the local
government local entertainer
hi I.
Born to a Stewart or.
How does.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so.
In a hypothetical situation DFA
through the structure that it
has currently set up would
identify grant opportunities for
some of our local.
Communities and they would say.
They would be in touch with
for instance the city of fall of
Hobbs and know that Hobbs was
interested in.
Additional funds for.
Use career opportunities and
they would DFA the staff at the
FAA would see a grant
opportunity for at the grant
writer in Hobbs potentially from
the Permian strategic
partnership would say we have
this wonderful opportunity but
it requires a twenty five
percent match.
From the city.
The city having not known about
that previously and it not being
capital outlay season for H. B.
two junior that time I would
submit an application as
determined by the DFA in the
grants opportunity council to
the matching grant fund and
should they meet the criteria
and the fund DFA think that it's
a worthy opportunity they would
receive a guarantee for that
twenty five percent match.
Thank you
for the answer so there will be
a.
People with FAA troll just with
stromal.
Of federal grant programs to see
what.
I eligible and.
That together with communities
in need to send.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
an ideal scenario my
understanding from conversations
with the DFA is that they we're
beginning their grants program
with state agencies and that
their hope is to work with local
municipalities and counties in
the near future however we also
have cogs that do provide some
of those services that we do
have other organizations such as
the Permian strategic
partnership that also provide
some of those services so it
currently.
It is not a perfect system there
are some ways that
unisa polity is another
subdivisions can find out about
grant opportunities but.
This is sort of what we have
right now and in the long term
it would be wonderful if we had
a database and plenty of staff
but we're really just starting
this journey.
Speaker gentle lady.
The actual preparation of the
proposal with Representative
Ferrary portion of the local
community that might need to be
trained to.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman with regard to the
matching grant fund application
that would more than likely be
someone from the local
government.
Four two.
Oversight.
Of the cash portion of these
funds.
Will be responsible for the for
approval of the distribution for
the the current location is
successful.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman the DFA.
General Motors visor Council in
that process.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman the role of the
Advisory Council is to advise
the department of finance and
administration on grant matters
including.
Methods and models for
identifying procuring using and
maintaining federal and other
requests identification of
barriers to procuring and
managing federal and other
requests best practices for
managing and accounting for
requests.
The contents and analyses of the
annual state and local grants
survey and other grant topics
requested by the department of
finance and administration.
As well were I'm always very
skeptical with respect to
politically directed capital so
the question would be.
Chapter of criteria.
This program is for subscribed
or oversubscribed.
The selection of natural there's
proposals.
From.
Madam speaker and gentleman the.
Requests Advisory Council in
coordination with DFA would
establish the criteria and
application forms and different
rules for the matching grant
fund DFA would make the
selections and presumably not
oversubscribed the fund.
Speaker.
There would be some sort of
force ranking process for them
to take place projects first
trained.
Applications in process have to
be ranked from Alan one to ten
is that accurate.
Madam speaker gentleman's yes
although it's also possible that
applications could come in on a
rolling basis and so it could be
a first come first serve
scenario.
Okay.
Madam speaker thank you
for your interest.
Thank you next we have the
gentle lady from granted out
going Sierra.
will come back to our our next
we have to look for a the gentle
lady from Bernalillo Sandoval in
Santa Fe.
M. F. with them in.
Next we have the gentleman from
curry.
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam speaker.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
please you.
Madam speaker at yes I will
yield to the gentleman from
curry county thank you Joe if I
just want to get a few
clarifying thoughts in my mind
so that I can fully comprehend
where I think you're going I
think I have it but I'm not sure
so this want to pursue a few
things on page two the most far
questions are on page two and
three.
Aligns five and six it talks
about the three representatives
of other political subdivisions
of the state the first thing
that popped into my mind as I
look down below where it talks
about rural utilities and
department of agriculture I
thought well that must be people
that represent the sole water
conservation district the
acequia something like that
July I'm speaker can you tell me
what were you thinking about
those three positions
What what was on your mind as
you went through this process
and created that group.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman with regard to
The three representatives of
other political subdivisions I
think you're correct that it
could be a state kia's it could
be a pony as other
Recognized political
subdivisions within the state
you mentions though.
Section B..
Sorry one B. the state director
of rural development and the
director of the New Mexico field
office of the rural utilities
that's actually the federal USDA
and the reason that we want to
have them incorporated and
invited to participate is so
that we're making sure
that we know what's going on at
the federal level and the
federal folks here in St know
what our communities need.
Thank you Julian thank you madam
speaker I just I guess when I
saw the terms you were rural
utilities and department of
agriculture those three non
municipal non County people
probably had something to do
with solar wind
something out of all all of
those.
people that are being appointed
are being appointed by the
executive and so I was trying to
follow the train of thought is
were we trying to go with this
group what we're trying to
accomplish and who do they have
in mind as we go through this so
that I could understand where I
think you're going.
One one nine gentle lady it
talks about one staff member
from the council of governments
and I'm familiar with NCSL or
CSG west Alex some of the other
organizations that that puts
states together what did you
have in mind when that languages
putting your bill did you have
in mind for the council of
governments.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman
a member from the eastern plains
Cobb mid Rio Grande we have
seven cogs in the state of New
Mexico and so one of those
representatives okay so you
think you have a local of CAGR
something statewide but not a
national
council of governments like NCSL
or CST western thank okay that's
helpful thank you jollity and
then again at on the line
fourteen fifteen it talks about
the state director rural
development and the director of
New Mexico field office it is my
understanding is in your
testimony so far madam speaker
delighted those are national
offices the that you're looking
at and not necessarily just
because it says the state
director it's not someone with
in New Mexico if someone from
out in the federal room.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman so.
That section does specifically
pertain to our members at the
federal level working for
federal agencies like USDA.
That provide grants to our local
communities and so what we're
doing is.
Suggesting that the governor
invite.
Of those representatives to
participate so that we can make
sure that our council and DFA
know what some of the
opportunities are that exist
they could generally when I read
the term other federal
representatives I assume that
implied that the the ones that
that I just read for federal but
I wasn't sure I just want to
clarify so I appreciate that
very much on line three on page
three it talks about the council
should meet regularly at the
call of the chair.
So I'm I'm assuming there's not
gonna be schedule monthly
meetings or something like that
it's just gonna be when someone
has a enquire here needs
assistance and they can they
call the council will come
together to work with them
advise them Geidam is that
correct Madam speaker gentle
lady.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
think the reason that we're
suggesting that it be at the
call of the chairs because as a
member asked earlier they may
need to meet more frequently and
the beginning as things are
getting set up and perhaps less
frequently later on and so the
decision was made not to
prescribe certain meeting times
thank you Julia I'm assuming
that over time it may kind of
morph into a monthly meeting or
something is scheduled once it
kind of gets off the ground
running and operating so I
appreciate that so and then my
last question has to do with
the.
Section F. line seventeen
through nineteen it talks about
the grant opportunity council
shall report to the department
to DFA the governor and this is
an legislature the normally
gentle lady madam speaker when
they set reports the legislature
will identify like the LFC
within the legislature
legislative finance committee a
lot of our bills report to that
agency they they are designed
and set up to handle that this
is a is a broad term is it does
a report to the speaker does it
report to.
do you have in mind when you say
the legislature.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman
Actually relied on the forty
plus years of experience from.
The drafter who assisted in this
process and so we did not
specify what questions what part
of the Legislature rather that
we wanted the information to
come back to the legislature so
that we as a body could.
Make statutory changes if
necessary or put pilot programs
into place for increased
funding.
Thank you gentle lady I I I know
several reporting mechanisms
madam speaker gentle lady that
come back to the state that I've
gone to find out who they report
to and and I found there's one
for gambling addiction or
something like that never
reported an eight or nine years
and nobody even knew it.
And so I would encourage as you
move forward if possible.
I would encourage you to use the
legislative finance committee
because that's made up of all
senators and representatives in
there there's design and geared
to handle this kind of
information I would encourage
that.
An active are you I would say
it's in a friendly amendment I'm
not going to offer it but want
to encourage generated madam
speaker that's all my questions
I appreciate it thank you very
much.
Thank you Representative we have
further debate the gentle lady
for granted all going to see it
Thank you madam speaker the
gentlelady yields.
Thank you madam speaker yes I
will yield to the lady from all
of those counties thank you
thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady and and so I
just wanted to make sure that I
understand that but a political
subdivision is our schools
considered political
subcultures cities.
Are they considered a political
subdivisions.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady I don't believe so
but I can certainly get a
definitive answer for you.
Okay thank you madam speaker
internally as a cog considered a
political subdivisions or what
what is a political
subdivisions.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady schools are political
subdivisions.
Thank you thank you madam
speaker thank you gentle lady so
I'm assuming that the council of
governments is also what what
what is the definition of
political subcommittee that way.
Subdivision that way I don't
have time just thinking soil and
water is a key is council of
governments right regional
educational cooperative centers.
Madam speaker gentle lady then I
yield to the representative from
Bernalillo and Sandoval County
Madam speaker and gentle lady
yes just for the purpose of the
definition madam speaker gentle
lady so I'm reading from an
attorney general's opinion but
it's looking at the case law a
political subdivision is a
division of a state that exists
primarily to discard some
function of local government and
specifically says that school
districts are within the
definition of political
subdivisions thank you thank you
madam speaker thank you Julie so
I think that like school water
conservation also would be.
And the council of governments
would be regional educational
cooperative centers.
And the light like it's ideas.
Irrigation associations.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady
It's almost certainly for the
purposes of the matching grant
funds that criteria would be
delineated thank you thank you
madam speaker thank you gently
because I I I really like the
idea of setting up the matching
funds because that is often a
very here for especially as
you've identified in this in
this
Bill for rural and frontier
communities they don't have a
lot of G. R. T. they don't have
a lot of excess revenue and the
matching grant can be a barrier
to them applying for funds and
so I I like that part of it my
question is in regards to the
three staff persons the three
staff persons.
Are you envision them actually
writing the grants or just
administering the matching
funds.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
at.
There are no three staff persons
are you referring to the three
county representative so thank
you thank you that are there
staff people Madam speaker
gently with the grant with the
bill.
Madam speaker gentle lady no
there are no staff in this bill
thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you madam speaker thank
you lady so basically they're
just going to need to make sure
that the the funds are
distributed for people in real
time.
Our political subdivisions in
real time for match to leverage
requests.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
the grant opportunities council
the role of that council is to
provide guidance from the ground
from the people who are actually
in the local communities in the
grant writing world who know
what the needs are to DFA.
Madam speaker and gentle lady so
they're going to the the
volunteer council's going to
advise.
Explain to me again what the
role the council is thank you
madam speaker and gentle lady
yes the Advisory Council and.
It advises DFA it works with DFA
to set the criteria for the
applications in the forms but
DFA well actually.
Make the disbursements and or
the requests thank you madam
speaker thank you Julie so once
the guidance has been set that's
why they may not need to meet
anymore because in DFA will have
clear criteria of who who would
qualify and when they would
qualify.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
would actually argue that the
opportunities council should
continue to me because
The things change and needs
change grant opportunities
change and so we don't want to
set something up today and not
have it be able to modify in ten
years based on the needs in ten
years thank you madam speaker
thank you delighted so do you
see the applications being on a
rolling basis.
Madam speaker gentle lady that's
actually something that the
opportunities council in
conjunction with the DFA could
make a determination on.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady and is there is
there cap on what math one match
could be.
Madam speaker gentle lady there
is not that is not prescribed in
this bill there could be a cap
set when the council that sets
the rules thank you madam
speaker internally so
theoretically until the rules
are set I mean without the
criteria one minutes probably
could pop comply for one waste
water.
Object and could have it I
needed that exceeds the million
dollars.
Madam speaker gentle lady
DFA should not awarded grants
without the rules having been
set and I can't imagine that the
members of the grant
opportunities council would like
to see at the matching grant
funding utilized by only one.
Entity but that's certainly
something that they would need
to work out in their meetings
and as they're setting the
criteria thank you madam speaker
thank you to the lady and then
and then on the on page four in
section be it talks about
priorities for the matching
grant should be given to
projects that are in rural and
frontier communities underserved
populations in smaller counties
municipalities to improve
service delivery are you using
it what are you using as the
federal as a as rural and
frontier communities definition.
State or federal.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady
I don't know that that is
something that we needed to
decide defined in this section
typically it would be the
federal definition but we did
not define okay thank you madam
speaker thank you gentle lady
and and and how what in your
mind is an underserved
population.
Is that because there could be
an underserved population within
a metropolitan area and so how
close to turning underserved
populations as a priority.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady that would be one of
the rules of the grant
opportunity council.
Thank you.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady and then smaller
counties and municipalities I
mean actually I if you did this
on averages if you just did on
averages the in rural would be
probably the federal definition
anything under fifty thousand I
don't know if it's county or
city and then frontier would be
much smaller based on population
density
but smaller counties could be
like what at the half of the
counties that are the smallest
or the minutes of holidays we a
lot we have some pretty small
communities of small is pretty
subjective.
So have a there's died I just
there's no definitions in the
act and so it seems like we're
it's going to be pretty
subjective to those establishing
the the boundaries.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady we did not want to
over prescribe we're sharing
intent but as noted before the
grant opportunities council will
be made up of a variety of
representatives from different.
Locations sizes geographic
distance you know.
Representation of the state and
so they will make those
determinations thank you thank
you madam speaker in thank you
gentle lady on on page three so
so I'm envisioning you know I do
a lot did a lot of grant writing
and so I would have loved to
have had the opportunity to go
to DFA and say like Hey we found
this federal grant or Hey we
found this private grant it
requires match we don't have the
match we're a small community or
underserved population you know
it's it's meets all these
criteria but it almost reads
here like the FAA's gonna.
It will it does say the council
will advise the person to
finance authority on grant
matters including methods and
modeling for identify procuring
using and maintaining federal
other requests so is DFA gonna
say Hey here's this grant you
might we could this qualifies
for match or can grant writers
for these political subdivisions
come and say to DFA without DFA
posting you're listening or
anything we have a need here it
is it is this came about.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
for the purposes of this bill.
Local governments or political
subdivisions would apply to the
matching grant fund which is
housed at the FAA before the
matching grant amount.
DFA that's the extent of what
we're doing this bill all right
thank you madam speaker thank
you lady and it it kind of
reminds me of the children's
trust fund when we set up a ton
more acts in the last couple
years the children's trust trust
fund has been around for awhile
there's also a disabilities
grant application that comes out
but they have.
Very.
Strict criteria and they have a
very closed open.
Requests for application
requests for proposals time
frame some in some cases once
every four years any other I
believe is annual but they.
There I think the best.
So the best outcome of this
would be if there is a revolving
opportunity that people could
fly as there was a need and that
the council could meet and see
if there is sponsor based on the
criteria that they set and so I
I just I hope that what comes
out of this is that this council
will put out information that
there is a matching grant
available and that they make
sure that every every sub
political subdivisions aware
that this fund exists and they
can access in real time when
they need it because there's
there's such a disconnect
between when federal grants are
do you when state grants are
due.
Fiscal years when when private
foundation grants are due or
even donor challenge and so I
see a lot of opportunity in this
and I hope that it stays
flexible in and that and that
people can apply year round and
I I also hope that the fund
grows and I think this would be
a great thing for us as a body
to choose to put money into with
the with the COVID recovery
funds and and and the fund the
federal dollars are coming into
the state it's a great way to
really give municipalities
meaningful opportunities to get
projects done and then generally
don't have money for but those
projects are well over a million
dollars the match as well over
million dollars thank you madam
speaker thank you lady.
Thank you Representative we have
further debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo some the line
and some the Fe.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady to seal thank you
madam speaker I will yield to
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Sandoval in Santa Fe thank you
miss my questions already been
answered so I just have a few
for you I noticed that the
appropriations were stripped out
of this bill looking at the
amended version so we're will
any of the money's needed for
this come from is it in the
budget
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady yes there's a million
dollars and you need to.
Thank you so the million dollars
HB too and that's to cover this
bill okay that's all the
questions I had for you thank
you.
Thank you Representative next we
have the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Hochman Vigil.
Thank you madam speaker can you
hear me yes we can.
Thank you madam speaker I does
the gentle lady yield.
Madam speaker yes I will yield
to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
Thank you gentle lady is on the
rise and support for this bill
when I first started hearing
about it I thought to myself
then this is exactly what the
doctor ordered for New Mexico
New Mexican citizens Madam
speaker anybody who's ever spent
any time in the nonprofit sector
or you know start at sh contacts
is known does have known and
will know how difficult it is to
write grants and more
importantly identify grant
opportunities that exist for any
number of industry and events
and you know community interests
and so the idea of a council
that will help bring all of this
information together madam
speaker and hold those political
subdivisions figure out what
they don't know could be
invaluable to them Madam speaker
another reason why I think this
bill is really fantastic is
because I think it helps deal
with The New Mexico's reputation
for sometimes functioning in
silos madam speaker I think that
a lot of you know communities
and and other and political
subdivisions but state capital
outlay for instance will try to
fund a project and they won't
have any oversights or any
agency that's allowing them to
identify other opportunities are
not thinking about or coordinate
coordinate financing so that we
don't find ourselves in these
the positions are piecemeal
piece Mealing bangs together you
know one after another so madam
speaker no questions just the
athletes for the sponsor of this
legislation I think that it's
still built exactly like this
that we are going to radically
transform our state thank you
madam speaker.
Thank you Representative next we
have the gentle lady from Rio
Arriba us on the Fe and Taos.
Thank you madam speaker will the
kind lady yield.
Thank you madam speaker at yes I
will yield to my colleague from
Santa Fe Rio Arriba and Taos
thank you so much Madam speaker
kind lady you can tell who the
grant writers are in the room it
becomes a very apparent that
also that
however zoom zoom can you please
New thank you.
We know the requests certainly
difficult federal grants are
written and the late hours of
the night or the wee hours of
the morning and you're
struggling to match every single
line item that grants with the
the words in the in the
grandstand and matching up the
budget so that everything's in
complete alignment and making
sure that every single thing a
require and every single thing
they ask is in that document
this is not the end product this
is the beginning product that
we're talking about of the idea
for the long run is much bigger
and it it appears what people
are talking about in this room
that we would have an office in
in DFA that would it would
really have a great deal of
staff and they would be able to
reach out and we could have
specialties in water and
education and labor and it you
take it every single grant that
we have the fact that you have a
a grand council with
representatives from USDA is is
vitally important I I spent half
of my money on grant writers in
the junior bill because that
will turn money around that will
keep money coming into the rural
incorporated part of my district
that really has the lacks the
capacity to put a complex grant
together in these requests are
difficult I think this office is
the beginning of New Mexico kind
of getting a handle on on how
complexes this issue is in
reaching out to small
communities and I think it's
important that we identified
rural and frontier communities
is as having preference because
those are the cubs communities
that lacked the capacity and the
knowledge to put these requests
together they're very very
difficult I have done you know
thirty million dollar grants to
the department of education.
my friend from all those
counties has has done bigger
grants and that the water and
wastewater these required.
The technical expertise in
addition to grant writing skills
ending in addition to CPA's and
lawyers looking at these
difficult requests they are
massive in the bigger the grant
the harder it is the more you
need so to put it council
together that understands how
difficult it is and sets the
stage I think for the future and
that's what I think we're doing
here that's why only a million
dollars with let's put in at
this point because you don't
want to over stand over extended
money state money when you
haven't really developed how the
process will work so I I applaud
I applaud the the gentle lady
for putting this together for
working this into H. two which
is not an easy thing so that we
can get this started so that we
can understand after the first
year after the first year will
know how many people applied but
they weren't able to do what
they were able to do and that's
just what will build that the
budget for the future so I
gentle lady I'm sorry I didn't
ask more questions I'm just
kinda adding to
to your work I mean I'm not
adding anything I'm just trying
to explain how we work together
to really make this happen so I
thank you very much thank you
madam speaker thank you
Representative next we have the
gentle lady from Eddy County
Representative Brown.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
please yield.
Thank you madam speaker yes I
will yield to the gentle lady
from Eddy County.
Thank you very much of Madam
speaker generally so.
I would like to ask a couple
questions about some of the
material on page three of the
bill.
I note Madam speaker gentle lady
that the council show meet
regularly at the call of the
chair could you tell us what you
envisioned by the word regular
regularly.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady regularly at the
beginning of this process may be
more frequent and less frequent
as time goes on and once rules
and procedures have been
established.
Madam speaker gentle lady so I'm
a little bit uncomfortable with
that work because it's just so
vague and if it had said state
quarterly or something we'd have
some assurance that indeed this
council is active and I agree
with you madam speaker gentle
lady that at the beginning there
may be a need for more meetings
because it's a start up process
but I think it would help the
bill if it define that term
better
Madam speaker gentle lady so I'm
now looking still on page three
of the bill and it's a party at
line for.
This is the grant opportunities
council shall advise DFA on
instead of on grant matters okay
so.
what
Madam speaker and gentle lady
when you get we see some
veneration here I parts about
what that would look like Madam
speaker gentle lady so part one
is that the council would advise
DFA on grant mentors including
methods and models for
identifying procuring.
Using and maintaining federal
and other requests so madam
speaker gentle lady could you
give us just a brief tutorial
about what you mean by methods
and models.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady the point of the
enumeration including methods
and models is so that DFA as
it's moving forward.
Can.
Use.
Methods whether it's email
distributions or a website for a
database they can court get that
information by talking to.
People who are actually on the
ground doing the work
that's the the role of the
council and
So they would be sharing their
knowledge with DFA as to some of
the.
Ways that make the most sense
for their community.
Madam speaker generally so so
thank you so methods Mr I agree
it may be how do we do this to
do by email that we do it by of
paper letter how do we do it
what are the models that you
envisioned and that's another
term that's here and I know it's
not synonymous with methods so
what are some of the models.
Used to or that could be used
for identifying procuring using
and maintaining federal and
other requests.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady.
Sorry I had a thought about the
flow of the window.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
models could be I mean it could
be a variety of things but one
of the ways that I could see
this working is you have a group
of professionals on the Advisory
Council who have been
practitioners and have
identified ways in which they
research for.
Procure this information and so
that could be one type of
modeling.
Madam speaker gentle lady so
Yeah I'm still trying to get my
head around that one I suppose
that you're correct that people
who've done grant writing of
perhaps professionally would
have some ways of going about
doing grant writing
Madam speaker and gentle lady
would you like to at anything
else on that.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
Okay thank you madam speaker
gentle lady so.
Let's move on to part two then
it's starting at one point nine
and it talks about identifying
barriers to going after grants
just off the top of your head
madam speaker gentle lady could
you give us some examples of
what you think barriers might be
thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady up not having a
grant writer on staff could be
one barrier not having access to
matching funds would be a
secondary.
Okay thank you.
Madam speaker and gentle lady so
if we next have that I think I
understand this one it's number
three on the list it would be
advising about best practices
for managing an accounting for
requests
Madam speaker gentle lady I
think it's really the case in
many instances where sometimes
it's the reporting or the
accounting that we'll get a
grant recipient into some
trouble so I can see where some
of cap coaching in advising on
that would be very helpful but
when we go to number four Madam
speaker gentle lady.
And it talks about that the
council would advise DFA
regarding contents and analyses
of the annual state and local
grants survey Madam speaker
gentle lady could you just take
a moment and explain about the
local grants survey.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady this would be the
data collection portion of it so
that we can analyze if we're
making an impact and succeeding
with our intent.
Very good thank you madam
speaker from I'm gonna now still
on page three look at part of
the line seventeen and it says
that the council shall report to
DFA the governor and the
legislature by December first of
each year.
And I'm a little surprised at
what the contents of that report
are required to be it talks
about the council's activities
about the grant survey and about
some recommendations for
possibly improving the number
and quality of federal another
grants awarded.
madam speaker generally I'm
surprised there's nothing here
requiring a report card on how
successful the grant writing
endeavors have been who has
received requests
perhaps
that information would be useful
to anybody who wants to avail
themselves of this advisory
service so
Madam speaker gentle could you
explain why that's not a
requirement for the report.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady that information
could be included in the annual
state level grants survey as
part of the information that's
provided back.
Madam speaker generally I I'm
I'm going to make a prediction
here that.
Some grant recipients may not
want to share information
because it is kind of a
competitive sometimes cutthroat
universe of people going after
grant monies and some people
might be reluctant to share
their success Madam speaker
gentle lady do you think that
might be the case.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady it could be.
Okay thank you.
Madam speaker and and and gentle
lady from Bernalillo I'm gonna
turn to page four of the bill.
And this is new material.
And this is about the grants
matching fund and it says here
and I I agree madam speaker
gentle lady that that can be
very helpful it's kind of like a
closing Fund in a way because of
many times there are
requirements for for a match.
but Madam speaker gentle lady so
what some troubling me a little
bit it's a timing issue this is
on a line eight that money in
the fund is subject to
appropriation by the
legislature.
To help political subdivisions
of the state meet requirements
for match.
So
You madam speaker gentle lady.
Does this mean that the
legislature decides on a case by
case basis which grant
applications will receive a
piece of the matching funds.
Madam speaker gentle lady Madam
speaker gentle lady now the
legislature is appropriating one
million dollars to the matching
grant funds and those funds are
dispersed by DFA.
Thank you Madam speaker gentle
lady so I'm I'm still not sure
that it's guaranteed with the
language it's here I think it's
a little bit
amorphous undefined yes
generally we know that the
legislature does appropriations
but this seems to be more tied
to.
specific projects the way I read
it so it maybe an area of the
bill that could use some
amplifying Language.
Madam speaker gentle lady
I do like the part of the bill
Madam speaker gentle lady it's
on page four of support be.
And it says the priority for
matching fund grants to be given
to projects that provide
services to rural and frontier
communities and other
underserved populations into
smaller counties and
municipalities to improve
service delivery or to be more
efficient and effective.
Madam speaker gentle lady so
we're so we're talking about
priority how does that work in
the real world for
Is the council going to.
Well it says the department will
establish standards of
eligibility and criteria for
prioritizing.
Can you give us any information
Madam speaker gentle lady of how
those priorities will be set and
what they might be.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady the role of the
Advisory Council is to
coordinate with DFA to come up
with those prioritization and we
are providing intent so that the
council and DFA have an
understanding of what the
legislators legislature is
interested in.
Madam speaker internally so I I
think I follow what you're
saying I I'm just always just as
a person who's from a.
Somewhat remote part of the
state remote from population
centers Albuquerque Santa Fe Los
crucis so forth I'm always
concerned that some of the other
districts in the state don't
quite get the chair of the pie
and I would hope that that would
be that there were truly would
be some assurance.
That the money would be spread
equally Madam speaker gentle
lady I have a few other
questions.
I think it was mentioned that
Madam speaker gentle lady the
grant writing can be
A very complicated
the matter and could you just
give us and I think madam
speaker generally there are a
number of members of our body
here to have experience writing
requests whether it's for
you know for profit groups or
for not especially probably for
non profits could you just give
us a sense gentlelady madam
speaker how hard this line of
work is.
Madam speaker gentle lady my
understanding is that it is a
very difficult line of work and
one of the reasons that we
struggle with bringing in
federal grant dollars is because
we do not have enough trained
grant writers in the state.
Madam speaker and gentle lady so
I I agree with you that it is a
specialty area especially
because it's usually very
competitive and usually there
are a lot of minute requirements
for for the requests for the
grant writing applications and
they have to truly be done just
right.
madam speaker gentle lady so
been around for a few years.
I hope some nonprofits with some
grant writing and you know the
ways we find about we're we're
the possibilities for for grant
money used to be
Booklets that had listings of by
a philanthropic groups or you
know for federal we we might
have some publications that we
look or where they put out
notices of available
opportunities so.
What I know now Madam speaker
gentle lady's we pretty much get
on a computer and type in some
key words and go fishing for
grants and there are some
databases already in existence
so is there anything.
Madam speaker gentle lady that
would be.
More than.
Getting on a computer to find
out where the requests can can
be found.
Madam speaker gentle lady in
terms of finding the requests
yes ma'am speaker gentle lady.
Madam speaker gentle lady are
just locating the requests and
knowing when they're open and
what you need to apply is not
something that just anybody
knows so that you do have to
there is training involved in
that.
Thank you very much.
So madam speaker generally I
just want to clarify that the
council will not actually be
writing grants it's strictly
advisory is that correct Madam
speaker gentle lady you are
correct.
Madam speaker gentle lady I I
can just predict that.
Those who are on the counselor
seeing the efforts being made
will have a hard time not
jumping in and trying to.
Give a little more coaching than
maybe they should I I can see it
being.
Third be foundation to be more
than advisory madam speaker
gentle lady do you think that
might be the case.
Madam speaker gentle lady that
is not something that I think to
be the case but it could be.
Thank you very much so.
the speaker gentle lady so that
I think I heard you say that the
council will perhaps will be
arranging for workshops or even
putting on workshops for
agencies and local governments
did I hear that correctly madam
speaker gentle lady Madam
speaker gentle lady the council
itself will not be putting on
workshops it might be suggesting
to DFA what workshops might be
helpful to us some of our local
communities.
And madam speaker gentle lady I
think there are a lot of
organizations that offer those
types of workshops I know one of
the nonprofits I work with back
home is doing that right now a
bringing in some someone to give
a workshop on how to write for
requests so that can be very
very useful training.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
So aside from the survey will
there be a way to track success.
Madam speaker gentle lady yes in
terms of the matching grant fund
the amount of money that is
guaranteed and then utilized in
the amount of money that
returning to the state is
certainly one way that we will
know that.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady so I think it would be
really helpful hints I want to
know if you anticipate this
happening that the council would
put a public database online
expo at least identifying of
which agencies and
of political subdivisions had
help somehow through the council
through did DFA whether they
were successful in landing your
grant and if so how much money
did they receive and do you
anticipate that being made
available Madam speaker gentle
lady Madam speaker gentle lady I
anticipate that being made
available through the
The grant survey that we
discussed earlier and I
certainly think that
transparency is good for
government.
Yes I agree with you gentle lady
hundred percent on that so
I have one concern Madam speaker
and gentle lady from Bernalillo
and that is.
I have a there's a perception
that sometimes
Government works for political
with political motive and I just
want to be sure that this is a
very neutral if it'll say
municipality needs some help
with great writing and they need
some advising on that that that
they get what they need and it's
not just given to you know and I
get I'm going to talk about the
bigger population corridors want
to make sure it's truly for
everybody madam speaker gentle
lady the COVID.
Madam speaker gentle lady in
crafting this bill I certainly
took many steps to ensure that
that is the case by including
representatives from small
medium and large municipalities
and cities and political
subdivisions
and also by suggesting that
priority be given to our rural
and frontier communities.
Thank you very much gentlelady
and madam speaker so I I am
going to support your bill
tonight I appreciate very much
the work you did on it from last
year we had a change that I
thought was very important and I
really truly appreciate you
accommodating my concern there I
think madam speaker generally
that we do miss out on a
specially a lot of federal
funding
there's there's quite a bit out
there actually and you need to
have people who are trained and
I think and very knowledgeable
on how to how to them at least
apply for those funds so I
appreciate very much the
legislation Madam speaker
speaker thank you for the time
this evening thank you gentle
lady seeing no further debate
the gentle lady to close.
Thank you madam speaker I move
that house bill sixty two as
amended do not pass.
Final passage of house bill
sixty two the vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
Electronic portion of the road
is closed the clerk to call the
members without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Alcon votes yes
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong votes yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash votes
yes Representative phone call.
Yes Representative boom go both
yes representative Cadena.
Yes Representative Cadena votes
yes Representative Castellano.
Representative Castellano votes
yes Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
both yes Representative on this.
Yes Representative and non this
votes yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Lara.
Yes Representative a lot of
votes yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis both
yes Representative Lundstrom.
Yes Representative Lundstrom
both yes Representative Madrid.
Yes Representative Madrid votes
yes Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen votes
yes Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
votes yes Representative Ortez.
Yes Representative Ortez votes
yes Representative Pettigrew.
Representative G. Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero votes yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
yes Representative office.
Here.
I'm sorry.
Yes Representative votes yes
representative Thompson.
Yes Representative Thomson both
yes.
The vote is now closed to by a
vote of sixty five in the
affirmative one in the negative.
House bill sixty two has duly
passed this house.
Okay folks were moving to item
number three.
Representative Lane are you
ready for house bill ninety
nine.
Madam speaker I ask unanimous
consent that house the rules we
suspend that the record show
that all options voicemails bill
ninety nine on final passage
been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
I object.
Okay.
Gentleman to explain the bill.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you for Hovor rolling that
objection I appreciate that.
Madam speaker so house bill
ninety nine what it does it does
two things so essentially is
creating two new crimes for New
Mexico the first section creates
a fourth degree felony in the
second section creates a
misdemeanor.
With regard to the fourth degree
felony what this bill does is it
makes it unlawful to threaten a
judge for his or her immediate
family member with great bodily
harm or to try to prevent them
from being able to discharge
their duties or to take actions
of retaliation against the
judges result of some action
taken by the judge in court.
Regarding the second section of
the bill that creates a
misdemeanor it makes it unlawful
to share the personal
information of a judge in order
to cause harm to the judge or to
interrupt the judicial
proceedings now I think there's
a couple reasons that the body
should consider a bill like this
and it did it has been well
received through both committee
hearings but there's a couple
reasons I think the bodies
understand one is
and really it's it's the it's
the backbone of a bill like this
which is the need to keep our
judiciary completely independent
so we can we can write the best
losses legislators and and I
have no doubt that we do that as
as members of this house and we
can have the best executives out
from feeling and and executing
upon those laws
phone it comes to disputes
especially criminal disputes for
you have a defendant who is
looking at maybe losing their
liberty it's vital that our our
judiciary be able to remain
neutral and objective and free
from outside influence.
And and you know there's a
there's a lesser reason as well
but I think it's worth
mentioning which is the need for
recruitment of judges you know
we made a priority and house
bill to increase the salaries of
judges so that we can have a
better recruitment of lawyers
out of private practice but also
just making sure that judges
feel safe that they're protected
and that their welcome I think
is is very important as well and
you know and I would like to
thank my co sponsors as well
Representative Hochman Vigil
Representative Martinez
Representative spent a
Representative Chasey and
Representative night birds and
then a madam speaker I also like
to introduce the body as well my
expert witness tonight is the
Chief Justice himself Mr Michael
E. Vigil who's with us tonight I
very much appreciate he's been
paying in late with us and I and
and this is a priority for him
that's why he's actually on the
house floor right now he
insisted upon that I'm very
grateful to have the Chief
Justice himself here with us
this evening to show how
important this bill is and of
madam speaker I believe one of
my co sponsors Representative
Hochman Vigil would like to say
a few things chair if you don't
mind calling her.
Representative whenever you're
ready.
Thank you madam chair thank you
gentlemen co sponsor I'm not
sure if I need to ask you to
yield again but I'll do it out
of an abundance of the heart of
caution.
Madam speaker I cut I certainly
yield to the gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
Thank you very much madam
speaker I want to thank all my
co sponsors for bringing this
bill you madam chair this body
does not take the consideration
of creating new crimes very
lightly we go through a strong
process and there is a lot of
betting that goes into the
creation of new crimes in the
New Mexico New Mexico criminal
code so I have made to sponsor
already touched on this Madam
but I think it's really
important for the body to know
that these judges these
remarkable human beings make
life or death decisions on a
daily basis and they can either
take away and another humans
freedom or they can make
decisions that could lead them
to financial ruin so it's
extremely serious calling and we
have to make sure that we do
what we can as a legislative
body to protect our judges and
make them feel safe and the job
that they are asked to do every
day I'm not sure if many in the
body know this but we had some
pretty unfortunate instances of
harassment and in some cases
assaults against judges
or their family members there's
a very famous incident that
occurred to and which is a judge
was almost run over by someone
that he encountered in his court
so for an order I'd for our
justice system to function which
is incredibly important to our
society and you know stating
these issues with crime that
we've seen we have to make sure
that the judiciary functions and
we can't have a functional
Judiciary of our judges are
scared to go to work and so this
is one way madam chair members
of the body that we can deter
some of this on helpful behavior
and we can make sure that judges
can go to work and feel good
about the jobs that they do and
with that human yield back to my
co sponsor thank you madam
chair.
Thank you madam speaker I
believe we are ready for debate
welcome Chief Justice we do have
debate the gentleman from Chavis
and Lincoln representative
Nibert.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentleman from San Juan in the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
you'll Madam speaker we yield to
the gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman our first question is
I was a bit surprised to to
learn the this was not a law
already can you thank you
comment on.
How.
Crimes against the judiciary
would be handled today.
Madam speaker John from Travis
and and of is it Lincoln the.
Lincoln
so it they would have to be in
order to be an offense that have
to be up for us level even
assault or battery or something
of that nature there's no
specialized crime right now of
whereas you know with other
participants in the judicial
process for example under
statute if if your witness
we do have specific statutes
that criminalize of threatening
or intimidating witnesses and
those are actually if you tried
to
Retaliate against a witness is
actually a third degree felony
and and that statute this is the
fourth so we offer some
protections already for some of
these other special classes but
right now I have to right so
level some other crime and and
not be a unique to the
judiciary.
So madam speaker and gentleman I
guess what I'm hearing is that.
Crime against a member of the
judiciary.
Would be tried and prosecuted
and the results would be the
same as if it were.
tried for involving a.
Regular service and you have
witnesses and maybe others
involved in that process have
similar type statutes that would
create a specific crime because
they fit a particular category.
Madam speaker gentleman that's
that's correct and
this is to try to safeguard the
judiciary make sure they're able
to remain independent throughout
the process and so you know
threats you know you gotta be
careful on I'm sure we'll get
into some tonight but we've got
to be careful in talking about
free speech
but when you're threatening a
member of the judiciary with the
specific intent to cause great
bodily harm you know then I
think that gets into another
category because now you've got
a judge who's received a threat.
Here she has to make a ruling in
a case and we want to prevent a
situation where that's in the
back of their mind that if I
issue this ruling then I've
already been threatened and I'm
frame what may or may not come
of that and so this is on to try
to curb that conduct.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
Is this legislation being
brought to us today to address.
Current problems faced by the
judiciary or would this be
preemptive and in major.
Madam speaker and gentleman I I
would submit to the body that
it's both so in in the consumer
affairs committee the Chief
Justice shared some testimony
but also had three district
judges who were able to share
their testimony on for so they
weren't able to share their
testimony in judiciary which is
committee that that you sit on
gentleman but madam speaker in
C. back they were able to share
their testimony about how they
have in fact been threatened and
harassed
and some very detailed stories
and I I don't know that I have
the license to share them
because they're very personal
but there the cut the type of
intimidation that would give us
all pause and so their incidents
that have already happened in
the past that have kind of given
rise to this this bill but then
it's also forward looking
because we want to make sure
that that we limit those
instances as as much as we
possibly can.
Madam speaker and gentleman do
we have similar legislation that
would protect the district
attorney's.
Madam speaker and gentleman
I not that I'm aware of.
So we have legislation that the
enhances crimes against police
officers
can imagine the the judiciary
I do think that it might be
worth looking at during the
interim.
Maybe the district attorneys as
well because in our.
Society right now it seems that
people who are involved with the
judiciary.
Are sometimes broadened.
Sometimes subject to crimes and
if we are to have an effective
Judiciary.
We need to make certain that
those people can perform their
functions without threat without
intimidation and without having
to fear that they and their
families are at risk and so I I
think that may be another area
during the in on the maybe
people ought to look at
and
I I certainly support the this
legislation of.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
It talks about
Sharing information.
And that's one of those things
that I guess is is a little bit
trickier in terms of
A crime and so I'd like to three
hear of your explanation as to
where you cross that line with
someone.
Shares information regarding a
judicial officer that would be
protected by this legislation.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
Chavis so to your initial point.
yeah I can see the point about
dust being covered by a bill
like this they.
You know they participate in the
judiciary process in a in a way
sometimes that can be you know
you deal with with violent
criminals and people that are
dangerous and and I'm sure me
oftentimes make lot of threats
and I I can see how there might
be a need for something like
that and that's something maybe
that we can look at in the
interim I would also submit
though if you're gonna look at
dust I think you also in
fairness have to look at
including public defenders and
and defense attorneys as well
because they and I don't I never
been a PD and I haven't had a
PED contract but I have talked
with lots of public defenders
and and it's not uncommon for a
defendant to refer to wrongful
think that their lawyer is doing
them a disservice and often
times they they don't act
rationally in response to their
legal counsel and so for gonna
look at protecting dust I think
we also have with the same
breath have to look at
protecting PED's
with now with regard to the
sharing of personal information
I think this is a really
important talking point for the
body to understand.
Madam speaker gentleman so it's
not just the sharing of of
personal information to me this
this comes down to the intent
component that's that's vital
and that's something all agree
that a jury would decide if if
you were charged under the
section for a misdemeanor but
the intent has to be to to do
wanted to during one of three
things either in your your
intent ensuring the personal
information is the cause harm to
the judge or his or her
immediate family member place
them in fear of great bodily
harm for the intention of
sharing the personal information
is try to enter up to the
ability of the judge to carry
out their duties
so I think it it's important
when it comes down to intent.
And yes.
We think of things like rats as
a face to face communication but
the reality is when you talk
about sharing of personal
information whether that's
through social media whether
it's through text message still
form of communication and all
played it the goal is to try to
projector judiciary.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
think the.
That's well explained and when I
looked at it it was fairly.
Merrily tailored to avoid some
of the problems that I think
would initially concerned that
type of issue you make an
excellent point regarding public
defenders and.
You know I would certainly
I got a wishes came before
Judiciary because we kind of
have that discussion and maybe
got the that issue fleshed out
further but it does seem to me
that.
Judicial officers.
This use that term
whether on the bench or for the
prosecution or the defense.
Are probably facing enhanced
Violent threats today than they
ever have and it's for that
reason that I support this
legislation is for that reason
that I think we really about a
study and determine whether or
not we should expand this in the
coming years to include the
other judicial officers there
maybe get the of the support
from not only the district
attorneys in the public
defender's provided the
springboard off come back and
and support that as well of the
I do have your thanks for
Supreme Court justice we have
over here today and I hope that
the body will passes measure and
get this over to the Senate so
they can take it up and and get
it signed into law thank you
madam speaker thank you
gentlemen thank you to justice
thank you John.
is further debate the gentleman
from Valencia Representative
Baca.
Thank you madam speaker.
The gentleman from San Juan
County please yield.
Madam speaker I I yield to the
gentleman from Valencia.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you John of touched on this
briefly when you talk about
there is a certain standard
about the first amendment
protected rights to communicate
that what would constitute a
threat to that within qualifying
qualify under this category can
you just.
describe that a little bit more
for for the body.
Madam speaker gentleman from
Valencia so the starting point
when you talk about the
government is you but we of
course have a a right to free
speech was codified in the first
minutes also codified in our
state constitution or bill of
rights.
But it's not an absolute right
and so there there is
The room for some restrictions
when it comes to things like
threatening bodily harm and so
madam speaker there there are in
fact forty three states that
already have laws on the books
that are that already make it a
crime to threaten
a judge and and there's a
federal statues well that that
does of the server the law and
so you know that the courts they
always.
Like to protect free speech but
again there is some restrictions
that are permissible.
Thank you and gentleman thank
you madam speaker.
Regarding the the type of threat
okay did mention social media no
the those in judge actually have
to be the recipient of that that
are going to be posted somewhere
on some public website or
Snapchat in and be out there it
is not next to the work we come
to the the the judge.
For the person that the.
This again is we going to be
there students will be the
ability to do it duties or fear
of great bodily harm.
Of the massacre gentleman from
Valencia so I think when it
comes to the sharing of personal
information section
it's important it again you're
sharing actual personal
information and you have the
intent to cause harm but I don't
think the threat itself when you
when you talk about the threat
Rep threatening section.
Has to be directed straight to
the judge for face to face with
the judge.
If if the prosecution can prove
that the person intended to
threaten the judge and that was
that was either directly that
would that was through
correspondence or social media I
think the intent there is is the
key to to have the threatening
questions directed at the judge.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen the the other
question I have is actually
about in the vehicle I mean we
do see that you know of road
rage and these are the types of
issues are becoming more common.
Would would somebody tried to in
there operative ical of and
maybe tried as far as getting
too closely parking out in front
of the building to that also be
seen as a as a perceived threat
and be covered under this
category.
Madam speaker gentleman from
Valencia so to the extent that
the the driver actually tried to
run over a judge or hate them
with their car that that would
get more into to something like
aggravated assault
and and and they would probably
be charged under this as well
now you wanna talk about
something like tailgating or
honking their form or flashing
their lights I think Dow and
less suit it crossed into you
know it is reckless Sir some
kind of aggravating factor like
that I doubt it would rise to
level of of of placing the judge
in fear of great bodily injury.
Thank you gentleman thank you
madam speaker.
You can go for you you talk in
the in about the personal
information in the some of the
items in the personal
information of physical address
phone number email and physical
location.
Explaining.
Of the definitive personal
information and directory
information that's part of our
responsibilities I serve as a
custodian of records they're
often record request they were
covered under IPRA.
Regarding this type of
information that now is personal
in this regards we could make an
Senate directory information in
other occupations rather a job
losses.
Madam speaker general from
Lynsey so.
The idea between behind the
personal is you know with cell
phones we don't publish cell
phone numbers
Public your your home address is
public most of the time you know
our county clerks for example
have have those kind of public
records
It's not so much the publishing
of personal information that's
the problem.
It's the publishing of personal
information with the with the
specific intent to cause harm so
whether the item ends up being
widely known to the public
whether the email is widely
known the personal physical
location the the problem is the
intent to ensure that so that
you're telling someone Hey.
this is where the judge lives.
And you can go to the judge's
house at two AM and here's the
neighborhood and here's where
they live and and we're trying
to avoid that kind of situation
where you're disclosing those
kind of personal information
what the intent of causing harm
to the judge or her family.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentleman.
The question I will say that I
support protecting all of those
folks involved in the judiciary
system I I do think the right
now is very tough we're talking
about
a lot of things of bills are
there going to make it tougher
on crime and criminals.
The question I have you didn't
mention the police officer
currently covered the question
with the good point doesn't
bring about district attorney
what what what this is New
Jersey because also for the
amendment this is part of the
the center through these trials
Senator into the faces
individuals but also has
potential to be perceived
as a fall to the also those
groups that as far as for the
sentencing of the as you know
the groups of service at a
sentencing after the trial.
Madam speaker gentleman from
Valencia so under current
statutes if you tried to
intimidate or tamper with the
juror it's a third degree felony
so that part of the judicial
process is already taking care
of the Madam speaker the
witnesses if you try to
retaliate against a witness that
is also a felony and so this is
trying to now take in judges and
that same rationale and and this
the jurors are vital witnesses
are vital but there's an
argument made madam speaker that
the judges are probably the most
vital piece of all that and make
lots rulings pre trial before
for a witness or juror even
comes into play and so this the
idea behind this bill is to try
to protect
judicial officers as as they
issue rulings and as I make
important decisions Madam
speaker with regard to the
comment about police officers
being included
again I'm I'm sympathetic to do
that that concept makes sense to
me but the focus here with this
bill is just trying to sure up
the judicial process because
we've already got witnesses and
jurors covered but for whatever
reason New Mexico's never
included judges.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen have no further
questions.
There is debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo sunlight in
Santa Fe Representative Lord.
Five four three.
Thank you madam speaker.
Well the gentleman please yield.
Madam speaker my allowed to
yield if she got down to zero
has a is that okay well
allowing.
The ruling Cheryl out so I will
I will yield to the lady from
Bernalillo thank you Mr you're
pretty sure that was a no
running role in here and I just
deleted that.
So I was in the the C. pack
meeting and there was a lot of
heartfelt testimony in their.
And.
I know what it feels like having
been stocked myself and it's not
fun.
If you have the experience is
really not fun.
This guy Natalie stocked me
continues to harass me.
But even though he was arrested
for continuing to charge for it
it was I think something like
this Madam speaker and
Representative reading something
like this would have.
Been able to put fourteenth if
we had you know something that's
for the judges St Louis would
have something with forty to go
after people who have done this
kind of things and currently I
also have a friend that is being
doxxed.
Currently online they've
released since phone number has
addresses personal information
in retaliation.
This is fun it's very scary and
it's not something to be taken
lightly and Madam chair
representative it's.
It's this is a serious matter
because.
Sometimes these people escalate
like in my case the person that
was stocking me followed me to
Starbucks and slash the side of
my car.
I thought he was going to kill
me honestly because this case
filled with rage.
He's actually made death threats
to a bunch of politicians who
run for office he's threatened
to kill them he has made threats
you stock tease harassed so I
personally know what that feels
like so I don't really have any
questions I just wanted to
reiterate listen to the stories
that I heard before it touched
me because I know what that
feels like and it is not fun.
And there is no restraining
order in the world that will
stop somebody that wants to harm
you so hopefully unlike with my
person Madam speaker and and
Representative unlike my person
who continually false the crack
cracks I would hope that this
would be enough to need to
address the issue right when it
happens and be more proactive
with people that.
Have these incredibly strange
urges to stock and want to
violate people's rights so I
think you thank you for letting
me run down the hallway well.
Thank you madam speaker
Representative and thank you so
much for being here thank you
generally there is debate the
gentle lady from what that all
Representative black.
Thank you madam chair does the
gentleman from Aztec yield.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from Otero.
Thank you John thank you.
Just one quick question.
Well maybe it's more of an
expired.
so.
I was reading that this
basically is if you were
intentionally sharing this
information is that correct
system.
Madam speaker generally for
material so it it's it's council
in terms of sharing information
with intent to and then it will
just a few items.
Thank you for that gentleman and
madam speaker.
I guess my question would be.
If judges information are part
of a public record.
And that information is out
there would then be a violation
of that information is part of
the public record I guess.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Otero so if.
Whether the information is part
of public domain if it's their
personal information and your
shared it with the intent to
cause it's a great bodily harm
or to interrupt or stop the
judicial process been even
though it may be widely known
that this is the judges email
for example or this I live in a
small town six thousand people
we know where each other lives
of a lot of that is common
information but even if it's
COVID if you share here's where
you know judge lane lives he
lives that you know one oh one
main street be there at two AM
and we're gonna make him pay for
letting that creep out of prison
that kind of sharing of personal
information is what this
designed to stop.
And thank you for that gentleman
and madam speaker so.
The gentleman I was curious on
and maybe this needs to be
elaborated on a little.
perhaps maybe redaction of of
their the judge's personal
information like like for
instance their address like you
just mention some of the
gentleman the one on one main
street definitely don't want
someone showing up at your door
at two AM so I don't know if if
maybe that I know it's not in
this bill would maybe that needs
to be the next step.
Madam speaker gentle lady yeah I
can understand the concern we
just again it's the idea of not.
Not sharing information with the
intent to eventually cause harm
the judge himself thank you for
that gentleman yes my concern is
that public records you know all
the tax rolls are actually
public and available online in
most counties and and so I would
I would urge the judges and the.
People involved to you know
maybe get that redacted through
the through the process so thank
you gentlemen thank you madam
speaker.
Thank you we have further debate
the gentle lady from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Madam speaker thank you very
much for the gentleman the lady
the shield madam speaker we we
yield to the gentle lady from
Travis.
Madam speaker gentleman gentle
lady thank you very much we're
at the stage of.
This second session of this
legislative.
Fifty what is is fifty four
fifty thirds what session is a
second member.
Somebody help me out by fifty
fifth fifty.
That is the second session.
Of the fifty fifty legislature.
And at this point I've gotten a
little bit crazy because I
haven't had enough sleep in the
eighty to get real crazy or I do
get a little bit later B. C. and
the I guess tonight is the night
again I'm really be okay so
whenever I'm First Street
analysis on this particular bill
house bill ninety nine as
amended.
Chris my glasses a real smudge
to madam speaker and.
Gentleman.
It adds the crimes of
threatening and doxing judges
and I'm like what are we talking
about the Westminster cat kids
club show.
Are we talking about those
judges that are the judging
dioxins.
Okay nobody thought it was funny
to me I thought it was.
At the time I did not know what
doxing meant okay I do sleep
with an attorney that I he
didn't say things like that so
but I do have a question for you
in this is a serious question we
were going over madam speaker
and gentleman of.
All the different aspects of who
does need a little bit of
protection if they are
threatened or whatever and
ministers Madam speaker and
gentleman.
I think some of the people that
are being missed.
And they did get threats all the
time.
Would be appropriations and
patrol officers would you agree
with that Madam speaker and
gentleman Madam speaker
generated from Chavis there
would not surprising to learn
that they deal with threats
regularly.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
know of some incidences that
have happened and it it is care
for those people and their
families as well and so that
might be need to be taken into
consideration to a lot of the
data of sitting here however the
bill of Rudolph analysis on it.
And the.
We might we might need to go a
little bit stiff from some of
these penalties madam speaker
and gentleman as fast as we are
as our law enforcement is on
catching criminals and they're
out.
Before the sun goes down I think
it's important that protection
is put in place to protect these
people that have sentenced them.
And madam speaker of.
I mean it.
We have a revolving door right
now as far as our criminals go.
And it's very troublesome to not
only the judges but all the
people that have been nine
tonight plus their families and
miss madam chair and.
Representative Eli.
We just saw that Representative
Brown has introduced a bill that
was passed off here for another
two judgeships is that correct
thanks so down in our area.
And I know that they're back in
the back of their mind they're
thinking.
I worry about my family.
If I do make a decision what
somebody does have spend the
reserve life in jail.
Whatever the case may be I worry
about my family so I think it's
very relevant in today's
society.
Because.
Right now the criminals to have
the upper hand Madam speaker and
gentleman thank you very much
thank you generally.
Next we have the gentle lady
from Eddie Representative Brown.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentleman from San Juan yield.
Madam speaker and I yield the
lady from Eddie.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman I appreciate that so
my first thought when I saw this
bill was why can't we do an
equivalent bill for legislators
it is I and I'm sure one of many
who had threats against my life
because of some of my official
duties some of the votes I've
taken some of the stands I've
taken and the as we've heard
before anybody can bring a bill
so maybe that's something that
one of us will consider in the
future but I do have a few
questions to madam speaker
gentle lady about house bill
ninety nine and the first
question is.
and I'm looking at page one of
the bill.
And it starting at one nineteen
it says no person shall threaten
a judge or the immediate family
member of a judge with the
intent to the down to part to
prevent or interrupt the ability
to carry out the judges job
duties.
Madam speaker gentle lady are
exceeding Hooper did a speaker
switch there looks like it.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan so.
What would happen in the case of
a judge to commit some kind of
behavior.
May be driving drunk inside for
the my car.
It would I be precluded from
filing a police report because
my intent would be for that
judge to account for that bad
behavior but that be precluded
under this bill.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Eddie that's a good question I
would I would send the answer is
no so this is designed to
protect the judge
from having his or her duties
impaired within a specific case
where where you're involved or
maybe have an interest in.
Thank you for that answer a
gentleman Mr speaker and and
gentleman.
So the next question is along
the same lines and it's
regarding page two of the bill
one one.
And it talks about retaliating
against a judge on account of
the performance of the judge's
official duties during the
judge's term of service the
question there Mr speaker and
gentleman with that preclude me
from filing a complaint for
judicial misconduct.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Eddie again I Smith dancers no
there there are of rules that
allow for those type of filings
this is more designed to
essentially retaliate against
the judge because they've issued
a ruling that maybe you don't
like or maybe it's impacted you
financially
but you know these these laws
are read as a whole Mr speaker
and so there is a there is a set
of laws that allow for that
process of finding an ethical
complaint.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you thank you for that I do have
some concerns regarding first
amendment protections I suppose
it always boils down to the
facts of the case and whether
our prosecutor could could prove
the elements of the of the crime
so that's always the true the
true a week we handle these
things so I think Mr speaker and
gentleman we do need some
protection for judges
sometimes they they make some
controversy over calls and they
need to have the protection to
you know not be retaliated
against so I agree with that
part of the bill Mr speaker and
gentleman
Did this go through Judiciary
Committee and the House Mr
speaker gentle lady from Eddie
it did.
And Mr speaker gentleman I I
noticed the on the face of the
bill house bill ninety nine
there's of it what first of all
to the rules in order of
business committee and so
how was this it was our message
from the governor take it wasn't
germane because it's a budget
issue could you explain that
please Mr speaker gentle lady
from from any that's correct so
the governor did issue a
specific message for this bill.
Very good I think that covers
all my questions thank you so
much gentleman Mr speaker
additionally there is a debate
the gentleman from Colfax curry
Harding quay Roosevelt San
Miguel and you Representative
Chatfield thank you Mr speaker
this gentleman yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Colfax curry
Harding quay Roosevelt San
Miguel and you know I want to
say that for a number of months
now thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
but honestly I'm astonished that
it's not already a crime to
threaten the judge always
thought it was and it just kind
of put that in context I I have
some questions for you and if
you don't know the answer it's
okay
is it the is it not a crime to
threaten the legislative.
Mr speaker the gentleman so I I
too was surprised to learn that
that threatening a judge with
with bodily harm is not already
a crime and I learned about it
this summer and actually one of
our LFC meetings the Chief
Justice made a presentation on
the budget and some of their
legislative priorities and this
was listed as one of the supreme
courts and really all of the
Courts AOC as one of their
priority bills and so that that
really took me by surprise now
to your your question Mr speaker
about weathered so specific
crime to threaten a legislators
as far as I understand the law
there's no separate
classification within our laws
to protect legislators.
Mr speaker German what about a
school board member of the
president of your school board
is it a crime to threaten them.
Mr speaker and gentleman as far
as I'm aware it it's not a
there's not a specific subset of
statutes that protect school
rumors or other local electives.
So Mister speaker gentleman what
we're talking about is making
this probably it's a crime to
threaten anyone to add at a
certain point is it not but we
would make it a low rise to a
higher level on the US
threatening a judge.
Mr speaker gentlemen so yeah
depending on the the nature of
the threat there is already some
criminal statutes that would
address that if you from the lay
person for example
but but this is true this is an
attempt to shore up really the
judicial process is as again
we've got witnesses and jurors
covered in this of this allows
us to bring judges and that full
as well Mr speaker gentleman the
I appreciate you bringing this
bill I think it's
remiss that we do not already
have that legislation I'm glad
that you brought it I will
supported and hopefully they'll
pass thank you Mr speaker thank
you Jim.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Lincoln and Otero
Representative Kirk thank you Mr
speaker will the gentleman yield
Mister speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Lincoln and Otero
thank you gentleman in Mr
speaker I'll make this fast
seven comes of the chief
justice's time and please get
back home it's late
we spoke about this in Judiciary
Committee and I told you and I
told Chief Justice that was
there and I was ready and
willing to to support it and and
I wavered since in a little bit
based on the first amendment
concerns that have already been
suppressed a little bit tonight
and so based on your vote can
you tell me have any judges in
New Mexico ever been murdered.
Mr speaker jointly can enter a
I'm not aware if any have or not
have any judges being kidnapped.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lincolnshire madam chair Mr
speaker and gentleman have any
of our courts ever been seized
by criminal gangs.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
the general Terrel I'm not that
I'm aware of I think arguably
one of them has Mr speaker but I
can only think of one instance
Mr speaker and gentleman have
any of our judges resigned as a
result of being threatened.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lincolnshire Terrel yes.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
and gentleman of have the judges
in New Mexico let criminals out
of jail gone soft on them in any
sort of way indigenous capacity
as a result of being threatened.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lincoln terra and I'd I can
answer that you said Mr speaker
and gentleman during your
opening that well one of the
reasons that we should
constricts that are restricting
free speech in passing this bill
is that we need to recruit good
judges and make them feel safe
Mr speaker and gentleman has
there ever been an instance
where a judge of qualified.
Judge walked away from from a
potential judgeship because he
felt here she felt unsafe.
Mr speaker generally counter I I
wouldn't quicker tries we need
to to restrict free speech I
would I would submit that this
type of speech is not protected
speech should still speech but
it's not protected speech.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentleman that's that's a I
think that's a kind of a fine
line and all of this right
because we do have a first
amendment right to free speech
and
the question is or the
distinctions between threat and
a true threat would you agree
with that Mr speaker and
gentleman Mr speaker and
gentleman from link and it it
comes down certainly to the
intent when you analyze that
speech Mr speaker V. are you
familiar with the subpoenas
States print courses Supreme
Court cases that.
talk about intent in the context
of true threats.
Mr speaker and gentleman on I'm
open to being educated.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I think the main
Supreme Court case was Virginia
be black where District Court
consolidated several cases and
black the main defendant in that
case was a KKK member in
Virginia and he and some much of
rednecks had a had a.
Possibility KKK a rally around
the country and they were all
convicted under a similar
statute I think the statute in
Virginia the time was.
it intentionally intimidating
others.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
the convention with all the way
up to the Virginia courts and
made it to the United States
Supreme Court for their
conviction was overturned.
And the reason was that they
couldn't prove that by having a
KKK rally KKK rally and burning
the cross that they were
intentionally intimidating
somebody just or if it because
it was for us to imagine KKK
rallies were crosses are being
burned you know in in the late
nineties early two thousands
that did occur but but the point
of the day the.
The court.
This the defendants first
amendment right to free speech
outweighed.
The effect of the of what the
what cross burnings have on
people and so Mister speaker
that.
But the Virginia decision
virginity like decision left
open it doesn't define for the
entire country what a true
threat really is instead it can
open the door for the circuits
to to decide their decisions
based on how they felt and there
was a case Mr speaker but the
distribution.
Mr speaker and gentleman called
United States the higher the
minute you familiar with that
case.
Mr speaker and gentleman we can
enter I am not familiar with the
case I would just the suspect Mr
speaker and gentleman that
whoever drafted the bill
probably is familiar with that
K. because that's from the tuned
circuit in this is another case
where this guy for a horrible
no.
To professor.
just reported come the time of
the revolution will convene to
detain you slay you by a blind
eye showed up into your school
trust ownership of the school
from the picture it goes on in
that tone.
And and he was convicted for a
crime of threatening using email
and the tenth circuit reverses
conviction based on first
amendment grounds so I agree
with you that the.
You don't have a you don't have
a right to.
To.
To absolute free speech.
In cases like this the courts
have weighed in favor of the
first amendment it is.
Hard as that is for us to you
know put but those two interests
on a scale and weigh them this
does somebody like this or
taking members KKK members first
amendment free speech right to
burn across and all these roles
with the cease but things about
other people based on race or
whatever it's hard to to imagine
wearing that but this is a first
amendment issue this is an
assault by making it an intense
and if you're in the.
You know Representative persons
for speech invoking that first
amendment right to free speech
and what it what the statute
does what this bill does Mr
speaker and gentleman is that it
it restricts.
Free speech.
And I appreciate the fact that
it is an intent of crime.
And I know prosecutor but my
understanding is that making it
harder for the state to prove
the case against a defendant who
threatens a judge.
What would somebody assaulted
judge would be so much easier Mr
speaker and gentleman to get on
assault or battery one with all
the state has to prove in that
case is that the the judge felt
threatened for the the judge was
attacked that's an easy case to
prove as opposed to
The defendant in and you know
and on this evidence to to make
the jury believe that he that
his mental state was that that
communication was sent by the
judge as a threat to the guide
told about the tense of the case
with the portal poem for the
tenth circuit reverses
conviction.
Because the fence was that he
had Asperger's syndrome.
It doesn't understand he doesn't
have the capacity to motional
capacity to understand how
people receive his.
Is communications.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
I am very thanks.
This is the point is that
unfortunately I mean I felt
myself since Judiciary that hard
spot of having to wait the
interest in it as much as admire
and respect the job that the
judiciary does.
I think unfortunately needed
it's it's it's typically put it
on the side of first amendment
because partially because of
what you and and the Chief
Justice said Mr speaker and
gentleman judiciary was that.
I think that this he can from
the Philly I think I think you
might just change your mind a
little bit but in Judiciary with
I understood you to say that
threats via social media fell
under the spell in the provision
and I think it's true threat.
The United States Supreme Court
has has put some
Has basically defined as an
unequivocal unconditional
immediate and specific threat
and and I don't think that
that's going to hold up I think
somebody's gonna get trapped
into a situation where they said
something really stupid and and
nasty and in the those much as
we want to prevent that from
happening it gives a for if he
comes out of the first amendment
tipping the scale over there
that so Mr speaker and gentleman
that's all I've got to say on
that but before I I shield Mr
speaker of.
By Representative the copy of
the bill that I have correctly
that.
For the funds.
We got the definition of know
retaliate.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Definitional challenges as we
tell it means intentionally
threatening bodily injury or
damage to the property of a
judge for family of in front of
a judge sentenced to retaliate
against the judge doesn't that
basically just simply retaliate
needs to retaliate the speaker
and gentleman.
Mr speaker a gentleman so it's
trying to connect this concept
retaliation to something of
tangible so bodily harm or
damage to real property so
that's what it means and as
content of.
Mr speaker just wanted to clear
that up and I appreciate the
bill appreciate that the
judiciary obviously
if within that probably will
vote no based on the the things
that I've gone over tonight I I
don't mean that is it is respect
for the judiciary or for
anything else but thinking
speaker and gentleman.
There is a rise for the Germans
take off their actually anyone
to take off their jackets they
may do so seeing no objection
German and basement about the
jackets
there is further debate on house
bill ninety nine crime of
threatening a judge.
there were there gentleman from
San Juan Representative Montoya.
Does the gentleman my neighbor
to the east.
In asked heck from San Juan
County Representative Lane to
yield Mister speaker I yield to
the gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
As I've been listening to the
debate I I to very much Mr
speaker and gentleman I have a
very.
Interested in supporting this
measure for.
For the reasons of.
a judge or justice merely for.
Sorry sings are comfortable.
Senator really for doing their
jobs we'll have people criticize
voice threats sounds a little
bit I like being a legislator
actually the times
but.
I believe.
Since more personal I think
that's maybe the difference I
think when provided make public
policy it's on a grand scale
we get fairly heated and in
these chambers over things are
important to us.
But I guess I think the the
issue is that it's very personal
someone.
Is maybe going to jail cell and
maybe paying find someone may be
losing a trial to another.
Individual.
divorces all kinds of things
that take place people could be
losing their freedom.
So
I know what we deal with here
Is we have some very very
Key debates and some very touchy
issues that are important to to
ourselves and to our
constituents
so I I have as well received.
certain threats at times I've
seen or heard from my family
members
certain things stated to them
and.
It it's so I I it is very
disquieting let's say so I do
understand this but as a I find
myself very much in the same
position.
that Representative Cook was
just describing which is.
What is a credible threat.
And we put this in the law.
It seems very very.
Someone's gonna have to make a
decision.
On the credible threat is.
And I think that's that's.
I likely will still support this
bill but I'm I'm having trouble
with that so of Representative
Eli could you maybe talk me
through a little bit of how how
you see that working out and if
if one of these charges would be
to move forward Mr speaker John
from San Juan I'll certainly do
my best so.
To start with
the it should be harder for you
to be prosecuted for crimes your
liberty restrained that should
be a difficult thing for the
state to be able accomplish.
That's part of the beauty of the
jury system that that we have
inherited in this country is
before your liberty can be taken
away from you and you can be
found guilty of of of four three
felony under this type of a
bill.
The prosecutors going to
successfully prove that you had
the intent to for example cause
great bodily harm to the judge.
And I know there's a lot of
discussion around around free
speech and some concerns around
that and Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan.
There is speech that's protected
in their speech that is not
protected as a two different
categories same reason you can't
yell fire in a crowded theater
that's that's kind of friends
are upon free speech absolutely.
And your sensitive spirit but
you have to understand our
system there's a thing called
protected speech.
And do we do we want to live in
a system to where we say it's
protected speech for you to be
able to threaten great bodily
harm against the judge with the
intent to interrupt the judicial
process our intent actually
cause harm.
That's all going to come down to
the intent component so can the
prosecutor prove that you have
the intent to do those things
that's that's the key elements
and you know at the it's not an
either or when it comes to these
type of charges so what what
could happen is that there was
an actual salt.
What a prostitute he can charger
for cell number one and then you
can also charge under the
statute that that happens often
times in criminal cases were
they charged with multiple
charges and then whatever one is
the highest that they'd
convicted usually what sticks so
I hope that helps.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman yes that that does
help I I.
Once again I.
Like many people in this chamber
you start reading the very
specific words especially during
a affect the lengthy debate and
you start to question.
Certain phrases or how the law
is particularly written and I'm
looking at this on page two will
Senator start on page one or
it's under.
section a no person shall threat
the judge or media or media
family member or of a judge with
the intent to but a look at
number three.
To retaliate against the judge
on account of the performance of
the judge in his official duty
and official duties during the
judge's term of service
I'm looking at that and.
I'm I am concerned that.
Mr speaker and gentleman absence
an act of violence.
I think there's a lot of threats
I think there's a lot of and
threats.
Think there's a lot of real
anger.
after a decision.
And when that
Mr speaker when that
The motion let's say boils up
and people say and make threats
they're gonna sound very
credible maybe the person has
even a record.
And.
I am just concerned.
That maybe we're we're I'm gonna
be causing some.
That I'm let me let me back up
all that.
Would there be the opportunity
for investigation first on this
or will the investigation take
place in court.
Mr speaker under one from San
Juan so anytime the that you're
charged with a crime it's that
that investigations handled by
law enforcement they oftentimes
will file the charging document
the file in consultation with
the district attorney's officer
of the prosecutors to the file
the charging document.
And that's that's the process
that it's not handled in in the
court room itself and I would
remind the body as well that.
You know when we express is
going to concerns we have this
in law so if you let's say
you're a criminal defendant and
the the jury did tell the judge
has to stand up the jurors gonna
Richard Burt.
You're guilty on counts one two
and three bone and if you try to
intimidate a witness at that
point try to tell you know
what's going so when is that
point which is similar facts
what you're expressing with
concern towards actions for the
judge of that that's already
illegal conduct and so all it's
saying is why is it okay to
direct that towards the judge
but not the jury this Mexican
system where that same conduct
whether it's for the jury a
witness for the judge.
They're all crimes.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so I'm I'm going to
ask maybe going down a different
line of questioning here
it says that a person who
violates the provisions of this
section is guilty of a fourth
degree felony could you explain
to me of what the consequences
of being convicted of fourth
degree felony or.
Mr speaker John from San Juan so
the maximum sentence for for
degree felonies eighteen months
in jail.
So thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman of it would that be
what someone lose their right
to.
Of own a firearm.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan yes if you're guilty of
a felony that's part of our
system thank you Mr speaker and
gentle and so forth agree felony
is still to fourth degree but
it's still pretty stiff pretty
harsh punishment Mr speaker John
from San Juan and I I would just
remind the body to actually the
the.
Degree of felony for threatening
or intimidating a witness or
juror is actually harsher those
are those are third degree
felonies in some instances a
second this just makes it a
fourth.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
so I I've heard a few questions
by members about whether or not.
This type of a
This type of legislation could.
Or should or potentially could
be brought forward to.
Apply to other.
Other public servants I heard I
heard district attorneys I heard
legislators
but is there anything in place.
For police officers or anything
like this in place for police
officers Mr speaker John from
San Juan I'm not aware of any
such as a car about a protected
class for police officers in
this context.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
And then handed something here
that shows.
I think a couple of other
protected.
Losses.
This okay bone project that
during the next question so the
speaker and gentleman just
A law enforcement as well it
does appear in this last year I
do appreciate this site like I
said I think I'll be voting for
this even with my reservations.
planning I have less
reservations prior to.
Representative Cook speaking
but.
Simultaneously I think I am
concerned this is not on this on
this bill but the.
Simultaneously we seem
protections for police officers
go down dramatically over the
last several years.
And I would like to see
something like this for some
measure of protection for police
officers who also.
That would have no real no no
real choice in having to handle
difficult situations and and
that in many instances very
similar to much more short short
term but depriving a person of
their.
Their freedom depriving a person
of their of their property
potentially
said taking a child away as I
mentioned all of these things at
the beginning of the discussion
Mr speaker and gentleman.
That these are some of the
situations that a that a judge.
Of these decisions that are made
that obviously people are gonna
have heightened heightened
the sense of emotion and I think
those same things apply to
police officers.
And so I I I I think I'm a
support this
but I would like to see this
body address that in the future
for but for our peace officers
as well as an actually I think
it's a shame.
Yes over the course of the last
several years we've seen
just the growing disrespect for
people who are who are million
merely trying to
Put themselves between of the
citizenry and and and maybe harm
self thank you Mr speaker I
think for us answering my
questions
and and I think the she's just
Chief Justice for being here
especially for helping answer
some of those questions of not
very often Representative Lane
doesn't know the answer to one
of these questions so that was
it was nice to see him have to
ask a question of an expert
witness thank you Mr speaker
thank you John there's further
debate the gentleman from Dona
Ana grant and share our
representative thought us.
Thank you Mr speaker with my
friend and neighbor.
Similar.
He turned that.
Please yield.
Speaker I yield to the gentleman
from Dona Ana grant and Sierra.
Thank you Mr speaker so those
are all those debate and and all
this back and forth about job.
Share information I was
listening to all the things and
I also had a lot of questions Mr
speaker and gentleman
concerning
The definition of retaliation.
Mr speaker and gentleman Mike my
question is.
What is the difference from them
and present them yeah and I mean
this respectfully twenty certain
US president.
How are those.
Laws different no it's federal
law but whatever how does that
different than
the judge just side is that you
can help me with that Mr speaker
German.
Mr speaker a general from from
grant so there are there are
federal laws that that already
protect the presidency from
these types of things and also I
think our federal judges this is
to try to protect our state
court judges.
Mr speaker I'm and I understand
I was just trying to
understand
How those this first amendment
rights were different.
On one class then another.
Can you explain that a little
better form.
Mr speaker a gentleman.
So you have sort of this broad
first amendment right to free
speech but it the only covers
protected speech and so there's
a number of carve outs within
the law that
says that certain types of
speech unprotected
and so we've talked about for
example and New Mexico state law
there's already carve outs for
intimidating or threatening
retaliating its witnesses and
jurors and so this is just
seeking to bring judges into
that similar arena to where
they're they're project as well
and and the judicial process
remains completely independent.
Thank you Mr chairman I'd I'd
just also is just shock of this
wasn't already a protected class
one commenter.
Our bustle of occupation or
profession and and just like
with the motherless invoice
officers registered and so forth
and so it was just
a also was kind of caught up in
Mr speaker gentleman on where we
draw the line and you know I'm
just thank you know okay I'll
somebody.
So something crazy on the and in
a parking lot or driving faster
are you know.
A judge.
And how that would be approved
and for and.
How that would good because in
the receive four degree felony
to help me I mean somebody needs
I don't know you're in a parking
lot of Walmart and yell at
someone as your you know as
you're driving by whatever the
judge the you know and I'm.
This is something.
Kind of heavy to the judge with
that then he perceived as is
breaking this law Mr speaker
German.
Mr speaker gentleman from from
grant I would cement on the fact
that know the language used in
the bill is it has to place the
the judge in fear of great
bodily harm and that's a that's
a very high standard when you
talk about great bodily harm.
Thank you Mr chairman yeah it
was just one of my big questions
I need to the former colleagues
us a lot of the same questions
maybe not to the in the form I
would because I'm pretty naive
when it comes to some of these
things are when you said that.
They would have to be presented
to a jury Mr speaker Wilmer.
Could be with the presented in
front of a judge of any time
instead of a jury as of I'm
again I'm naive on this street
Mr speaker Joel.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Syria so under our system.
In the vast majority of cases
the colonel defendant has that
has the right to choose whether
he or she wants a bench trial
which should be in front of a
judge or a trial and from his or
her peers which would be in
front of a jury.
Thank you Mr chairman okay so
I'm gonna move on because I
think we've got a separate
entity
my next question was can you
please define judge for me and
give me the actual judges in our
federal how far you'll go with
us but so that I can understand
you know what judges there are
just district judge magistrate
judge what what what the judges
will be covering the distance
for speakers on Mr speaker and
gentleman from Sierra so the the
definition contained with the
bill defines the judges a
current or former justice judge
magistrate domestic violence
special commissioner or hearing
officer so it's going to cover
your Supreme Court the court of
appeals are district judges or
magistrates judges municipal
judges the probate judges it's
going to cover your hearing
officers that are a within the
executive branch including
domestic offices.
Thank you Mr speaker and
Germany if the whiles the bill
was a probate judge only not
like the way
The rules on who's the
I was going to be the of.
Executor of the state or
something or not you know rule
on something like that so I was
wondering if that if that was
covered you know I I again I I
really am shocked when I when I.
This is an already covered and
the differences of all these
different things that we do here
is eight whether it's a
legislator for
a judge your police officer so
forth so it was a bit confusing
but I I I see
what our our friend in my other
neighbor Representative Cook
brought up and what other people
concern was
we are living in present times
Mr speaker gentleman we want to
protect
Judges so forth I just I just
was concerned that we make of
create something that someone.
very easily get themselves in a
lot of trouble
maybe drinking or whatever and
say something crazy on the
internet because in to lose
their freedom are you see that
that that could be.
Something that could easily
happen Mr speaker German.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
zero in my opinion no I have I
have tremendous faith in the
jury system it's proven itself
time and time again and so I
think those kind of scenarios or
or in my opinion highly unlikely
to result in in a criminal
conviction.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
German I appreciate your you're
asking all my questions and so.
I'd love point in supporting the
bill thank you very much seeing
no further debate the gentleman
to close thank you Mr speaker I
just want to get take a moment
just give the Chief Justice my
personal thanks for being here
here on the house floor with us
in helping with this debate I
appreciate that very much Mr
speaker this just comes down to
the fact that judges lives
matter so with that I move that
house bill number ninety nine do
now pass.
We're on final passage of house
bill ninety nine as amended the
vote is now open.
The exciting portion of this
vote is about to close.
Electronic portion of the lord
is close the clerk to call
members with that reported to
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong yes Representative
ever Armstrong votes yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash votes
yes Representative boom costs.
Yes Representative will go votes
yes representative Cadena.
Yes Representative Cadena votes
yes Representative Castellano.
Yes Representative Castellano
votes yes Representative Dow.
Yes Representative Dow votes yes
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative and
again Garcia.
That
that a yes.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Lara.
Yes Representative a lot of
votes yes representative Lente.
Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis votes
yes Representative Lundstrom.
Yes Representative Lundstrom
both yes Representative Madrid.
Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative McQueen votes
yes Representative Roger
Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
votes yes Representative Ortez.
Yes Representative Ortez votes
yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero votes yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana.
Yes representative Sarinana
votes yes Representative off us.
Yes Representative also votes
yes representative Thompson yes
Representative Thomson votes
yes.
Fifty nine in the affirmative
and seven in the negative house
bill ninety nine as amended has
duly passed the house.
Alright we're not going to go to
item number five is the gentle
lady from Bernalillo ready on
item number five house bill
ninety six as amended.
I'm ready to get to that point
please Mr speaker.
For the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill ninety six as amended
is on final passage has been
taken that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
the gentle lady to explain the
bill thank you Mr speaker and
ladies and gentleman the house
the violence intervention
program is a very exciting.
Opportunity for everyone in
every community in this state to
be able to apply for funds to
try to prevent violence in their
own communities I have with me
this evening is my expert
witness Jerry but chicha.
Who is the director of the V. I.
P. program in the City of
Albuquerque commander Aaron
Jones who was here yesterday to
health the lady from Bernalillo
Representative Figueroa with the
Topshop bill was going to be
here for for me or for our bill
here but he had to deployed
today so we can get another law
enforcement agents law
enforcement officer on the phone
if we have a question that we
can't answer.
So I just want to give you a
little bit of.
Background the violence
intervention programs are taking
place in many of those states in
our country and there have been
cities with lots of
Coverage of their success
Baltimore and
Oakland and several years ago
the City of Albuquerque started
pilot program and the idea here
is that there is money in the
budget on page two hundred and
sixteen and house bill two for
the violence intervention
program for the money to go to
the department of health and
four communities to be able to
apply for
violence intervention programs
that fit their needs so let me
stand for questions with that
thank you there is debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county yield.
A friend from Travis county.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady I just a couple
questions we didn't see the same
Judiciary so I just read through
it and it looked to me like
the overall part of overarching
effort was to do with the issue
of violent crimes with would
that be an accurate assessment
on my part.
Yes the reason the City of Mr
speaker and and gentleman the
City of Albuquerque and we've
heard.
The daily about concerns about
the crime rate in Albuquerque
had started to put this into
effect and let me just say that
Let me give you an example of
how it works in Albuquerque in
twenty twenty the V. I. P.
program identified a young man
who was shot in the back and he
was at high risk for
retaliation.
So the VIP change that with this
gentleman and then admitted that
he thought he noted that he knew
where to find them and that when
he was well enough he intended
to retaliate by shooting the
person who shot him so the team
intervened at just the right
moment.
And they worked with the young
man and he actually admitted
that he needed help so the team
identified a serious mental
health issue address substance
abuse ended intensive work with
him.
Case managers utilize daily life
coaching today he has not
committed other violent crime
and has not been victimized
again.
So it'll different it'll be
different in other communities
but that's the idea.
And.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
We have several communities in
fact I believe I live in one of
a more violent crime is
Unfortunately.
Part of everyday life and I
think we need to do whatever we
can to address that issue and
and so when I when I was going
through the legislation
I saw certain words and it looks
to me like
The word deadly weapon or or
maybe I should ask it this way.
Is having a gun.
Always considered having a
deadly weapon.
Mr speaker and gentleman we're
talking about guns that are
being used to hurt other people
I by folks who are.
Pretty dangerous so that's where
what we're talking about and and
so I'd say that that ever again
would be considered a deadly
weapon particularly in the
context of this violent crime
issue.
Mr speaker we're just Mr speaker
and gentleman we're really
talking about deterring the use
of deadly weapons in retaliation
or drug crimes and so forth by
having a behavioral health
approach.
To
To the the problem let me just
say that since March of twenty
twenty the Albuquerque V. I. P.
team has interviewed with two
hundred and ten individuals at
the highest risk of engaging in
the cycles of violence.
Three percent of their
candidates have not reset
evaded.
Mr speaker delay limit one is
get to the point I I see the
words gun violence and
aggravated assaults in at least
four or five different places in
the legislation Senator struck
me as.
Gun violence is necessarily.
Activated assault and it looked
to me like the over arching
intent of this legislation was
may be broader than that more or
a piece and so it seems like.
For instance battery.
I would consider battery to be a
very violent crime.
Yes that would not be captured.
Under this definition.
Assault.
Would not be captured under this
definition because it requires
activator the sol and so it
seems to me the that what we're
really getting Adam in this
piece of legislation is for
wanting to review violent crime.
And I'm suggesting to you that
the maybe we ought to broaden it
a little bit to to just use the
words to I for instance on page.
Page three.
Line for.
Used.
In evidence or research based
public health approach to reduce
violent crime.
And there's other.
Uses where those words could be.
Just simply violent crime and
you would still capture this
which you would also expanded to
capture other.
Violent crimes that wouldn't
fall under activated assault and
so that that would be my my
comment with respect to this is
maybe looking at changing a few
words those five words for just
simply violent crime and I think
that would give.
Where you want to go and at the
same time really tried to have a
dental not just the the.
The.
Activated assaults.
Thank right of Saul would also
encompass activated battery but
but to the compass certainly
regular battery and regular
assaults which I think gov fall
under the the number L. of
violent crimes then that would
be I think something that we all
on to be marching toward and and
I would certainly or I certainly
support the legislation but I
think that focus would help in
my community.
That I think it would help in a
lot of other communities where
we may not have the
Senator very good San level but
you still have behavior that we
want to deter we want to
intervene and we want to get
them the resources as you
pointed out so with that comment
madam speaker I I certainly.
would like to see that change
but
That's that's something that I
guess two years thank you madam
for Mr speaker and gentle lady
there's further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Sandoval in Santa Fe
Representative Lord.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please yield Mister
speaker I yield.
Thank you.
I agree a lot this came through
may see back with a previous
representative have said.
It was very troubling to me is
that this is a.
To me I read.
I read is it it's going to be
hard finish and I read this is
an anti gun bill because we're
only focusing on gun violence
and we're not focusing on the
full aspects of what
Violent crime would be.
And I think.
Mr speaker Representative I
probably would have been on
board with this except for the
focus on just gun violence so
Representative sorry I'm Mister
speaker and representative can
you explain to me the difference
of what it would be if somebody
was murdered by a knife versus
buy a gun.
Mr speaker and a lady the person
would still be dead.
Thank you that's my exact point
Mr speaker Representative my
point is that when somebody is
murdered.
It doesn't matter how the
murdered.
In this state.
It's embarrassing how higher
crime rate is a crime rates are
ridiculously through the roof
and the focus should be on crime
violent crime the emphasis
should be on deadly weapons the
emphasis should be on trying to
actually fix our crime problem
that is happening in New Mexico
and not just focusing on one
thing so Mr speaker and.
Representative what was the
reason this bill is so
upsetting.
Is that it doesn't matter how a
woman is raped or child is right
for how someone is murdered how
someone is victimized the
economic doesn't matter what
matters is the person that did
intent not just the gun as I
keep saying Mr speaker and
representative of my guns are
not violent my guys have never
been violent my gun and never be
violent its intention of the
person and if we're actually
trying to get to the root cause
of what is happening in New
Mexico then the wording should a
ban.
Violent crime.
With a deadly weapon it should
have just been the single focus
on the second amendment and on
the gun which is never violent
there is no such thing as gun
violence Mr speaker and
representative the people who
commit crimes who have bad
intentions could use deadly
weapons so I'll pass on this can
you tell me.
Can you explain how this is all
going to play out because we
have a violence intervention
program act.
Can you tell me.
It's going to be in charge of
this it would someone hired with
the committee would be
overseeing this entire program
Mr speaker and representative.
Mr speaker and lady from.
Bernalillo and Torrance.
Pretty soon finally sand on
Santa Fe right now.
Mr speaker in lady.
The money is going to the
Department of Health the
department of health can have
three percent to have the staff
to administer the program.
There will be grants available
to any governmental entity
community
county or municipality Indian
tribe.
Throughout the state.
And they will submit requests
based not necessarily on their
own experience but on evidence
from other successful programs
where.
Bowl excuse me community is
working to interrupt the cycle
of violence in their communities
so and that is
What will happen the issue of
the New Mexico sensing
Commission will assist with the
evaluation of the programs.
Thank you Mr speaker and
representative and head on
something there when you talked
about the violence portion
because that's what I'm gonna
keep taking this back to the
violence no matter how that
plays out in a matter what kind
of weapon is used to the
Department of Health get sad and
then they're going to hire
people to work and this.
And this committee for this
intervention are there going to
be any pro second amendment
people that will be hired to
give a different perspective
instead of just hiring only
people that are anti second
amendment.
Mr speaker and lady.
There's nothing whatsoever about
pro or anti says second
amendment in this legislation.
That's that's.
Not a question that even that I
could even answer thank you Mr
speaker Representative I I can
tell you why am asking this
question because of the soul
focuses on violence
committed with people using the
gun and everyone that's higher
there is anti second amendment
they're going to have a
different slant and how they
develop the programs are going
to have a different stat I know
from when I studied psychology
and I took statistics that you
could take any statistic you
want and twisted and turned it
for example most most people
what people die after eating ice
cream and going swimming that's
because more people eat ice
cream in the summer time and go
swimming in the summertime.
They don't necessarily correlate
what I'm trying to get at is
what I'd like to know if we're
going to spend ten million
dollars of tax people's money is
it going to be a wide spectrum
of people that are going to be
in this committee meeting
there's going to be law
enforcement hopefully with
people with bits on the ground
and not just one type the law
enforcement to be multiple types
of law enforcement and what I'm
trying to find out would there
be anybody in this committee who
is who believes like I do that
violence is violence and the gun
part of it doesn't matter or
would it just be because what
I'm getting at when I when I'm
afraid of it will be a bunch of
committee of people who are
let's say.
Mr speaker Representative they
are already involved in activism
and a couple people come to mind
that I would imagine that they
would be recruited for this job
because they are very much anti
gun and that their opinions
would be slanted so I'm trying
to find out who how with this
process go when we're hiring
people and what kind of people
be hired into this intervention
program in late before she
answers a question just as a
point of parliamentary procedure
in committee we were for members
as Representative spot on the
floor it's gentle lady and
gentleman so it was a while ago
but you mentioned Representative
Chasey as Representative rather
than gentle lady so on the floor
you need to refer to a shift
leader I know it sounds crazy
but that's the parliamentary
procedure Mr speaker it doesn't
have the option to it doesn't
have to be gentle this lady.
Correct but not Representative
thank you lady Mr speaker thank
a lady sounds very odd.
I don't disagree with you but
that's that's our rules thank
you.
Mr speaker and lady from Santa
Fe New Bernalillo and Sandoval.
My expert informs the that the
violence intervention programs
that are in effect throughout
the country work with law
enforcement at the federal level
the state level the city level
and then the county level.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady hold on one gather some
more my questions here.
Mr speaker and gentle lady on
page three it talks about.
Honor to July first two thousand
twenty the department so receive
and review applications for
grants were awarded grants come
from.
Others tax payer that's what I'm
trying to guess at taxpayer
money.
Mr speaker and ready they
requests comment from the house
bill two appropriation so there
are a variety of funds that that
provided the state budget but
yes taxpayer dollars are part of
it and I find that to be
perfectly appropriate I'll tell
you in my community people want
something done about the
violence in our city and our
neighborhoods so they are happy
to have state dollars coming
from the taxpayers to make our
lives much more peaceful.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
and that's actually where we
will agree on.
Violent crime what I don't agree
on this the focus on just folky
focusing on the the gun issue
and here's why.
As I've stated before.
If somebody is monitored I don't
think a grieving mother grieving
parent cares whether that child
or loved one was hacked to death
or stabbed to death what they
care about is the crime issue in
New Mexico.
And Mr speaker gentle lady from
having traveled all over New
Mexico and before his activist
and now as a politician I have
spoken to a lot of people and.
There are a lot of Hispanic
Democrats that are furious about
the crime issue that I have
spoken to.
And they also love their guns
and they don't like the focus on
just the gun issue with the one
is a crime issue to be fixed.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady.
The problem with this whole
thing which I will vote no
against this again just because
we are not focusing and we're
not helping and we're not
looking at.
Violent crime we're looking at
only violent crime with that
we're gun was used and Mr
speaker and gentle lady the
other day we had people out in
the front who would have their
families of murdered and it was
heartbreaking to hug them and I
would hate to look them in the
eyes and say I'm really sorry
that we're not going to look
into you know we're not to look
at ways to stop that particular
crime because a gun was not used
what I want to the state in New
Mexico Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
Yes Representative to get
serious and it also brings me to
tears because we have such a
horrible problem with crime in
this state it is completely out
of control and if we are going
to address it Mr speaker and
gentle lady and needs to be all
encompassing and not just
looking at one pool and I want
to remember that the gun is a
tool the bat as a tool to probe
more as a tool the knife is a
tool is the person behind it
with the intentions that we need
to look at and figure out why
these people are getting away
with literal murder and our
state and why it is that we have
got to people doing so many
horrific crimes and I can tell
you my why I think it is is
because they know they can get
away with it and instead of just
focusing on.
Why somebody was harmed in the
first place and what we can do
to fix it and the state and
fixes broken beautiful
incredibly beautiful state with
incredible and wonderful people
and some of the best food in the
world and how we can fix it and
make us number one in everything
and that includes crime no
matter what the crime is done by
so Mister speaker and and a
gentle lady I yield my time.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott.
Well the lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I yield.
The financial aspects of this.
Others were.
Section four paragraph okay.
In the morning and.
Some more uniform on.
Well into the community and use
research based.
McHale for brooch.
To reduce the violence in the
community could you put some
more all those phones until
then.
What that looks like with my
boots on the ground.
Mr speaker and gentleman as
talented as you are I don't
think you're going to do is do
it tomorrow morning when you put
your boots on because what this
contemplates and what is
happening with the violence
intervention programs around the
country is that communities are
looking to their own.
Neighbors and they're they're
looking to see what services are
available and what crimes are
being committed and did you hear
the story I told about the the
the man who they apprehended in
Albuquerque who was going to
retaliate.
Did you hear that story.
Okay let me tell you that story
again sorry sorry folks the rest
of you are going to have to hurt
again so in June of twenty
twenty the V. I. P. program
identified a young man who was
shot in the back.
And he was.
Because of all of these
characteristics he was at high
risk for retaliation so the the
V. I. T. to met with him in his
apartment and that young man
admitted to the team he was
pretty sure he knew who shot him
and he was going to get it back.
And so the team tried to work
with him they
They were they'd just captured
him at the right moment and I
don't mean captured from
literally but they got in at the
right moment and they
Got to express his wishes to get
help they identified a serious
mental health issue addresses
substance abuse they had case
managers working with him Daly
giving new life coaching
referrals to appropriate
behavioral health services and
today he has not committed
another violent crime and is not
been victimized again and since
March of twenty twenty the VIP
tune in Albuquerque has
interviewed with two hundred and
ten individuals at the highest
risk of engaging in cycles of
violence ninety three percent of
them have not done it again they
have not received of it so it's
a matter of seeing.
If you read the legislation
carefully there.
There need to be behavioral
health services social service
programs.
In the community so that the
The program can work so that the
team that goes in to work with
them and sometimes that includes
former perpetrators who have
turned their lives around and
they have a.
A very good connection with
somebody who's in a similar
situation so that's that's how
it's going to work.
For how it works in Albuquerque
New I think each community will
be unique because there are
different needs different
populations geographically we
have a sparsely populated state
so whoever.
Goes after this is going to
probably be very creative.
Mr speaker and gentle lady this.
This would involve for example.
Family counseling.
Canceling with respect to.
Drug abuse issues.
Of.
Instead of.
We were
talking about social work with
the actor.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman my
experts and is informed me that.
The police are involved but
there social services as well.
But what they do is they can
intervene with victims of
violent crime.
are likely to become
perpetrators or their past
perpetrators themselves so it's
that cycle of.
I got shot I'm gonna go shoot
somebody else and then I'm gonna
get shot again and so forth so
when they go out it's law
enforcement and the social
services.
Mr speaker gentle lady this
would be after the fact this is
after individual was already
been identified as a violent
criminals and Kerr it's plaster
speaker and gentleman it's
somebody who's been the victim
of an aggravated assault.
Obviously not a victim of
homicide because that person is
going to be able to participate.
Who's been shot I didn't mean to
make that funding I apologize
because I don't mean that but a
victim of a
you know maybe a drug deal gone
bad and a shooting or a an
aggravated assault so Zacks who.
That's where they start with
that particular individual.
Speaker gentle lady to the
extent the.
A large for this activity is
organized.
We now getting into.
Of.
Gain counseling if you will.
Thank you I just learned
something about this.
The they have partners the US
attorney the dust the share of
all of law enforcement and they
have people who are identified
as high risk they're criminals
they're known for criminal
activity they've been.
Victimize and that's who they go
in with if that person doesn't
participate that person is
basically alerted that he or she
is now on the radar of this law
enforcement partnership.
Mr speaker and gentle lady there
would be no specific target
toward.
In related activity which is
also called I would say almost
whole use.
Some significant factor in this
violence would you agree.
Mr speaker and gentleman
actually that is how knowing who
the gang members are and what
they're doing is part of
identifying these folks.
Speaker gentle lady let me move
on from there.
To I have heard and read.
Program that all described as
broken windows policing.
Your claim to the.
A very broken Landau levels
which prevents deterioration
further is there any element of
fact involved in this program Mr
speaker and gentleman my experts
is no it's really it's really to
go after people who are already
clearly committing crimes and
dangerous.
Speaker gentle lady in
neighborhoods that kind of
faster data activity.
Broken windows would.
Let that continue to happen Mr
speaker and gentleman that no
not necessarily but it's the V.
I. pre the I. P. program is not
targeted to that we're there we
will make myself part of the
team here
with the V. I. P. two is
interested and focused on
violent.
Crime either with the use of a
gun R. Hahn any kind of homicide
it doesn't have to be with a gun
and and riveted assault so that
so those are the three types of
crime that they're focused on.
Okay.
Speaker gentle lady I could get
you to turn to sections of
And paragraphs.
See if I can come up with here.
In terms of the current.
And the department shall require
each grant to.
Has at least fifty percent of.
Requests for the purpose of.
Contracts with one or more.
Yes service providers could you
describe the qualifications of
those providers and health foods
it does this program in half
proposed Mr speaker and
gentleman I'm gonna say a little
bit and then I'm gonna consult
my expert to elaborate.
But what this contemplates here
the reason.
The that requirement is in there
is that the individuals with
whom they are intervening.
Are pretty hardcore.
They need a lot of help.
If they're going to turn their
lives around so you need good
drug abuse.
Counseling for drug abuse.
Thank all of a sudden the word
has left me they programs that
enable people to stop using
drugs whether it's inpatient
treatment or outpatient
treatment intensive outpatient
treatment they need counseling
they need medication.
And so you can't just spend all
your money on
The law enforcement piece of it
you've got to spend it on
providing
public health services that's
what this is a public health
approach to violence.
Receive my thanks for wants to
add.
Mr speaker and gentleman but a
out on to that there funding at
the top three needs.
With the.
Art will really for substance
abuse detox houses.
And treatment
psychological treatment due to
past trauma.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
have to I have to read from that
answer.
The very significant portion of
our.
Is been representatives of law
enforcement activity is in fact
directed.
To social programs.
Journalist one last comment.
This approach.
More troops these bad guys like
Victor.
Excuse me I didn't hear the
word.
Mr speaker gentle lady this
approach largely trees.
Guys like victims would you
agree.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
They have their victims at this
time because they have been
victims of a violent crime.
But what the purpose is to
intervene so that they don't
become perpetrators anymore.
And that's why the
astonishingly high rate of not
recidivism by these individuals
ninety three percent of the two
hundred and ten individuals with
whom the V. I. P. program
interview have not themselves
committed another violent crime
that's the purpose it's not to
feel sorry and just say well
here let me help you until you
can go commit another crime this
is to change it is to
interrupted.
Young lady I can appreciate the.
What you are expending
tremendous resources here.
Resources director.
Police crime prevention and
director intervention.
Instead of these social service
programs.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think this is the approach.
We have been implies saying for
the last few years and Mr
speaker gentle lady it's not
working.
Engine lady was to be one.
Is.
Police to make sense to use of
the people in the communities
fail safe for.
In their homes and
the.
A criminal.
Sure crime.
They're going to be punished.
Will not fall.
A revolving door I think.
With this out of control crime
problem we have all the low
binding citizens.
Home soon Los crucis incentive
for.
And the lower body victims of
these crimes.
Are the folks that we need to
have most consideration to.
At this point.
Mr speaker and gentle lady wall
a wall of pressure to success of
you all of program.
I don't.
This is exactly the right course
of action for rural.
In a restaurant in the balance
of this debate section Mr
speaker and sorry to gentle lady
for your answers there's further
debate the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative Rehm.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield Mister speaker I yield.
Mr speaker gentle lady who is
sure expert.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
introduced her Jerry but changes
she's the director of the
violence in Rhode prevention
programs in the City of
Albuquerque and commander Erin
Jones was going to be heard
today actually he was here
yesterday but we didn't get
heard yesterday that he had to
deploy this morning so he's he's
gone but if you have a law
enforcement question we can get
someone on the phone.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
I'm somewhat familiar with the
program in Albuquerque and I
have a few questions about it
and how this works with this
bill members of Mr speaker and.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo on
page one down one twenty three
is community based service for a
providers who are those
providers.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe we've answered that
question it is the folks who
provide detox the folks to find
intensive outpatient treatment
for drugs it's folks who can
find post trauma
treatment it's folks who can
provide housing.
And all of the behavioral health
array of services.
Mr speaker gentle lady I
apologize because of the late
hour.
I think we're all a little bit
foggy after you started naming
them I remember to but Madam
speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo on page two going to
the Department means so
department of health.
The way that I see the program
working currently is the
funding is something the DA's
office has is that correct Mr
speaker and gentleman no.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo we're it aware of the
obtaining their funding for the
current program.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
the city's budget.
The pilot program.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
perhaps I didn't hear budget who
paid the pilot program Mr
speaker and gentleman the City
of Albuquerque.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
I I think the funding should
come as it is now the City of
Albuquerque the dust officer DPS
is we're I think the funding
should come rather than the
department of health
I mean are you I do agree that I
think the
program is working and you know
I I hate to change courses if
you will ten minutes in mid
stream so I think that we ought
to think about.
Keeping the system that's
working currently rather than
tweaking to let me move on to
Something else here.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo I want to go over to
a page five that six and seven
were fifty percent of the grant.
Will be used for entering into
contracts what would the other
fifty percent be use for.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
money goes through either the
city the county or the tribal
government.
And it this whole program is an
of partnership between law
enforcement and the community
based services.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo what I'm worried
about I think I think we need to
get as much funding into the
program as possible so when I
see fifty percent that I'm
worried that some administrators
say well we're gonna take the
other fifty percent for
administration.
And so that's why I'm thinking
we need to.
Tie this up a little tighter.
you know I've seen contracts or
legislation and the passes said
no more than ten percent can be
used for administration of the
program might be a better way to
word that Mr speaker gentleman
you didn't ask a question that
I'm going to see it is it
alright if I answer you
regardless
hi.
I doubt sincerely that such a
project would get chosen for
funding because the whole idea
is to have law enforcement.
Actively participating along
with the behavioral health
providers to make sure that
we're trying to keep the
community safe for we're keeping
these folks from getting back
into it.
The mobile life of crime.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo I agree with you I
think it's working in
Albuquerque and I want to make
sure that we continue with
So would you know I just I I
kind of hate seeing changing the
wagon and and stream or
something similar to the Mr
speaker John I do not understand
what you're saying.
All I'm sorry
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
from Bernalillo hi.
I think the program is working
very well in Albuquerque this
program Mr speaker.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo yes the program that
they're currently doing in
Albuquerque I think it's
innovative I think that it says
sex full and I just don't want
to see us change the way that
it's currently operating such as
giving the money to of.
you know the health department.
Where you have a fifty percent.
Possibility to be diverted to
some other.
Of Syria Mr speaker and
gentleman the department of
health is getting the full
appropriation because this is a
public health approach to
stopping.
The cycle of violence.
The public health department
gets three percent.
I'm not the public health
department our department health
gets three percent to administer
the grant but in the cities in
Albuquerque or in Dona ana or
the or wherever whoever of
supplying.
They want to be sure that half
of the
the funding in that particular
community or tribal government
is going for services.
And the other half for law
enforcement.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
think if we tightened it up to
exactly what you just said would
make me real happy.
But.
Mr speaker and gentleman I see I
think I understand what.
We're what you're concerned
about what you're concerned
about is the way the what the
rules are going to be that are
promulgated.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo yes to I I I make it
I am very happy that three
percent will be used for
administration I'm just saying
the program as it's written here
doesn't say that.
Yes it does Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Let me find it for you.
Mr Johnson would probably
funding for has she originally
drafted this bill okay it's on
page two line twenty two the
department expended over than
three percent of the balance of
the phone.
Feature for administering the
violence intervention.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo thank you because
like I said is currently and
then my last question is I saw
the appropriation was stripped.
Is the money and house bill two
and if so how much Mr speaker
and gentleman on page three six
two two six two House Bill to
Line.
Line I assess the department of
finance administration shall
transfer nine million dollars to
the Department of Health shall
establish criteria for the
distribution of grants
supporting violence intervention
programs.
I was also told appropriations
when we strip the appropriation
because of that that there's
also one point seven million I'm
not entirely sure if if
About recurring and nonrecurring
funds but that's that's what we
have right now.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo I think it's a very
successful program I want to see
it continue
I think that what we've heard is
is that for criminals to
perceive the state quit.
Arrested few would would be
helpful and so contacting these
individuals that might do
violence and making them
informed if you will that we're
kind of looking over your
shoulder watching you I think is
a real good idea thank you Mr
speaker
there is further debate the
gentleman from Chavis Eddy and
Otero Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady yield Mister speaker I
yield thank you gentle lady a
couple of.
Questions.
This bill.
He uses the department of
health.
And.
That seems.
It seems strange to me that
would have a crime prevention
and the department of health but
as I listen to you.
Your your effort is to prevent
eight individual from having.
Reoccurring crime is more than
it is preventing new crime is
that correct Mr speaker and
gentleman I think it's both
because if if you interviewed or
and I hope I I really should
turn my ex for more often but if
the team interview with an
individual and prevents that
individual from creating more
crime.
That is a huge savings to
society I was trying I was
looking for the FIR because and
it's here I just got a lot of
paper work what it costs for
every murder it's just
staggering when you look at all
the costs associated with one
murder so
This is taking a public health
approach though because it's bad
for our public health to have
here just like we had the go
harm reduction act people you
know we don't want them
overdosing in the parks because
the kids play in the parks but
we also don't want people dying
on the streets being assaulted
on the streets so.
We're a healthier community not
only if we have windows that are
broken but if we don't have all
of this violent activity on the
streets so it's more than
stopping one person because it
becomes a cycle so the people
around that person are more
likely I think to be safer but
let me check with my experts
here to.
This is really good information
Mr speaker Representative are
gentleman from late.
They work with the whole
families.
And with so many of these
individuals this is generations
of crime.
So it's stopping.
The generations of crime that
these families have experienced
it really interrupting that
cycle it's what we're always
trying to do instead of just
having no one family whose
incarcerated and then the kids
end up in prison and so forth so
it's it's more than just the one
thing.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
appreciate that I was.
I believe you mentioned
Baltimore and I was taken up.
You know looking at what had
happened over Baltimore store
Klay.
Many of the crimes aren't listed
but.
No murders are always seems to
be the headlines and I I let
from nineteen.
No.
From two thousand twenty with
the.
For the record here.
If you go back to.
Two thousand and.
All the way back to two thousand
going back twenty years.
It.
The crime had risen.
And then I got to thinking about
Albuquerque and I was thinking.
All of this program agency has
been successful and we all know
when we've heard time and time
again about crime in
Albuquerque.
And so I was just wondering.
How do we measure success when
we have all these ongoing
problems and I was just
wondering the knowing those
facts.
How do you how did you come to
grips with the fact that the the
money spent.
In the effort was successful.
Mr speaker and gentleman right
now in Albuquerque it's a fairly
small programs are just two
staff members spring three staff
members involved and
I I just think when you work
with two hundred and ten people
and you have ninety three
percent success rate that's
pretty rewarding and they want
they want to continue doing it
because
they're they're making a
difference.
In Albuquerque but I will say
that.
Boy twenty twenty was a bad year
throughout the country and we
certainly know that here.
We certainly do gentle lady and
Mr speaker the other thing that
I thought was.
What is interesting.
Can you explain.
I mean you talk about evidence
and then there's research type
approaches I cut that off of
the.
The website as I was reading on.
But it happened then in Boston
and and I was just wondering
gentle lady.
The the effort is relatively
new.
And in Albuquerque but some seed
money in and started it how much
how much seed money did
Albuquerque put in originally.
Mr speaker John would you repeat
that I'm sorry.
How much seed money did
Albuquerque put into this
program originally.
Mr speaker and gentleman this is
a gas of about four hundred
thousand okay.
In my other question was can you
explain to the body of the
difference between these
evidence based on research based
approaches that are typically
used in crime prevention.
Mr speaker and gentleman
Those words could be slightly
interchangeable.
What.
The.
Program has done.
Is research what worked
elsewhere.
And tried it in Albuquerque.
And figured out if it works for
them.
The green gentle lady.
Sorry I was getting some more
information from my expert to
finish my answer hold on just
one second I apologize.
Mr speaker and gentleman in some
parts of the country the
programs have actually been
going on for about ten years and
so what they did with the City
of Albuquerque did is research
the results of those programs to
see what.
Prom held promise for the City
of Albuquerque that's looking at
the evidence based research
based methods.
The gentle lady and Mr speaker
the other thing that was is more
and more apparent to me as I as
I looked at this was.
There seems to be clusters of
crime.
In cities where.
Crime is so prevalent.
In those.
Plasters are typically
identified by poverty by drug
abuse of all of those things
that we know about.
Is there an effort within this
program to touch communities.
And make it and an address at
the community level are we
attacking symptom of are we
looking at the problem.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
say what they're not dealing
with symptoms at all because
they're actually going hardcore
at what the it takes to get.
One individual at a time to get
out of this and actually or one
family or one set of generations
at a time out of the cycle of
violence so
as far as the community goes let
me check.
So Mr speaker and gentleman this
is interesting to me after
studying the other cities the
City of Albuquerque.
Did a study.
To try to figure out who was
driving the crime rate and it
was one percent of the
population.
And so that's the population
that they're targeted here.
So not only did the city look at
the other areas of the country
to see what was working there
they said okay who are we gonna
be dealing with in Albuquerque
and actually did a study and
came up with one percent and
those are the ones who are doing
it over and over again.
In general lady and Mr speaker.
That was what I caught in the
building talks about the played
a target of population that's
that is the problem.
And I was wondering if you could
explain to me into the body this
ten million dollars citizen is a
first time annual appropriation.
And you're talking about one
percent of the Albuquerque
population the minutes fifty
thousand people.
Of.
What is I mean will we have the
ability to add significantly
address that.
That whole portion I mean how do
you go about.
I mean you just come off of a
As many cities did not just to
record crime this I'm trying to
understand how you're going to
deploy this capital to make a
difference and what do you
expect to get out of it what can
we expect to see.
Mr speaker and gentleman one
percent of the six hundred
thousand in Albuquerque is just
six hundred people so that's who
this is being focused on now and
we expect to get out of it more
good results because there will
be more than two hundred and ten
individuals with whom the city
can engage.
That's the population so far
that has a ninety three percent
success rate.
The bridge she meant right now
and I'm in.
It's to be able to.
And if you can keep that up
that's money well spent I I
think anybody would agree to
that Mr speaker and gentleman I
do agree that Sunday.
It is
It's it's an effort Mr speaker
and gentle lady
Is it your belief that we will
see a reduction in crime next
year because of this program.
Mr speaker and gentleman my
experts says and she has a long
long long career in.
Juvenile justice and now huddled
justice at the city
that it takes three to five
years to have see a really
dramatic reductions.
But I am I want to say that I
don't see this is the only tool
in the box because I think the
gentleman from lady who was
talking about the broken window
policing all of those have merit
I read an absolute astonishingly
inspiring articles.
last fall.
It wasn't any are times that
The greener the neighborhood the
lower the crime rate so I think
that kind of goes with the
The gentleman from late so I
think there's so many things we
can do that will make our
neighborhoods safer and and so
forth but this is this is an
important one because it's
targeting it's focusing on
deterrence and changing the mind
set and the whole behavior of
Really formerly dangerous
people.
Mr speaker and gentle lady you
just you just threw the gauntlet
the I have to know more the
greener the neighborhood the
lower the crime.
And that means.
Is that an indication of the
income levels I mean how do you
get I mean most of the subsidies
that I've seen come out.
Most of the programs that I have
seen that turned neighborhoods
green.
I would Linda believe that most
of the people that.
That utilize those may have
higher incomes Mr speaker and
gentleman I wasn't taught for
concert we're sort of off the
subject here but I I couldn't
resist mentioning it.
I don't necessarily need green
is that everybody has grant but
that there are open spaces and
parks and and attention and and
safe.
Unity areas in the neighborhood.
That makes sense to me
Speaker and gentle lady I I.
I was immediately drawn to a
green energy issue Silas I was
going there.
Speaker and gentle lady this
bill indicates the department of
health health will be
responsible for admissions
during the requests.
Will those requests be is
available to my community as
they are Albuquerque.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
There will be.
Every on every city or county.
Or tribal government could apply
if they so desired.
And the metrics for them to be
accepted they have to have crime
at a certain level Mr speaker
and gentleman here right let me
let me clarify.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
could be a small community but
the requirement is that there's
a disproportionate amount of
violence activated assaults
homicides to the population.
In Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Have you looked across the state
and see what committees this
bill is applicable to.
Mr speaker and gentleman I have
not please see.
So what Mr speaker and
gentleman.
What the
in gathering the data for the
proposal the city consulted The
New Mexico's sentencing
commission so this is based on
twenty nineteen data and it
could be updated because we have
change things change so much as
you all know during the
pandemic.
And
but those
the the areas that had the.
Most disproportionate high crime
rate were areas one two three
four and five and I said well so
what areas of those ants
Bernalillo Santa Fe Rio Arriba
and the southern part of the
state years Silvercity sent.
so that's what.
That's right now the criteria I
would expect the department of
health to want to have the
latest on data before they let
the.
The proposals before they issue
a request for proposals.
The Crimson lady of is there any
metric if you look at those I
communities.
Bernalillo Santa Rita Rivera and
Silver City area is there any
metrics that you have been able
to identify.
Why those are the highest with
crime.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
exceeds the
the scope.
College for this bill.
But was Mr speaker and gentle
lady I I I I agree to that but I
just thought since you are
looking at a.
Senator highlight and was
looking at it maybe you'd come
across something Mr speaker and
gentleman Mr changer totally
which is what has started to
drop to I was listening to her
and I apologize but she was
saying that high intensity drug
trafficking is one of the things
that drives that particular
disproportionate ality.
That the.
I don't guess that to be
unexpected
Mr speaker and gentle lady and I
was just wondering.
I know this is not.
It if drug is if drugs seem to
be.
The propellant that drives the
crime.
Are there.
Are there things in your
community that the.
You're doing.
In concert with this pilot
program to read a Kate that as
well I mean is that a truce is
that it is that a two sided coin
that you're trying to address.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
say so if you could have seen
the capital outlay requests from
Bernalillo county it was for a
major detox center was for all
kinds of
programs for the homeless and so
yes those are you know substance
abuse detox housing trauma
services so absolutely.
The lady by a
I think we have to do all of the
above I would I'm not
I'm not at all.
Again.
This type of effort.
But I think I am personally
drawn to the fact that.
When we know.
I mean the open border issues.
In southern New Mexico.
The identified and all problems
that we have all seen and many
of us fail.
I hope that your bill.
And your pilot program is not
over run by the fact that we
have failed to address the
issues that are causing your
problem and so that is still
problematic to me.
But.
The effort is interesting the
bill is
Ninety seven percent of success
rate is.
Is remarkable
I.
I wish we had spent I wish we
would spent as this date.
A little more effort on trying
to prevent the influx of the
problem that is causing your
problem thank you gently thank
you Mr speaker there is further
debate the gentleman from Lee
Representative better.
Thank you Mr speaker the gentle
lady Mr speaker I yield.
Mr speaker generally the good
news is the majority of the
questions that I had written
down have been asked and I'm
gonna do my very best not to
repeat anything and so if I do
this my apologies is because I
didn't know the.
I didn't know the answer.
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
the first question I have.
Relates to.
Page two online ten.
Tell us about the non reverting
fund.
In the state treasury.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
This is a first questions just a
personal one have the heck did
you get that in there.
Mr speaker and gentleman this is
an existing frontier is being
changed so we're trying for it.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady for that answer
Today is June well where we had
a debate on on a law enforcement
protection fund the that reverts
images Karen so.
This is accomplished so that I
can be ready for the sixty day
session Mr speaker and gentleman
I knew where you're going with
eyes so word in there.
I appreciate the a little bit of
levity here
Mr speaker and gentle lady on
page three.
Talks
No.
Program from where.
The current phone section for be
blind I.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
apologize if you've been through
this before but what specific
practices at Intel.
Mr speaker and gentleman I hope
I get this right because it was
really good so the focused
deterrence is the actual there's
research done on this particular
approach so it's a law
enforcement.
Draven.
Stress strategies to identify
the individuals.
I.
Who are at highest risk for
causing all of the crime.
And either interview with them
to interrupt that violence and
if they don't participate they
know that law enforcement is
watching them so to determine
future crime by those who
participate because they're
getting the services they need
and you're letting the other
folks know we have your eyes on
you.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
This may go just a little bit
outside the and to the left of
the legislation does please let
me know.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Why are those people.
Out right now if we know that
they're still creating a
problem.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
quite understand that question.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
guess I was driving to a point
saying if if we have law
enforcement looking at this from
a strategic standpoint then
they've pinpointed.
The problem people the person
people.
Mr speaker and gentle lady in my
head that means that we're
probably dealing with somebody
that's a repeat offender.
And if that's the case.
Wouldn't that in itself before
the problem Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman you
can't just a recipe repeat
offender when here she's of
actually committing a crime so
they may be out but.
The City of Albuquerque did a.
Really huge
community engagement discussion
last summer metro prime
initiative to try to figure out
how to improve its approach to
making the streets safer
thanking our whole community
safer
so.
The law enforcement knows some
of these folks they know they're
there you can't just go get them
unless you catch them doing
something and you can prove that
they did.
So I
I think just knowing that
they're there.
It is
what we're we're focusing we're
trying to get them let them know
we know you're here to would you
like to participate in this can
we support you we keep you from
retaliating on.
And and so forth.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady and I think you
mentioned that one of the the
stories that you again tonight
about one of the successes that
the V. I. P. processes.
Has made and I appreciate that.
Mr speaker and gentle lady this
is only my second session but
I've been.
Back in the state for about
thirteen years and coming up
here pretty much every session
for that and I remember that and
and I tried to get go back and
find it.
Remember significant debate
about ten years ago they came
from.
Law enforcement and but only of
Albuquerque.
from the DA's office at the time
from from the sheriff's
department in senators and and
Representative said had
significant debates.
Over.
The way that we were Mr speaker
and gentle lady reducing.
Or penalties on on crime.
And.
Those debates led to very
specific point with with several
people that said you know if we
continue down this road Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
This is where we're gonna end
up.
And this is where we're at now
we have the high crime rates we
have the issues that exist
because Mr speaker and gentle
lady for the last ten ten plus
years.
The junior we reduce our crime
rates.
We I want to not reduce our
crime rates we reduce our
penalties for certain crimes and
and so I look at this and I say
you know.
Looking back we always have
twenty twenty vision.
And several of Mr speaker and
only several people in this room
several people listening in.
We're here during those debates
and I I just find it interesting
that.
Born the sitting here today
instead going going.
Talk telling ourselves we knew
this was coming.
We knew the exact crime rates
were coming we knew this was
going to be an issue we
predicted it ten plus years ago
and so I appreciate the efforts
that we're going here in fort
continue on a soapbox some of
the.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
want to get to a question German
if I would the division fine but
if you could to confine your
questions to the bill itself yes
Sir thank you very much Mr
speaker so.
Mr speaker and gentle lady one
part of the bill is very
specific about a minimum of
twenty percent of.
The the nine million being
allocated to Albuquerque in my
math is correct that's about one
point eight million at a
minimum.
Mr speaker and gentle gentle
lady I'm curious if that value
that percentage that dollar
value.
Came.
With some of the study work that
was done.
In Albuquerque.
With the original two hundred
seventy thousand in this.
That percentage change in the
number came with the specific
request.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker was that a question
on it I didn't understand the
question yes ma'am Mr speaker
gentle lady very specifically
the one point eight the minimum
of one point eight million
that's going to be allocated to
Albuquerque
When we when we get through this
process.
Is there a written plan Mr
speaker gentle lady that's
already been put together and
and
The projected cost to that.
To get that implemented.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
City of Albuquerque are would
submit our proposal to the
department of health.
And they would be probably
applying for approximately
twenty percent of the available
funds The New City of
Albuquerque though has twenty
seven percent of the population
of the state of New Mexico.
The lady I.
I understand where the
percentages are I was just
driving to a very important
question was has there been us
with the study that's been done
in Albuquerque has there been a
dollar value placed on that that
equals somewhere around one
point eight million dollars.
Mr speaker and gentleman
actually of Albuquerque did this
program full blown with all of
the six hundred identified
individuals that's not nearly
enough money.
Mr speaker gently at.
I appreciate that answer but I
feel like I didn't really answer
the question with respect to
that with the plan with the
process is been placed with
without cookies on funds
We get to the gotten to a point
where they've put an initial
value for the first year and I
asked this question because.
The.
Physically says.
No also the verbiage that the
bills
allocates.
A minimum of twenty percent of
the funding going to population.
In excess of five hundred forty
thousand people.
So with that Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
We're the twenty percent the
minimum twenty percent number
come from deserve deserve a
request some more.
The the drives that number Dr
that percentage Mr speaker and
gentleman the City of
Albuquerque has piloted this
program it has worked well their
idea is to get funding for the
whole state to be able to
participate in they set up so
that less than the percentage of
the population of Albuquerque
possibly might.
It
might
Be all that they get.
Mr speaker and gentleman also is
studying what other states have
done generally twenty percent of
the funding goes to the larger
population areas because those
of the year is a drive the crime
rate for the state.
And the lady in the.
Over the last part go and and
really I'm not Mr speaker and
gentle lady trying to to to push
into a corner I just we've
talked about the success of the
program Mr speaker and gentle
lady that is pin it into this is
been worked in in Albuquerque.
And so I was hoping to hear
maybe of of what plan they
already have in place.
That probably fits some of the
many criteria the that are
placed in and these and in the
inside this bill.
In is Pacific Rim gentle lady
with that plan there's a cost
that they've that they've come
up with to implement that plan.
Mr speaker gentleman you asking
is what the plans are for
Albuquerque.
Yes I was those curious as we we
look at this and I understand
your your answer gentle lady
with respect to looking at other
states and what they've done for
the higher metropolitan it for
the higher populations of the
least twenty percent of the
whatever the fund is I'm just
curious Mr speaker and gentle
lady with all the work that the
City of Albuquerque is already
done.
Is do they have a written plan
and did they approve the
associated costs to that plan to
implement.
Mr speaker gentleman yes.
Mr speaker gentle lady what was
that cost.
Mr speaker and gentleman right
now they've spent about forty
four hundred thousand dollars.
Mr speaker gentle lady what's
third anticipated
implementation should should
this bill pass we're speaker and
gentleman I'm trying to find
that out from my expert here.
Mr speaker and gentleman if they
put all the components in place
that they want to it will cost
over three million dollars
annually.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I would be very
interested at some point in time
seeing seeing that plan so we
can look at it and put that
together and Mr speaker and
gentle lady that leads to the
next.
Question that I have.
With respect to
The bill requiring the the
department of health be
responsible for administering
these this grant deserve
timeline Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
On.
Making with respect to that in
the implementation of the rules
Mr speaker and gentleman not in
the bill.
The only understand that it's
not the bill I'm just curious if
if there's any speculation on on
what the intent with the
department of health and what
the expectations would be should
this be charter Mr speaker
gentleman that's outside the
scope of this legislation.
The gentleman if it helps we
vote on this bill the other
night it's the grant application
program and this is a granting
authority and so they'll go
through that if that bill passes
then it'll be part of the
process by which these programs
are value with the sentencing
commission be part of that but
that is not this bill.
Thank you Mr thank you generally
in that instance of the depth of
the bill the.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
usually when when I put for
myself when I I I put a plan in
place I have the phase concept
of when I hope certain
benchmarks would be hit and
that's what I was trying to get
to what the what the concepts
were with respect to
Getting the rulemaking done.
And being able to actually see a
return on investment with
respect to applying those funds
either in the City of
Albuquerque or one of the other
four areas that that were
earlier identified.
With that Mr speaker and gentle
lady
We have a
In definitely County and Hobbes
we have the organization.
That would probably.
One of those community based
service providers that would be
able to go after this that that
that Phil if it meant the rest
of the criteria that that
organization would be the former
drug abuse.
Senate down there and Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
When we had conversations
earlier there were conversations
an earlier debate those
identified that this would be
city county and tribal
governments in partnership with
law enforcement Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Former drug drug abuse was able
to apply and and be successful
in this with the law enforcement
that they would partner with
would that be the local in in
your opinion the local Hobbs PD
or would that be the sheriff's
department or would be a
combination of the two Mr
speaker and gentleman the city
of Hobbs or the county R. Lee
County would have to be applying
for the grant not just the the
real health services provider
and they would they could
partner like the City of
Albuquerque does with multiple
law enforcement.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generated for that
clarification.
there are aspects Mr speaker and
gentle lady of this bill that I
like as we had in debate which
I'm not.
In a report cap phone stand and
see Pat there are parts of the
the the I don't like it I wish
you the best of luck with your
legislation Mr speaker.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Catherine
Sikora Valencia Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
kind gentle lady yield to the
from the Gail caucus Mr speaker
I gladly yield.
Thank you madam and Mister
speaker I I was curious on page
four I have three fairly easy
questions page four
section one into the difference
between how the population is of
defined.
So Mister speaker and I do want
to know on subsection one so at
least two of the requests will
be going to counties or
municipalities or tribal
governments with the population
under five fifty thousand.
Thank you madam Mr Chairman Mr
speaker and and kind lady and
and how is under the fifty
thousand how is that population
estimated.
Mr speaker and and lady I think
everybody knows the population
of a county or a city I I don't.
If you have a.
If you have anything under fifty
thousand that is county or city
or tribal government would be
eligible thank you.
Pardon me thank you Mr speaker I
I just saw that it was from the
recent University of New Mexico
and then on on that section to
its from the census I'm sorry
yes.
That's where the population
numbers come from some okay
thank you thank you for that I I
wasn't sure I don't live in the
area that's calculated that so I
was just curious and then Mr
speaker
kind lady so I spent reading
have the grant can be awarded to
a county or a municipality can
the county get the grant and
then disperses to other.
across the the county or does it
have to be in the does it have
to be specific municipality or
village in the county.
Mr speaker and and lady I thanks
and I will check with my expert
but I I think this is kind of
being on the City of
Albuquerque's decision but.
As long as it's in the county.
It seems to me that that
qualifies I think what they're
trying to avoid though is having
for example the City of
Albuquerque get a grant and the
county Bernalillo get a grant.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
lady I I appreciate that because
you know catching County seven
thousand square miles and so I.
Mr speaker kindly so I just
wanted to make sure that the
county could apply and disperses
so that's that's helpful and Mr
speaker kindly can you tell me
you mentioned Jennifer who
helped draft the bill is she one
of your expert witnesses Mr
speaker and and lady from good
hello Elizabeth Liz Johnson.
When she were to the council
service she drafted the bill for
us.
Okay thank you Mr speaker kind
lady and then your expert
witness
who does she work for madam Mr
speaker and and lady from grant
it I'm sorry said grants and
it's not grant I am so sorry
Sapporo
she works for the City of
Albuquerque's she's the director
of the V. I. P. program in
Albuquerque.
The jury batida thank you I can
remember potential Mr speaker
that's a that's a different name
and as I appreciate that so and
then Mr speaker one last
question is there a license for
so community based service
provider those are licensed
providers is that correct
kind lady.
Mr speaker and lady from
Sapporo.
They could be license but is not
required so it could be you know
it could be a a licensed
clinical social worker who has a
private practice in the
community it could be a drug to
detox program at
I I know in Albuquerque there's
the county has some programs and
and I'm sure there are in other
parts of the state as well or an
agency that helps people find
housing.
Thank you Mr speaker and kind
lady and that was all my
questions thank you Mr speaker.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from grant and
although and share our
Representative Dow.
Thank you Mr speaker religion
leading your ideal.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I and I I was not familiar
with a.
Public health approach to.
addressing these issues and so I
strictly went off.
The language in the bill.
Which is that we would have
evidence.
Based approaches to reduce gun
violence and aggravated assault.
When I did these Google search
is not familiar with them I did
find the definition of a public
health approach and it has this
it the concept to the definition
of the approach not the evidence
based an example of an evidence
based model or curriculum but
the health impacts pyramid on
addressing what's the name the
in the bill I think we've been
really really talking about some
great things tonight they're not
named in the bill with names in
the bill is gun violence and
aggravated assault so I mean we
we talk about all kinds of
things that.
Should be supported should be
funded but what the bill is
funding.
That says that it's prevention
of gun violence and aggravated
assault so it says that there
and in this information I don't
even know.
I'm not familiar with this
organization but it sits yes
just.
G. V. dot org are you familiar
with that organization.
Mr speaker and later you know.
Well they they have that in
their CDC but they both have
This American Journal of public
health at this pyramid framework
for public health action and the
framework sales like what we've
been talking about tonight at
the base of how you have the
impact in public policy is
social economic factors then
changing context to make
individuals default decisions
healthy long lasting protective
interventions in this is moving
up in the pyramid.
A clinical intervention and then
counseling and education does
that sound accurate.
Mr speaker and maybe yes thank
you thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady so I can only apply
this to what's in the bill and
what's in the bill is gun
violence prevention of gun
violence and that result by the
way I could I could not find a
public health approach and
evidence based model on around
the term aggravated assault I
can only find evidence based
models around the term gun
violence and so what it's saying
in here under the social
economic factors is in the
bottom of the pyramid the base
level address in equity and
structural racism funds social
services education housing and
job training does that sound
accurate of what you're
envisioning.
Mr speaker and letting your kind
of be on the bill so.
You're talking about a pyramid
that I've never seen before and
us if it fits here we are
actually targeting three areas
it's homicides gun violence and
aggravated assault aggravated
assaults as a lot of different
violent crimes so
as far as
its relationship to other
factors I don't have a knowledge
of that Mr speaker and gentle
lady I I mean I I don't know how
long we've been debating the
bill but I wasn't able to find
evidence based models research
based models provide any factor
that you're addressing other
than gun violence so if that is
the but the social at the social
economic so you're asking for
evidence based model so has to
follow this approach and you're
saying that it's a public health
approach so if it's if the
response of applicant is going
to employ your model then they
they're going to have to change
the context to make individuals
default decisions healthy and
the description around gun
violence is passing universal
background checks passing
firearm licensing repeal stand
your ground laws it says long
lasting protective interventions
expiring extreme risk laws when
you move into clinical
interventions it says legal
means safety counseling violence
intervention programs and
counseling and education is a
storage campaigns firearm
training courses that's that's
what was under the public health
public policy approach of an
evidence based model research
based model of of gun violence
and that's what your bill says
it's going to do I just I just
wasn't able to find anything
around aggravated assaults but I
did find that those are those
are the the public health
approaches but under approaches
that were to reduce.
Gun violence the division of
criminal justice services which
would not be department of
health they had lots of evidence
based models that could be
implemented in the division of
criminal justice services
problem oriented public policing
hot spot policing procedural
justice crime prevention through
environmental design and focused
deterrence street outreach
criminal justice knowledge bank
so these are evidence based on
research based models I I just.
The but those are those wouldn't
be a public policy Department of
Health approach those would be
criminal justice services so do
you envision a blended model of
these two.
Mr speaker and lady from grant.
You're not talking about
anything in this bill or
anything with the V. I. P.
program you've done some
research but it's that has
absolutely nothing to do with
the program that is that
Albuquerque's phone.
Talked agency but she just said
that it's more like public
policy and not a public health
approach that that she's hearing
from you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady could you
give me some examples of because
there's not in evidence based
model named in this bill so
you're saying that there's a
model but it's not named in the
bill so could you give me just a
couple of examples of some
evidence based models that.
Your envisioning or is there
only one that's going to be
accepted as the rules are
developed Mr speaker and IT this
bill invites communities to
design their own but based on
evidence that they have you
there gathered like the City of
Albuquerque for that they have
found in other communities that
works.
Madam speaker Mr speaker gentle
lady the grant I mean your your
bill on page three.
On line three A. says use an
evidence based research based
public policy approach that's
not subjective that's not
something a local communities
get to make up that is an actual
term in grant making and I I
mean I don't know how you get
away from that and so I I just
need you to teach me and educate
me on some of these evidence
based models like I couldn't
find them on the internet will
other than the ones that I
named.
Mr speaker and lady from grant
you said public policy and this
is public health and what I
explained earlier and I've done
it more than once is that we are
not requiring that a community
actually have done its own
research and developed a model
as long as the community is
designing a program or
contemplating a program that has
that's based on is another
program that works somewhere
that's evidence based.
Mr speaker internally there's a
lot of things I could learn from
you but I I am very familiar
with the definition of evidence
based on that's not evidence
based that could be maintenance
for this grant Mr speaker and
ladies telling both of you if we
could find a discussion of the
bill but slow down so that each
person's talking so that we can
get a question and answer for
both of you so I appreciate that
thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
could you point me in this bill
to your unique definition of
evidence based model family.
Just to be clear this bill is
not the granting authority bill
an evidence based model includes
performance measures data this
provided a valuation of the data
that's not part of this bill and
she's made that clear so if you
could confine your questions to
the bill Mr speaker gentle lady
on page three.
Line three word a I will repeat
from the bill.
Use an evidence or research
based public health approach to
reduce gun violence or
aggravated assaults is this
relevant to the bill Mr speaker
the lady the evidence based
approach is and possibility for
which we discuss in the night
from the start but evidence
based it doesn't have to be in
this bill Mr speaker I thought
Mr speaker point of order I
thought that we're not supposed
to talk about other bills we're
talking about this bill that
we're only supposed to stick to
this bill or talking about a
bill that's exactly my point
generally so Mister speaker I'm
originally if you could find
yourself to the bill
appreciated.
You're asking about an evidence
based approach the gentle lady
events the question you can ask
it again but I ask you to
confine your questions to the
bill Mr speaker I'm literally
reading from the bill and my
question is about the line I
just read from the bill.
Generally you can answer the
question if you can.
Mr speaker and lady from I think
they actual terminology that is
used by the City of Albuquerque
that's used in other areas that
would be something we could look
up when you have time is the
term focused deterrence on line
I.
Problem oriented policing.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady and I did find both of
those
as evidence based models through
the division of criminal justice
services I I found both of those
and so I'm wondering then why
how this would be implemented by
the department of health rather
than just a services or is it a
mixed.
Mr speaker in waiting first of
all the department of health
isn't doing at the department of
health is managing the program
they are putting out requests
for building to rigs they'll put
out requests for proposals and
the communities will respond to
those but focused deterrence is
a specific approach that
involves law enforcement and
social services.
I think we did described earlier
exactly how that works and thank
you Mr speaker and gentle lady
and so that is part of the
current program that Albuquerque
is using Mr speaker lady yes
thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentle lady and so.
Is is there any role with
assisting the the sentencing
commission if they have any role
in this process.
Mr speaker and gentle lady they
will be assisting with the
evaluation.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
and thank you gentle lady.
And does the criminal justice
coordinating council do they
typically serve tribal areas.
I'm one of continue to answer
the last question first because
I hadn't finished on the
sentencing commission will also
help with providing data to
communities so that they can use
that in their grant applications
thank you Mr speaker thank you
Julie I like that.
So I'm sorry to have to repeat
the another major question Mr
speaker.
So fifty percent of the the
funding will contract to the
local service providers and so
is the is there funding for
these events for the I. is part
of the evaluation and this part
is a is a gathering the data or
is that.
Is that part of the model
already.
Mr speaker.
What this specifies only is that
fifty percent needs to be spent
on the services available in
their communities these are
public health services.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
think where I am.
Seeing a trend is that
throughout the session we're
creating access for bills that
have no appropriation but
money's already in the budget
and then we're saying we're
going to create we're going to
fund it before we build it and
then we're going to have
guidance that's actually you're
saying.
Not defined in the bill but I'm
I mean I I read the bill
different than what you've been
describing
Then we're supposed to just pass
the funds ten million dollars a
lot of money that's how much
money we put into community
schools in your one so ten
million dollars a lot of money
and it's it's definitely needed
but the only one the only
evidence based models that I
could find were literally around
gotten violence and based on it
is is there is there part of the
model of that exist in
Albuquerque already some of the
things that I described
promotion around licensing
background checks I have noticed
that the Albuquerque's done
buybacks on fire arms could
these of dollars be used to buy
back firearms this is bigger
lady
that is not part of the violence
intervention program and.
So I would say probably answers
probably now Mr speaker and
gentle lady that we're not
naming that program in this
grand and again it says.
In the in the bill are not
meaning that program it's an
example is that correct or is
that the only one allowed or is
it an example of.
Mr speaker and lady it's so
simple thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady so if someone else
wanted to do.
This public policy model and
they wanted to use an evidence
based model and some of those
that I named are.
Licensing of all fire arms
tracking the flow of fire arms
background checks on all
firearms restricting firearm
access factors that protect risk
and protective factors that are
identified to protect and
restrict access to firearms that
could be a model is someone
could apply for Mr speaker lady
that's public policy not public
health.
But public policy is part of the
evidence based public health
model Mr speaker and leader this
is focused on public health.
So then Mr speaker and gentle
lady are you saying that they
could not use these dollars to
do to promote licensing
background checks are access
factors that protect and and
reduce access Mr speaker and
lady from grant that's not the
purpose of this program Mr
speaker and gentle lady so would
you say it would not be allowed
to order the purpose would be
prohibited Mr speaker lady I.
I have no idea but I cannot
imagine that it would go beyond
the scope here because the
department of health is going to
promulgate rates based on this
bill if this bill is enacted.
Mr speaker and gentle lady if
it's not prohibited its evidence
for evidence based model that
allowed Mr speaker I'm not going
to yield to this particular
question again I believe that I
have tried to address such as
best I can.
Mr speaker gentle lady I was
just looking for yes or no and I
didn't get that thank you Mr
speaker.
For the right the gentleman from
Bernalillo a great dance here.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The lady please yield.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
so I was just.
I've been missing all giving
Representative access we have an
adopted the practice of having a
camera on when we are having
remote members participate would
you kindly do so Sir.
I can speaker.
To see more speaker.
Coming here to win the prize
sure that we're just background
zoom the entire session.
Well I'm.
Thank you Mr speaker for doing
that on the.
Mr speaker gentle lady
Unanimous consent is been the
rule requiring gentleman to wear
a tie.
No objection it is so ordered.
Mr speaker
Mr speaker gentle lady I was
looking here at the.
The FIR said the question of the
FIR decided some questions on.
Well start on the fire I
It was we were looking at.
Where.
it did specify a lot about gun
violence those trying to reach
other homicide rates and and any
other things that were in here
and I just wanted to kind of
The body no with the speaker
gentle lady that.
Most of the gun violence
that takes place is generally
of.
Suicide.
Two thirds of that.
You suicide and then a big the
last major after for the next
biggest
Percentage is getting slashed
programs and so you know maybe
in the fuel business and making
many of these rules of sitting
here trying to think of how many
murders we have had that can
that the.
You know that the people had
been shot the so forth and I can
tell you that
a lot of these I'm sorry your
the the rate had gone up in
twenty twenty but we know that a
lot of those people were
This is due to.
Depression and a lot of suicide.
And and I just wanted to bring
that up.
Mr speaker Natalie were you
aware that suicide is the
highest
percentage of.
In related.
Yes.
Mr speaker and gentleman on
suicide is tragic but it has
nothing to do with this bill
because this is a crime bill.
Mr speaker is only and I'm sorry
I'm just reading also the FIR
and off the information that was
there that's why I just want to
bring that up all the churches
About twelve disorder bring that
up by the question of all.
Mr speaker gentle lady is
You mentioned Silver City of the
summer city area.
Can you explain is is the source
of the area of the southwest
corner.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Hi expert does not recall.
Okay Mr speaker gentle lady.
I was a.
I have been listening to you
said there were several regions
that you're going to of.
The.
That we're gonna get some of
this funding that was I.
Refusal is funded so can you
please explain what was.
Mr speaker and gentleman what I
did say earlier is that that was
based on two thousand nineteen
data.
I'm gonna try to change my
background.
The listing on that.
Better.
All right sorry about that I was
trying to.
Mr speaker.
I was trying to say that the
department of health would no
doubt get more updated
statistics before this is
the request for proposals goes
out.
Thank you Mr speaker gently on
that I can make somebody smile
out there.
I was just I was messing with
that earlier and I don't know
how to fix it if you can tell
trying to go back to take that
off so.
Mr speaker gentle lady it's just
a year brought up that that that
this area was a very of of of a
lot of of violence and couldn't
Be you know and could have that
of funding I was just trying to
figure out what what you're
you're talking about being that
we cover the whole southwest
here the I don't understand
which region is I.
I think does the further south
you go you run into more of that
drugs.
Drugs well it's a record but
there's a lot of a lot of that
activity in southwest New Mexico
near Deming and so the other
thing I have heard earlier
speaker gentle lady is you were
talking about the the funds and
how
Which was reoccurring and
monetary a non recurring and
there was one point seven
million dollars of.
Recurring.
Is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman if
there was a question there I
only heard the part this set is
that correct.
I'm sorry you know what is I'm
having trouble of listing and
also mapped out of town I'm
gonna go ahead and finish with
my question I'm sorry I'm having
trouble with my with my internet
connection so I'm I'm actually
it's pregnancy.
I'm through Mr speaker.
Okay thank you.
There's further debate.
Gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady chair from
Bernalillo yield.
I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I actually have.
Maybe to the chagrin the
sponsor.
Some questions that.
I have been asked.
But I I not understood the
answer and.
I I.
Maybe I would just instead of
asking about evidence based
research
Four research based public
health approach.
Or focused deterrence problem
oriented policing.
I just have a hard time Mr
speaker and and gentle lady as I
as I'm reading this I know these
words have meaning but the
average person doesn't know.
What that means and so I instead
of asking the same questions
have been asked I'm gonna try to
ask these a little bit
differently.
And some of speaker and Julie
and I you know what I'm sorry I
was a little put off my game
there does the gentle lady
yield.
The last thing I did okay thank
you Mr speaker gently
so I'm.
So I let me take you through
scenario on maybe you explain to
me.
What this would look like so
Mister speaker and gentle lady
we we were to I just summon.
Who has been determined to be.
Are the target population.
That is that high risk for
victimization or retaliation.
That results from violence.
What type of program would they
be going into is this
counseling.
What is this Mr speaker gentle
Mr speaker and gentleman did you
heard my example earlier.
I heard a couple of explanations
earlier and I still didn't
understand so I'm I'm trying to
find out is I understand
completely I answered this but
I'll do it again so what happens
is an example as they have an
individual who's just been the
victim of a shooting in a crime.
And he is one of the six hundred
individuals the one percent of
the population that law
enforcement is looking at in the
City of Albuquerque the violence
intervention team mates would
have finds out.
If he is willing to accept some
help.
Very identity yes they
identified that he has a mental
health problem his addicted he
doesn't have a home.
So they spend a lot of time with
him and the work with hands and
try to interrupt the cycle of
violence they also if you is
part of a family which most
people are work with as it turns
out generations that where
there's been a generational
cycle of violent crime and they
have had
the general dear dear colleague
from the leader Townsend the
gentleman from the NMAA
actually gave me a.
Our again the city credit for
ninety seven percent success but
it's ninety three percent
success so many three percent of
the two hundred twenty
individuals with David in
building like that have not
recent avid.
So Mister speaker and gently
once again a little confused
from that this because you
described a victim.
Of gun violence or a video via
this is speaker John when he was
shot like in a drug.
The older gone wrong but he was
at high risk for retaliating and
going right back out and
starting it all over again so he
we had just been shot so he was
a victim of a of a but it's not
like.
He's an innocent victim.
Thank you Mr speaker and and I I
guess that's where I'm going
I've I've I've been hearing the
word victim but I've been
hearing a recidivism.
And I just I'm I'm trying to
figure out if it's a recidivist
victim that was what maybe
that's what it is with the words
have been kind of intermingled.
As victim versus victimizer.
And that's that's what I've been
trying so I.
The idea of somebody not.
Who has not committed a crime.
But was the victim of a crime.
Not.
Retaliating I don't think that
happens.
Most of the time I think that
that is a portion of the time
but.
Of course not every victim.
Is a victimizer.
Mr speaker and gentleman of
this.
High level involved individual.
They are.
So we're not talking about.
A perfectly normal citizen
walking down the street getting
shot nobody's going to worry
about.
Once certainly going to go
knocking on his door and.
Trying to make sure he doesn't
get even we're talking about
people who are already
Involved in crime.
So thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady so so.
The reason we're recidivism is
the the the word that you used I
think at least once was because
they have previously themselves.
Been involved in crime so the
one percent is someone.
has already committed a crime
themselves and then becomes a
victim of crime so that they're
both not not one or the other as
I said and I for a probably
finally got a good education in
there and not an innocent
victim.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
gentle lady that's where I think
my my disconnect has been during
this whole discussion is.
Halfway through the story the
person who has been who is the
victim is somehow.
In danger of recidivism and I
and I didn't understand that
that's all I have specifically
been might disconnect Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
I I still have and I'm not going
to go down this road because I I
don't know that there's a good
answer for this.
But.
There's a whole series of words
here that I'm sure they they
mean something.
In the in the world of of
intervention but.
A bunch of words that don't have
to the average person.
The specific meaning.
Focused deterrence and.
the data driven methods if those
are are specific words it means
something but I don't know what
that what that looks like so so
that's Mister speaker July
that's why I'm asking are we
doing is just counseling
whatever it's a.
He describes having needing a
home maybe for
you you mentioned a couple of
other things but when you're
talking specifically about being
the victim of crime and trying
to talk trying to help them not
then again commit a crime.
I don't know that everybody
makes the connection to some of
the things you describe so that
that's what I'm asking you is.
Is the this is counseling as
well correct Mr speaker and
gentleman what I did described
earlier is that the Albuquerque
police department partners with
US attorneys the GTA the sheriff
and they're looking at the high
risk individuals and they've
identified one percent of the
population it's about six
hundred people and those are the
ones are looking at and when
they become one of them is shot
or something then that's when
they are contributing they find
that the most serious needs.
So what they're providing to
that individual is substance
abuse detox housing and most
likely
Counseling to deal with past
trauma.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady so I and by the way are the
reasons what I was asking I just
doing the math in my head it's
really later really early
depending on how you look at it
but one percent of six hundred
thousand people as six thousand
people.
So so that I was trying to
figure out the numbers earlier.
When we were.
talking about you know ten
million dollars going this
program every year and and when
you're saying six hundred
people.
I that just seems like a lot of
money.
Mr speaker and gentleman on this
page is you said it's it's less
than one percent and they
identified about six hundred
people and when you consider the
money saved.
no interesting way one of the
One of the studies here at Iowa
State University actually
estimated that one.
Murder costs society an
estimated seventy two point two
million dollars.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady for that answer.
So.
I heard about the great success
that this is been Albuquerque.
And during that same time frame
that we've been talking about
the the the success rate of this
we've seen.
Crime violent crime particularly
in Albuquerque.
Going through the roof.
So I am wondering is that.
That is not these people who
are.
It committing these crimes are
these new criminals who who is
this committing all these
crimes.
And all of these murders if
we're having this high of a
success rate ninety three
percent.
I'm not there's a disconnect in
my mind.
Mr speaker and gentleman
obviously we need to expand the
program because only two people
working on it right now now
they've just gone up to three
staff members so there's a lot
more that can be done and I
don't know if you were in for
the part of the discussion a lot
of people have been in and out
but it takes three to five years
to the makes a to realize the
full results.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I saw three to five years
But at this so I'm confused
about the.
About getting to the ninety
three percent success rate than
if we were talking about this
program only being in effect for
a little over a year well Mr
speaker and gentleman we're just
giving you preliminary results
from a pilot program so of the
two hundred and twenty with whom
they have interviewed they have
a ninety three percent right of
no recidivism.
Thank you speaker and and and
and gentle lady I just once
again
I'm I'm only relating to what I
see on the nightly news.
And it just it it.
I'm finding that out the same
time we started.
Going away from.
From crime and punishment to a
different type of.
Of plan that we've seen of the.
The crime rate in Albuquerque go
up I believe I heard it was over
thirty percent I believe is a
report that I read.
And so I'm not questioning the
numbers of the specific program.
But I am.
Questioning.
The efforts and if there's only
two people doing this in
Albuquerque at this seems maybe
a little bit of a.
Well I'm I'm not gonna say it I
just it just doesn't seem like
the effort has been actually
that strong and Albuquerque
Mr speaker and gentle lady I.
Just briefly yeah you've
answered most the questions that
I have but.
I am a little confused with.
The actual title of the
intervention program is the.
Violence intervention program
act.
And it was mentioned earlier and
I and I the first thing that
caught my eye is this a
specifically.
About gun violence.
And
I guess my question here is I.
Do we need to.
The program would also I would
imagine help someone who is the
victim of of right.
Three violent crimes Woods
present put the stamp on.
The three violent crimes that
are on target to share our
homicide gun violence and
aggravated assault any kind of
aggravated assault.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
it is is there a reason that
refer that someone is a victim
of right would would not be it
is but they're not want to
retaliate Mr speaker and
gentleman a victim of a rape is
never not an innocent victim
remember we're talking about not
innocent victims these are
perpetrators of crime that we're
going after who are victims
themselves.
Thank you Mr speaker generated
so you're saying that a girl
that is in a game could not be
right.
Gentleman that is not what she
said.
Speaker and gentle and gentle
honestly point of that that is
not what she said and I I would
appreciate if you could maintain
some decorum and listen to the
gentle lady's answers and ask
questions that relate to the
bill she's said at least three
dozen times this bill is
targeted expanding a pilot
program that works to prevent
further acts of violence
committed by non innocent
victims of.
Gun violence and aggravated
assault so this line of
questioning about rape is not on
point I would ask you to move on
to next question Mr speaker I
respectfully disagree
considering that this is been
called a health.
Care Jim I understated agree I'm
suggesting that you move on
you've got the answer to your
question I understand you don't
like the answer but please ask
your next one thank you Mr
speaker and gentle and gentle
lady.
It has been mentioned by other
members of.
In the chamber today that the
that there are other types of
violence so let's forget for the
second for the for the sake of
discussion let's forget the
previous point that I was making
but assault and battery are also
violent crimes so.
What has what seems to be.
The problem for folks.
On on this side of the aisle is
pointing out.
Among the.
Type of crimes that can be
committed here is specifically
an animate object a gun.
You could easily be.
Somebody trying to run somebody
over with a car or hit him with
a baseball bat.
For brass knuckles for a knife
for non checks or what ever.
And so Mister speaker and gentle
lady I am going to be offering
an amendment.
And the amendment is to
specifically instead of having
just get caught up.
Many poor folks getting caught
up specifically on the gun
aspect of this and potentially
limited a good to.
Activated assaults including
assault battery or whatever that
someone may want to retaliate
from.
For.
And I would like to offer at
this time.
The house amendment one.
To house bill ninety six the
violence of violence
intervention and then
intervention programme Act and
the two oh two number is two two
two seven one five point one
eight generous to the amendment
I believe he's explained to
gentle lady is just a friendly
amendment no it's not Mr speaker
let me tell you why.
The city has been working they
they did research.
On the states and cities were
phones intervention programs
have been going on.
They identified three types of
crimes that were causing the
most harm in the community they
were homicides.
Gun violence and aggravated
assault obviously homicides it
doesn't work you can not go into
the building with a non innocent
victims.
But those perpetrating gun
violence and aggravated assaults
yes you can intervene so if you
change this bill you've
basically
Taken from the city and from the
others who may wish to apply for
this program the opportunity to
get at what's driving their
crime and the information about
these three types of crime are
the days of the things we want
to stop in our communities to
make them safer so it's very and
friendly and I urged the body to
vote now they don't even.
Seeing none gentleman from
Bernalillo thank you Mr Gramm we
do actually I just add up to
debate ever please signify by
saying I decided to debate the
bills was named.
The eyes have it Mr speaker I
just stood up to debate the bill
you Mr speaker I just set up to
debate about the Leo you're not
allowed to interrupt the speaker
I recognize him before you did.
Generators in one unit of our
personal privilege.
This is a point of personal
privilege is not in order at
this time Jennifer San Juan you
have the floor thank you Mr
speaker.
I would suggest.
That.
We do have a crime problem in
New Mexico.
I do believe we need to have
all aspects surrounding crime be
addressed.
We do want to do we do want to
participate in intervention
where we can.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
But I believe that what is
missing.
Is that this is not jest our
crime problem Mr speaker and
gentle lady is not jest
Victims who.
It's not just circular Mr
speaker and gentle lady it's
growing.
It's a growing problem in the
speaker and gentle lady I would
suggest and I think this is what
the public believes that the
problem has been growing as we
have become more lax.
On the idea of someone being
punished for the wrongdoings.
Unfortunately not every victim
on Victor victimizer should be
looked at as a victim not
everyone some yes obviously
there is a cycle there's a cycle
of poverty there is a cycle of
addiction there is a cycle of.
Quite frankly a cycle of the
lack of respect for life.
And that is ingrained in many
portions of our society Mr
speaker and and and gentle lady
I would suggest that this is a
part this is a piece of the
puzzle this is this is one item
that needs to be addressed Mr
speaker and and gentle lady.
We have had an opportunity in
the governor's even.
I think gone against the grain
and suggested that we need to.
Need to do something about the
other aspect that we're
completely neglecting here and
Mr speaker that is the idea that
we.
Treat.
The victimizers as if they
themselves are victims.
Far too often thank you Mr
speaker there's further debate
the gentleman from curry thank
you Mr speaker provided please
you.
I certainly will Mr speaker
thank you delay all it I have
two questions in in the
questions are gonna come from a
lot of the responses that I
heard you give this evening or
are you just mentioned that.
You would prohibit the cities or
counties from getting at what's
driving their crime you were
trying to find as you build your
foundation for your bill you're
trying to find out what's
driving the crime he talked
about doing research on
different states in different
cities in the process of of
coming together you talked about
The sheriffs and the police were
looking at high risk individuals
as part of the process
you quoted from several studies
when you said you had a interim
committee or a group that came
together in the Albuquerque
area.
To look at the in reserves the
different programs to bring your
bill together and and as I
listen to all of this there was
something that came into my mind
there was a result of an article
that I read several months ago.
About the top three reasons that
cities are experiencing a high
crime and and that sort of thing
and so my two questions are.
Is Alfa is Albuquerque is
sanctuary city and did you look
at sanctuary cities when you
look at the foundation of the
problem when you're putting your
package together the following
questions Mr Chairman we've got
of them been asked to suspend
the rule to allow the gentle
lady from Bernalillo to said
when she's not responding to a
question Representative is
objections so that rule this is
funded gentlelady from
Bernalillo Mr speaker and
gentleman the answer is yes and
no.
Thank you
to recite verses late it's late
at night so department of a yes
it is a century and no you did
not look at that as part of your
research is that Mr speaker and
gentleman that did not services
anything that was a factor that
would have
contributed to the crime rate.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
you did look at it and decided
it would not serve as a factor.
Mr speaker and gentleman
that was not.
A factor for which we were
looking but we had a very open
ended discussion in the city and
basically anything could have
been raised but that was not
appreciated thank just curious
if that was something that you
look at thank you Mr speaker
that's all the questions.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Eddie.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
for the gentle lady from
Bernalillo please yield yes I
yield.
Thank you Mr speaker generally
so I'm just.
Been listening to the debate and
I'm just trying to summarize in
my mind what this bill is about
is I'm going to give you a
sentence and perhaps you could
tell me if I'm
on target with what the bill
does so.
House bill ninety six is
targeted at not innocent
victims.
R. E. victims of gun violence
who were themselves at fault for
committing gun violence.
Other words to people to guns Mr
speaker gentle lady is is that
what this bill is about.
Mr speaker and a lady from
setting.
Exclusively it was a simple that
we use to where they're looking
at individuals who are involved
in crime.
And intervening at a point where
it looks like they may be able
to get one.
To interrupt the cycle of
violence for that individual and
I'll say him but it could be a
woman too but for that
individual and his family.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
Senior further debate the gentle
lady to close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that house bill ninety six do
now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill ninety six.
As amended.
They were final passage has a
ninety six as amended the vote
is now open.
This portion of the vote is
about to close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon yes
Representative Alcon votes yes
representative Debbie Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong votes yes
Representative bash.
Yes.
Representative fast food yes
Representative Blanco.
Yes Representative will go votes
yes Representative Cabana.
Yes.
Representative votes yes
Representative Castellano.
Representative Castellano.
Yes yes Representative
Castellano is yes thank you
Representative Dow.
Representative Fajardo.
No Representative Fajardo of
votes no Representative Harry
Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative Hochman
Vigil.
Representative Lara.
Yes Representative lot of votes
yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative let the votes
yes Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis votes
yes Representative Lundstrom.
Yes.
Representative Lundstrom votes
yes Representative McQueen.
Yes Representative queen both
yes Representative Roger
Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
votes yes Representative Ortez
this is Hochman Vigil can you
hear me yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil
votes yes Representative Ortez.
Yes Representative were yes
votes yes Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
Yes Representative G. Andrés
Romero votes yes Representative
Roybal Caballero.
For.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes representative Sarinana.
Representative Terrazas.
No Representative says both no
Representative Thomson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes Representative close by a
vote of forty four in the
affirmative twenty in the
negative house bill ninety six
as amended has passed the house.
Okay members just as a reminder
we're going to proceed in the
following order.
Next we're going to go to item
nineteen.
Then nine.
Then fourteen.
And then sixteen.
Then at the seven.
Then twenty five again.
The next bill will be item
nineteen.
Nine.
Fourteen.
Sixteen.
Seven.
Twenty five.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Dixon are you
ready on item number nineteen.
Thank you Mr speaker will you
get me to that point the record
reflect much necessary for
placing House Bill seven as
amended on final passage has
been taken gentlelady to explain
it all.
Thank you Mr speaker house bill
seven as amended establishes the
opportunity enterprise fund
which is a partnership and
funding program it's created
within the New Mexico finance
authority to support local
communities that want to build
and invest in commercial or
entrepreneurial space to
directly support economic
development initiatives.
And Mister speaker I have an
amendment the gentle lady to
move the amendment.
I move floor amendment one to
house bill seven the gentle lady
yeah would you please give us
the two oh two number from the
bottom of the amendment.
Two two two six six seven point
one.
Gentlelady to move the amendment
gentlelady to explain.
Thank you Mr speaker of the
house floor amendment one
provide some clarification
language
I can.
Go through each orders if you
just give us a general
description of the amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker so one of
the key points is that we're
clarifying that fair market
value for property can include
sufficient rent as well as other
securities to ensure the
maintenance and protection of
property
and we are.
making sure that.
Principal after principal
interest is allowed as a source
of income for the fund.
Is there debate on the
amendment.
Is there section to it hearing
on house floor amendment number
one to house bill seven is
adopted.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo you
still have the floor thank you
Mr speaker I have a second
amendment came gentle lady to
move the amendment.
I move house floor amendment
number two to house bill seven.
And the gentle lady that is a
two zero two number triple two
six nine seven point one yes
indeed gentlelady to explain the
amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker this
amendment
says simply the authority may
prioritize an application for
enterprise assistance for a
proposed enterprise development
project located in a non urban
County.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Is a division amendment
gentleman from curry thank you
Mr speaker Mr speaker could you
repeat the to to number I
believe you said six nine seven
and mine is different than the
other they were to I I do
believe they've both been passed
out the first amendment was
triple two six six seven point
one the second amendment was
triple two six nine seven point
one thank you Mr speaker
version.
Is there debate on the
amendment.
Is objection to it hearing none
house floor amendment number two
to house bill seven as amended
is adopted gentlelady from
Bernalillo you have the floor.
Thank you Mr speaker I will
stand for questions there is
debate the gentleman from Santa
Representative Harper.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady yield.
Thank you Mr speaker I will
yield to the gentleman from
Santa Fe County.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
I have a few questions just so I
can make sure I understand how
this legislation so if I
understand this correctly we are
creating what's being called an
opportunity enterprise revolving
fund.
Mr speaker and.
A lady I imagine that there is
an appropriation associated with
this fund.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman yes there is funding
in the budget for this item.
Mr speaker and gentle lady how
much funding who was in the
budget when it left the house
and is it still there in the
Senate.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman at seventy million
dollars.
Speaker Julie so we're sitting
this was a a large portion of
funding.
And the speaker and gentle lady
who who will be managing this
new fund.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman it will be under the
auspices of the New Mexico
finance authority and Mr speaker
I failed to to introduce my
expert witnesses for this
evening I have Marquita Russel
director CEO of the New Mexico
finance authority and Jason
Espinoza director of New Mexico
idea.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady it's a great to see your
your witnesses here again I've
seen a lot of other legislation
thanks for being with us
tonight.
so Mister speaker and gentle
lady have
the.
Fe already has
revolving funds and authority to
Of.
provide loans to folks who have
applications I mean I I think
was on
the floor session or two ago we
had the enabling legislation
that was carried and passed so
what what is different here
seven what the NMFA can already
do.
Thank you Mr speaker and
representative a gentleman this
is for specific economic
development projects.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady so
the.
If a does not have the authority
right now to do economic
development projects is that
correct.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman NMFA does have a fund
from which they can make loans
however they didn't there's no
money in that fund and it does
not do this particular.
All right so was bitterly so
that's kind of two different
answers to different questions
right so you're saying there is
an existing frontier with no
money.
So Mister jelly can we not use
that fund.
Mr speaker and gentleman no
that frontier does not allow an
MFA to make lease purchases
Sorry Mr speaker and gentleman
but it does not fulfill the
intent of this legislation.
Some speaker gentle lady so this
legislation has nothing to do
with other fun we're not trying
to put money in that other fund.
I see you shaking your head so
okay thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady so so we're starting
a new fund and what specifically
does this fund do that is
different besides the lease
payments that you
that you mentioned could you
perhaps going to a little more
detail on why we are creating a
yet another fund.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Santa this
built through the opportunity
enterprise fund five sets to
provide a unique and distinct
tool in the economic toolbox for
both the state and local
communities it.
More specifically
what this program is doing is
allowing for local communities
which are in the best position
to know what their communities
need
to
work with partners and.
Develop industrial space smart
manufacturing hubs commercial
kitchens or maker spaces
dependent on their specific need
to foster micro and small
business creation and growth and
bring jobs to their communities.
Mr speaker and and jelly from
Bernalillo thank you that's
that's getting closer to what I
was looking for
you really don't understand what
are the current limitations of
NMFA and then what this will
allow innovative do that they're
not doing right now and.
And I I guess I'm still just
trying understand a little bit.
More deeply
prevention working with partners
and working with local
communities I mean.
And if they can already do that.
So you're talking about you know
restaurants in maker spaces and
these kind of things can NMFA
not do that right now.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman they can make loans
for those projects but they
cannot purchase and lease them.
Okay so Mister gentlelady from
Bernalillo okay I think I'm I
think I'm on on the same
wavelength now so so right now
and if they can.
Find loans.
the navy rate back and there's
some interest rate ten
associated with that.
But male this legislation will
allow for a.
To all.
And then at least two
You know a private entity for
example or maybe even a
government entity speakers I can
compose a government entity and
a private entity lease this call
may NMFA on property.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Speaker John from Bernalillo
thank you.
So.
Speaker and generally is this
the first time then and if it's
going to be able to actually
own.
Property.
Mr speaker and gentleman NMFA
currently can.
Own buildings for state
government purposes this would
be distinct in that
the opportunity enterprise fund
would work with local
communities to.
Build or purchase your the space
and then coordinate with the GST
through a master lease
agreements.
To rent the space.
And through that.
GSD or would Hey the fund for
the principal balance and then
also in the fair market value
would include
Money for fees maintenance
Administer it administering the
property and.
Those the excess of that would
go to.
GSD.
Okay Mister Joe if we're
Bernalillo thank you that that
is also very helpful to know
that
this is in the very first time
that NMFA will be managing
property is sounds like they
have experienced at least for on
the state side managing property
and and if the speaker is if I
understood your response General
Services Department does the the
work on the ground is that
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
that's correct and actually so
NMFA does not manage the
properties they own them but GSD
manages the properties okay Mr
speaker generally thank you that
that is that is helpful.
So.
So we'll have a lot more
potentially properties that GST
is helping us.
To manage.
I I'm I'm assuming that.
Well it's about assumption can
you explain to me how GSD gets
the funding for doing that work
is it through an affairs as to
the general fund to.
General Services departments
annual appropriation.
Mr speaker and gentleman at the
so.
The opportunity enterprise fund
enters into a master lease
agreement with GST.
GSD rents out the property and
from the rent payment they pay.
The funds back but they also are
allowed to charge sufficient
amount for their management.
Mr speaker Julie thank you
that's that's very helpful and
it kind of leads into a couple
other questions I had some
concerns perhaps Mr generally.
The.
Our structure of of this.
The kind of expansion in the
sorority.
Mr generally being able to not
just
purchase and lease
property but also it looks like
There's a story here for NMFA.
To offer.
Low interest loans for zero
percent interest loans for.
Various business development.
It says is that correct Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes so
the opportunity enterprise fund
would be able to offer loans and
that's particularly useful for
some of the smaller more rural
communities that don't have
access to that.
Financing.
So Mister speaker and and
gentlelady from Bernalillo.
I I know access to capital is a
challenge.
and but.
Talk about that a little bit
more because my understanding is
that there are a lot of
community banks and there are a
lot of credit unions and
there are opportunities for for
businesses to get loans from
them.
so I'm I'm trying to understand
how this.
Interacts with that process.
Thank you Mr speaker and
representative one of the
concerns on in drafting this
legislation we had was not to
replace the role of banks and so
that's why we can this
legislation allows for the
guarantee of loans so that the
costs of community banks and
credit unions I would still have
a roll.
Smith speaker and gentle lady so
I I appreciate that that there
was some thought they wanted to
the development this will this
legislation this bill.
but I guess I'm thinking speaker
gentle lady if there's an
opportunity to receive a
essentially zero interest loan
or a very low interest loan.
Why would anyone then go to the
bank.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman well in order to
qualify for the options through
this endeavor they need to show
that they
Have not been able to at the
need to provide sufficient
evidence that other means of
financing
are unavailable or insufficient.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
yak
Our mission is to that statement
properly so.
Are we saying that a business
has to show that they've applied
and try to get credit but they
were unsuccessful.
And and that we are we actually
taking a great risk was taxpayer
dollars on on a the business's.
Folks in the industry have
determined to be too high risk.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman to a certain extent we
are taking a greater risk than a
commercial lending institution
and part of that is because of
one of the goals of the
legislature and the state of New
Mexico is to support economic
development efforts in our local
communities.
Mr jelly I I'm very grateful for
the honesty of your answer and
and I also understand and
appreciate the the goals of
stated here that you're trying
to help
maybe an idea the to.
You know maybe could be
successful but others of dean's
to risky so I understand you're
coming from but Mr gently just
again trying to be.
You know intellectually honest
and consistent
you know I've I work very hard
to make sure that we're
safeguarding.
Taxpayer dollars and
and I really am concerned
for two reasons here one that we
are
Taking greater risk.
And so the likelihood that we
will have losses higher and then
to I do really see this as.
Adding competition
to the banking industry I
appreciate this effort you put
in there but I still really feel
that I mean if I was going to
start a business and I an
opportunity to get a zero
percent interest loan
you know I I would definitely
pursue that over you know
A higher interest rate loan at a
at a bank.
SPLA your your thoughts on that.
Image of a question we should
ask the gentle lady.
Thank you did.
I miss the grant to the gentle
lady for her thoughts on why she
filled this legislation was
still.
Important and worse caring based
off of those concerns.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman this is the should not
be considered the first option
for
financing the requirements as
established
To say that
They need to provide sufficient
evidence that other financing is
either unavailable or
insufficient in addition it this
is a community effort you know
this.
Projects and partnerships that
receive funding need to
demonstrate local support and
the value that this brings to
the community and the
community's economic interests.
Thank you Mr speaker and gently
from Bernalillo.
I.
Again I I understand
And respect we're coming from I
I do have concerns around that
area specifically.
And also Mr speaker Julie if you
could maybe you know zooming out
to the thirty thousand foot view
talk about.
What you expect the interplay to
be between this new authority
that we're giving to NMFA versus
what is commonly done in our
economic development department
was
statewide leader funds local
Halina funds
you know we have a a lot of.
Money right now in the general
fund
in in house bill two going to
economic development.
And.
You know how hello this.
Contract with those existing
programs.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so backing up to the
thirty thousand foot level.
The first thing is that all of
the projects would be vetted by
the opportunity enterprise
Review Board and that board
consists of some of our
agency leaders so that we can
ensure that we are making wise
financial investments
and we're also including
representatives there six public
members appointed by Legislative
Council who have experience in
one or more of the following
areas.
Banking and finance commercial
or industrial credit.
Private equity venture capital
or mutual fund investments
commercial real estate
development engineering
construction and construction
management organized labor urban
planning for sustainable
construction and development now
the opportunity enterprise
Review Board.
Works in conjunction with the
New Mexico economic development
department and by working
together they can recommend and
review projects that day feel
meet the criteria that are set
forth through the rule making
up for funding so this is once
again a distinct program.
Is separate from leisure
separate from need to separate
from our other existing programs
that fills a gap.
And works with our local
communities and the economic
development department.
speaker and Angela from
Bernalillo thank you for that
the answer I'm I'm pleased to
hear that there is
an effort to coordinate so we
don't have duplicative efforts
here and and Mr jelly thank you
for talking about the make up of
the board of that was another
question of mine Mr daily and I
think you've been very
thoughtful and and creating
these six public members are
can you talk about the a non
public members of this review
board.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes the
non public the
Sort of.
State agency members are the
secretary of New Mexico economic
development or designate
and that would apply for all of
them the secretary of
DFA.
The secretary of GSD state
treasurer.
State auditor and then
Representative from one of our
council of governments.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so we
have it's roughly a two dozen
issue maybe a little bit more
members total.
Mr speaker gentleman twelve.
You Mr leader thank you that's
what I was trying to that's what
I was trying to say but not
working on health thank you yes
with a dozen members.
And.
I guess Mr Julie I.
I don't have a better idea of
how to structure I think you've
done a good job but I am
concerned that a lot of these
people.
R.
kind of by their very nature
have political appointees.
and and even with their half
their background I am a little
concerned that perhaps there
will be some political.
by Esther influence in in this
process can you maybe speak to
to the concerned and and really
this stems from what happened
maybe about.
You know fifteen years ago when
we had folks in the you know
state investment council that
were directing investments and
we all know the double up it was
a big black guy for the state
government we just wanna make
sure that we're not.
Repeating that mistake they were
really being objective and not
just giving our friends could
not get.
Loans from the bank now a loan
from the state.
Thank you Mr speaker and
representative there to specific
ways that I think can help
address your question the first
is that the
six members the public members
are appointed by Legislative
Council and the second mechanism
is that their six year terms so
by nature they have a longer
period of time and.
Less subjected to political Ms.
Yes Mr usually I am I I think I
agree with you on that having
longer terms makes it
Less political all agree with
you on that
but I just called to say
You know I participated
Legislative Council for a few
years early on in my time here
and not to say that to you know
it's it's not a.
It's not just one but either
side I think either side is
really good at appointing
political people
and and so I am a little
concerned about that process I I
I would rather we had.
something more similar to how we
choose our
chief hearing officer that that
here's protest to release from
the tax department we go through
a process where people apply and
we we have a board of of experts
that goes through the resumes
and interview folks instead of
just.
Those are.
You know a particular member of
this body
a point to a board that maybe
had two years of experience on
their resume you know to venture
capital.
Speaker gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman
The other aspect of that might
provide some ease is that while
the board and to the Economic
development department
recommended projects
politically the NMFA has
discretion.
Mr really thank you that that's
also why I'm I like hearing that
there's multiple layers to this
so that that is also good to
hear.
So with speaker internally I
really appreciate you taking the
time to help me understand this
bill.
By again I understand and
respect the the goal and your
desires of the Mr gently I I am
concerned you know someone who
tries to safeguard our.
Our taxpayer dollars that.
The vast majority goes to
teachers and and kids and people
who need health care.
That we're making sure that
we're.
Not being overly risky that
we're not competing with the
private banking sector.
And that we're not putting
people in a position where.
Maybe maybe they are making
political based decisions
rewarding friends and that makes
us all look bad when this comes
to light later I don't think
that's fair.
To people who are going to put
in that position so I've had I
think I'm going to respectfully
not support.
Your legislation
slide again thank you for the
time thank you Mr speaker.
The gentle lady from Chavis.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
Thank you Mr speaker yes I will
yield to the gentle lady from
Travis.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I had
basically the same questions
Representative Harper at I I do
have lots of problems with this
because.
At.
The fund assets will be used
this is my concern right here
with the first one okay.
Purchase planning designing
building surveying improving
operating furnishing equipment
equipping or maintaining of land
building or infrastructure to
create or expand economic
development opportunities within
the state.
So this opportunity enterprise
will be owning could be owning
the structures that are there.
Am I understanding that
correctly Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady yes the state will
potentially own some of these
properties and one way to think
about this is that right now New
Mexico has a surplus of funds
and we can put those funds to
use and get a return on our
investment
from now and in the future and
we can do that.
By owning property that we get
the payments back into the fund
for we can also Representative
make the loans and have those
payments come back to the state
and even with the leases access
revenue will go into the state
general fund so another way to
look at this really is putting
our dollars to work.
Mr speaker gentle lady and
another way of putting it is
let's break the back of New
Mexico okay there's no guarantee
those funds are gonna be there
in the future.
And that I really have a problem
when they were saying the state
is gonna own it Mr speaker
gentle lady I have a problem
with the government's own
anything anymore we have seen
what has happened we see that
thirty by thirty the band that's
going to be hitting is Mr
speaker I'm appalled by this I
really am of.
That was just I'm not even on
the second page and I'm already
getting worked up about this.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
What will happen.
Hold on here of lost my place
now.
Just one moment.
The thing that concerns me Madam
Mr speaker and gentle lady on
page three hi and J..
Up to an agreement the.
And it provides for payments in
lieu of taxes to the county and
then J. starts up payment in
lieu of taxes Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Give me an example of a payment
in lieu of taxes okay and then I
will give you what I know about
payment in lieu of taxes.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
payment in lieu of taxes are
designed to make up for lost
revenue that the county might
see when the state owns the
property.
Mr speaker that's exactly right
right now we have federal lands
in several of the county's third
Lok lots of the counties located
throughout the state of New
Mexico those counties are to
receive payment in lieu of taxes
for those pieces of property
located within the boundaries of
those counties as it is I can't
remember how many years ago was
federal government said oh no
we're not going to pay you that
is the same amount anymore so
they have cut that the counties
of lost money due to that Mr
speaker that actually happened
to this what is it called
opportunity enterprise I believe
it could Mr speaker especially
whenever we have state running
businesses like this which the
state has no business running in
the first place I'd like your
thoughts on it.
Mr speaker gentle lady are you
asking about the payment of
taxes or something else I'm
sorry could you repeat your
question yes I can okay at this
time we're gonna go back and
talk about the payment in lieu
of taxes the federal government
has already renewed Act and many
counties throughout the state of
New Mexico by the state and we
are not going to tell you this
right anymore we're going to cut
it down to you name and number
that's what they want to cut it
down to so if the opportunity
enterprise.
That may be going on I hope not
but if it is.
And this endeavor fails what's
gonna happen those counties in.
Mr speaker that I meant a loose
taxes will go away in my
understanding that correctly.
Mr speaker gentle lady the funds
can make a payment in lieu of
taxes in the event that the
project is not.
Mr speaker in case of default
what will happen.
Mr speaker gentle lady the
In the event of default from
the.
Partner the fund can really set
they can sell it.
Yes Mr speaker gentle lady but
the fund will always pay the
payment of taxes if.
The default occurs.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Will the taxpayers dollars ever
be at risk.
Notice my head.
Mr speaker gentle lady at the
appropriation is making loans
and so yes there will be a risk
however there are protections
such as club Act measures.
Mr speaker as a taxpayer of the
state in New Mexico.
I.
Don't like where this might be
hidden because we are putting
the taxpayers dollars at risk
right now it seems like we're
investing where's that amount I
saw.
A hundred and
Over seventy million dollars
appropriated for of fiscal year
twenty twenty three.
So what is going to happen
after.
Twenty twenty three Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady I'm sorry
what happens after twenty twenty
three years for were you gonna
get funding.
If this is such a great thing
shouldn't just kick right off
and be able to buy for
everything right the end because
Mr speaker right now gentle lady
we do have a great about a money
that's available for we can
actually do some good in the
state of New Mexico without
putting the taxpayers dollars at
risk Mr speaker gentle lady.
We've seen what the purpose of
this legislative body is trying
to do by setting down oil and
gas production trying to kick
back a culture in the you know
what back here Mr speaker gentle
lady.
There is no guarantee that that
money is going to be there in
the future.
That correct.
Never mind let's move on.
Mr speaker gentle lady on the.
Whenever I'm looking at your
membership list of starting on
page six going on page seven of
your bill.
Europe with me so far okay.
Six public members appointed as
starts on the bottom of page six
have to designate to.
The rest of them will be the
first six members those next six
members are appointed by the New
Mexico Legislative Council you
will have experience in any one
of the more following than talks
that banking the talks about
commercial real estate
development and engineering.
Tell me why organized labor's in
their.
Mr speaker gentle lady
apprenticeships job training
workforce development.
I understand Mr speaker what
organized labor it is that if
we're actually trying to get in
New Mexico working.
Why does organized labor need to
be there whenever could be a
contractor from Axel if you're
going to go forward with this if
you're gonna have these
participants come in shouldn't
they be the one that's making
the decision on who is going to
do the building the construction
the planning the design all the
necessary stuff that goes along
with it without having to rely
on organ of organized labor to
make that.
To be in there involved in the
project Mr speaker gentle lady
there is also the provision for
someone with a engineering
construction and construction
management experience.
Mr speaker doesn't just fall in
the realm of organized labor.
There are plenty of people out
there that are well qualified in
that field Mr speaker gentle
lady let me turn on over here to
my next tab that I have marked
in this but and there are plenty
of them because I've had like I
said earlier I still have great
concerns about this.
One moment.
Mr speaker gentle lady turn to
page twelve if you will of the
bill and I don't know if there
was an amendment on that part of
that or not let me make sure
that there's not okay we're good
there.
And we are.
Good there if you will drop down
to about lines of the seventeen
through.
Twenty three.
But it was we are talking right
here a contract we're talking
about a contract under section
see to provide enterprise
assistance.
So it lists all the stuff down
here but on.
Line seventeen number six's says
specify how it will specify had
debts incurred on behalf of the
opportunity enterprise partner
will be repaid.
And then it continues to provide
that in the event of a default
the authority may they go ahead
and let the audience knew let
the members know let anybody
that still awake at this hour
and why you'd want to be awake
at this hour I don't know I
really don't understand that
this is very interesting Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Explain to me how you will take
position of will be in charge of
it and what happens after the
default.
Thank you Mr Mr speaker gentle
lady
In such a case NMFA would take
possession and then be able to
make the best decision either to
sell the property Lee said
can make the determination from
there.
Mr speaker gentle lady in front
of what would be the time frame
for that piece of for that
project the the has now entered
into default how long do you
think that it might give me an
estimate of what the time frame
would be to remove that partner
from the.
Opportunity enterprise.
Lose lose the property back all
the necessary documents
available for the next person
that moves into it.
There's a time frame therefore
there is money.
That is.
Not working for the state would
that be a fair statement might.
Mr speaker gentle lady the time
it would depend on the
particular market circumstances.
Mr speaker I agree with you
there and therein lies the
problem I think Mr speaker
gentle lady to skip on over to
page thirteen.
Under section do
we're talking about opportunity
and enterprise financing.
In under C. on that page line
twenty four and twenty five
continuing gone over to page
fourteen.
Is is talking about financing.
Senator C. in particular Mr
speaker and gentleman gentle
lady is states financing shall
not be subject to repayment if
the terms of the contract for
financing are carried out by the
opportunity enterprise partner
it continues to say that the
project should be the property
of the story should be a
property available for lease as
provided in section ten of this.
Of the thirty enters into caught
agreements with General Services
Department or other state
agencies or entities approved by
the board to administer and
maintain the property as
required by the opportunity
opportunity enterprise Act so
Mister speaker gentle lady
whenever we are.
Lohan's actually don't have to
financing which doesn't have to
be subject to retirement Mr
slaughtered Mr speaker one of
the taxpayers gonna say about
that it's their money.
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
not the loan section the
financing is when.
The fund owns the property.
Loans are later in the bill.
Mr speaker it falls under
section nine which is financing.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Of this is the authority can
enter into agreements with the
General Services Department
explained that to me please.
Mr speaker gentle lady NMFA in
the fund can enter into operator
the master lease agreements with
GSD because NMFA does not manage
properties General Services
Department does.
Mr speaker gentle lady thank you
for that answer.
Of Mr speaker I'm gonna drop on
them because I know there's
other people that have questions
as well down at the bottom of
the page fourteen.
Under this section tennis's
opportunity enterprise lease
terms.
This is the authority will
receive an overview applications
for leases and up the authority
may enter into a contract to
lease an available property to
that opportunity enterprise
partner in exchange for ripped
payments that's kind of
convoluted there.
Can you straighten that out for
me.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady this would be the instance
in which the fund and NMFA could
bills the property and do the
lease itself that is one of the
options enumerated previously.
Okay thank you for that it's as
clear as mud Mr speaker gentle
lady
Mr speaker of the gentle lady
the funding that have gentle
lady from Chavis please Mr
Corman would appreciate it if
you would not the cast is
versions I'm not casting
aspersions is not very clear Mr
speaker not thank the taxpayers
have the right to hear what is
going to be happening with their
dollars Mr speaker gentle thank
you Mr speaker gentle lady on
page fifteen.
Fund raises the fund if under
the repair opportunity
enterprise loan repayment.
Of the thirty was shall receive
and review applications.
Because loans it may make up to
make loans to opportunity
enterprise partners if the
funding is available.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
If the funding is available so
that is this going back to my
question I asked earlier Mr
speaker gentle lady what happens
after twenty twenty three.
If those if the tax dollars are
not made available The New.
I don't think that it'll be up
and running by that time point
able to sustain itself would be
gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady it is a
revolving fund and so over time
the fund will replenish.
Mr speaker the I'm still really
concerned about the funding that
may not be available after
twenty twenty three.
Mr speaker gentle lady here's
another question I have for you
on page sixteen.
C. starting on line twelve
through fifteen it looks like.
If.
This is the loans shall be made
for loan periods of no less than
fifteen years and no more than
thirty years.
Will there be a penalty if there
is a.
And early payment for pre
payment on that loan.
Mr speaker gentle lady we say
explicitly not.
Okay.
There will not be Mr speaker
gentle lady are cracked okay so
any loan that is made for the it
cannot be made for less than
fifteen years the state at the
end of twelve years is business
this partner you have has done
really well and they want to pay
it off they would be able to do
that is that correct okay thank
you very much Mr speaker gentle
lady I'm moving on.
Because then those start to run.
I I've tried to read everything
regarding the reports and I'm
skipping all the way over to
page eighteen nineteen right now
and this is it's more less clear
for the finance authority is
going to do to.
Make sure that everything is on
the up and up but I don't see
anything in here about an audit
have I missed it.
Mr speaker gentle lady the New
Mexico finance authority is
subject to the state auditor
Act.
So this fund would be to.
Okay so Mister speaker gentle
lady I am hearing the end of
from your expert witnesses there
because they are subject to that
and that audit would be mated by
available to the public in my
understanding that correct
that's good to know Mr speaker
gentle lady or cracked thank you
very much for that response Mr
speaker of.
We have talked about.
This so bill.
About the money that we do have
that right now the the excess
money that we have right now.
That Mr speaker I also filled.
This is ten may be to shut down
our local lenders.
Our private lenders and that
that gives me concern Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Hi.
I am concerned because right now
the seventy million dollars is
been appropriated for twenty
twenty three that money is there
right now.
There is no guarantee the way we
are spending it right now.
That is going to be a lasting
account Mr speaker gentle lady
thank you for your responses
that's all I have next in the
the gentleman from lease on a
chamber the gentleman from San
Juan is not there gentleman from
Bernalillo isn't there John from
the reserve Scott.
That's where saying all their
names seven can run back to the
chairs gentleman from Lee
Representative Scott Mr speaker
if you're worried about people
being in the chairs we can put a
call on the house.
Gentleman.
Gentleman I'm trying to read off
everyone's names that they can
be recognized for debate.
If you like you not to mention
their names I won't do it but
I'm trying to give everyone the
courtesy of letting them know
that their next debate that's
why I said gentleman for me I
didn't see and gentleman from
San Juan it in CM gentleman from
Bernalillo did CM I've read the
names out out loud to give
everyone a chance to speak
recognizing the gentleman from
Lee.
I think you would like to speak
generally recognized.
You Mr speaker.
Mr Burciaga.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
handled.
Mr speaker I will kind I will
yield to the gentleman not
casting aspersions firmly.
Iterating that I'm not going to
cast aspersions this is the
perfect.
Use of legislation to bring
before this body.
Two forty five AM.
Whether Senator day morning and
I think over the course of this
conversation.
That are going to be able to
demonstrate why this needs to be
considered when no one is
watching.
Mr speaker.
Chairman ladies.
Your to stay.
This bonus of legislation.
We'll also rose.
The state speculation by the
state.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee County this legislation
seeks to address the lack of
available properties throughout
New Mexico which remains a large
barrier to attracting companies
and creating jobs.
John let me let me ask question.
Does this legislation authorizes
speculative.
Acquisition by the state.
Mr speaker gentleman from Lee
the legislation does not have
speculative in their.
Mr speaker and gentleman let me
let me rephrase again.
Legislation authorized.
Acquisition of.
Real estate.
By.
In New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes.
Mr speaker and gentle lady does
this legislation authorizes the
development.
The real estate structures
buildings parking lots.
Whatever.
As a consequence of this
legislation.
Mr speaker gentleman the
projects would have to go
through a vetting process but
then yes.
Mr speaker.
Prior to.
The
development of this real estate.
Does any less or.
Have to be identified and
contracted tomb.
Return.
That yes.
The state in what would be
considered economic manner.
Mr speaker gentleman that would
come out in the rules that the
board approves.
Gentlelady the answer.
simple answer would be no.
Mr speaker gentleman was at a
question.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it
was a question with the answer
to my previous question.
In one word be.
Mr speaker and gentleman could
you please repeat the previous
question.
Okay here we go.
The acquisition and development
of this.
Contract to return that
investment from my store.
Prior to.
Working on the development of
the project.
Mr speaker gentleman now.
Mr speaker and gentle lady let.
Back to.
My previous question with regard
to what this project for
speculative would business
person consider acquisition and
development of a passive real
estate.
With prospects in New.
for the return of investment
debt investment not considered
speculative.
Mr speaker and gentleman in
order to qualify.
For this program the project
would need to have secured the
approval of the local community
the recommendation from the
economic development department
and the recommendation of the
twelve member board.
So I think that what is being
done is laying the foundation
for the community's interest in
whatever project the community
believes and has reason to
believe along with the
recommendation of experts that
it is going to benefit the
community and bring jobs.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'll
ask you a question.
Would.
Businessperson.
Purchase.
Developed with buildings and
improvements with no immediate
prospects.
For return on investment would
not that.
This month be considered
speculative.
If you are offered Mr speaker
and gentleman I do believe that
your definition would be
correct.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
and gentle lady now.
With respect to loans that might
be advanced as a consequence of
this legislation.
Is it true.
Thanks loans would have to have
a previously.
Striated higher risk that is not
bankable if you will in the
commercial market.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
We are saying that they need to
provide sufficient evidence that
other means of financing for
proposed project are funds of
funds available or insufficient.
Thanks for the answer to my last
question was yes.
Is that correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman what I
said was that they need to
provide sufficient evidence that
other means of financing are
unavailable or insufficient
thank you for that Mr speaker
gentle lady so these prospective
loans one in fact not be
bankable.
In order to qualify.
For.
Lands to this program and I
think.
Any reasonable person would be
able to assume those would be
very high risk.
With that.
Mr speaker gentleman not
necessarily this could be
closing.
Of a gap.
Financing.
Speaker gentle lady in that
circumstance.
There's not enough down payment.
To satisfy commercial lender
that that loan would be.
Propria.
Appropriate asset for bank.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
are a lot of reasons this could
happen the bank could be running
up against its legal lending
limits.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
gentle lady what interest rate.
Could loans the advanced.
Mr speaker and gentleman no less
than zero percent.
Mr speaker and gentle lady did I
hear you say zero percent.
Mr speaker gentleman yes.
Are you aware.
The loan any commercial
operation that is available.
To a business start up or
established.
Zero percent.
Mr speaker gentleman it's as no
less than zero percent.
Mr speaker and gentle lady zero
percent is not prohibited.
Mr speaker gentleman it says no
less than zero percent.
Gentlelady.
Chair to.
Students.
In this legislation for
advancement.
These loans.
Mr speaker gentleman could you
please rephrase the question.
Speaker gentle lady objective
yardsticks for the advancement
of these loans so sorry a ten
percent down payment or twenty
percent down.
Or sufficient assets tobacco
twenty percent of the loan value
or anything of that nature.
Mr speaker gentleman those are
not in statute and would be set
up through the rules.
What is.
Understand how there might be
concerns from someone with
business experience.
This construe
is politically incorrect.
Capital investment was
insufficient safeguards.
For the return of those funds
back to the New Mexico
taxpayers.
Mr speaker gentlemen I do not
see it that way.
I am incredulous.
To to to not.
So you were.
Thank.
I have.
Striated.
On.
Yes.
To this debate.
This has the potential.
To be politically directed
capital to projects or would not
otherwise survive in the
commercial market place.
And.
Replace
as this body to be invested in
New Mexico taxpayer dollars
thank you Mr speaker thank you
Jim Leddy for your answers is
further debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker of a yield
to the gentleman from San Juan.
So thank you Mr speaker and
gentle lady just been writing
all kinds of notes like crazy
has been listening to this
debate.
so I'm just going to.
Can reset a baseline for myself
here
so this there's seven million
dollars.
That that is the seed money for.
For this.
Lente proposal.
Is that correct Mr speaker
gently seventy million dollars
additionally set aside.
Mr speaker gentleman yes.
Thank you Mr chairman late in
the seven million that is a one
time investment.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is a
one time appropriation that sets
up the revolving fund.
Thank you Mr gentle lady
also.
This seventy million dollars is
already baked into the budget
before this bill hit the floor.
on day one when when the house
bill two is going forward there
was already seventy million
dollars set aside for this
purpose.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
is seventy million dollars in
house bill two.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
As as I've been reading.
Through this well if there's one
more thing that really just
jumps out at me.
Up to or say down to.
Zero percent lending rate.
That Mr speaker and gentle lady.
That is that's just amazing that
we would even have that what
we're trying to do is.
Get business started especially.
What some might call some price
of prime.
Of.
Lente
High risk subprime lending as I
his foot.
As I was listening to
Representative Harper.
This is the asked questions
earlier.
This.
Essentially Mr speaker and
gentle lady have.
Is that in my opinion if you
don't have to agree with this
but in my opinion this is a back
door.
Set UP of the State Bank
And and the speaker and and and
gentle lady that that that's a
concern I think that is exactly
why we were hearing this at
three o'clock in the morning.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
but if I can have you turn the
page to.
In the definitions just reading
through the definitions and I
was looking at item do.
Mr speaker is says economic
development opportunities need.
Advancement of an.
Environment and firemen only
substantial or sustainable
economic development goal of the
state.
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
what would qualify under the as
a sustainable and
environmentally sustainable
economic development goal of the
state.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that would be
determined by the authority in
coordination with the department
and it includes the creation of
jobs.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I I I am may I read that
little bit further down says
includes the creation of jobs
the
provision.
Of needed services and
commodities.
Some speaker and gently if if if
we could just go a little bit
further down.
to
definition just.
Enterprise development project
means the purchase planning
development building surveying
improving operating furnishing
equipping for maintaining of
land.
Mr speaker and gentle lady what
what would the the maintaining
of land potentially be.
Mr speaker gentleman that that
could potentially also be
purchase of land if you read the
sentence and use the comments.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentle lady but it does say
maintaining of land.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady.
A very cynical person or someone
who is rural.
debating on the floor at three
o'clock in the morning when none
of the media is here could think
that what what this is is this
is a.
Subprime state marijuana funding
thank.
Mr speaker okay.
So Mister speaker and gentle
lady coming just looking at the
terms very very favorable terms.
And seventy million dollars set
aside for this for potentially
zero percent interest.
To.
As was described earlier.
Having trouble with my face
covering.
As was described earlier.
That.
This would go to.
Individuals.
either could not get a loan at
another banking institution.
Or they could come up with
enough.
Capital.
Mr speaker and and and gentle
lady have as I've heard several
of my colleagues bring up
different.
Areas of lending practices.
It doesn't make sense at all
until you read.
The definition under item the on
page two.
Development goal of the state.
So Mister speaker and and gentle
lady.
Would someone who cannot get a
loan wanting to get into the
marijuana business.
Whether it's growing or selling.
Would they be able to apply for
this of the funds here in this
potential seventy million
dollars and be able to do it.
And get a potentially is zero
percent interest rate.
Thank you Mr speaker and
Representative from San Juan
there are a couple of things
that you have brought up that
I'd like to address and so I
will specifically answer that
question at the end but first
I'd like to I know that I do
believe there's media in the
building number one.
Number two Mr speaker and
gentleman I would have happily
debated this at three PM
however.
All of our bills even the ones
that are getting unanimous votes
seem to be taking a while and I
in fact volunteered to stay here
all night because there is
important work that we need to
be doing and I am happy to stay
up for twenty four hours until
the end of session to get stuff
done.
So Mr speaker and gentleman
Kerr.
More members on my side chided
for learning to sing on and on
hang on hang on all right let's
let's can cover it the hours
late I get that for both of you
let's confine ourselves the
bill.
John Asher question judge was on
its way for the question
gentleman ask your question.
Speaker I ask my question I'm
would you would you repeat it
please for me I know the
question Mr speaker and gentle
lady the answer is no cannabis
is not permitted in this program
because it is not federally
approved.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
however it is not federally
approved but this would not be a
federally
at this this these dollars would
not comply necessarily with the
standards of the banking
institution.
Mr speaker and gentleman I will
happily provide the exact line
in here that would
It's a section eight.
Eighty three.
The project must demonstrate
that the proposed enterprise
development project or lease
will comply with applicable
state and federal laws.
So Mister speaker gentle lady LA
cannot be use that so
specifically cannot be used for
that purpose Mr speaker and
gentleman that is correct so
Mister speaker and and gentle
lady.
So I still stand by this is a
back door attempt at a State
Bank.
And that we are putting in place
prime lending practices to
people who are a cannot qualify
for another lending institution.
Is is am I am I wrong in that
capacity as well.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
apologize what was the specific
question the specific question
is.
The.
The way the money can be landed
Lente from this.
Program.
In my mind still fits the
definition of a back door
attempt at a State Bank
institution.
And that the.
People who would be.
Able to get a loan from here I
would if this were in the early
two thousands might be
considered a subprime this would
be considered for subprime
lending.
Because the people who are not
qualified for a regular loan and
on top of that come in with
very little down.
If if anything so Mister speaker
and gentle lady this very on
secured.
And risky loans so in my mind.
Let's take marijuana out of the
description but I still believe
this is a back door attempt at a
subprime State Bank.
There is that.
Is that incorrect.
Mr speaker gentleman that is
incorrect.
Mr speaker and gentle lady we're
just gonna have to disagree on
that this is in no way.
Is this considered fiscal
responsibility in no way.
Putting up seventy million
dollars of capital.
And potentially lending it out
at zero percent interest.
And in giving loans to people
who cannot qualifier can not
obtain a loan through a regular
in the lending institution this
is not prudent.
And this is not good for New
Mexico thank you Mr speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Rehm.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker one of the things I'd
like to speak about before we
begin.
Like you and our we begin our
day at eight a
No hello.
we.
It is three four nineteen
nineteen hours into the day to
be an attorney and
understanding the work laws that
we have you know you were going
to have individual school and
homes that are rather tired.
And we're required to be here
and I think that that is
something probably the
legislature ought to consider
particularly if those
individuals and up and some type
of traffic crash anyway.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo.
I I I think what we of decide it
is this is a state very is that
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman this is
not a State Bank.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo if we're going to
loan money what are we going to
call ourselves.
Mr speaker and gentleman
funders.
Mr speaker channel eighty okay
so worry we are funders we're
not a bank but were funders for
not a lending institution were
funders okay so we're not
federally insured.
And what insurance do we have
for our facility.
Mr speaker and gentleman in
terms of insurance do you mean.
Property insurance for.
Collateral.
Mr speaker gentle gentle lady
we're a funders so we're going
to win money the most basic
are federally insured.
I'm asking what type of
insurance will we have if we're
not federally insured to protect
our assets.
And madam speaker gentle lady I
think that if you go back to the
crash of twenty nine that was
the issue they were not
federally insured banks.
Mr speaker gentleman a we're
talking about the finance
authority not a bank.
Mr speaker gentle lady I didn't
understand your answer on Paula
Jones.
Mr speaker gentleman.
We're not talking about a bank.
Therefore doesn't need to be
federally insured this is a
finance authority.
Mr speaker gentle lady
Let's let's talk about the
whatever this is
are we going to have employees
since they're going to be
business from what we gonna do.
Mr speaker and gentleman this is
a new program to the finance
authority.
Okay Mister speaker gentle lady
are we going to have a.
Office of the go to.
Mr speaker gentleman The New
Mexico finance authority does
have an office.
Mr speaker gentle lady of how
many employees do they currently
have and how many do they think
they'll need in the future to to
do this.
Mr speaker and gentleman the New
Mexico finance authority
currently has fifty five
employees and the anticipate
needing one additional person.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
So we only need one individual
to handle seventy million
dollars.
Worth of loans is that what
you're saying.
Mr speaker and gentleman I'd
like to point out that the
seventy million dollars does not
need to be distributed are
allocated instantaneously and
also in terms of maintenance and
leasing that would be done
through GST.
Mr speaker gentle lady if you
ever run a business.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes I
have.
Okay then fine Mr speaker and
gentle lady so we're talking
about operational cost.
And you're telling me that we're
going to have an asset or you
know what we're gonna have a
bank account of seventy million.
And we're gonna have one person.
To sell right you can tell me
what that is please
And we're gonna we're gonna be
of an office of sorry set up.
Mr speaker gentleman
as I previously mentioned NMFA
would need one additional staff
they do have other staff that
can absorb some of the work.
You Mr speaker gentle lady what
is the salary of this one
additional staff.
Mr speaker gentleman the job
description has not been
written.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
would assume that this is the
state minimum wage person I
would assume that you want
somebody with banking experience
although we're going to be
funders we're not going to be a
bank is that correct.
Mr speaker gentleman
The New Mexico finance authority
currently has six lenders on
staff and for members.
For credit analysts.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo the six wonders that
they currently have have what's
kind of the average salary for
the.
Mr speaker and gentleman one of
the provisions in this bill
allows for administrative costs
the NMFA needs to be provide
paid for.
By the fund so if you're
concerned about the fiscal
impact to NMFA.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes son's
concerned about the impact of
the fund let me ask my question
again what is the average salary
of the wonders or do you do I
need to take the time to look it
up on the portal right now
Mr speaker and gentleman we do
not have that information at our
fingertips if you'd like it to
look it up he could.
Mr speaker if you wait a few
minutes so I can look it up and
then I can give the body the
answer yeah we're not gonna do
that so if you were going to
include your question right now
all move on to the next but
we're not going to just wait for
you to look up information on
not doing that Mr speaker I'm
trying to get an answer to a
question in the gentle lady
absolutely doesn't want to
answer it so I could have seen
it the other way and then
perform the body.
She has answered she doesn't
know the answer.
If you want to take the time to
go look it up that's fine the
body does not have to wait you
can turn over the question
someone else they can sign up
even given the question.
But we're not going to sit and
wait while you look up and do
research that's not what the
purpose of maintenance
gentleman.
Mr speaker with the respect the
lady the gentle lady said.
You can I mean she offered the
opportunity to do that that's
all he said no one said it was
gonna take a lot of time.
So to say no we're not going to
say we're not gonna take the
time very much time Mr speaker
it.
Three thirty in the morning
everybody's tired.
We're all getting a little
grouchy.
Gentleman is a way to handle
that there is once it but here's
the way to handle it if he wants
to stop questioning the sponsor
he can do that we will move on
to another person if you don't
want to give that question and
that information is someone else
who can do it but the debate
does not include.
Someone going and researching a
question while the body weights
that is not the way this debate
one that is not at all what was
going to happen Sir.
German would you want to do if
you want to if you want to
conclude your questioning now
you can do that you can look it
up and give it to another by
another person they can get on
the board for not going to just
sit and wait while you do your
research.
Mr speaker of I just just the
way the gentle lady from
Bernalillo including her expert
witness who I assume would have
knowledge what the salary is
here's what I'm willing to do.
If you want to go look it up.
We will call on the next person
when you're ready and that
person is concluded I will come
back.
Mr speaker what we'll do is
we'll continue but I think that
we can find somebody look it up
I think operational cost is
important consideration in this
I'm sorry funders it's not a
bank is funders
but I think that we should
understand what the operational
cost of that businesses down I'm
not stopping you from answer
that question but I don't want
to do is just simply stop the
question and let the body weight
that's not what I want to do the
one I'm willing to have happen
is if you think that's important
you want to look it up all that
you do that I will call another
person when they are concluded
and you are ready I will pick it
up again with you when you can
ask a question on what's unfair
about that but I don't the rules
just do not contemplate us just
waiting while you do research.
Mr speaker that's fine we can
continue the questions I'm just
surprised that an expert from
the finance authority doesn't
know the salaries within their
but we can move on.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so how wide of the
universe can we loan money to
individuals and more
specifically what I'm asking is
hi I have individuals who live
in my district who probably
would love to refinance or home
or have a personal loan at zero
percent interest that you've
testified earlier.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
The project needs to fit with
the economic development goals
it is not for personal homes.
So Mister speaker gentle lady
from Bernalillo if they were
purchasing a investment property
let's assume in my district then
or building apartment complex
and they could go ahead and
apply for a zero percent one Mr
speaker gentleman now.
Mr speaker I'm sorry gentle lady
I didn't understand your
response Mr speaker gentleman
no.
That does not fall within the
purview of this program.
Mr speaker gentle lady how does
that not following the program.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
program does not do housing.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo does it two
investment adventures.
Mr speaker gentleman the
creation of jobs.
Is an important factor in the
vetting process.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo so if I if I have an
individual in my district that
wants to purchase some land and
build an apartment complex that
will employ people to construct
that.
Would that didn't qualify.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
That is not the intent of this
program.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo then perhaps I don't
understand the intent of it
could you explain.
Mr speaker gentleman.
The intent of this program.
Is to fix.
Again that we have in New Mexico
regarding economic development
and one of those gaps is the
lack of available properties
throughout New Mexico.
Because it remains a barrier to
attracting companies to the
state and the way this fund
works
and actually quoting an
Albuquerque journal article
Albuquerque's available
industrial space hits historic
low
and Albuquerque's already low
industrial vacancy rate dipped
below two percent during the
second quarter of twenty twenty
one
this program.
Is a partnership and funding
program that is created within
the New Mexico finance authority
to support local communities
that want to build and invest in
commercial or entrepreneurial
space to directly support their
economic development
initiatives.
This program Mr speaker and
gentleman this program is
distinct from Lida and other
existing programs and fills a
gap in our economic development
toolbox in addition it also
allows us to use one time excess
revenue to support economic
diversification throughout the
state create a multiplier effect
and set up future revenue
streams.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady from Bernalillo hi again
don't understand how a building
project doesn't do that perhaps
maybe if I change that to I'm
going to build a of strip mall.
For business with that then fit
underneath.
Mr speaker gentleman projects
that are approved have to go
through a vetting process which
includes the review board as
well as the New Mexico economic
development department so if all
of those entities were in
agreement that the project
you're proposing is worthy of
receiving financing or loans
then that would go to the New
Mexico finance authority who
would then have also met
discretion.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo I'm just trying to
understand what the scope is so
that when my constituents asked
me how they can utilize this
money you're have access to the
loans I can give them proper
direction to contact the
authority.
so that's what I'm trying to
find out.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo on page seven and
flaunting three.
looks like of what we're looking
for is a purchasing with banking
and financial industry
experience of for employment.
Is that correct.
Mr speaker gentleman no this is
a person with.
That experience to serve on the
review board.
So we start with page six line
twenty five six public members
appointed by New Mexico
Legislative Council council who
shall have experience in any one
or more of the following areas
rate the banking and finance
industry.
Mr speaker gentleman yes we
would want someone with
experience in the banking and
finance industry on the review
board so that they could help
justifier make determinations
about whether project might be
worthy.
Then Mr speaker and gentle lady
from Bernalillo I'd like to take
you to to page date
line nine through ten not hold
any office or employment in a
political party for what period
of time I don't understand the
period of time.
Mr speaker gentleman while
they're on the board.
Mr speaker gentle lady and I'm
not trying to be hard but I'm
having difficulty hearing you
can you repeat the answer thank
you toward Mr speaker gentleman
my apologies so it would be for
the term when they are on the
board that they could not hold
any office for be employed with
a political party.
Mr speaker gentle lady then they
could be employed by the
political party just prior to
that.
Mr speaker gentleman it just
says that members of the board
shall not hold any office or
employment in a political party.
Sure what this means financing
shall not be subject to
repayment if the terms of the
contract for finance these are
carried out by the.
Opportunity on the
improprieties partner.
Mr speaker and gentleman as I
explain to your colleague
earlier.
Financing.
Is not alone this is when the
state would own the property.
Mr speaker gentle lady is that
the intent of this funders to
actually make money or not the
for profit.
Mr speaker gentleman
as I mentioned the
one of the intends is to support
economic diversification
throughout the state and create
a multiplier effect with the
funds.
Mr speaker that's all the
questions I have at this time
thank you there is for the
debate the gentle lady from
Santa Fe Representative Lujan
thank you Mr speaker for the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
A yes Mr speaker I will yield to
the gentle lady from Santa Fe.
Thank you madam speaker
So is it.
To that the mission.
Of the finance authority is to
provide low cost financing for
farmers.
Particularly particularly excuse
me it's past three o'clock
appointment times are working
quite well
those in disadvantaged
communities.
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady that is
among their priorities yes.
Thank you.
Speaker.
Generally and I think that's a
really good thing I want to
thank Mexico finance authority
for their work what they've done
is it.
It also to from the New Mexico
finance authority.
That there.
They have a and.
Really really good record of
loans and and.
Funded they do you.
Speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes.
Thank you I think that there are
no do you they are the two
economic development program
similar to what this is
establishing your bill.
Mr speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady are they
do since two thousand five
offers some economic development
programs.
Thank you Mr chair I think this
is expanding in some of the good
work that they already do and I
think that this is something
that.
That built upon their reputation
and I can understand some of the
the questioning Mr speaker match
of this been going on tonight
and this morning.
They were all really really
tired I'm I just have one more
question I think that is come up
for me
If you could answer center order
the the differences.
Rates with other bank would
banks this is not a bank or
credit unions is compared to
what would be establish in and
this
Mr speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady the
program has not established the
interest rate yet so would not
be able to answer.
Thank you
thanks chairman the lady but
that's just normal and the
function of what this bill is
trying to accomplish and helping
those kind of kind of
disadvantaged
opportunity for those with an
additional advantage positions
to get the opportunity is that
correct speaker madam.
generated.
Mr speaker gentle lady yes this
is designed to help some of our
rural or potentially
disadvantaged communities
Fund economic development
opportunities.
Thank you madam speaker
generated just.
Just one other one other piece
of information.
It's come up Stricker generally
in regards to think about the
seven I'm sorry from native
inspection of public records on.
The target is
What what is the processor power
house that
effective I guess through having
a.
Since the.
This in place of the state Mr
speaker madam the gentle lady.
Mr speaker gentle lady the terms
of the contract our public.
Thank you Mr speaker generally
they think that that is
something that I I like as well
and I appreciate your time and
efforts it is all the effort
that you put into this I think
this is something that's come up
during the interment how we're
trying to resolve it expands
some of the good things that the
good works it to come out of
NMFA and I just want to commend
you on your work and expanding
this
In development since project.
She at the time and I yield
back.
Mr speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from
Bernalillo county yield.
Mr speaker I will yield to the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln counties.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady for those of you
have that have not gone to law
school welcome to finals week.
Mr speaker and gentle lady of
what are they called the bar or
a partner in this legislation.
Mr speaker gentleman
there won't always be a borrower
but the idea is that there will
be a partner in the endeavor.
So that's why they call it a
partner there will be a partner
in that endeavor Mr speaker
gentle lady's of as I is that
what you stated.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
As.
Mr speaker gentle lady generally
when one of us use of the word
partner there's some.
Relationship.
The word partner generally takes
on some.
Our connotation of there's a
relationship between those
parties if so Mister speaker
gentle lady could you describe
the relationship that you're
intending to secure through this
legislation between that private
entities and the state of New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman yes so.
There are partners because
they're entering into a
contractual agreement and
relationship but the idea of a
partner is that when there is a
community that would like to be
able to support its local
entrepreneurs with a value added
agriculture project project or.
Something to support
automated vehicles
the community for the developer.
And the fund are entering into a
partnership.
You know Mr speaker and gentle
lady of banks don't call their
customers partners is probably a
good reason for that because
they're not in business with.
That private entities.
They are a lender but they're
definitely not a partner in the
enterprise.
It appears to me that we call a
partner here because.
The state of New Mexico will be
engaging in business with
private enterprise maybe to fill
fill some worthy objection or
worthy objectives.
But it concerns me that that may
be
What is the intent of this
legislation to create somewhat
of a partner ship between the
state of New Mexico and these
private entities Mr speaker and
gentle lady how does the auditor
objectively deal with involving
the board.
Created here and.
And conducting their
constitutional work.
And at the same time be a member
of this board.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
idea was to find some
accountability.
In the process.
Well Mr speaker and gentle lady
if the auditors serving on the
board.
How can the auditor
independently.
Review the work of that board to
make sure that they're in
compliance with state laws and
regulations.
Mr speaker and gentleman but we
didn't receive an analysis from
the auditor
or this was not flagged in the
other agency reports so I don't
have a good answer for you.
Mr speaker and gentle lady maybe
we need a lot of.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
what I would suggest to you
that.
I don't think the auditor.
Can appropriately perform his
constitutional functions.
If he is a member of this board
and conducting oversight of the
very board the sits on.
I think there's an inherent
conflict of interest there I
think that is something that
needs to be changed.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
If losses are incurred.
Who is accountable for those
losses.
Mr speaker and gentleman do you
mean losses through the course
of the revolving funds life.
Mr speaker and gentle lady let's
assume that ten million dollars.
Was loaned out in year one.
And among the among that
portfolio of loans.
In year ten.
Four five of those loans have
defaulted.
In the state never gets paid
back there is a loss incurred
who is accountable for losses
that would be incurred by the
state of New Mexico in this
partnership.
Mr speaker and gentleman it
would be on the books of NMFA.
Well obviously.
The money didn't come back it's
on the books but who is going to
take the fall who bears the
responsibility for the loss.
Mr speaker and gentleman there
are mechanisms in place to
recoup monies there's the sale
of the property is their club
Act measures
Those are built in.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
I worked on many.
Loans over my years.
And when times of all packs go
bad.
The bank in the.
Holding the bag.
Properties are worth less than
the values of the loans the bank
tried those off.
In a private situation.
There.
Their board is accountable their
officers are accountable and
generally it's not a very
pleasant situation I'm just
wondering who is going to be
accountable if.
Down the road.
The seventy million dollars
maybe becomes fifty million
dollars for.
Maybe less.
And I I I guess the answer is we
don't know who's accountable and
I would suggest Mr speaker and
gentle lady but there's no
accountability really here.
Losses will be on the books but
nobody is going to be
accountable for those losses and
and that concerns me.
The board.
That's established here and
service their own goals.
The the.
In section seven paragraph three
it's to provide safeguards to
protect public money.
Again Mr speaker and gentle
lady.
How do we protect public money.
Yes.
The board lands money and zero
percent interest and we're
entering.
Probably and there are a of
increased inflation.
Mr speaker gentleman were
landing at not less than zero.
In my hypothetical Mr speaker
and gentle lady.
I made a loan of zero percent.
How.
Do they meet their obligation to
provide safeguards to protect
public money.
When there's a zero percent loan
and for entering an era of high
for higher inflation.
Mr speaker and gentleman as
previously mentioned it will be
not less than zero and can
include an appropriate amount to
cover fees and administration.
Mr speaker and gentle lady is
if.
If the provision means what it
says.
You will not be providing
safeguards to protect public
money if you make a zero percent
long it's not possible.
It can not Kerr.
Section eight programs C. four
provides for guarantees to be
secured from the
bar or.
And my question is would those
be full guarantees or or what
partial guarantees.
B. require.
Mr speaker gentleman those are
rules that will be set up at the
New Mexico finance authority has
never done a partial guarantee.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
have ever done a guarantee.
Mr speaker gentleman yes.
Mr speaker and gentle lady a
guarantee is only as good as the
asset based of the base of the
guarantors Act correct.
Mr speaker gentleman yes.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I
believe in the questioning from
the gentleman from Lee County
You seem to me to be established
that the folks that would be
taking out these loans.
Our folks who would.
normally not receive loans from
a Representative Representative
this is not anything you're
doing this is the legislative
version of the seventh inning
stretch the webcast is goes down
at approximately four o'clock so
there to reboot they're telling
me they got a shut down right
now.
And reset it will take about
five minutes I apologize and
that will come back we're gonna
stop the clock so you don't lose
any time but one legend but in
honor that we can adjourn.
We cannot adjourn.
I'll be happy to return to
all of ours these of.
The state the.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
county.
Goal is in the.
All of those the Senators
speaker I move that we recess of
the culture.
And tomorrow's the same move.
Legislation in place this point.
Going to be about five minutes.
The.
To the.
