Members of the House roll call
is now closed and we have a
quorum.
Please rise for the indication
given by Representative Roger E.
Montoya.
Madam speaker what was once.
Madam speaker and members of the
body what an honor to be with
you today to start with the
invocation.
I would like to remind us that
we work in walk today on.
They will land.
The.
Tribal.
Ancestors.
Modern day tribal members.
Review this land.
As part of the first people's.
I would like to to speak today
on behalf of all that emanates.
From this earth.
All the beautiful creatures.
I love the animals.
Our water ways.
Our air.
The fact that we.
As leaders elected in our state
have the distinct honor to work
respectfully alongside our
neighbors our brothers and
sisters.
For me is a deep and profound
moment in history that I
treasure.
These last.
Several weeks.
I have been so proud of the work
that we do.
To hold our citizens.
And all the people that inhabit
the state.
In the highest includes place.
With beauty.
And dignity.
I'm in.
Mexico the gentleman from San
Miguel Santa Fe in Torrance
County for the pledge of
allegiance Representative
costume.
Let's go to the gentleman from
Lee County Representative Parker
for the certified Mexico.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Madam speaker.
And members of the house Madam
speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
From native.
Gentleman from Chavis a an Otero
county Representative Townsend.
Thank you madam chair and body
a short amounts money today.
Is a somber anniversary.
In New Mexico and it's the no
fault of anyone that is.
A predicament in the pandemic
that we were Padilla.
But.
Madam speaker we have the
ability to help our
constituents.
They expect us to.
The question is will we.
Do we have the will to.
Legislation has been introduced
to limit the governor's powers
going forward.
And this legislature.
Should never be shown again as
they have been found in this
process.
New Mexico deserves and expects.
More than a fraction of their
freedoms.
Whether it's twenty five percent
or seventy five percent.
I think you will find that New
Mexicans expect a hundred
percent of their freedoms.
This governorship not restrict
liberty in the longer.
I businesses don't want their
constitutional freedoms given
and taken away.
On two week cycles.
What happened in Waterloo the
county yesterday is a travesty.
County less than five thousand
people.
With few jobs and few
opportunities.
Went back to read.
On a point.
One six percentage.
That is.
Less than the repeatability.
Of the yes that we're
administering to define the
virus.
Freedom shouldn't be flippantly
given and taken away.
When they're restored they
should into our.
We are.
Fifty one days now under the
session.
We have seen no plan from the
governor.
That we haven't seen the
governor.
What New Mexicans the.
Yes I color book of frustration.
Whether they're red and green
red or whatever.
Madam speaker this body.
Is important to the state of New
Mexico and we deserve a seat at
the table and we deserve to know
what the plan is long term.
Thank you very much.
Gentlelady from granted out of
your county Representative Dow
thank you madam speaker all of
last year a statewide workgroup
comprised of statewide community
organizations examples would be
think of women voters New Mexico
first in double ACP foundation
of open government calling
because the state ethics.
And other groups.
Madam speaker and some members
from this body both Democrats
and Republicans members of both
chambers the house and the
Senate created a redistricting
task force to formulate a plan
that would result in a fair
redistricting and what the
people of New Mexico select
their representation rather than
legislators selecting their
constituents Madam speaker
throughout the session bills had
been moved from committee to the
template table with unanimous
consent and I am now requesting
that this body do the same for
house bill two eleven Mr madam
speaker I rise to make a motion.
Madam speaker I move that house
bill two eleven be withdrawn
from house Judiciary Committee
and placed on the temporary
calendar.
Gently would you please restate
your motion.
Mr speaker I move that house
bill two eleven be withdrawn
from house Judiciary Committee
and placed on a temporary
calendar and according to Mason
section four nine one dash three
this motion may not be tabled.
Mr speaker over forty members of
this body have signed on to this
bill is bipartisan and did I do
not believe it's appropriate for
seven members of judiciary to
prevent the floor from hearing
this bill.
Motion is to
withdraw the bill and put on a
temperate calendar indeed this
is not a motion the subject
being tabled debate on the
motion may not discuss this I'm
reading directly from Mason's
section four nine one subsection
for.
It is not in order to discuss
the merits of the proposal upon
a motion to discharge a
committee or withdraw the
proposal from the committee
debate is confined strictly to
the purpose of the motion.
So we're not to discuss the
merits of the bill there is
debate gentlelady from
Bernalillo Representative
stable.
Mr speaker and members of the
house.
In debating this motion made by
the gentle lady from.
Those counties Mr speaker and
and members of the house.
The.
Is scheduled in committee.
In the Judiciary Committee
tomorrow Mr speaker members of
the house.
Then.
We must follow the committee
process.
Mr speaker and members of the
house that the gentle lady from
all those counties twice
requested that this be rolled.
And not be voted on.
Four Mr speaker and members of
the house I urge each and every
one of the members of the house
to follow the committee process
and if the bill is scheduled for
a hearing in a committee
tomorrow let's process take its
course.
Generally.
Thank you Mr speaker the
gentleman from Chavis Indian
Otero.
Thank you Mr speaker
Mr speaker the gentle lady my
friend from Bernalillo is
partially correct.
in an effort.
To bring a bill.
To fruition that forty members.
Signed on to.
That has been blocked for number
day.
That is correct but bring in
that bill from that committee to
the house floor we're forty
members the sign on the bill can
vote on it.
Is only the transparent and
ethical thing that the now I
will remind the body.
Especially my friends.
That built.
Through the committee process is
a great tool.
But we have seen Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
Rocket dockets I passed the
committee bypassed everything
and many members of this body
didn't even get that see what
those bills were.
So I think what the gentle lady
is trying to do.
Is absolutely valid.
Especially when forty member
sign on to the.
Why in the world would we
disallow.
For the members of this body the
right to vote on the bill my
goodness Mr speaker it's the
only real transparent and
ethical thing to do.
next to the gentleman from
Bernalillo and Sandoval thank
you Mr speaker of John what will
the gentle lady yield Mister
speaker I yield to the gentleman
so we don't have a new rule that
if a bunch of people sign up we
bypass the committee process we
do the members would be on the
floor getting everybody to sign
off it is set for tomorrow let's
let the committee process take
place taking its place as we've
done in the past otherwise we're
we're gonna be doing on the
house floor is an entirely new
deal or gonna be running around
getting everybody to sign off on
these bills so the committee
process is the appropriate place
for and I appreciate Mr speaker
and gentle lady thank you.
Mexico John for San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you speaker does the
gentle lady from grant Hidalgo
and Sierra County jail thank you
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan County
thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady
it is my understanding and
correct me if I'm wrong but you
are your bill is going to get a
hearing tomorrow but M. I.
incorrect in hearing that
it's already been communicated
to you that the bill will be
tabled so Mr speaker and gentle
lady does that sound like a fair
committee process to you when
one individual has already told
you the outcome of your bill Mr
speaker and gentle lady Mr
speaker and gentleman thank you
for the question House Bill to
eleven and Senate bill one
ninety nine are the result of
last year's working group there
are certain issues and certain
elements of fairy District make
that need to be included and the
bill was based upon the U. S.
Supreme Court ruling and in
essence both said Senate bill
one ninety nine and two eleven
have in essence been killed and
replaced with Senate bill
fifteen which removes key
provisions that part of the
working group and nationwide is
considered very distracting yes
they're being heard together and
I yes two eleven is heard it is
to be tabled.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady what we do here.
And what our constituents and by
the way what we're talking about
now is the constituents of forty
members of the legislature.
What we are what we do here Jon
point of order just as a general
just a point of clarification
this bill does not have forty
Sanchez it has thirty five.
Thank you Mr speaker and I have
I understand one of the bills
has forty.
So Mister speaker governments is
thirty five there are it appears
at first glance the forty but
the five primary sponsors list
of their names the second time
in the section below this thirty
five thank you Mr speaker let me
clarify.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
Their thirty five members a
significant number of bi
bipartisan legislators who have
signed on to this legislation Mr
speaker and gentle lady.
What we are expected to do here
does not happen very often.
And that is we are supposed to
come here and debate and we are
supposed to take ideas that are
presented listen to them listen
to the debate and then vote on
that.
What I understand Mr speaker and
gentle lady is the pre
determined outcome.
What we are what we are hearing
today on this floor is this
issue is being brought forward
because we know it has been
promised to us that it will not
receive a fair hearing and their
thirty five members
approximately representing
thirty thousand plus
constituents in the state.
Who each.
To each one of those members.
And we're in a position today
where we already know the
outcome so Mister speaker and
gentle lady do you have did you
have any other choice but to
come to the floor today and try
and bring it before the entire
membership instead of letting a
handful of people in a single
committee and it sounds like
maybe a single person in that
committee determining the
outcome of this legislation.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan County I am simply
using the example that has been
model by us by Mr speaker who
has been moving bills out of
committee and to the calendar
all week so I simply follow the
rules as any member of this body
can do for the consideration of
this body we've been doing it on
consent and I'm simply following
the example of our leader Mr
speaker you got.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I appreciate that and I
urge the body to vote.
If if for no other reason than
this bill receive a fair hearing
in particular by the members who
signed on to this legislation.
At the beginning of the session
thank you Mr speaker.
Now this further right than
generations you representative
Cadena.
The generals Dona Ana
representative Cadena.
Mr speaker gentle lady good
afternoon gentle lady from here
ET L. Mr speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from Diana.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
how many times did we schedule
house bill two eleven and the
House Judiciary Committee last
week thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentle lady it was scheduled
wants to my knowledge and roll
to this week.
I'm.
Lady I believe we scheduled it
twice Mr speaker gentle lady I
write it is a vice chair of the
committee and I'm proud that I
get to work hand in hand every
day with madam chair Casey and
setting the agenda and up there
and thoughtful way our committee
Mr speaker gentle lady when we
have House Bill to on the house
Judiciary agenda last week
how did it get rolled over.
Current thank you Mr speaker and
thank you gentle lady because I
am part of this bipartisan
statewide working group that has
been working over the interim
though I have been working
bipartisan eight with the Senate
and the house sponsors of Senate
bill one ninety nine to eleven
and even at that fifteen and
working with those open the
groups that are advocating for
open governance and very
distracting and at the request
of those groups of which I am
part we rolled the bill in hopes
that Senate bill fifteen would
make it to the house with
meaningful reforms to Mexico
redistricting which it has not
so I did role in hopes that
Senate bill fifteen would come
to this body in the way that we
signed on and in the way that
The New Mexico citizens of New
Mexico are requesting that is no
longer the case it does not take
into account tribal governments
it does not take into account
communities of interest it does
not prohibit the use of partisan
data it does not prohibit plans
for political parties or
incumbents it does not require
any gentle lady we said the
beginning thank you Mr speaker
debate needs to be limited.
The merits of the bill.
The lady just to confirm we at
ATC did indeed that have to
eleven last week and then we
rolled house bill two eleven at
your request Mr speaker gentle
lady Mr speaker and gentle lady
that is correct.
Okay and then Mr speaker gentle
lady is it accurate that again
we put house bill two eleven
honor House Judiciary Committee
agenda for Monday of this week
Mr speaker and gentle lady that
is correct.
I'm.
The lady after we put Health
eleven on the agenda for Monday
we again Wold house bill two
eleven at your request is that
accurate Mr speaker and gentle
lady Mr speaker gentle lady that
is correct I was acting in good
faith that Senate bill fifteen
which made it to this chamber
with the intention of this body
in the state of New Mexico
citizens.
Okay Mr speaker gentle lady I
would like the body to know that
as we now confirm how you did
Kerry did in fact Edgell this
bill this piece of legislation
important legislation in front
of our committee on several
occasions and then we all the
same bill at the request of the
funds there Mr speaker and
gentle lady I also like the body
now that we have both house bill
two eleven and and the fifteen
on the house Judiciary schedule
for tomorrow and I look forward
to be debating those bills
following the procedures and
protocol of our body I after
members to vote against this
motion thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Next we have the gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative Andrés
Romero.
Thank you Mr speaker the
generally deal thank you Mr
speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady so before us we have
a proposal to I think we got
around and we've called it
blasting from committee and I
think we heard from the vice
chair of the Judiciary Committee
on that this bill has been
rolled a couple of times and has
been heard in the schedule to be
heard in the Judiciary Committee
I think that by trying to blast
a bill out of committee and
bring it directly to the floor
and bypass our committee process
is setting a dangerous precedent
for this body is that we have
this committee is that one of
the things we always discuss as
legislators in particular are
citizen legislatures that we
have a body of experts in their
field and these are populated by
those members that are just that
members and experts in their
particular field and I always
take great pride in our
Education Committee on Mr
speaker and gentle lady that we
have exactly that experts in
their field we have I'm an
expert such as yourself in early
childhood that can really land
that place in that advocacy into
that committee we have members
that are high school teachers we
have middle school teachers
we've had educational assistance
current former school board
members and that's super super
important to our committee
process and we get these bills
are such substance and weight
vetted by those experts and so
far as we've heard that this
bill has been scheduled multiple
times in the Judiciary Committee
is scheduled tomorrow to be
vetted by the just that the
experts in legal proceedings
here in our body in the house of
representatives so I think by by
passing the committee process
were setting a dangerous
precedent and we're bypassing a
process that we can have.
That sort of expert opinion on
these matters moving forward so
with that Mr speaker gentle lady
I I cannot support your measure
thank you.
The gentleman is for the debate
the gentle lady Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentle lady from requests so the
and see here you know thank you
Mr speaker I do yield.
Thank you I just want to go on
record as one of the counties
that one of the three counties
that provide forty percent of
the revenue to the state this is
an expectation.
From those three counties.
From the constituents of those
counties that make sure that
this legislative body has
revenue that they can spend that
they expect to see this bill on
the house floor.
And I just want to go on record
with that thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Thank you General New Mexico the
general from Bernalillo Santa Fe
Torrance and Valencia chairman
equity.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
gentle lady disability of thank
you Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
Mr speaker gentle lady I I sit
on House Judiciary I think all
of our committees are important
and they all have a clear area
expertise.
I think.
House judiciary
is somewhat unique among our
community our committees and
that it's not a necessarily
subject matter.
Expertise but it's also.
Process and structure expertise
and I have been looking forward
to hearing your bill in our
community.
Mr speaker gentle lady because
it keeps showing up on my agenda
in our committee.
And I've been disappointed Mr
speaker gentle lady that you
have chosen to roll for.
Mr speaker generally it showed
up on our agenda yet again is
scheduled for tomorrow is
scheduled to be heard alongside
a similar bill which I think is
appropriate.
Mr speaker gentle lady I think.
I think after having your bills
rolled at your request.
To then demand special treatment
for it and I passed.
Working committee in our house.
Mr speaker gentle lady I cannot
support that Mr speaker gentle
lady I look forward to seeing
you tomorrow and House Judiciary
thank you.
The gentleman next to the
gentleman from the
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr will gentlelady
yields.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the gentleman.
Mr not familiar with the a panel
and question could you tell me
what the title of the bill is
please.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
very distracting.
That is I believe it's only once
every ten years
gentleman again to point out
that the masons rural cider
cited by the gentle lady states
the debate shall conform
strictly to the motion and may
not discuss the subjects of the
bill.
Discuss the.
Hi.
Question the previous
representations of what just
made with regarding to expertise
in committee.
Legislation has thirty five
Sanchez.
And deserves to be heard on
this.
The house thank you Mr speaker
thank you.
The Germans for the debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Sarinana.
Thank you Mr speaker does it
generally do you yield Mister
speaker I yield to the gentle
lady thank you so there's a
process we go through that
everyone has to go through I
have to build I've had two bills
go through gesture and they made
both of my bills better and then
I'm going to Senate Judiciary
because that is the process and
we all have to follow it gentle
lady thank you Mr Mr speaker
gentleman this is also the
process and it is the practice
of this body in the leadership
to do so so I am simply
following a process that's in
place in Mason section four nine
one dash three this is a legal
process.
Through the debate the gentle
lady from Bernalillo there's
further debate the gentleman
from Bernalillo Representative
chairman Maestas in thank you Mr
speaker will generally from
Sierra Hidalgo grant yield thank
you Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady I just want a rise
in opposition to the motion and
I appreciate you digging deep
and masons.
To talk about of procedure with
regards to committees but I want
to tip my age but this is the.
This is the you not to go too
far in Mason just had to talk to
talk to Mr bill.
Because what he taught us is
that if a bill dies in committee
you have to start over.
Well that that's actually
relevant to this debate that's
actually relevant to this debate
because this bill isn't dead
it's actually scheduled which
makes no sense to me why this
motion is happening.
Other than to speed up a day
and so I appreciate Mr speaker
delay the the the fact that you
have good Intel on the vote
count.
Just because of what you think
about is going to die it doesn't
mean it's not worth the
conversation or the opportunity
to persuade members I mean.
I
Mr speaker jelly I mean I get a
personal income tax for four
straight years knowing it was
going to die and I became
ceremonial in house tax the
gentleman college class of seven
made the motion every year just
because of bill dies doesn't
mean you you got a it's unfair
hearing Mr speaker gently from
granted this year the the the
gentleman from San Juan minority
with suggested it's unfair
hearing know that the hearing
has never taken place so I I it
makes no sense
The only the only time you blast
of bills on the last day when
everyone's in agreement the
Senate of of the ledger
resolution thirteen was blasted
back in two thousand fourteen
and that at to allow state
investment to to go above the
fifty percent cap international
investments that one everybody
agreed it was seventy to nothing
and we blasted it with a half an
hour ago that's the only time
that it's appropriate to use
this motion respect the
committee process thank you Mr.
Thank you Mr speaker I also grew
up on school house rock so I I
remember the song about when the
bills to the full before it gets
a and dies before it gets to
committee.
I don't remember the versatility
next.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Figueroa.
Thank you Mr speaker will my co
sponsor and house bill two
eleven please yield thank you Mr
speaker I yield to the
representative.
Thank you Mr speaker
Right along with the gentle lady
I worked for months on house
bill two eleven and Mr speaker I
know we can talk about the
content so I'm not gonna go
there
but I will talk about my
perspective on this motion Mr
speaker.
Because I believe it is a good
bill.
And because I believe it is
crucially important to the
citizens of New Mexico to have a
fair and transparent
redistricting process.
I believe that it must go
through Judiciary.
Mr speaker I imagine that
disappoints my co sponsors in
the house and probably
disappoints the members of the
Senate who also worked for
months on this bill with all the
advocates.
The process is part of fair and
transparent government.
And the conversation is
necessary.
To make in the bill move
forward.
In a straight forward and honest
way.
And I believe in Judiciary the
conversation we have about the
merits of the bill itself and
the process by which it was
created.
Can sway some of those who might
now be thinking there on in no
position for house bill two
eleven.
But the conversation is
essential.
Just as a sensual as fair
redistricting is for the
citizens of New Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentle lady next year
the gentleman from Bernalillo
chairman Martinez.
Thank you Mr speaker provided
from the state of Indiana please
yield thank you Mr speaker I
yield to the gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker and Julie
do I and I apologize I'm I'm
kinda should be shuffling around
between this and and Senate
debates
this this bill that your motion
attempts to to remove from
committee the the bill has been
scheduled in Judiciary is that
correct Mr speaker and gentleman
that is correct and I've been
assured that it will be tabled
in Senate bill fifteen will be
the emerging Bill which does not
follow the intent of the the
original a statewide effort and
bipartisanship bills that were
moving on.
Some speculate the bill actually
has been scheduled but it's been
rolled over is that correct Mr
speaker and gentleman that's
correct I rule the bill in hopes
that Senate bill fifteen as many
people as they're putting an
effort on it and as many people
from across the state and
statewide organizations have
been begging imploring for
amendments that they would be
successful and they have not
been I was asked to pull the
bill but instead I rolled it and
now I I do not believe that
there's a fair intent to hit to
give it its due hearing.
Mr speaker gentle lady's but the
point is that you I do I do
request the bill is rolled over
the bill was not rolled over out
of anybody else's decision it
was rolled over because you
asked for it to be rolled over
is that correct Mr speaker
gentle lady Mr speaker and
gentleman that is correct it I
would prefer for to been rules
and allowed a fair process with
with with the appropriate
language required to align with
the in the US Supreme Court in
Senate bill fifteen.
Mr speaker I think that's the
flaw with the motion that that
we are here.
hearing at this point in time I
mean
as a chairman myself it over as
the chair of a committee myself
I put a great deal of faith in
that process and I think any of
my committee members in on my
committee will tell you that we
you know we have political
differences no doubt about it
but we try to be as fair as we
can possibly be in fact that was
commended at our last meeting
hearing by one of our ranking
Republican members for allowing
one of the experts or one of the
public commenters to go way past
the a lot of time to to to hear
his piece I'm gonna take a great
deal drugs in that I also know
that to Judiciary Committee of
of which what we're I served you
know for a couple years as a
vice chair I know that is a
committee that is very diligent
in its work and very fair in its
approach I I I I have no reason
to believe that that committee
is unfair in fact one of the
jokes internally that committee
is that we had you know we we we
had ours and I really resent
McQueen opposite sides of the
political table but they were
both very good access to our
construction and we could spend
hours debating the meaning of a
single word because of those two
very very bright legal minds so
I have no reason to believe that
the process is in any way unfair
or restraining your particular
bill unfairly I I think that if
the bill has been scheduled
twice and it's been rolled over
twice at your request I mean now
you are asking us to consider a
motion to bypass that process
based on nothing more than you
know what you perceive to be up
some sort of unfairness going on
I think is is really just not
something that we as a body need
to be spending our time on with
just a few days left in the
session so I will respectfully
vote no on your on your motion I
guess I'm.
Not even sure if we can vote on
the motion but I certainly
disagree with your motion and I
would employ you to please go
through the committee process
and if the bill passes we will
hear it on the floor just like
any other bill thank you Mr
speaker and thank you to.
Thank you John next you have the
chairman from Siebel and the
committee chairman Oakland.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
with a gentlelady yields thank
you Mr speaker of course I yield
to the kind gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady
underestimate I'm just trying to
wake you up okay
I just want to know one thing
okay your bill is being
scheduled to be heard in
committee by.
Two times I have pulled up.
Muted.
Number.
The members Judiciary supposed
to do right I mean when you
million committee before you go
to committee you look at the
bill
and you get the committee you if
you have questions you already
got the mall remind you that
everything together.
The lady I can tell you this
okay.
With the committee process your
bill is not ready for prime time
I'm sorry to say that okay it
needs to go to the committee
processes so they can hit the
floor and leave a comment after
this because you're saying that
you're reading taken.
Thank you reentry demanded but
your bill needs work sorry I
can't support your suggestion.
Thank you gentlemen there's
further debate the gentle lady
from Los Alamos Rio Arriba
Sandoval and Santa Fe
Representative Chandler.
You Mr speaker well but gentle
lady program logo in Sierra
County please yield thank you Mr
speaker I yield.
Thank you very much gentlelady I
am not one of the co signers on
the bill I'm sure you're aware
of that gentle lady and I just
would like to clarify something
is it fair for me to say gentle
lady that the reason you role to
build multiple times was that
you were hoping for up an
outcome in the Senate that you
are now I'm satisfied with
gentle lady Mr speaker Mr
speaker and gentle lady I
originally filed Senate bill two
eleven after seeing Senate bill
one ninety nine stalled.
And replaced with Senate bill
fifteen which has been the bill
that has moved forward and there
it is not my will but the will
of a statewide group that
comprises many statewide
organizations that there be fair
redistricting plan and yes that
is true I role because there
were commitments from the
statewide organizations and and
and and and hope that key pieces
in Philly districting.
And direction from the US
Supreme Court would be included
in a Senate bill fifteen which
has not so yes Mr speaker and
they and gentle lady that is
somewhat true it's not my bill.
I can only
Mr speaker I'm confused you are
one of the lead sponsors on this
bill is that correct.
Mr speaker Mr speaker and gentle
lady I am not one of the this is
the this is the bill presented
by the people I did not draft
this bill it is a mere bill
Senate bill one ninety nine
which is the result of a
statewide workgroup comprised of
many organizations committed to
fair redistricting so I support
this bill.
And the guiding of Senate bill
fifteen it no longer resembles
that and I believe the people
will be honest it is known that
Senate bill fifteen is probably
in its final state which this
happens once in a decade and so
I am simply using what what
happens on the floor all the
time withdrawing built from the
committee hearing in placing
them on the temporary counter.
Mr speaker gentle lady let me
reflect back what I think I
heard
you are the lead sponsor on this
bill and yet you are now telling
this body that it is not your
request that we engage in this
process but it is someone else's
request that you are simply
mimicking is that I understand
that correctly gentle lady Mr
speaker Mr speaker and gentle
lady it is this bill is
representative many many
districts from the co sponsors
as well as a statewide group
that's comprised of many
statewide organizations.
And I am the person carrying it.
On behalf of the citizens of New
Mexico of which seven people
tomorrow will determine whether
it moves forward.
Mr speaker generally
at to conclude this discussion
Mr speaker gentle lady I propose
removing it from the Judiciary
Committee an entrance land very
disappointed by the request as
someone who did not sign on to
the bill because I would like to
understand it better and and
know that it has been vetted by
a group of individuals who are
who will do that in Judiciary
and as you will recall gentle
lady I used to serve on that
committee and I know how
diligent they are in reviewing
these things I I would be
relying in large part on their
analysis and gentle lady so for
that reason I I I request that
the body not support this motion
lastly I I I do find it quite
confusing they have a a bill
sponsor suggest that this the
motion made yet somehow not
really the the the that
individuals motion but I I found
that whole discussion very
confusing but thank you very
much Mr speaker and gentle lady
Mr speaker and gentle lady this
is my motion.
As for the debate the gentle
lady from Bernalillo chairman
Thompson.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from grant Hidalgo
in Sierra yield.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the gentle lady thank you gentle
lady and Mr speaker so instead
many times that this has
happened a lot this session I do
remember here like one of my
bills was removed from
appropriations after consulting
with the chair and with the
agreement of the chair gentle
lady and Mr speaker have we
removed anything from a
committee with out the the
committee chairs blessing.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I do
not know.
Mr speaker gently I think that's
part of the problem that the the
ones that work removal where we
move because it was an
unnecessary referral I believe
this is a very necessary
referral and what what I could
see coming from this gentle lady
Mr speaker it's any time I mean
all of us have bills that we
think are life and death to the
state I mean otherwise we
wouldn't be carrying on so if we
got a bill that we thought was
really really important health
insurance bill for me that I
thought could literally save
lives and that was that to a
committee that I didn't think
was in favor I would just roll
it a couple times and then come
on the floor and say well this
committee is not going to let it
go so let me slide I see that as
a very dangerous precedent that
we're setting that where we if
we don't like the committees we
get we try to go around them and
for that reason Mr speaker and
gentle lady I can't support this
because we need to follow the
process thank you Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Townsend seven the gentleman
from Chavis Indiana Terrel for a
second time.
Thank you Mr speaker I just want
to reiterate to the body.
That the process is.
In may some.
And our rural books.
Our fair and honest processes.
You know some bills that go
through here get one committee
some get to committees some get
three committees I've even seen
water to get more than that I
think I might have had one but
with that said.
I've heard people say that this
is a flawed motion.
May not like it but is not
flawed it's right out of masons.
And
Mr speaker if I if I insinuated
or if you took of that I was
saying that the body was an
ethical or on transparent.
I I.
Please that was not my
intention.
But what I will tell the body.
Yes that.
This motion.
Is a fair motion.
It happens all the time in this
body where we hear things that
we don't like but it doesn't
mean that it's block it just
means we don't like it.
Lord knows I've heard lots of
things a session that I didn't
like but I didn't mean that the
process was flawed.
I would ask the body.
To remember.
That.
Thirty five people signed on to
this.
A major and one committee can
prevent it from being heard
happens to every bill.
But when you have thirty five
people sign on to I think it
does it deserves to be heard on
the floor.
In thirty five seventy people
will make a good decision on the
bill that affects seventy people
and their districts.
For
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
Mexico the gentleman from
Bernalillo Cibola McKinley
Sikora San Juan influencia
Representative Harry Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker with a
young lady to be able to make.
Thank you Mr speaker I will
gladly yield
Mr speaker and eighty public
board is redistricting.
Mr speaker gentleman I think
most people would think it is
important.
Of the Mr speaker on lady you
know I'm on by share of all the
transportation Mr began dating
and it's not committee I think
we.
Your build on a bipartisan
standard it is not a Republican
or democratic bill or Senator
hall didn't really matter Mr
speaker and maybe I do feel that
way about other committees that
you've been in front of.
Mr speaker and gentle lady it
depends on the bill.
Mr speaker and I'm not a in late
in the gentleman of this
accident sorry.
Mr speaker young lady
Why is that do you think that
the judiciary is going to need
one for for what reason are you
thinking that Mr speaker and
gentleman I I I'm not making a
decision on that I'm simply
following what this body does on
a regular basis which is to move
bills withdraw them from
committee impossible to
temperate calendar and it's not
just the speaker who has this
ability any member of this body
can do that anytime according to
Mason's and so that is what I'm
doing.
Thank you you Mr speaker and the
reason I brought that up because
I heard all conversation the you
would pull the the your role the
bill twice and then all of a
sudden you to one of the
committee which makes you wonder
what the reason what's the
reason behind that the young
lady Mr speaker Mr speaker and
gentleman this is just one of
the fundamental rights that a
member house of the white to
present any proper proposal for
consideration of this body
generally any member who has
been recognized presiding
officer can present a motion and
other proposals to the body and
that's what I'm doing according
to Mason's section one fifty
five paragraph one so I'm simply
doing what any member of this
body can do it anytime
thank you Mr speaker young lady
all it just of would also be Mr
speaker number eighty was the
the comment that was mentioned
earlier the June you'll be using
a diet Disher you and that's why
you don't want their and my
question was what makes you
think it's going to die want me
to get up and get a fair shake
in with your Mr speaker and
gentlemen at one of the things
would be the feedback from this
statewide working group that's
comprised of community
organizations and the emails
that have gone been going
between the groups and also
quite frankly the sponsor the
speaker of the house sign on the
Senate bill fifteen.
Mr speaker you maybe I'll.
Do you have any.
The bill to the committee Mr Mr
speaker and gentleman I am
following masons rules of order
and I am doing what any member
of this body is able to do we'll
know tomorrow after Judiciary if
this part if this is a request
was was appropriate Mr speaker
and eighty
this is just a comment I think
should be gone maybe that we
should let the process go
forward thank everybody else
does an adult at the end of the
day if it fails is talk to
somebody was up at anything
against you personally I think
it's just a process thank you Mr
speaker thank you Mr speaker I
won't take the outcome
personally thank you.
Okay there's no further debate
the vote the gentle lady stated
the motion.
and we will have a roll call
vote.
The vote.
Is now open.
Click to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Cadena.
No.
Representative Cadena votes no.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid votes now.
What is close by a vote of
twenty five in the affirmative
forty three negative the motion
fails.
Okay we announcements and
miscellaneous business are there
any nonsense.
Mr speaker.
Who is that Representative
Jennifer Bernalillo
Representative masses thank you
Mr chair members just up
commerce will start at eleven
thirty tomorrow just heads up
eleven thirty tomorrow as
opposed to new thank you.
Members.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
message.
Hearing objections so ordered
Cllr to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill twelve.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill seventy one.
Senate bill two forty four as
amended.
Senate bill two forty seven as
amended.
Senate bill two seventy six with
emergency clause.
Senate bill three sixty five as
amended Senate bill three eighty
seven as amended with emergency
clause and request the
concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief
clerk.
Message will be entered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo Mr
speaker I move that we go to the
next order of business committee
report.
See no objections so ordered.
Click to read first report
committee in full.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too is been referred
Senate bill ninety two as
amended has had it under
consideration point thing with
recommendation that you pass
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Is there objection to adopting
the committee's reports.
With one motion and having the
journal reflect that.
They were acted upon
individually.
I see none the clerk to read.
Senate bill one forty six do
pass.
Senate bill one eighty one as
amended two passed.
Senate bill two eighty six as
amended to pass as amended
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Mr speaker.
We're on adoption of a favorable
committee committee report
Senate bill ninety two dash a.
As amended.
Favorable committee reports
Senate bill one forty six.
Favorable committee report
Senate bill one eighty one dash
eight.
Favorable committee report
Senate bill to sixty to eighty
six.
That's twice amended.
All those in favor say aye.
I.
Okay.
All those opposed nay saying
Hey.
The committee reports are
adopted.
Mr speaker your commerce and
economic development committee
to has been referred Senate bill
thirty five has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that I do passed
as amended.
Respectfully submitted on Tania
Maestas chair.
Move adoption.
Is there objection to adopting
the committee's report with one
motion and having the journal
reflect that they were acted
upon individually.
I see none of the clerk to read.
Senate bill one oh six two
passed.
Senate bill one twenty four as
amended to pass.
Senate bill two oh four do
passed and then three for to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Antonio Maestas chair.
Move adoption please.
We're on the adoption of
favorable committee report
Senate bill thirty five as
amended.
Favorable committee report
Senate bill one oh six.
Favorable committee report
Senate bill one to four as
amended.
Favorable committee report
Senate bill two oh four.
All those in favor say aye.
Those opposed say nay.
The committee report is adopted.
Mr speaker your Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee to was been
referred Senate bill seventy two
as amended has had it under
consideration reports same with
recommendation that it do passed
as amended respectfully
submitted Matthew McQueen chair.
The option.
We are on adoption of a
favorable committee report
Senate bill seventy two was
amended.
Thank you all those in favor say
aye.
Hi hi.
All those opposing a.
The committee report is adopted.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee to is
been referred house memorial
twenty has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that do pass
respectfully submitted an
helical Rubio chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
Is there objection to adopting
the committee's report with one
motion and having the journal
reflect that they were acted
upon individually.
See none the clerk to read.
Senate bill seventy three do
path.
Senate bill one eighty six as
amended to PAF respectfully
submitted an helical Rubio
chair.
We were on adoption of a
favorable committee report House
memorial twenty.
Favorable committee report
Senate bill seventy three
favorable committee reports
Senate bill one eighty six as
amended.
All those in favor say aye.
I.
Those opposed say nay.
The committee reports have been
adopt.
Mr speaker your local government
land grants and cultural affairs
committee to it's been referred
Senate bill one ninety three as
amended has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that you pass
respectfully submitted to get P.
Garcia chair.
Estamos speaker Google but a
report that called meet that.
We are on the docks of the
favorable committee report
Senate bill one ninety three as
amended.
All those in favor say aye.
I.
Those opposing a.
The committee report has been
adopted.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
military affairs committee to is
been referred Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill ninety has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that it do passed
respectfully submitted on the
sale the LFC one share.
Mr speaker move adoption.
Is there objection to adopting
the committee's reports with one
motion having the journal
reflect that.
They were acted upon
individually.
Seen on the court to read.
Senate bill two seventy two as
amended two passed.
Senate bill three oh three to
pass respectfully submitted of
the sale the Alcon chair.
Mr speaker move the report.
We are on an adaption of a
favorable committee report.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill
ninety.
Favorable committee report
Senate bill two seventy two this
amended.
Favorable committee report
Senate bill one three oh three.
All those in favor say aye.
I.
For those those those opposed
say nay.
The committee reports have been
adopted.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation.
I see no objections so ordered.
Click to read.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
twelve an act relating to the
Tory will.
No toria acts and acting revise
uniform law on the Toro acts
requiring rulemaking by the
secretary of state repealing
sections of the NMSA nineteen
seventy eight pertaining to know
Tauriel acts Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill twelve.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
twelve having being been read
twice by title is you for to
committee.
To House Judiciary Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill seventy one and after
leading to consumer protection
and acting the patients debt
collection protection act
preventing collection from
indeed indigent patients
requiring health care facilities
to screen patients for
assistance eligibility requiring
health care facilities and third
party health care providers to
report how certain public funds
are spent.
Limiting enforceability of
certain judgments adding to the
definition of collection agency
in the collection agency
regulatory act removing attorney
fees and costs for certain suits
by collection agencies amending
and enacting sections of the
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
Senate Judiciary Committee such
to percentages chair committees
up to percent of bill seventy
one.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill seventy one having been
read twice by title is referred
to the health in humans house
health and Human Services
Committee.
Senate bill two forty four as
amended introduced by Senator
Hickey and after leading to
immunization allowing a child's
parents or guardians to file a
certificate from a certified
nurse practitioner stating that
immunization would be
detrimental to the physical
condition of the child Senate
bill two forty four as amended.
Senate bill two forty four is
amended having been read twice
by title is referred to the
house health and Human Services
Committee.
Senate bill two forty seven as
amended introduced by Senator
Sedillo Lopez and hawks
Representative Hochman Vigil an
act relating to juvenile justice
prohibiting the imposition of a
sentence of life without parole
on a child providing parole
procedures Senate bill two forty
seven as amended.
Senate bill two forty seven as
amended having been read twice
by title is referred to the
health of Judiciary Committee.
House Judiciary Committee for
clarification.
Senate bill two seventy six
introduced by Senator Pinto and
after leading to public affairs
creating regional volunteer
response teams to assist with
hazardous materials accident
response declaring an emergency
Senate bill two seventy six.
Senate bill two seventy six
having being read twice by title
is referred to the land grants
local governments and cultural
affairs committee.
Senate bill three sixty five as
amended introduced by Senator
Kernan and potentially leading
to mortgage loan origination
changing prohibitions and
requirements relating to certain
adjustable rate home loans
Senate bill three sixty five as
amended.
Senate bill three sixty five as
amended having been read twice
by title is referred to the
health commerce.
Commerce.
And economic development
committee.
Senate bill three eighty seven
as amended introduced by senator
Wirth and after leading to
campaign finance amending the
campaign reporting act requiring
a contribution to be deposited
in a segregated bank account to
be exempt from the independent
expenditure reporting
requirements Senate bill three
eighty seven as amended.
Senate bill three eighty seven
as amended having been read
twice by title is referred to
the health need house Judiciary
Committee.
House memorial twenty six
introduced by representative
Lente a memorial requesting the
public education department to
develop a comprehensive
education plan to address the
consolidated Yazzie Martinez for
state in New Mexico court
decision and offer in
consultation with the plaintiffs
requesting the public education
department to provide the
legislature with an annual
report on the implementation of
the comprehensive education plan
and compliance with the
constitution of New Mexico to
find out risk children with the
uniforms and sufficient
education House memorial twenty
six.
House memorial twenty six having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the house Education Committee.
House memorial twenty seven
introduced by Representative Dow
a memorial requesting
legislative finance committee to
convene a parity pay task force
to study reimbursements to New
Mexico personal care services
providers and child care
providers House memorial twenty
seven.
House memorial twenty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to.
House.
Labor veterans military affairs
committee.
House memorial twenty eight
introduced by representatives
Crowder.
And Chatfield in the morning and
Senators woods and Ingle a
memorial honoring Floyd
Patterson and recognizing his
outstanding service to New
Mexico House memorial twenty
eight.
House memorial twenty eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
placed on the speakers table.
House memorial twenty nine
introduced by Representative Dow
a memorial declaring March
seventeenth twenty twenty one
for H. stay in the house of
representatives House memorial
twenty nine.
House memorial twenty nine
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
placed on the speakers table.
House memorial thirty introduced
by representatives and then this
lane and Scott a memorial
declaring March eighteenth
twenty twenty one bow tie day
and house of representatives
House memorial thirty.
House memorial thirty Evin been
read twice by title not is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
I see no objections so ordered.
The gentle lady from Chavis.
Mr speaker thank you very much I
was just going to let the body
knows that this morning at six
fifty one AM.
We had a little boy born I am
very very proud of them he came
into this world weighing seventy
two pounds and Mr speaker of.
If anybody would like to see
baby pictures they can come over
and take a look at thank you Mr
speaker.
Congratulations.
Mr speaker.
One thing I move that we go.
The gentle lady from Chavis do
you have a second announcement.
Mr speaker is not so much of an
announcement as it is a point of
order here or personal privilege
if you want me to go that route
I don't care.
Mr speaker reading yesterday's
golden rod I was right what
committees are meeting and
everything else and yesterday I
was reading because I am a
member of this committee health
agriculture water resources for
Thursday March the eleventh this
is now would tend to at this
time.
Mr speaker today's golden we're
golden rod said since March the
eleventh Thursday house
agriculture water resources
committee no agenda at this
time.
Mr speaker.
This morning I had a zoom
meeting that started today to
Copley finished up about one
o'clock I was going through my
emails.
And this message was sent this
morning.
At seven thirty one from the
secretary.
At the house agriculture and
water resources committee
stating that that committee
would begin in one hour on March
the eleventh two thousand and
twenty one at eight thirty eight
AM Mr speaker.
I.
Was frantic I thought I had
missed a committee meeting and I
don't miss committee meetings
but I really have a problem
whenever there's a notification
sent out at seven thirty one to
our meeting to begin at eight
thirty I immediately called
several other members of my
committee and they said.
We did not know that there was a
meeting.
They take their email and they
got to notice one of was at
seven thirty four one of them
was at seven thirty six I can't
remember the time frame for sure
that Mr speaker I would just
like for our committee chairs.
To make sure that they're LA's
are not just automatically
sending notices out that there
will be a committee meeting
putting all of us into an uproar
Mr speaker thank you very much.
In the late.
Gentle lady thank you.
Gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan do you have an
announcement.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to let the body no House
appropriations and finance
committee will meet tomorrow at
eleven thirty thank you.
Members take note.
Gentleman from Rio Arriba
Sandoval and San Juan county do
you have an announcement yes Mr
speaker I'd like to respond to
the the.
Gentle lady from Chavis counties
concern in regards to an
announcement that was made I
yesterday at the conclusion of
our house floor session I did
make the announcement that we
did not have an agenda we would
have a meeting this morning
unfortunately and and and if if
it created a a confusion and
concern it is on me and not on
the staff but the the staff
member did mention that they
were unable to delete of the
automatic reminder for the hour
before the session begins a
reminder on doing so please with
all due respect to the gentle
lady from from Chavis and Mr
speaker and all the members of
the house agricultural committee
that that that onus is on me I
take full responsibility and
please don't to go go don't take
it out on our staff to do the
best they can with the tools
that they have at their
availability thank you Mr
speaker thank you members.
Thank you gentleman.
General gentlelady from
Bernalillo do you have an
announcement.
Thank you Mr speaker I do and I
just want to follow up what the
chairman before we said the same
thing happened with the consumer
public affairs committee I got a
notice that the meeting was to
begin in an hour and I checked
in with my committee yes and he
said that they were unable to
cancel.
So I asked her to please send
out in the notice to members of
the committee to let them know
that that was an error and as as
the former chairs that that
please don't take it out on our
staff that was it was up I get
the computer glitch for lack of
a better a better phrase to stay
at now I apologize if anybody
got frantic
Step that it was not it was not
intentional on anyone's part
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentle lady from
Bernalillo does the gentleman
from better Leo have an
announcement.
Mr speaker I'm assuming that's
Representative Romero.
Representative Rowe Romero yes
thank you Mr speaker yes your
house Education Committee will
meet tomorrow at nine AM to nine
AM thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you.
Does the gentleman from Lee
County.
Representative Pettigrew have an
announcement.
Mr speaker thank you for the
opportunity and I just want to
re iterate my
announcement yesterday that
Senate bill thirty two needs to
be.
This to House act.
And I just feel very strongly
that this was a bill that
deals with State Land and should
be sent to the proper.
Committee for review and with
that Mr speaker I yield back
thank you.
Thank you Mr gentleman from Lee
County does the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Armstrong have.
An aspect.
But yes Mr speaker thank you the
health and Human Services
Committee will meet tomorrow at
nine thirty that's a a new time
get to sleep in an hour nine
thirty for health and Human
Services thank you.
Members take note.
Mr speaker.
Finally Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business third reading of
legislation.
Seen no objections so ordered.
Gentleman from Lincoln
analytical Tero are you ready
on.
I don't fifteen.
I am Mr speaker.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for the placing
of H. B. two sixty nine as
amended on final passage has
been taken and that is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
Gentleman to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker House Bill
to sixty nine as amended would
amend section twenty four dash
fourteen US six of our statutes
which is the electronic medical
records act to permit disclosure
of an individual's electronic
medical records to provider
health care institution or
healthcare group purchaser for
treatment payment or health care
operations activities the
disclosure is in compliance with
health insurance portability
with the health insurance
portability and accountability
act of nineteen ninety six that
Mr speaker I'll stand for
questions.
Seeing no debate the gentleman
to close.
Mr speaker I move that.
House Bill to sixty nine as
amended do now pass.
You're on final passage of house
bill two sixty nine as amended.
The vote is now open.
See the.
Was the is the.
The.
Twenty seconds remaining.
You see us the low.
As a.
Electronic portion is closed
with the clerk called the
members.
Without a recorded vote.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Yes Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong votes yes.
Representative Cabana.
Yes.
Representative is yes.
Representative Lara.
Yes Representative Lara both yes
Representative ream.
Representative Rehm votes yes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of sixty eight in the
affirmative and zero.
In the negative.
House Bill two sixty nine as
amended.
Has now passed the house.
Gentleman from Santa are you
ready on item sixteen.
I have Mister speaker.
The record reflect.
That all action necessary
replacing.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
seventy six.
On final passage has been taken
and that is it is now subject to
debate amendment or
substitution.
Gentleman to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker and ladies
and gentleman of the house.
only be sure to very quick
stories I have many more
Now pass it on to my co sponsor
Representative you madam
chairman from Senate over Rio
and then I do have an amendment
that I will make after that
point as well of the.
Members what house bill two
seventy six in response to
something that is not person.
just two quick stories to show
both sides.
****.
Sure we
around that number election time
frame
there were
Supporters of president trump.
That went in right in front of
the client's home showing Walker
out.
And and then around that same
time period there were folks
that protest in front of senator
John hallways for Daniel.
he was not there in his wife
your reserves and daughter
Abigail and said no got a baby
no thank you
then they didn't even start shot
to come out to help.
And then in my very own
neighborhood Rio Rancho there
was an old retired couple was
flying a flag in the yard and
And folks like that slide
instantly started protesting for
House every weekend for two
weeks.
And I just I don't think that's
right
I think your home is your
sanctuary.
so what happens there.
And and so this legislation
defines a new term targeted
residential picketing and makes
it a misdemeanor.
when was that Mr speaker like to
head over to my co sponsor
John from sent over to the
program.
Mr speaker John thank you very
much so hi this is a difficult
balance for me
my father was the original
executive director of the
American civil liberties union
in Arizona
Ennis thank goodness still alive
and when Representative Harper
approached me about this bill.
I talked to him about it and he
said
Yeah I'm fine with this bill
which we'll talk about the
minute but then the wind chilled
me was he said I'm fine with
this bill because I love my
daughter in law.
she's worried about what could
happen if we don't start to
think about.
The danger that is approaching
politics in this country and
that's the concern.
Is that we shouldn't wait until
there is a death to come back in
a special session address what I
think is going to quickly become
across the country in more more
pressing issue.
For those like me who are
champions of the first amendment
let me remind the body that this
is not about content we are not
restricting content of speech
that would be in violation of
the first amendment what we are
doing.
Is addressing time place and
manner.
In a tailored narrow way that is
designed to advance the public
policy of preventing what could
be an explosive and dangerous
situation and with that Mr
speaker I'll turn it back over
to the gentleman from Santa Fe
County and I appreciate him
yielding to me thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
that said I do have an
amendment.
Mr speaker
that addresses
much of the conversation we had
and you sure committee which I
found very helpful in this
amendment strikes the bill and I
would move house floor amendment
number one to house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill two seventy six.
Gentleman will you read the two
oh two number please certainly
Mr speaker it's two two zero
seven zero two point two.
The amendment has been passed
out and it's online.
Gentleman to explain the
amendment.
Thank you Mr speaker so this
ammendment really does three
cents to address conversation
had in the district and.
The first is.
It strikes the portion of bill
that defines a region of a
hundred feet from the property
one of the residents.
The districts that out and and
this goes back to the questions
we have on oil depending on
where the house is that and and
how you know this is a large
house or small residential in
this suburban area it was just
right and so well it definitions
I believe it strengthens the
definitions
The
world is just.
Hi residential picketing
consists of getting that is
specifically directed or focused
toward a resident of a person.
So I think that cleans that up
the the second thing it does is
That clarifies that.
The person's presence
defining picketing the person's
presence that prices the tort
and ritual or household.
instead of intended to apprise
so takes this.
It makes it more specific about
what that person's doing instead
of their intentions again I
think that strengthens of the
bill in the last thing it does
is it defines residents.
there's a lot of discussion
about what to this what could
this be.
And so we define it to be a
single family or multi family
dwelling.
That's not in use as a place of
public needs and so this would
not
capture businesses would not
capture maybe a business system
lives in it has to be a single
family or multi family dwelling.
and so with that Mr speaker I'll
stand for questions on.
Is there debate on the
amendment.
The gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
two gentlemen from Santa Fe
County yields.
Mr speaker we are.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen of.
Mr speaker I'm I'm pleased to
see the amendment so I I think
that the language Titans Titans
of the bill and also tightens up
the potential
issues that might be addressed
here and I just want to ask one
question Mr speaker and
gentleman with the changes that
you made in the amendment are
are you comfortable that that
I think in committee I use the
example of a.
Ice cream truck going down the
street the that that would no
longer be deemed to be picketing
as defined in your a
legislation.
Of Mr speaker and and.
John thank you for that good
question.
Hi I am confident addresses that
point because we definitely love
our our ice cream
and I that would be a a
commercial activity
and it's not targeted to a
specific household what is to
all of the households that
particular region.
how would I package here it is
wise to targets an individual or
an individual household.
So I.
We have a trust into outline of
ice cream sales trucks.
Mr speaker and gentleman of that
was provided real concern and
committee of that's why I voted
against it it it really
prohibited a lot of activities
of that what should otherwise be
allowed.
In front of a person's house or
going down the street whether
the marching or or driving and I
think that the language that you
now have employers addresses
those concerns and so I'm really
pleased to see the the tighter
language number one and number
two the specific
the specificity by which your
applying the bill because I
think if it were ever challenged
in a court of law that you need
to be there and you need that
Taylor this specifically to two
very Mel acts that reflect
Improper conduct and I think
you've done that with the
language so I thank you
Gentleman from from Santa Fe
County for for bringing this
ammendment forward thank you Mr
speaker thank you John.
Thank you John.
There's further debate the
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo kindly
yield.
percent of all of your yes Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker for give me.
from from Santa so I I don't
have the privilege of sitting on
Judiciary so have not seen this
bill and I did not hear.
The debate surrounding of.
You know what what gave rise to
these particular changes.
And so on the first change or or
striking out the reference to
sort of this just Geographic hi
a hundred feet can you just give
me a little more detail help me
understand why every striking
this this provision because at
least my perspective I think it
it wanted generationally as a
sort of how does objective
standard of of somebody could
know how close or not close the
computer Representative
residents and now that's been
removed so you can just help me
understand why.
Mr speaker and a general concern
want thank you that's that's an
excellent question.
And
Really it goes to.
but let me preface it by saying
we're not inventing the
reinventing the wheel here this
isn't the first time that
something like this has been
brought forward.
The Virginia K. mentioned
earlier there actually is a
warrants in Virginia against
target rate
there's there's one in Salt Lake
City of a sample of a story
there
there's one in Michigan that's
one Illinois we actually have
Steve Albuquerque has an
ordinance restricting picketing
the targeted residential
picketing as does Bernalillo
county as the as the city of
Artesia.
And as we were contemplating
discussion prudish here and
looking always different
ordinances.
what we found instead of saying
well there were there ninety
nine feet away first hundred one
feet away
what's so magical about a
hundred feet.
what became works there working
always different ordinances that
it's.
Front of work directly targeting
residents.
and so by removing that.
Kind of arbitrary a hundred feet
and just focusing on on that
definition of focus towards are
residents of a person.
That we're upset me the
potential confusion or getting
wrapped around the axle one
hundred fifty.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman from central thank you
for that and you know I did I
did do just a little bit of
legal research and.
these types of statutes have
been found to be constitutional
because again as the as the co
sponsor gentleman said this is a
time place and manner type
regulation it's not content and
it's not view point.
and so I don't worry about the
constitutionality of it.
I just wonder about you know the
person that's that's trying to
exercise certain rights just
making sure they understand sort
of what the boundaries are of
what they can and cannot do
constitutionally.
And so that's why I ask about
the hundred feet
because now now that's been
removed and I and I and I do get
the point though.
Why is this behavior not okay at
ninety nine feet but then also
the suddenly appeared a hundred
one feet so I I appreciate that.
but then I wonder if if which
just focus for the residents of
a person.
and I and you don't tie that to
something Geographic I I I I
almost don't really understand
what it means when you say.
Are picketing focused towards a
residency can you just help me
work through that my mind the Mr
speaker and gentleman from San
Juan a great question you're
you're almost tracking
conversation Judiciary exactly.
that's how you define residents
what is residents meeting was
the next what we discussed at
length.
and and we agreed with the great
comments from committee that we
needed to provide residents.
and so in this ammendment we
define it to mean no single or
multi family dwelling unit.
that is not being used as a
place of a public meeting.
And so this targeted marketing
has to be at the residence of
the targeted person.
Right so but we wanted to do is
make sure that someone wanted to
exercise their their rights to
protest to exercise free speech.
That's a good still you know
organize a March down the street
of a particular person.
or you know we're not we're not
talking about balking at the
still perform as long as it's
not
directed at the residence of the
person being target.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for that clarification I do
want to ask a question also.
On another change that I saw and
what it what this change I
believe does not provide a
number for you.
It's a it's number three on the
amendment so this changes
language from intended to
apprise.
Up to now I think just that our
prices.
So my question in regard to that
change is you know.
In in the long we talk about and
tenants that's an important
concept to men's raha is an
important concept when you talk
about criminal culpability.
And when you remove that word
and tenants.
I worry if if.
That changes back men's raha
element requirement.
and I'm not suggesting that
someone could protest without
knowing they're protesting I
don't think it goes to that
I think it goes more towards
them focusing but not
necessarily intending to target
a residence maybe they're going
through a neighborhood or
something like that.
and so my question is why why
change that from and tents and
and limit let me leave that.
Yes I miss figure gentleman from
so I think you another great
question we did talk about mens
rea at quite a bit.
the intent.
And
all however the gentleman from
Bernalillo Sandoval.
She she cares too but
But I was trying to do is are
looking always comments that you
looking at what what what what
is the intention of trying to
get and they'll look at what the
person is intending to do.
just seem to collect the money
the waters for quality what you
know what's what's going on we
just wanted to make it clear
that it's what they're actually
doing
if they are Mr presence to a
apprise the target was your
household.
But a message.
That that's that's worsening is
not permitted it really doesn't
matter what their their intended
to stand there with a sign or or
or or or or whatever.
I'm.
There are ten.
We we don't want to bring
intended to explain tracks.
Mr speaker will the gentleman
yield and I can just add quickly
to that
what it's intended to do is keep
the man's right out but also the
a fact so in other words it is
both intense but it also has it
doesn't rise so when you say
when you take out the word
intent you actually are
strengthening it's not enough
for somebody you intended it has
actually price that targeted
individual it does both and
that's why the drafters of
Legislative Council suggested
that change thank you Mr speaker
and gentleman for the excellent
question.
Mr speaker and gentleman
I was asked to see if the
gentleman from Santa Fe County
who is very adapted to us are
could give longer answers
because that's what lawyers do
so I'm I have a professional in
the to his answers because they
are lengthy and thoughtful and I
appreciated so thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Mr speaker John thanks for those
answers I've I've been told that
lawyers love the sound of their
own voice say I can either
confirm or deny but.
Thank you for for the the debate
for the clarifications like I
said not having set through this
on any committees this is new to
me and of course just Ciniza
minutes for the first time so
the dialogue helps provide some
context for me thank you.
Thank you John.
Gentle lady from Santa do you
wish to debate the amendment.
Thank you.
Gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval and took.
Sir Senator a in Torrance would
you like to debate the
amendment.
Mr speaker you're referring to
me.
Yes.
You Mr speaker are you left out
one of my counters Mr speaker
and gentleman yield.
Are you.
Mr chairman
On the board of because I was
going to compliment you on a the
handling it very diligent issue
of.
The sensitively and recently
And then I read the amendment.
Mr speaker and gentleman it's
it's still I support the bill
but I am concerned about
removing the of proximity
require.
Mr speaker and gentleman for
example I you know I can imagine
a situation where.
the target of your I heard the
lives well on top of the hill.
Mr Chairman behind the gate.
but has a lovely view of the
city Mr Chairman and you know
that if you stand in a
particular spots well away from
the house.
You would be in his view chat Mr
chairman and I think that should
be fair game.
Because it's not it doesn't have
this threatening nature to the
residents are to the occupants
of the residence.
And I'm concerned that by
removing the proximity
requirement well I understand
how it simplifies the bill the
difference between ninety nine
feet under one seat I'm
concerned there is no limit.
And there could be situations
where you were well away from
the residence and still we're
we're exercising your first
amendment rights to protest so
Mr Chairman could you could you
did you think about that could
you address that.
Mr speaker and gentleman all the
for to a gentleman from
Bernalillo Sandoval for his
comments so I'll just mention
that.
No I I had that same order as
well when we first looked at
making that change could I be a
block away and pointing a
megaphone towards a resident not
be considered.
Targeting that that residents.
And the answer I got from what's
council staff and also from
working all these other
different.
ordinances and laws was that no
focused towards something is
more than just pointing at it
from afar.
but all over the gentleman from
Bernalillo Sandoval also sure
spots.
Mr speaker and gentleman
that you know I don't really
have much to add to that I mean
we have this is such a delicate
balance we're trying to figure
out what's the right way to do
this some of the hundred feet
requirement we start looking at
that and you know the issue was
if you live on a ranch in your
hundred feet does that make
sense if you're if you live on
sections are you going to be in
a public roadway so we were
trying to figure out a way and
this is the difficulty with time
place and manner restrictions
there's never going to be a good
answer to that and so the
directed or focused seem to be
the most straightforward answer
rather than a hundred feet
because we were worried that
we're the unintended
consequences to that of stopping
people for example being on a
public highway if you lived
right off a public highway so I
I don't
Mr speaker gentleman disagree
with your concern I just don't
think we're ever going to be
able to come up with the
solution is going to satisfy
everyone.
Thank you Mr chairman
Yes I like to build better
before Mr Jones.
Thank you.
Thank you John.
Gentleman from curry
Representative Crowder do you
wish to debate.
Thank you Mr speaker yes I do
will gentleman from Santa please
you.
Are you.
Thank you John I am very much
enjoyed the debate tonight
because I've learned so much
from it
thank I approach this with a
view of a developer.
And when I saw the hundred feet
there was a comfort to me
because I know the set back from
our property line it almost all
the subdivisions that were done
in New Mexico from.
Probably the mid seventies all
the way up to two thousand have
sixty four right wise in the
street and a twenty five foot
setback from the property line
to the resident in order to
allow room for a car to park.
And so as I viewed the hundred
foot I thought well that's good
that keep some completely out of
the residence area because they
can't be in the street.
Without stepping on a neighbor's
private property would be the
only way they can do that
because it's eighty five feet
from backer backer whatever most
the streets back in those days
or thirty sixty.
So the sixty feet you had about
a twelve foot easement on either
side of the street.
And so when I I saw you striking
that I paused.
I like that I want to leave that
in there but as the as the
discussion is progressed I see
why you did it I understand it
it's as protective and maybe
more so and and other areas
outside residential areas most
of the subdivision since the
early two thousands of
and on what's called skinny
streets for calming streets and
they're actually narrower to
slow down traffic in residential
areas.
In the setbacks are are a little
bit different they're allowing
residents to be built a little
bit closer to the street because
of cost of land and development
costs and those sorts of things
so I believe that that with your
amendment.
The vast majority of residential
subdivisions.
Would still be very very well
protected from this targeting
that you're addressing so I very
much appreciate it I found
myself going from one side to
the other because it was a great
discussion and debate thank you
for bringing forward thank you
Mr speaker thank you John.
Thank you John.
The gentleman from San Juan
Representative Representative
Montoya thank you Mr speaker
this gentleman from Santa yield.
Mr speaker your.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman as it's all of this is
that time of the session where
it's I think it's happened once
a year for about the last four
years where I find myself
agreeing with C. as chairman of
energy.
I think I like this bill better.
Before this ammendment and and
Mr speaker and a gentleman let
me.
Give you my reasoning.
And that is and hopefully I will
get to a representative from
curry to to go back again to the
other side
so Mister speaker and gentleman
what I see with this change.
Is one eliminating.
Pro testing in a subdivision.
But what we're now doing is what
would be directed at a single
person.
Who has.
And in particularly if it's a if
it's a.
A public official let's say.
that is something that we all
signed up for when we do that.
I and the the example you gave
earlier which was the somebody
had a flag.
now what you are potentially
setting up with this ammendment.
Is that.
Now you're probably gonna have
some sort of a March up and down
the street.
So it would be focused on that
individual.
So now what you've done is other
people whose homes is there it
is also their castle now you've.
Made them feel like they're the
target of this protest and quite
frankly now you may have your
neighbors automatic you who you
live next to because now what's
happened is now you've put the
neighborhood and discomfort
rather than just the individual
and I think the majority the
protests don't happen because of
somebody's flag.
They normally happen because
somebody is somewhere in the
political process.
and and so for me I would
rather.
Have it because now it says it
can't be directed at the at
whoever the target is.
So now what you've done is
especially if it's a big organ
at a big organs I organize
effort now they can go up and
down the street on the sidewalks
on either side of the street.
And go in a big circle round and
round and round and now use.
Inconvenienced everyone else is
that something that what was the
thought prior to this
Prior to this amendment also up
Mr speaker John from San Juan
you have just taken us back to
our conversation and house
concert Public Affairs
Committee.
which is fascinating
is in that committee we had a
hundred feet but it wasn't
specifically tied to the
residents or property line and
so we had a long talk about.
Well where you tie it to and
yeah what is that now because
it's a hundred feet we're gonna
have people go hundred once you
to our neighbors.
And
and they were to have our our
neighbors upset.
so it's it's fascinating to see
work with us conversations on so
I mean it Mr a couple order so
first right right now and
current law.
so it's a more trucks and go
around your home they could you
know all the disturbing images
they can do all kinds of things
right and and that's
well they can do that
They can also.
you know directly you know just
our target your whole not March
around our March most read
through the neighbors in Austin
street or so that this is all.
It's all happening this is all
correct for a lot of people do.
So the question becomes how do
you define.
What is to close.
What what begins to.
Encroach on someone's privacy
for their safety or security.
And I don't think we can get the
perfect answer to that is it
fifty feet and one neighborhood
is at a hundred feet and other.
So we went with language that
was not specific that was more
broad that talk about focusing
towards particular residents.
And I think that's I think
that's the best solution.
but I totally understand where
you're coming from and where
others would say maybe one
hundred people.
I think.
There are just so many different
Our neighborhoods across the
state.
they were locked up find the
perfect answers not off the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval went down and.
This is John I know I have
nothing further to add thank
you.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentleman Mr speaker and
gentleman it the the other thing
that could happen here with this
not focus status single
residents.
I I could see a group of people
lining up before three
residences.
are on just the the one on
either side of the of the
residence
Mr speaker and and and and
gentleman I I I really think
that
the best way to go Mr speaker
and gentleman is to if there
proposed pro testing a specific
thing I think that's better in
the community and
Mr speaker and gentleman
You mentioned that this would
not stop.
A.
maybe a March.
Through a residential community.
And the way I was reading this
before.
that if if it was within a
hundred feet it could
potentially stop of March.
Through the neighborhood that
that's what I was reading this
this before is there some reason
why we would not want to stop a
March through a residential
community at that that might be
the best answer for talking
about not allowing I mean if
we're going to if we're gonna go
away from allowing the
individual who's trying to
they're trying to protest from
being protest it directly.
I'm not sure why we would allow
March through a neighborhood
where there have they had
nothing to do with it Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Are so much bigger gentleman out
now we're crossing over into
first amendment rights and
what's been tested the
U. S. Supreme Court and I'll
share my thoughts on I'm not a
lawyer I'm sure the gentleman
from Bernalillo Sandoval will do
some good clean up after not
speaking.
but these these types of laws or
just have been tested your tier
one was tested in New Mexico
court and.
and then there are others that
have been tested and all that U.
S. supreme court and upheld.
And and the points that were
raised in those arguments why
the Representative held for
first that they did not.
Limit content.
So.
Madam Mr speaker and and that.
From San Juan we can't.
Tell someone what they can and
cannot.
state that's that's
constitutionally protected.
The second was that it was these
were very narrowly targeted
statute store very specific and
talked about a particular
person's residents.
They they specifically said
these are okay because it did
not walk marching for sharing
opinion on on on published.
A road weights
I think if we did block
protesting in residential areas
valuation on constitutional.
So that's what it is I'm just a
very targeted and they're all
would be my answer or are you a
sort of gentleman from
Bernalillo Sandoval I'm Mr
speaker John again I mean I
think.
We're trying to strike this
balance but not on content so
people can say whatever they
want
so that we're not restricting
but when it comes to first
amendment and that's why the
residency is so refined this is
not just somebody standalone
house it also could include
apartment dwelling it's the the
quote those praising as director
focused on which is part of the
reason why we didn't do the
hundred feet was because
six of the director of public
service on once the.
And all of the survivors
constitutional muster so it's
not a question whether it's
constitutional or not it's
question whether the body as a
policy matter things we struck
the right balance to prevent the
danger that we're all concerned.
Thank you Mr speaker John.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I I don't think anyone
here has I mean I it's been
mentioned a couple of times by
the sponsors but I don't think
anyone has mentioned anything
about content.
As in any of this discussion
of what can be said of what
cannot be said I think this is
really been limited to where.
And so Mr speaker and gentleman
that's.
Once again.
We're talking about putting this
in place and I believe at the
beginning of the state of the
Sanchez description of the bill
was that a person's home
building a castle.
And that there that needs to be
kind of a safe space so Mister
speaker and gentleman the reason
I'm asking these questions
about.
Individual or now for now
bothering neighborhood.
Was last year we had some very
I know I know of I think was
mentioned was some fear some
trump supporters.
That in a specific specific
given incidents last year Mr
speaker and gentleman we had.
Protesters across the country
going into neighborhoods.
I don't know if that was somehow
less scary.
For for whoever was living in
those homes a a mob going down a
street.
Versus a group of folks in front
of an individual residents I
mean to be honest if I'm in that
neighborhood and there's this
big protest going on I would
feel more comfortable if I'm in
the house down the street next
focus that.
This individual's house who
they're mad at.
Now I I still like what we're
doing is.
We're encouraging more of what
would be.
Big events into neighborhoods.
I don't think that's that's not
where I want to go.
As a realtor Mr speaker and
gentleman I I'm getting
referrals from people all across
the nation trying to relocate in
San Juan County on believe me
I'm very happy for it
but they're doing so because of
the great ins exact anxiety that
they have from these protests
that took place in their yards.
In up and down their streets so
to be honest.
I would have been happier with
the hundred foot.
Right yes because I think that
but he might have caused people
to think twice before disturbing
an entire neighborhood.
so Mr speaker and gentleman I'd.
I don't once again has nothing
to do with content.
Of.
Right to protest Mr speaker and
gentleman.
We're in a building right now.
Where we put up a fence.
Far away from the building.
So that protesters who we
thought might want to come here
and protest couldn't do it.
It's just to me.
This and we all signed up for
this as the Legisla- has
provided we all ran for public
office.
People who are upset.
US.
And what we've done here is
we've tried to limit them from
from coming here and talking to
us I know that that's admit that
Madam is maybe I'll save that
for the discussion of the bill
as a whole but.
That distance.
I I actually preferred that
distance in a residential area
home necessarily prefer that
distance here at our capital so
with that Mr speaker and
gentleman I'll save the rhythm
remainder of my comments for the
debate on the bill thank you Mr
speaker.
Seeing further debate does the
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan Representative
Lundstrom wish to speak on the
amendment for the bill.
Mr speaker on the bill.
Thank you.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Sandoval in Santa Fe
Representative Lord thank you Mr
speaker will the gentleman from
Santa Fe County please yield.
Speaker your thank you so much
so okay you can walk me through
baby steps on these amendments
Okay and I I apologize because.
I'm just seeing the amendments
now so we had a targeted
residential picketing.
Consists of picking that is
specifically directed or focused
towards residents are person and
then we struck out one hundred
feet.
Of the resident so can you
explain that to me in realistic
terms what does that mean for
someone like me who has a
starkly been one of these people
who started as a activist and
protester what exactly does this
mean to me let's say I wanted to
go to someone's house so we
decided we're going to protest
we want to stand out of their
sidewalk what does that mean to
us as a collective group of
people that would want to
protest.
Mr speaker and gentle ace thank
you for the question.
so.
What this means is.
If your ticketing is directed or
focused towards a particular
person.
For our residents.
I'm sort of.
Directed or focused towards a
residents of a purse and clarify
that so it's towards the
Representative residents of a
person.
that would no longer be kosher
no no longer fly.
but if you are on a yes a street
corner if you are wanting to
protest in front of a public
space you know you need to get a
permit from the city right for
for a protest for the public
space
what this.
this has nothing this makes no
change on any of that.
All it does is says if you are
Focused toward the residents of
a person
so in order to coach.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
It would include the governor's
house.
Mr speaker and and gentle lady
I've I've actually given that's
awesome question why do you ask
that that question.
and and I believe the way that
we have to provide residents.
As a single family or multi
family dwelling unit.
that's not being used as a place
of a public meeting.
I believe there's there's room
to say it depends.
Right if the there is a meeting
going on at the governor's
mansion some public meeting.
then I would say that we we've
we've drafted this you could
have a a protest outside the
building.
But otherwise I think you would
qualify as a single family
dwelling.
And
Yes the that would not permit
picketing at that point.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
so.
Yes.
I've actually protesting for
House before us and I'm not all
that so I'm really big on
peaceful assembly and I think
almost everybody that knows me
knows this because we like to go
and have our voices heard and
it's and it's been.
Seems like a whole bunch of
tumultuous years right on both
sides and and there's been a lot
of protesting and I have no
problem with peaceful assemblies
not ever with peaceful
assemblies so what we're picking
it's when people congregate
outside a place of work or
location.
Where the event is nonviolent so
I'm looking at this as a non
violent events I can't go on
protest and some from the cemex
house which I would do anyways
right because I I don't when
once we do that to me so I
wouldn't do that to them and I'm
sure those people who don't feel
that way and do you want to pick
in front of people's house.
I see that there's a difference
between that picketing and the
violence right and that's where
about it before that first
assembly amendment says there's
only two times you can't do that
and then when there's threats of
imminent danger which we can
call on forced for and get rid
of the people are there blocking
the traffic and blocking the
site about this action of the
way to get around that if
they're expanding the sidewalk
black in the street.
The kind of answers my question
about that hundred feet I got my
question answered but picketing
said did look that up well I
will ask you do you feel that
picketing
Mr speaker do you feel that that
picketing definition is what you
would say is picketing as a
congregation of people outside
of a place where there's a
peaceful assembly in this
nonviolent.
so I just figured always thank
you for for that great question
And but I think what I'll say is
we want to be very targeted as
we actually included a
definition in this bill what
take a target.
Right because we we know that
there are other definitions of
picking for example the one that
you just shared with us
generally Mr speaker and so so
here's the the full definition
put our ticketing means a
person's presence that our
prices.
The target individual part of
Housefull vocally or by
expanding our marching with the
sign banner or sanitation device
rather needs an opinion or
message.
So so in this particular case we
we actually don't address the
violent nature not
it is really just the targeted
ticketing that we want to
provide.
Thank you that's on the question
Mr speaker that's all the
questions I had on the amendment
I do have questions on the bill
as we move forward thank you and
I yield my time.
Thank you for your.
Gentleman from Santa would you
like to move the amendment.
I believe I move the amendment
but I'll move adoption of
amendment if it's appropriate
this time Mr speaker.
We may have further debate on
the amendment.
Does the gentle lady from better
Leo.
Representative Roybal cop
because I get a wish to speak on
the amendment.
Mr speaker No I'm not on the
amendment on the bill thank you.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Stapleton wish to
speak on the amendment.
The speaker I'm on the bill.
Does the gentle gentle lady from
some of our Powdrell Culbert
wish to speak on the amendment.
Is the gentleman from Eddy
County Representative Brown we
switched to speak on the
amendment.
Does the gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya wish to
speak on the amendment.
Si no further debate with the
gentleman close.
Mr speaker I move that we adopt
House floor amendment one to
Mr chair committee substitute
for house bill seventy six.
We're on adoption of house floor
amendment number one.
To House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
seventy six.
The vote is now open.
Forty five seconds left.
The electronic portion of the
vote is now closed with the
clerk called the members without
a recorded vote.
Representative Cadena.
Yes.
Representative Cadena is yes.
Representative Chasey.
Yes.
Representative Chasey is yes.
Representative Dow.
Representative Fajardo.
Yes.
Representative Fajardo is yes
Representative Ferrary.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes yes.
Hochman Vigil is a yes
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative small.
Senator says yes.
Representative Pettigrew is yes
Representative small.
No Representative small is no.
It.
Yeah.
Representative Dow is yes.
So.
I meant to vote yes on the
amendment I apologize
Representative small is now yes
Representative Ferrary is a yes
and Representative Ferrary is a
yes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of forty two in the affirmative
twenty three in the neck
negative.
House floor amendment number one
to house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill two
seventy six has duly passed.
Is adopted.
We are now back on the bill.
The gentleman from San Juan you
have the floor.
Mr speaker stand for questions.
That was supposed to be the
gentleman from Santa.
Representative Harper my
apologies.
No worries.
The lady from Santa.
Debate on the on the bill.
Mr speaker and well the job in
Santa.
Yes.
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady from Santa
and and members I just rise and
support of this.
The gentleman did not tell you
that it was in my district that
we had one of the first massive
demonstrations during the
selection.
Series.
And for the couple.
To protest and I think it was
older couple that lived on the
main street on a on a corner
lot.
The.
Protesters.
Decided to read some of the
science.
All of the fence of this couple.
And interesting about it not
only did they have protesters on
the firewall.
Of these individuals property.
They marched around the corner.
And on the front of these
individuals home to the end of
their parking.
Are their driveway.
And and marched back.
I see.
That was across the street from
the property.
Holding signs and and and
getting this is the very first
time that it happened.
And.
Some of the signs there could be
more money.
Needless to say.
And so I'm to rather have the
hundred she recalls and goal.
And sitting down in the home
with this couple.
Relocated from California to New
Mexico.
And this was their dream home.
The fair.
And the using this that this
couple.
So while I'm sitting in their
home visiting them.
You know I'm the same way.
And have you know we have the
freedom to support.
Ever we want to support.
My son had not been there if
they had not been Republicans
and all Democrats I would have
felt the same way that you have
the right.
Freedom of speech to support
whom ever you choose to support.
And I.
The campaign in New you get a
lot of youngsters that is really
enthusiastic about these type of
activities you know there's got
to be some boundaries.
And having spent time with this
couple.
Twice.
During the campaign season they
were scared.
You know and they try to play it
off well this is part of
politics.
Body language was fear.
And.
Even though those protesters did
not go all the way down the
street.
The.
Has always been supporters of
mine and I could bump up and
down the street I probably had a
five hundred size in that
community.
Which is probably a violation in
itself but.
But you know I'm knocking on
the man's and the folks that
will change you know I had to
sign.
In years past but I don't know
if I should put one.
Out this year you know because
the meeting we had all these
problems you know this.
That.
They should be able to support.
Anybody they want to whether
it's me or whether it's my
opponent.
Says about the hundred fifty.
And I spent a lot of time in
this community.
Because of this particular.
Infants up.
To.
Support this you know all
as a black female Republican.
This is my home.
You know during the campaign
season.
And we're pretty aggressive
husband so that was my security
plan.
But still
yeah personal space has been
invaded.
And you know I live in paralysis
my other security plan was
talking to the Kerala fully.
And since I know a lot of the
last six weeks of campaign that
literally alright and my Mr the
these folks off of my property.
And.
My question to the
representative Representative
Harper is did you address and
all of the legislation the role
of the law enforcement will be.
And.
These activities take place
again because it is my
understanding.
That the most law enforcement
can do is stand I stand by to
keep it a peaceful protest but
as I understand there's nothing
in place that can stop these
folks from Representative been
signed off of your property what
they do on the state is one
thing but having them to and
invade your personal space
something else so did you
address that at all in their
legislation.
Mr speaker and Julie from Santa
thank you for the great
statements and and question.
and what we did do with the
legislation's this is now a
criminal offense.
We do not
specify how the law enforcement
should you know enforcer
addresses from offense but I'll
tell you.
just.
One of the stories that I I
found it just happened here
recently.
I so it's City Utah has this
same ordinance and there was a
group out in front protesting
missus a doctor and you are done
with their state we all just and
this group Utah UNM's for
medical freedom were protesting
from our house and an officer
shot up and explain to the
protesters that there's an
ordinance against residential
picketing and that they would be
guilty of a misdemeanor if they
continue to stay there.
And what happened is they all
left
and they hope their protests
somewhere else so I'm.
I don't know if that's how you
don't you're but I assume that's
a good example of how much.
So
do you think all law enforcement
may start working on that yes it
is having experience that ever
since Aug at some point.
Ever since I've been in the
legislature.
You know it is intimidating.
And so.
The classes so they came to my
house but not everybody has that
luxury so you know do you think
law enforcement throughout is
has been or is made aware of
this because I think this
election season.
Was one of the worst what do you
on the left or the right it
didn't it doesn't matter.
One of the worst election
season.
And history.
Because of the the invasion of
privacy so.
With this past laws all the time
that people never see so do you
think law enforcement will
really be aware of this and act.
Opponents.
Yeah so Mr speaker and gentle
from central thank you again for
the question
yeah if this.
If it's the will this body to
pass this session and if we're
able to get through the the
Senate governor signs it.
I would assume every session we
make changes to the criminal
code and that information is
disseminated out to.
No different law enforcement
agencies and we we passing bills
this session that change prior
laws.
but but my hope would be that if
this is a sign that just about
anyone well just one of us grows
anyone is subject to a.
Picketing they could call.
our local law enforcement and
and and so what show up and
explain to them.
That this is not permitted and
and that that record dispersed
miss decided not to they would
be cited for violating that
crime.
Okay Mister speaker and thank
you I just think we all have the
right to support anything lever
we want to support.
And nobody has the right to come
in and the face.
Your property or money property
and this is really a much bigger
deal than people perceive.
That it it is it's a very big
deal and it's getting worse so I
would ask all the members are to
support this piece of
legislation thank you gentlemen
Mr speaker.
Thank you.
Thank you gentlelady seen
further debate the gentle lady
from McKinley and San Juan
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Lundstrom.
Seeing further debate the gentle
lady from Bernalillo.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr speaker and well
the gentlemen please feel.
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady in my friend.
Thank you my friend thank you Mr
speaker so I have a.
A few questions to gain some
clarity on
Going back to the intent because
I want to make sure Mr speaker
and gentleman that I heard I may
have missed some important
points in your introduction
concerning what the intent of
the bill is so I want to clarify
first.
Was Mr speaker and gentleman was
the intent of the bill
to.
Our target.
or aimed at those that are
targeting public officials.
Mr speaker gentleman.
So Mr speaker and gentle lady I
can honestly say that the
genesis of the bill was not a
public officials it really was
this retired couple from
California in Rio Rancho
Representative Powdrell Culbert
mentioned.
and then there's another story
mention from Salt Lake City here
just a couple months ago about
their state epidemiologist right
he's not going to essential it
would also benefit elected
officials we're not limiting
this just to
you know.
One particular part of the
system rates really anyone who
is
being targeted at the residents
would benefit from this.
So Mr speaker and gentleman it
would be safe to say that it is
And targeted in individual the
individual such as that you
described so anyone includes
anyone and everyone Mr speaker
and gentleman and so that brings
me thank you Mr thank you
gentlemen that brings me to
trying to figure out of again
Crossing that fine line and I
think that on your co sponsors
introduced
In his statement you know some
trepidation in terms of how we
handle this particular matter so
along that same line Mr speaker
and and and gentleman.
What is the rationale.
And public policy basis for
limit team.
First amendment right in this
bill.
Mr speaker and gentle lady
if I may
I'd like to refer that question
to a gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval so the appropriate Mr
speaker and gentle lady would
you mind facing that question
just talking to her again.
Mr speaker and and gentleman I
will what is the
The rationale and public policy
basically.
For limiting first amendment
rights in this bill so madam
speaker gentle lady.
What we're talking about think
about the signs let's let's put
it real in real terms think
about January six think about
the new service the favorable
statements about Auschwitz the
racist statements that were made
now put those in front of
someone's house with children in
the house with people pro
testing using those kinds of
symbols.
This is not about that content
it's about saying we can't do
anything about content it can go
from mild to severe but the
bottom line is we are allowed to
as a state body to say.
Con place and madam.
It is not acceptable to be doing
that kind of activity in front
of someone's home or you're
directed or focused on them.
So I I give the example only so
that.
Madam speaker Mr speaker and
gentle lady we can all visualize
on both sides what what we're
trying to do without talking
about content it's that kind of
speech that were thinking about
in terms of it's not appropriate
to do it for someone else will
have to say that as a matter of
public policy now whether we
strike that balance right or not
that's the fascinating and
frankly one wonderful thing
about this debate is we're
really talking about the central
issue of the first amendment of
the freedom of speech and so you
know that criticism could be
made that we haven't talked
about this right and certainly
that's been made tonight and I
get that but in terms of what
we're trying to do we're trying
to do something that I think is
appropriate which is it is not
appropriate to have speech that
could I think in my mind we two
very dangerous situations we're
trying to nip that in the bottom
is something the
constitutionally we can do thank
you Mister speaker gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentlemen so.
When you talk about.
time place and manner is the
presumption that those who
violate.
Time place and manner intend to
harm.
Mr speaker gentle lady nope it's
not that's why we can't do that
we are not talking about the
content of the speech were
simply saying you can't do it.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Then.
What is the relationship.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Between.
What.
Is higher.
What constitutes the higher
level of protection which is the
first amendment a constitutional
right in the first amendment.
And
And what.
A result referred to it as as
minor long as
as what you said was within our
powers to do.
So it it
There is there is what I said
earlier Mr speaker and gentleman
that flying however in my view
Mr speaker and gentleman.
That excuse me.
We're.
Placing.
What I believe is a limitation.
Whether it's putting it in time
place or manner.
Is subject.
To Mr speaker and gentleman to
violating a higher constitution
higher protection of the
constitution.
And.
That's where.
And gentlemen
I'd like you to address so that
there's a.
For those of us who
Mr speaker and gentleman I
believe some of my colleagues
have wasted earlier and speaking
in reference to the amendment
the greater right.
Protections as they relate to
our constitution.
Just
recently I apologize Jim let Mr
speaker generally.
I could tailor something that
would say
G. were only going to prohibit
violent speech in front of
someone's house I mean I think
we all agree that's what we want
to do we can't do that that
would be unconstitutional.
I have no hesitation in saying.
Mr speaker gentle lady first
amendment is important to me my
father as I mentioned was the
first executive director of the
ACLU I grew up around the first
amendment I get it.
But there is a legitimate.
Now exception.
To the first amendment that has
to do with time place and
manner.
And so we're not R. we're not
abolishing the first amendment
were not unconstitutionally
infringing on the first
amendment we're simply saying in
this limited circumstance this
is an appropriate restriction on
the first amendment no different
that someone yell fire in a
crowded theater you can't do
that either that is also
something you can't do even
though you people would argue
what you have the free speech
right to say what you want no
you don't there are restrictions
the question is where we draw
those lines and that's the
question but nobody is arguing
the first amendment is an
important sacrosanct the
question is where are those
exceptions we know that they
exist and the question is is
this appropriate or not that's
the question before the by thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady Mr speaker gentle lady if I
could maybe come up that from a
slightly different angle as well
so I I hear your question.
and and it's been interesting
watching over the last several
months I've had a crash course
in and the first amendment
what I've learned is that.
Any of those all rights are
there not unlimited.
There are limits to those rights
The gentleman from Bernalillo
already mentioned you can't let
your fire in a movie theater.
we also work with
there's nothing that to says
that Facebook or Twitter can't
what is your account.
a second amendment right to bear
arms you know does not mean that
I can personally own a nuclear
weapon.
so there are limits and in this
case
this particular targeted limit
on free speech has already been
tested before the Supreme Court
at least twice and they have a
public and it's also a bit of
help by New Mexico court your
tier statute was challenged
there was a whole by New Mexico
court.
Hope that helps Mr speaker
generally.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
thank you
Gentleman.
When I was first took office and
you and I came together in our
freshman class together
Mr speaker and gentleman I had
the the honor of serving in
consumer public affairs and
Judiciary.
And there were countless times
Mr speaker and gentleman.
And was built in countless
discussions and debates around
and and they proceeded and
they've continued throughout the
years around.
Excuse me
Legislating there's another fine
line in this Mr speaker and
gentleman and that is.
Legislating.
When it pertains or affects.
Individual circumstances.
And there's that discussion
about well if it it happened in
our neighborhood and happened to
my neighbor or it happened to
me.
Then in needs to change we need
to do something about it.
Mr speaker and gentleman however
we're also talking about the
public.
And public policy.
And
In Mr speaker and gentleman I
think that's where I am the
Wanting to kind of more on this
discussion because.
Excuse me.
We on both sides of the aisle Mr
speaker and gentleman were shut
down multiple times for
attempting to pass public
policy.
When there were circumstances.
That we're
the only individuals that didn't
have
Strong impact or public
impact.
Greater than.
What we understand Mr speaker
and gentleman as as the public
and in this case I think now
we're also entertaining on
something that's even greater
and that is are the
constitution.
So for example
And and.
And Mr speaker and and and
gentlemen I don't know if I I'm
sure you do recall the many
times that we faced
these types of debates within
our committee and and and if we
were lucky on it to get it to
the floor they were brought up
again on the floor
because we were told over and
over again not only in the
debate but we learned
in through the debates that
That our job.
What is to.
Be taking care of.
Public policy that has.
Impact.
On the greater public.
And not because either we
ourselves individually Mr
speaker or gentlemen were
personally affected or if we
have families and many of us you
and I have brought examples in
the in our previous years of
families you in fact you'll in
fact Mr speaker and gentleman
faced a great deal of of of
debate on several times when
that occurred and I was on that
other side and I then there were
times that I was with you on
this so I get concerned Mr
speaker and gentleman.
When.
When we do this and I learned in
that in in the in the Sears and
this is why I'm now getting
concerned.
And when asked the question at
the beginning and that was
whether it had anything to do
directly with targeting the
protections or increasing
protections of public officials
because that's that was an
important point
because as someone mentioned Mr
speaker and gentleman I think it
was
Representative want I am not
quite sure who was that who
mentioned yes we take our public
officials
going to different category I
guess that's debatable because
of what we just saw recently Mr
speaker and gentleman
and my heart bleeds for the
judge who lost her son
In a random not random that in
just in a and she was target.
And our Supreme Court justice
is also has been disclosed that
she's a target and so some may
say Mr speaker and gentleman
that you know we take an open
office we represent the public
and that we should not be
afforded any kind of special
protections or special public
policy that relates to our
particular positions and that's
important and I bring that up Mr
speaker and gentleman because
the hard lesson I had to learn
throughout these years was just
that
and and.
In my particular case and many
of you don't know this.
But in twenty eighteen my life
was threatened.
Someone stole my home Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Armed and threatened to kill me.
As I was being threatened and my
life was being threatened I was
on the phone calling nine one
one.
When I identified myself Mr
speaker and gentleman.
identified myself and also said.
I gave my name and I also said
what was.
Immediately.
The response was to connect the
nine one one call the dispatch
to.
Albuquerque police department to
the state police.
And that triggered.
A different.
And.
The type of response.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
And in doing so.
It put me in a different
position which was very
uncomfortable it was
uncomfortable and to to waste
one I said very clearly to those
that were that came to my home
to investigate that I did not.
One any preferential treatment.
in this infants however when I
was on the dispatch they did
tell me that
that it had to be reported in
that matter for whatever reason
the protocols of whatever and Mr
speaker and gentleman the
reasoning I I bring this up is
because it would have been very.
I guess easy for more
appropriate for me or whatever
to come in the in our last
legislative policy session and.
And proposed the bill.
That would have protected and
given special well you know it
would have been perceived as
special Mr speaker and gentleman
however.
I could have introduced a bill
that would have
created additional crime for
anyone who targeted.
Threaten bodily harm and it
resulting in death or not
resulting but just threatening
on a public official because
that's not in the protections.
Right Mr speaker and gentleman
so it.
But that was not.
What was important to me.
What was important to me was one
and that was a I was very
appreciative of the.
When the response was handled
which would have been the same
way it was handled for anybody
else.
In the public anyone else and
that to me was the most
important element of all of this
because yes Mr speaker and
gentleman I did take you know I
didn't know what I was getting
into as a public official course
I wasn't expecting to have my
life certain.
By an armed person.
I wasn't expecting any of that
none of us do.
However Mr speaker and
gentleman.
My point being that we it goes
back to basic promise that you
and I learned to our freshman
sophomore and and subsequent on
tenure and in in not in the
house as legislators is that.
The line is narrower when we
attempt to create public policy.
and we re after re I say react
because it's not really a
response it's more of a reaction
to.
The fuel incidences.
That.
Were brought to our attention.
That we feel obligated as
legislators and representatives
of those districts to race Mr
speaker and gentleman.
First.
There are already laws in place
that protect property rights.
There are already laws in place
that protect individual rights
they're already crime the
criminal crimes.
The laws and you know
statutes in place that's the
classic protection of private
rights.
Those are already in place and
so it in this particular case
the Mr speaker and gentleman I'm
really seeing that what we're
doing is.
Reacting.
To the temperament.
Of particular conditions.
That we may not like.
Or that maybe we may perceive
crossed the line.
And places in harm or endanger.
And we're creating unnecessary
what I believe are and and
necessary limitations Mr speaker
and gentleman when we already
have those protections in place
so if someone feels it you know.
I could feel that the man or
woman or whoever is in front of
my house within the.
Limitations that you've
articulated.
And I may feel that I.
And that person
is carrying a sign.
And if I feel I'm recourse
already already have recourse in
my view Mr speaker and gentleman
so
I believe this is a huge
stretch.
In two.
On us or in.
Each upon our greater
constitutional protections.
And
And that to me is all right
action.
On the part of.
Individuals.
Necessarily.
Part of.
The right to express.
Your constitutional freedom of
speech freedom to protest
freedom to gather.
Freedom to express.
Freedom to speak.
Perhaps you haven't been Mr
speaker and gentleman on that
side of the fence or those
individuals that you describe
perhaps they worked.
On that side.
You're still how important it is
for those of us who have fought
so hard Mr speaker and
gentleman.
To not only maintain and uphold.
But to fight for these
constitutional protections and
that's the same no matter what
side of the argument you're on.
Matter so I'm not affected I'm
I'm someone who's come up into
the social justice movements the
civil rights movement I know
what it's like to pick it to
March to rally to express to
take peaceful
Just.
I know what that's like.
And so when I see someone in my
front yard who's expressing
that.
My reaction Mr speaker and
gentleman is to.
To.
Something that I put my face my
life on the line to protect Mr
speaker and gentleman this.
Come up in the trenches to
prevent.
That right and again it Mr
speaker and gentleman it doesn't
have anything to do with what
side of the argument here and as
the ensure called mention will
sponsor.
Just to do with honoring the
greater.
Here and that is the
constitutional right to express.
Without.
Without being construed it my
right to protest the ticket to
be in front of your house my
house or your house.
Is not with the intent to harm
we're not in the position to
make that determination Mr
speaker and gentleman so what
are we protecting against.
There has been no.
Mr speaker and gentleman all
we're doing is.
Expressing.
Opposition.
And having the right to do so
via our constitution no
protection.
We haven't shown any expression
of of intent to harm and that's
not our job.
Mr speaker and gentlemen so.
I I I stir speaker and gentleman
I just I see no purpose of this
in this long in this in this
bill I see no reason for it
other than responding to some
individuals who felt
uncomfortable perhaps who never
experience is deplorable don't
understand it because they're on
the other side never never had
to face social injustices racial
injustices economic injustices
are and Justice of any online
labor injustices any injustices
that would have called for the
right to protest.
The right to gather the right to
pick it.
And I I I'm sorry for those
individuals that they've not
been faced with that but the
reality of our country and the
reality of our histories.
And the reality of the
disparities and the injustices
in this country no matter what
side you feel have dictated that
we must hold those
constitutional protections.
That we must.
Ensure that everyone have those
rights and that we have no
business.
Whether it's
as public policy makers.
You in any form or fashion
institute along.
That in.
On those constitutional
protections Mr speaker and
gentleman that's not what I
believe.
Is our place of that were the
case Mr speaker and gentleman
last year two years ago whenever
that might the threat was made
and by the way Mr speaker and
gentleman that same gentleman.
Came back and.
Again.
But this time.
I you know we we did what we
could and protected what we
could.
Responded and gave the benefit
of the doubt let the system work
when he came back the second
time Mr speaker and gentleman I
did for the safety of my family
for the safety of my neighbors.
I had to take action and so I
went through the court system
and did so and thank thank god
that that that that was resolved
in that manner.
Mr speaker and gentleman to the
house of representatives because
I could as a state
representative and introduce a
law that would give it extra
special protections to
legislators.
Because of my personal
experience.
I did not do that Mr speaker and
gentleman.
And that's.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
what I believe.
Is what.
We should not be doing and your
piece of legislation
that the the greater law Mr
speaker and gentleman the
greater purpose of our of our
constitution must be upheld.
And we as a state legislator jet
legislature just because we're
state legislature.
Must not ever take the position
of infringing on those kinds in
any action that we take in
public policy in infringing on
those constitutional rights Mr
speaker and gentleman and I'm
you know I'm thank you for the
for the question for the answers
to my questions but I again
believe that this is out of
order in this in this
The policy arena and I
respectfully ask my colleagues
to pay close attention to the
intended purposes of this law of
the statute and to
And I will not support it might
encourage my colleagues not to
as well thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I you.
There has been a request to
suspend the rules that the
gentleman are allowed to remove
their jackets.
The ladies can remove their
jackets if they so choose.
Any objections.
See further.
The gentleman can remove their
jackets and the ladies to.
See further debate will the
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan Representative
Lundstrom.
Please thank you Mr speaker will
the gentleman yield for a few
comments please.
Mr speaker I yield.
Thank you gentlemen I I first
I'd like to say is that I
appreciate you bringing this
piece of legislation forward and
I prefer and I support it one
hundred percent.
I think it's important that the
body understand that any member
has the right to bring forth any
issue you feel is important for
debate and you should not be
subject to lecture.
I believe that it's incredibly
important Esther speaker and
gentleman that anything that we
fail as a body and as individual
members.
Is important to the state of New
Mexico we have a fundamental
right to bring that forward.
And I just think it's important
for the body to know that I
support this bill I'm gonna vote
for it I'm gonna ask everybody
in the chamber to vote for it.
I just feel that to see this
level of bipartisan support is
also incredibly important Mr
speaker and gentleman only have
the two smartest guys on the
floor coming forth with an idea
I think we need to listen to it.
And you've got my support I hope
everybody votes for this don't
ever feel like you don't have
the right to bring forth
legislation that is important to
the state of New Mexico thank
you Mr speaker and thank you
gentlemen Mr speaker with those
comments being our webcast
because I wanna make sure we get
those recorded so I can send
them to my wife thank you thank
you thank you.
Thank you generally.
Thank you see for further debate
will the gentle lady from Eddy
County Representative Brown.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Santa please
yield.
Mr speaker will.
Thank you gentlemen Mr speaker
so gentlemen the title of the
bill is creating the crime of
targeted residential picketing.
Mr speaker gentleman do you
really have political speech and
mind in bringing this bill.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
It's it's really any.
Form of speech that is targeted
at an individual home where they
should feel safe or that's their
sanctuary were no privacy.
that that's with the the
motivation here it's not a
political speech this will be
part of that
Representative but what I drugs
in cases here was not but
speaker gentle.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman so.
as the bill was been amended it
now states that targeted
residential picketing consists
of picketing that is
specifically directed or focused
toward the residents of a
person.
Moving on a little further into
the bill there's a definition of
picketing and that's what I'd
like to focus on in my comments
its says picketing means.
A person's presence intended now
says that prices the targeted
individual or targeted
household.
Vocally or by expanding our
marching with the sign banner
sound amplification device or
other means of an opinion or
message.
So based on that definition Mr
speaker and gentleman I think
this would include trick or
treaters.
So Mister speaker John let me
explain so picketing means a
person's presence.
Better prices the targeted
individual or targeted
household.
Locally trick or treat.
Or by expanding our marching
with the sign.
Banner Santa can fit application
device because a few of those
those of those of my front door.
Or other means and other means
is rather vague.
And it's open opinion or a
message and so the message is
triggered treated which means
give me candy or I'm going to do
something bad to your house.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
I guess I'd like to know what
what you think about that.
And then the same lines what do
you think about solicitations.
At someone's front door Mr
speaker gentleman.
Mr speaker gentle lady I love
that question that that is
wonderful following it is.
Maybe my favorite holiday even
more than Christmas I'm just so
much fun addresses of the family
going to.
Have fun
so Mister speaker gentle lady I.
yeah I'm looking at this.
For through.
You know the the ones that we
talked about earlier you know
comes to a like in my screen
shot right that messages is not
targeted
so I I think that that passes my
mustard here
yes the message is is targeted
and it's.
It's a a message to
please find some candy.
Mr generally
You know what kind of showing
out looking for more.
What the the thirty thousand
foot view.
Right
to this mean anyone like if I go
to my neighbor's house more door
I want to tell them something
does that include me.
Mr speaker gentle lady
The answer is no all and and and
all looks when we.
Selected very carefully I mean.
Looking at the the rulings from
the U. S. Supreme Court
different ordinances that are
out there in New Mexico Utah
Michigan and Illinois.
We chose our church their words.
And it's still still we're
having these discussions right
it's very challenging to.
You know even though it's a
simple concept to distill it
into a simple easy to digest
way that captures everything
we've already talked about kind
of the five hundred or one
hundred foot will have could
lead to some issues here
I'm not sure when were.
Targeting
ticketing.
I I I I don't see how.
me going to talk to someone
Stewart soliciting which I don't
know how many of us love
soliciting maybe we should make
some go
for those kinds of things when
someone looks at this
When which would say that that
that is included mall I'll turn
over to
John from sent over we if you
want to add anything.
Mr speaker and gentleman
generating out I don't I think
the gentleman answered perfectly
appropriately this is not
targeting trick or treaters
thank you Mr speaker and gentle
way.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen so yeah it's not
mention interpreters they're not
actually listed here but this
this would be a statutes and
statutes means something and
something that's.
Perhaps not is maybe is over
broadly written can lead to
these types of questions.
And so I think I think the bill
is problematic for that and and
a couple of other reasons I I
fully appreciate what I think is
really the intent of the bill
and that is to keep.
People from being harassed
certainly family members suffer
through that if that happens and
Mr speaker and gentleman
the neighbors probably don't
appreciate IT there should it
happen whether it's a hundred
feet or not
the distance really doesn't
matter when you have a bull
horn.
And I know that the polling
places there's a restriction on
though
campaigning within a hundred
feet of the front door of the
polling place and it actually
seen people take out measuring
tapes.
And measure a hundred feet one
inch and the campaign from there
which really is problematic as
well.
So I appreciate the intent
behind the bill but I think
there are some problems still in
the drafting of the bill and for
that reason I will not be able
to support it thank you.
Further debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Stapleton thank you Mr speaker
Mr speaker with the gentleman
from Santa you.
Mr speaker your.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Santa
to send of of you know
I I need some clarification and
then I I have some a couple of
questions not a couple but some.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa I am aware that
I'm John Lewis was beaten black
men and women will be children
will be.
Only whipped fall protests in.
A lot of words about.
Yes in.
In so I'm is this.
What is.
Yes in the beginning instead of
the same.
Mr speaker and
the battle for leader of that's
a great question.
And in the bill we only to find
Pickett we we don't define
protest.
Is the direct answer to your
question Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa that is correct but
however.
Yes in
the same in terms of the ticket
in that exists in this bill.
Mr speaker and gentle lady I I
another great question I believe
that's that's correct we refine
picketing to main.
vocally marching with the cyber
banner and I I think.
We would agree that those could
also be
Elements of a definition
protest.
So you.
Gentleman simultaneously they
mean the same thing.
R. Mr speaker generally I.
I don't disagree with that.
So when one Mr speaker and
gentleman from Santa Fe saying
bit of protest in something.
Would
apply for a misdemeanor as well.
Speaker Joe just like I I think
I understand where we're going
with this and and crime if I'm
all.
So.
The intent here and how it's
been drafted.
Is that.
If you are focusing towards our
residents of a person with a
message.
That would be a misdemeanor.
But if you were
pro testing was with any message
for rural getting
it as long as it wasn't that
focused at one house
distributed no impact
on this legislation on that
activity.
So.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa.
You know specific question is
being targeted.
and then then.
How would you know if a specific
person is being targeted.
Local people goes into.
What would be committing a
misdemeanor but you don't know
would be.
No are.
But.
One.
It's all of them is on that
same.
Yes so it's Mr generally again
great question and and the
answer is they're not targeting
a particular house not focusing
on particular house for going
around the block this is not
address that.
It's not as simple as like when
folks over the Clinton house in
stream water up for one folks
short drive Dunn's house and say
providers isn't real how to use
their you require store masks or
or when someone shows up in
front of but anyone's house and
has a message for that
individual
that's that's what this would
address Mr Jones.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa.
Clarification on my simple.
In terms of.
With.
The gentle lady from the gentle
lady from the owner of that
gentleman from Santa we all live
on the same.
We legislators on this you know
we all have the same
organization a group all what we
in two.
State medical association.
And somebody.
The side.
But.
They don't have any.
But.
What.
What do you what.
So.
Mr speaker Jerry I'm I'm I'm I'm
I'm trying to understand I think
I think I understand your
question and the answer is
If someone is marching around
the neighborhood and there's
lots of different people it
could be targeting or or not
that.
That would be fine.
what we're saying is if someone
is focused on one house.
And maybe just maybe this group
is a
Yeah yeah I don't know what this
is it's focusing on a house
that's that's a parent was just
marching around.
Speaker generally.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Santa this same points made by
the gentleman from San Juan in
regards to even if you know how
standing in the street and
you're going around in circles
and you've got a house in front
of you I'm.
The house on the right but
talking about how do you know I
mean to me in.
Because you know.
People are targeting because in
the middle of the street but yet
you can give them a misdemeanor
your.
Anyone.
Do you this is related to
somebody targeted what.
Yeah Mr speaker and gentle lady
so that would have to be clear
that they were targeting a house
before they could be charged
with a misdemeanor if there were
no marching and and in my
neighborhood and saying they.
They they hate me because I work
on taxes
you know it they can Marshall my
neighborhood said all they want
but they stopped in front of my
house and and said we hate you
because you're you work on
taxes.
and make it so my my wife can't
leave was my daughter took piano
lessons you know.
That's what this would address I
hope that helps.
This.
this is not about the basin
property but.
Specifically from one house is
that correct.
That's right we don't we don't
talk about property damage or
anything it's all about
focusing picketing at a
Representative house residents.
So.
what.
Was the reason why you initially
again but this piece of
legislation.
So the speaker gentle lady
So.
The thing that brought this to
my attention was a couple in Rio
Rancho is being protested at
their home.
but then I started paying
attention to the news.
When I saw different stories
from New York from Utah from all
over about this issue.
And the Mr gently I.
I I agree that some.
It's not good to legislators to
one incident and it was just one
incident I will be sharing this
bill will be going through this
effort I want to
you know.
Going through the the work.
To look at all these different
court cases to talk with people
get their opinions.
I think things are getting worse
not getting better.
And the fact that C. director
has this ordinance that
generally already has this
orange that are too short has
this ordinance I think it shows
that
this isn't just a one off.
Hello and and that it's
something that you know we
should.
We should look at addressing and
just because one particular
saying.
Brought to our attention
does anyone provided that one
particular person my part is
Mister Jones that was in your
question.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
some of our did you say that
Albuquerque already have this
ordinance in place.
Mr speaker gentle lady that's
correct thanks so Mister speaker
and gentleman you mentioned
something about the U. S.
Supreme Court do you know if
this eight this type of
legislation is in existence at
the national level in regards to
picket in protest in.
So Mister speaker generally
excellent question we answer is
yes and it has been taken to the
US Supreme Court and tested at
least twice
and found to not violate the
first amendment and and actually
we have also
of the now suspended you sure
committee staff and based on was
super helpful and and their
conclusion
after going through these these
different cases
was that the proposed targeted
residential picketing law would
probably withstand
constitutional scrutiny.
From and then also mentioned
that your tier.
longer to receive Artesians
order to place it was already
challenged in New Mexico court
and it was found it was upheld.
Speaker and gentleman from some
of all so this past summer there
was a lot of.
No central in Albuquerque.
I'm.
That.
It was not about the black lives
matter protest in.
They did go in neighborhoods.
They did go into homes.
So one of the reasons that they
did that.
So.
We.
When
one is that any group that is
part tested and they go in the
neighborhood but that didn't go
on the person's property.
They didn't say anything about
the person.
I'm.
We but.
In front of those homes that can
be yes that would could receive
a misdemeanor.
Speaker and gentle a thank you
for that great question and and
the yes there's no.
I'm they could protest on
central if they are permitted
just like they can now thank you
go into a neighborhood and
protest they can even mention
someone's name as their pro
testing in that Nibert that's
fine.
where would cause Mr meter is if
they stopped in front of
someone's house.
And started getting that
individual in that house in
their in their residents that
would be work crosses the line.
From Santa how do you make the
determination that they are.
To get a house in what category
do what makes that determination
that that will.
Mention the price is right they
haven't said anything about the
person but.
St.
How does one determine receive a
misdemeanor.
All right so Mister speaker and
gentle lady.
Thank you for the question and
what's the.
Language says is that is focused
or directed towards the
residents.
And so if if this group was
you know what let's just say
they came off of central we went
to a neighborhood.
They were protesting
You know they're gonna be
shouting no because they want to
they will bring it was attention
right to get it was attention
shot across different directions
maybe mostly for some arching.
let's say that the it's it's
time to stop and decide we're
going to go next there were
still protesting.
as long as they don't don't say
okay we're gonna pick this house
and everyone look at this house
the reserves out of this house
and focusing the protest on this
house.
then there's no way that they
would be guilty of a misdemeanor
that
speaker general.
From Santa the determination
will be made based on the
action.
Mr speaker tell you that that's
exactly right that's why we
maybe one of the minutes we
maybe we would actually took out
the word of ten because we we we
wanted it to be based solely on
action we are actually school
raise the bar strengths and that
requirement is based on actual.
From Santa can you please tell
me what can you please explain
what section do is what's the
meaning of section B..
Yes Mr speaker gentle lady thank
you for that and then I'll just
admit
I'm not the resident expert on
this
but I believe there is in our
statutes already this
demonstration that tools New
World services act.
that we just want to make it
clear that we're not we're not
touching that statute at all
we're leaving that all
and also the gentleman from
Bernalillo and Sandoval can add
to that or not.
Mr speaker and gentleman just
briefly all these questions
really artifacts specific
questions and the burden will
always be on the state so the
state is going to have to prove
the person violated this law
into the law becomes void for
vagueness it gets struck here we
do not think this large void
that'll of course be the first
challenge this law that is to
board we have to what I believe
as a sponsor of this bill making
a statement that this kind of
time place manner restrictions
appropriate and this is for
thank you Mr speaker thank you
John.
Mr speaker and the two gentlemen
from Santa.
My good friend I think you guys
are the best in the house but
that question is all still out
for consideration.
Thank you Mr speaker and the
gentleman.
Thank you gentle lady.
Seen further debate the
gentleman from San Juan.
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker this
gentleman from Santa yield.
Mr speaker I your.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
really just have one question
that way till this part of the
debate to to ask
You're saying that statutes
already exist in a couple places
in New Mexico a once again did I
hear.
I was a to Artesia and
Albuquerque reserves are.
the speaker and and gentleman
from San Juan the the server one
is Bernalillo county.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
So.
I guess my my my one question is
is communities are already able
to do this.
Why do we have to do this from
sentencing why do we have to
make every community do this
state as your as we're hearing I
know was stated earlier this by
partisan support for this bill
but as I've been listening there
appears to be a lot of
bipartisan opposition to this
bill.
I'm wondering why we don't just
if we want this in our
communities I why do we have to
make a state law why would we
not just allow each community to
decide for themselves what they
want to do with this issue the
speaker John.
Speaker John are you asking me a
question about local control.
I am definitely Mr speaker and
gentleman asking you a question
about local control it since
that that I heard the those
words come out of your mouth
once or twice Mr gentleman
that's that's a fair question
and but I hope you and your
members know that I try very
hard to be intellectually
consistent and honest in my
positions and I I know I've been
on the floor debating against
statewide laws on.
You know other.
issues that I don't agree with
us saying let's let the local
folks decide.
and so so it's it's a it's a
well founded good question Mr
speaker and gentleman and the
answer
that is good it just.
Comes from from from from my
hardest that's not to questions
that I really feel that it is
not appropriate.
To have anyone in their
sanctuary have their privacy.
Our security.
Their safety is threatened.
That our homes should be a place
that we feel comfortable and
safe that our children so
comfortable and safe.
And and I believe that this is
something
that to me is I want to carry it
at the state level to protect
all citizens of the state and
that way I'm in a way that still
protects our first amendment
right to express our opinion
and and.
State when we disagree but
without harassing someone.
Speaker and gentleman so I I
very much appreciate the
question but I feel this is.
It's important enough.
To me.
Hope to the other members of
this body that we we look to
protecting and safeguarding the
citizenry and especially helping
them to feel safe in their home.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
gentleman I appreciate that but
I do believe there's a lot of
discussion on this there's a lot
of surprises throughout the
bodies I've talked to members of
both sides that this debate is
even approaching three hours.
and I think this one hits home
for a lot of folks for different
reasons I mean you've heard.
You've heard people today
present different sides of the
argument and end up on the same
side of what appears probably is
going to be a vote for different
reasons and I and one of the
things that I heard in the
discussion when we were talking
about the hundred taking away
the hundred foot care your way.
Well as some other
considerations you took into
account maybe there's or maybe
it's more of a a rural setting
more of a and so the speaker and
and gentleman for that reason
that's why I think there should
be a local control issue.
Because rural counties are not
urban counts
Representative Chatfield.
Doesn't even represent a single
count heap G. representative
eastern New Mexico.
And so with that Mr speaker and
gentleman it's.
I don't think that there is a
way we can and I think you
stated this earlier can't get
maybe two a perfect bill.
I think the closer to home you
are.
The more opportunity you have to
make that legislation or that
rule or that law or that
community standard.
More.
perfect.
And and that's a principle if
there's one principle that I die
on that's the one principle that
are going on is I think we do
too many things from within this
building.
That tells everybody else how
they should do things.
I know some of the counties Mr
speaker and gentleman
you cry don't want to.
Protest on their front yard to
close because of some of our
counties more heavily armed and
others.
And that so Mister speaker John
I think that this might be a
unnecessary in some counties and
some rural areas I think a more
private property is more
isolated property is the less
likely there is going to be a
organized protests against that
house because I think the threat
level.
Feels really hard so Mister
speaker and gentleman that's
that's my argument tonight is if
this is already available in the
state has not.
On this issue at least.
Gone and said we are going to
preempt all the communities from
this putting these are
provisions in place locally.
I think we should leave it to
the local governments to those
local communities they can have
those local town hall meetings
and I understand that's probably
a little bit harder and some of
them the more the more populated
counties and stand cities to do
it that way but.
Jordy the state I would dare
say.
Thirty of the thirty three
counties would be better served
to let them handle this
with their city councils and
county commissions so I
regretfully and it's very
softly.
As I think you state will look
to table this and this bill.
Thank you Mr speaker John.
Thank you John.
Seen further debate the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Stansbury.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman yield.
Mr speaker I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentlemen
I hate to have a series of
questions about this bill and I
happen to agree with many of the
points that have been raised on
both sides of the aisle this
evening including the debate
that directly preceded me and
I'm really genuinely trying to
understand the implications of
this bill because of this
complicated dance that we're
talking about around our
constitutional rights to free
speech so Mr speaker gentleman I
want to kind of like get back to
basics for just a moment I did
not have the opportunity to hear
this bill in either the
committees or the legal analysis
and so this is my first time
hearing this bill Mr speaker
gentleman could you just explain
what is the an intended outcome
so I understand the situation
that prompted and and the other
situations that informed at Y.
eight Mr speaker and gentleman
this bill was brought forward
but from a practical standpoint
how would this bill be
implemented so individuals
appear in a neighborhood in
front of someone's house and.
The police would be called on
them for appearing in that
neighborhood is is that how it
would be implemented.
Yes Mr jelly that's yeah that's
that's about exactly right if
you would not be as people just
commenting from the house you
would have to be they start
target Hey getting of that house
so they have to start.
Shouting or holding up signs are
trying to convey some message to
the house but at that point the
individual House committee call
to the police the police COVID
explained that that's not we go
and and disperse the crowd.
So Mister speaker gentleman like
just you know really
fundamentally thinking about the
implementation and the way
picketing is described in the
bill itself so just you know
obviously it's hard to deal in
hypotheticals but just based on
the definitions I'm seeing this
bill if someone appeared on a
sidewalk in front of the house
with the let's same from my
house with the sign that said I
don't like what you're doing
would that be illegal under this
bill.
So the speaker and and Jonah
State appeared fire house with
that sign and
they're not just walking by they
were there was absent for your
house then that back yes and so
Mister speaker gentleman could
the police arrest that person.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
if that person.
did not desist after being
notified by the police
and that person would be cited
for a misdemeanor I don't know
seventy six ERS that are or what
but that's a it's a misdemeanor.
So in the practicality of
implementing the bill Mr speaker
and gentlemen essentially the
enforcement of the bill would
require.
In this instance law enforcement
coming out and.
Telling the individual or
individuals that they could no
longer.
appear in front of your home to
express their point of view is
that correct.
Originally that's what happened
in Salt Lake City here just a
couple months ago.
the protesters want to drive
Dunn's home actually showed up
and.
And explained that that was the
the ordinance and they relocated
and protested somewhere else.
Yeah and so Mister speaker and
gentleman I understand in the
legal arguments that I've heard
this evening that the way in
which this bill is constructed
in the case law that informs
that.
Holds intact the tested case law
that the speech itself is
protected the idea that somebody
can disagree with my point of
view but the case law and and
the testing cases have to do
with time place and manner as
the other gentleman has stated
that Mr speaker and gentleman
as the just as a person I'm not
an attorney I'm not a
constitutional scholar.
It just seems to appear in in
the sample for example that we
just gave that this would in
fact infringe on somebody's
ability to express themselves in
a free manner.
And I think one of the things
that I find really.
Call about this bill is that
there's no parameters placed in
the bill around what defines
harassment or things that would
be you know for me the cause to
involve law enforcement or
that would define a basic
standard that would justify
taking away somebody's
constitutional right to express
their point of view.
And I understand that the law in
the case laws tested around this
issue but it would appear to me
based on kind of some of the
things that we've been talking
about that this would impact
cost speech and so for me I find
this bill deeply troubling for
that reason because I believe
that we do have to protect the
right of speech and of course Mr
speaker gentleman we do not want
people you know harassing people
or destroying property or trust
passing or making people feel
and safe and in some instances
right of course trespassing and
destroying property are already
subject to to criminal charges
but I do find that especially
with the amendments that were
made tonight that this bill.
Does not put enough parameters
around this line to justify
taking away the fundamental
constitutional right to speech
and though Mr speaker and
gentleman I am so sorry to hear
about constituents have been
harassed property that's been
damage that's awful and there's
nothing more awful than feeling
harassed in your home and unsafe
and I really really genuinely
understand that and my heart
goes out to the people that have
experience that but I think as a
body it is our duty to uphold
the constitution of the state of
New Mexico and the United States
which includes our right and
freedom to speech and I do think
that this bill does not protect.
Enough parameters to ensure that
we're protecting speech first so
I wanted to say thank you for
the debate tonight and I really
appreciate what you're trying to
do
Mr speaker gentleman
but I'd I just needed to ask
those questions so thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman.
Thank you gentlelady.
Scene for the debate the
gentleman promote that'll Eddie
sevens counties Representative
Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Santa Fe New
Mexico.
Mr speaker I yield to the
earlier.
Thank you sure I.
This is the.
A great conversation.
Many times
I am at home in my district.
People say I don't know how you
do that you know that place is
crazy and.
Hello that.
And one of these this type of
conversation is up.
Yes ma'am I think.
That I don't.
Even when I'm upset with this
whole.
The box and made it more than I
love.
The.
The I. T. C. a bill that you
have read R. J. are the our
teachers staff should refer to.
Is a unique statute
They came from a member of this
body.
It was bill gray.
US district fifty four
representatives of.
Prior before me.
and years before that she was
on.
A city council and there was a
union negotiators.
And.
Like a lot of.
Providing meals that go astray
at Dr Stewart people were
playing loud music outside of
the house and shinee no lights
through the windows some doing
all those things that you talked
about happened in Sandoval
county or similar which are very
wrong and should not ever be a
laugh I'm one hundred percent in
agreement with that and I think
everybody's here.
Would agree to that.
Bothers me as
Is the fact that.
Maybe in concert true but it's
been said before but the.
Whether it's a local control.
Whether the bill whether your
bill needs to be to provide
more.
Where that kind of stuff can't
happen.
Which I request.
But preserving the right of free
speech to me.
Because you know of the
constitution starts with we the
people Senator Barnes that the
constitution that the that that
the government exist.
To serve the people.
And then I think about.
That has that first amendment
has lived a long time.
And there are crazy people out
there in the world that abuse
that I think you have.
Described in I have described
the most certainly need to be
squashed immediately.
No one.
Should still jeopardized in our
own home I agree one hundred
percent.
But then I got to thinking about
the kids the students.
Tiananmen Square.
And how they got there because
that was the only place they
were allowed to protest.
And I think you're.
That's not that one right.
So.
I am one hundred percent in
agreement.
With your effort to protect.
A man's our families all.
I think we I think your bills.
Might need to be turned up so
that we don't.
Take away a person's right to
briefly at symbol.
And peacefully assemble.
Whether it's in front of my
house or your house.
I think.
Peacefully assembling is worth
protecting and I I want to help
you with your Gail.
And I don't want to.
Take away from of the person
tried I think about.
All of the crazy things that
have happened whether it was.
You know or police on our
brokered here in Saint Louis and
Chicago have done bad things and
people in the sample.
I worry that if you if you stop
I.
The the more.
Or the demonstrations and proud
of of a.
A resident she what happens if
they follow that family to the
restaurant.
What happens that they follow on
to the.
Mall.
I mean that puts the family in
more jeopardy because they don't
have the protection of their
all.
And then I think it's going to
get worse so I it's a.
It is a worthy effort and again
that's a conversation that makes
me love this place more than I
hate it sometimes
but I
I think protecting a person's
rights to pre assemble as one
that I can't.
true well.
To jeopardize and.
You know my good friend from
Representative from Medicaid
family thought about.
Trick or treaters.
I thought about Christmas Carol
our.
And I thought.
And my grand the majority
leader's singing in front of my
house.
I mean.
Somebody might protest that but
I would welcome it and sell it
in their lives the problem thank
you a gentleman thank you Mr
speaker.
The children.
Seen yet further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentleman from
Sunderland
Well the.
Gentleman from Sunderland.
And the only existing.
Rocket scientist in the house
you.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
point kindly yielded thank you
for your patience.
It's good to finally chat was.
And the NSA only existing
because the representative of
the must I stop retired and he
was the other rocket scientists.
Yeah.
Sure.
So that leaves you as the only
remaining as the madam speaker
and that's that's a compliment.
It's not speaker
Gentleman from Sunderland I I
support your legislation.
And
I have a question though you
know we talk about the freedom
of
Of speech but I kind of want to
approach your legislation in
terms of of what freedom of
religion.
And and and then and then we
kinda in a they out the scenario
a to live scenario and and then
just see how.
what what it what happened in
this kind of
Religious prayerful.
event.
might conflict with.
What you're proposing.
And and I'm not making that.
Is the most beaker kind of the
basis on which I will support
not support your bill because I
am supporting your legislation.
And and I I believe in the
philosophy that you.
But you I
so eloquently portrayed in terms
of why.
The issue of privacy.
And the US must be Kerr and and
that matters a lot.
Because we know the estimates
beaker generous on the line I
want to the how our privacy is
violated.
It's violated when some people
break into our homes.
And cleaners out.
It's violated when the.
People this must be
Come into our driveway in still
are vehicles.
As the non speaker.
It's when somebody comes into
our little rock cheap Fund.
Maybe kills our our cat.
Or or sheep or our chickens.
You know and
and so our privacy in terms of
our home and our home setting.
This landed in many ways and you
bring as the must be grow
different perspective in terms
of that privacy is violated and
that's what I appreciate about
your bill.
Mr speaker
We had a community event it was
Representation for health and
harmony nineteen ninety five.
And estimates speaker it was a
community event it was not a
media event to cater to the
media.
It really was a prayerful
procession in the traditions of
Hispanic.
Catholics.
You know when we take to the
present to kind of a brief
harmony.
To our community.
When we take to the procession
to bring rain.
To our community.
And we take our saints with us
on this profession.
And it's usually.
Focused.
Passed in my community here not
these because they must be grow
we would do the.
Cause us on those samples wizard
Education that started at the
church that went up maybe two
miles to the west messa on to
the common as it at the school
land grants in their we pray for
rain.
Yes in my speaker and our elders
believe that as long as we
continue with those Santa
samples.
That.
Walking of the state's
procession on to the comments.
And as long as our Pueblo
brothers and sisters continued
with their dances to the rain
gods.
That we would have wonderful.
Rings in the growing season.
And our community has just doing
those processions Mr speaker.
In our one of us is Pfister's
don't carry on that.
Issue.
Speaker a.
We had a representation for
health and harmony.
That's where it's called.
It was actually at my archbishop
Michael Sheehan.
The rigid religious leader of
the Catholic Church.
In this our stresses.
As long as well as by father
Jack Robinson we was our
preference system faster and
only family church back in
nineteen sent nineteen a ninety
five I was still not elected I
went got elected in ninety six
Mr speaker.
This.
You know it was basically in the
event that occurred through the
coordination of a group of
parishioners at Holy Family we
called ourselves the only family
community unity Committee.
And we set out on a procession.
And we reached out to people for
our parish along the mile and a
half stretch.
If they wish to set up a little
alter.
We call these estimates speaker
and this council's.
And
And this consoles people from
those households would set up a
little altered was sent statutes
candles flowers.
And
And the procession.
Started off
At the church.
And it went through the
neighborhoods they're not
Driscoll.
This must occur.
And part of a procession.
Was to target.
For drug dealers.
In their homes.
And to crime riddled liquor
establishments.
In these establishments in these
drug dealers estimates speaker
we gave our community up backed
by.
You know I'm a science the.
Ills.
And the effects in terms
community health for the drug
dealing it was paramount around
that time.
Is the most bigger.
At first the community didn't
know how to take this.
So only a couple of people
offered to put up altars.
But then.
As our pastor father Jack.
Kind of a announced.
The procession is the most
bitter at the pulpit.
You know for a month on Sunday
masses.
You know we went from three
altars to light fifteen
officers.
On the day that we started the
procession people are coming on
board.
Saint.
You know yeah this is happening
it's happening next door to my
house.
but you know what.
We need to stand United.
Speaker that's what we did we
stop at the fifteen officers say
prayers.
Stop at another one.
Stop at another one the same
thing.
And then we come to the drug
dealing house Mr speaker.
At the drug dealing house on the
street.
Not on the sidewalk not on the
property.
We would say more prayers and we
join hands in a circle.
All two hundred of us must be.
Something that circle would have
to fall down into three or four
circles because of the.
Of the of the
of the narrow street similar
speaker.
And
And that was so effective it was
a long procession on my own I
have.
Not the little over three hours.
it was not immediately then is
the most bigger but.
There was a media person there
reporter for the opportunity.
Who was a partner with our
community.
In tackling these liquor
establishments that or it was an
addict.
And also dealing with the drug
problem initiative.
in our community.
And actually.
The rand previews on the on the
Iran and excellent article after
the procession.
All right and did a whole series
of articles.
And we're so proud of this
gentleman.
small speaker and you became
like an adopted son of a
community this reporter for the.
So as the most bigger accounts
my question now in terms of.
Stopping.
At the homes of these drug
dealers.
In engaging in this type of.
Kind of religious expression.
You know and
I don't see it as of right of
freedom of speech.
This is kind of more tied to
a issue of religious freedom.
In terms of traditional custom.
In terms of how additional spent
communities store if we have
dealt with.
Hey us.
This harmony.
And how this procession is part
of our process to bring harmony.
You know but it's much bigger it
does kind of maybe
Representative.
A little are.
What you're trying to do with
your legislation this the house
speaker so that's the question
the imposing.
Mr speaker and the gentleman
from Bernalillo
thank you for sharing that story
it's a beautiful story
My sink.
This is drafted if they were
targeting a particular house was
that message.
That that could be a problem
and.
And and again going back to what
to the gentleman from Bernalillo
Sandoval said no we're not.
Trying to limit what the message
is.
So we have to.
I guess what I want to say is.
You're giving us something to
carefully consider.
And I think
We've shown between the
committee process that's a the
gentleman and I are open to
changes and with I've been
listening and taking notes
during this debate.
We don't want to make it so that
your trading is illegal or
caroling is a legal.
So and I know if if it's a
pleasure to this by the to let
this go forward and and that
goes to the Senate process I'm
sure we'll make changes but I'm
really glad you sure that the
stories were after we got to
think about that.
Yes the must be creative think
about it this.
Because we we have another
archbishop that eight one of
these prior processions.
we don't want to see him and up
and that was got out.
Full of your forty immigrants on
the ad but thank you madam
speaker
You know the community was so
grateful.
And
For this type of
Peaceful.
Let's just traditional way of of
how Hispanic communities deal
with.
K. up some this harmony.
and how we try to bring harmony
back.
To the unity after prayer and.
And and and the.
In a peaceful approach.
And
in a small speaker and gentleman
Vermont.
On the line
And I know this may not have
bearing
But
You know the issue of our the
placing.
You may not have very Mr speaker
on your legislation.
But
But I still I still want to put
it out there.
Many because maybe you're co
sponsor can kind of reflect on
it.
But this doesn't residences and
and and and and and and and to
one degree
of Business.
It is basically the placing of
symbols.
Okay.
And symbols of death.
In a residence.
And.
I know you're legislation
doesn't go there.
But.
It's along the same lines of
this issue of a violation of
privacy.
And not only that but.
why nation of once the.
Spirit.
One site spa speaker.
And
you know I mentioned in this
prayer procession for health and
harmony led by the archbishop
Michael she hand lessons
retired.
And he was a rookie archbishop
he came in and ninety five I
mean the procession happened in
nineteen ninety five he came in
I think in ninety three or
ninety four so he was very young
but he was still really grounded
on these issues of.
You are many.
And and and dealing with the
illnesses that
that drugs and alcohol.
Brought to our community must
occur.
These there is there's three
letter to there were three
elector sentiments we we've shut
him down.
I ran on that platform that the
elector I would close work with
the community in closing down
the street crime bill that
recession was a pre more.
Spot national national.
three more crime bill
establishment.
And
Must be current and we closed
them down one ninety seven.
We are sworn in yeah one ninety
eight India wanted two thousand
one.
And you won't believe this most
bigger.
There's the harmony that brought
the community no more homicides
every other with every other
month.
Coming from these
establishments.
the south valley these
connection where I live being
the northernmost community of
the southbound.
At six of the top ten the W. I.
intersections in the metro area.
After we close these three
letters that measurements down.
Zero intersections showed up in
the top ten.
So you can see the chaos.
Thank crime rental in this case
there are some insurance can
create.
And actually a lot of those.
The W. I. in a.
The worst the W. I.
intersections yeah we're rex but
a lot of them were deaths.
And
It's not speaker getting back to
the symbol of eight the symbols
of hate.
Symbols of death.
The end up on your residence.
You know some of these letters
that management's all three of
them.
We're heavily connected to the
politicians.
In the area actually.
We've all defeated them small
speaker but
To state Rep system must be
Curtis that senators county
commissioner.
A judge.
I want to become.
The Supreme Court justice was
tied in with these through the
establishment of the Lakers
sentencing us beaker.
That into the cartels of what
just.
And people won't believe me
when.
I'd say that.
but you know we had intelligence
from state police at the time
that this is going on.
Mr speaker all lower in the
home.
There was a.
Thank you.
And when I launch the apostle.
Three individuals.
Handkerchiefs over their eyes
their hands tied behind their
back gunshot behind their head.
One of those individuals was the
brother of one of the owners of
one of these the perceptions.
And actually that was a cartel
kids.
So madam speaker and again
getting back to the symbols of
hate symbols of at.
Some of these litter owners.
Right into the politics.
Retaliated against some of us
leaders.
And
Small speaker and that.
They sent the.
One box.
Of the dried.
Smoked fish that you usually see
in the east coast.
The Senate to this news reporter
of the Tribune.
We had a little bureau in the
south valley they're not the
school.
And at that time the Albuquerque
Tribune that are larger
distribution.
In the south valley than that
then that the Albuquerque
journal.
Yep pretty darn.
Many because of the Tribune
focus them on.
Human interest stories in the
well.
They focus then on.
On interviewing.
Kids from our schools terms
of their sports activities.
You know really kind of really
are really grounded newspaper
that address valley interest
valley concerns.
Well the Vance you know just
like the regular newspapers and
small towns.
But you one expect to find that
in the metro areas speaker.
Well these notorious one one
particular family one of these
establishments.
Sent this Bob wouldn't box.
Dried smoked fish to this
reporter.
and your office learn rent there
in this budget where the valley.
With the scissors shut down its
throat.
And a black ribbon tied around
its neck.
We all know that that's a mafia
symbol for a hit.
Speaker.
And
And I know you're bill doesn't.
Address that but again.
It's one nation privacy.
That happens in our businesses
and our residents.
The same is much bigger
Representative the car owners.
Two roosters with their heads
cut off.
In my front yard.
In my eighth grade son.
The last one to leave the house.
Would go out every morning.
Before I took a shower not ready
for school.
To get the journal.
Or that in the journal because
approving wasn't afternoon paper
to read the sports.
You can across those two.
Did.
Roosters what it's going to and
anybody knows that the those are
a symbol of okay.
What.
Mr speaker and
You can see as well as speaker
how your bill hand gonna has
ramifications in terms of.
Maybe what what more we need to
do.
In terms of protecting the
privacy of our residents.
You know and in terms of people
going to extremes in these
cases.
you know just much bigger was
really hurtful is that.
This reporter was such a great
night.
It was so dedicated you saw a
lot of the people of the arctic
communities here in the south
valley about the school I was by
the US.
In its most bigger when that
happened.
He went into shock.
He called me.
As we are good friends.
And he showed me the box.
And.
It just.
Sent them.
It just totally demoralized and
small speaker.
You never went back to work.
In fact this must be very the.
He kind of went back to his
hometown Espanola.
To the stress to kind of.
Here his is fear that this
symbol.
Kind of a shattered his heart
and soul.
And this must be and
And.
And that that was such a loss.
You see this giant of a
reporter.
You know standing side by side
our communities and our quest to
bring justice and.
And peace and tranquility you
know against these drug dealers
trying to establishment system
not speaker.
And
He moved out of state with his
girlfriend.
Speaker and
So I think that's another Avenue
is the most bigger jumps on the
last.
That we kind of really need to
address.
Because
You know we want to keep our
community safe our our families
healthy in mind and spirit.
But when we have these
intrusions.
Mr speaker.
There is a violation.
In our hearts.
In our spirit.
In our psyche.
That never.
These us.
We can maybe set aside estimates
speaker.
But.
It's it's always there it's
always a little bothersome.
You know
and so it's mostly from.
Santa.
You don't have to respond in
terms of the last issue of
symbols of hate and that.
You know
but
But I think this may be an issue
that we can.
Down the road explore and maybe
come up with something tangible.
Mr speaker Jim R. programs on
the lot thank you.
Thank you gentlemen.
Si no further debate the
gentleman to close.
Thank you Mr speaker and ladies
and gentleman I.
I would be lying if I said I
enjoyed being in the hot seat
for three hours.
but I I wanna also say I have
greatly benefited from this
debate.
I'm.
To me this is a highlight of the
session to have this discussion
with all of you I just wanna
thank you for your order from
this.
and.
And the great care that we take.
When it comes to upholding the
constitution which we all live
and also making sure you're safe
in our homes and I just want to
thank you all for that.
And with that Mr speaker I would
move that house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill to seventy six as amended
do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House Bill two seventy six
as amended.
The vote is now open.
Thirty seconds to vote.
The vote is about to close.
The electronic portion of the
vote is now closed with the
clerk called the members without
a recorded vote.
Yes Representative votes yes
Representative Madrid.
What.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Pettigrew looks
now.
Madrid road yes Representative
Madrid both yes.
By a vote.
By a vote of.
Thirty three in the the other
affirmative and thirty one in
the negative.
House Bill.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House Bill to
seventy six as amended.
Has duly passed.
Members premium tickets to watch
the Senate Judiciary Committee
meeting on the bill just passed
will be available for the the
chief clerks office premium
seating will be available for
hundreds of dollars I should be
good hearing I would forget.
Gentlelady from McKinley and San
Juan are you ready on item
eighteen.
Yes Mr speaker can you get me to
that point with the record
reflect election necessary for
placing House Appropriations and
finance committee substitute for
house bill three twenty five on
final passage has been taken the
gentle lady to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker this
evening I'm going to give a
couple brief comments and then
I'd like to ask my co sponsor
Representative Hochman VA Vigil
to take over on the amendment
and and going through the bill
basically Mr speaker this is
what we call a generic bill
affectionately known as a dummy
that is coming out of the house
Appropriations Committee and I
decided as the rural air service
enhancement Act at this point
Mister speaker I'd like to ask I
cosponsored to continue with the
amendment and the bill.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady from McKinley
County R. for co sponsoring this
very important bill I'm at this
time Mister speaker I would like
to move the amendments to a two
numbers point two two zero six
six five point one.
Right has been passed out it is
up on the website and I
generally do is move the
amendment generally not to
explain.
Thanks very much Mr speaker what
we what this amendment does is
weird setting language on page
five.
Which would be a new subsection
I and rather than read the
language Mr speaker I'll simply
explain it what we have here
Mister speaker is the grant
program to establish and
supplementals and supplements.
services to rural parts of our
state there's already a federal
program for this Mr speaker I
thought the central air services
programs established in the code
of federal regulations and this
amendment ensures that for any
new route that federal funding
will be sought first for such
applicable so that we can
maximize the amount of state
funding going to these routes
for those that would not be
applicable for federal funds the
second thing that we're doing Mr
speaker is we are ensuring that
there is a are a competitive
edge.
You're procurement.
Yes for carriers that are
interested and providing such
new essential routes in New
Mexico and that allows us to
ensure this process is pope and
making sure the state get the
best bang for its Buck and it
also ensures government sunshine
is maintained so that for the
December state of New Mexico can
make sure that we're and.
Administering and granting these
funds and are the best way
possible the last thing that
this amendment does Mister
speaker and Austrade find sixty
thirteen on page seven which is
the appropriation as it is no
longer necessary at this time.
I stand for questions in general
is explain the amendment is
there debate on the amendment
John legend Lee Representative
Scott.
Thank you Mr Kharola gentlelady
from Bernalillo here Mister
speaker I yield to the gentleman
from the camp.
The man walked.
As.
Is small wrists on.
What are.
Thank you for pouring.
For these forms.
On.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Lee it does not
this amendment does not preclude
that community for applying for
funds on a different route
however if there is about
already established for which is
essential air services have been
granted to the federal program
these funds would not be
applicable for that particular
route because usually the
federal program pays for the
entire R. the whole shebang of
one well that qualifies for
service.
She.
Mr speaker gentle lady of pro.
He has such worse or worse.
We're going to Denver or Dallas.
Yes program which reliable for
smart to work.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
correct it must be a different
route.
What is that's all the
questions.
With regard to the amendment is
for the debate on the amendment
the gentle and encouraging
Representative Crowder thank you
Mr speaker religion already.
The gentle lady please yep.
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from per account thank
you Jody my question is almost
identical to my colleagues
I had I don't understand what to
fourteen CFR part three twenty
five years can you explain that
a little bit please.
Thank you Mr speaker John Kerr
canning fourteen CFR part three
twenty five is is what
establishes the federal
essential air services program
and all the requirements for a
there are.
Okay and that fourteen CFR part
three twenty five that's a
federal
references that correct jollity
Mr speaker gentleman that is
correct okay and as I read your
amendment on on item I we're
says individual grants awarded
through the roller enhancement
grant program shall not be
awarded for routes that qualify
so can you tell me a definition
of a qualified in this bill
please.
You Mr speaker and gentleman so.
With regards to this man and
some subsection I would be those
routes that specifically
qualified for federal funding
under the essential air services
program as promulgated under
part three twenty five fourteen
CFR.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
Sugg I'll give you an example of
the committee Armstrong has
essential air service from
Clovis New Mexico to Denver
Colorado.
Enjoy lady Mr speaker that that
is not the route that the
committee for sure they went
through about a year long
process with five applicants and
submitted to the federal
government a route to Dallas and
that's what I really want to go
they had a smaller line boutique
airline less than nine
passengers.
That would fly back and forth to
the commercial airport right
there at the F. W..
But we lost that the federal
government for some reason
decided since the the primary in
placements were from the
military basic care for space.
That as long as I got to a
a major hub airport.
Then that would suffice and and
it and it just worked out all
right just work great for
military folks but most locals
are want to go to Dallas for
worse are still searching for
flights that go to the west I'm
sorry to the east.
And so as I read your your
Amendment when it talks about
qualified that route qualified
for research or service when Bo
to Caroline had the contract
they had that contract I think
three years of I believe.
But it was changed to Denver so
as I read your amendment Clovis
would not be able to apply for
any of the state funds even it
if it's for
Security purposes at the airport
or to.
Modernize the lobby at the
airport or something in that
nature they cannot apply because
the route.
They would like to go to Dallas
on.
Has already one time been
approved yet qualified for
essential air service.
But it.
Is no longer been awarded that
that award was moved to Denver.
So as I read your amendment
Clovis could not apply for this
in hopes of getting boutique
airlines to fly them to the
Dallas fort worth airport is
that correct gentle lady Mr
speaker Mr speaker and gentleman
that is not correct so I would
submit to you that qualify in
the presentations here this
amendment would be applicable to
those routes that wind continue
to pop I enter central air
services.
Sounds like at some point the
FAA determined that this route
no longer qualify for that
funding and it would of be up it
would be are able to qualify
under this bill.
That thank you Julian and I
could see how to be interpreted
that way but I can also see how
to be interpreted the other way
Mr speaker gentle lady.
I don't see where it says shall
not be ordered for us that.
Currently call it doesn't say
currently qualify just as
qualified.
And so
This amendment it is very very
troubling to me I'm concerned
that
A lot of the airports around the
perimeter of our state from
Russell Hobbs to Carlsbad Clovis
department and to Gallup anyone
it was flying.
To a hub airport.
That could qualify.
Would not be allowed to apply.
For the if they qualified for
essential air service we could
not apply for the state funds.
I'll continue to read and listen
but.
The language the words crafted
troubles thank you Mr speaker
and gentleman.
Mr Johnson Chavis and Lincoln
thank you Mr speaker over gentle
lady from Bernalillo county New.
I thank you Mr speaker idea I
yield to the gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln.
Mr speaker gentle lady are you
can see that we're referring to
a provision of the code record
of federal regulations and I'm
just questioning whether it's
wise to refer to regulations
that.
Can be changed
On a fairly regular basis maybe
this is one that doesn't but I'm
just not sure whether it is wise
to to refer to regulations I
think we could say central our
service program
that may be available from the
federal government or something
along those lines but I'm
worried about citing specific
provisions and member called a
federal regulations thank you Mr
speaker thank the gentleman.
These are for the debate on the
amendment the generating any.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady please feel.
Mr speaker I yield to the gentle
lady thank you Mr speaker
generally I think I see you over
there You Like and looking for
an aquarium but here you are Mr
speaker and gentle lady I I have
some of the same concerns that
have already been expressed when
looking also at your graphite
and talks about that qualify for
funding.
I don't really know what that
means you are eligible for
funding does that mean
That sense of how they need to
criteria but my question is and
with that instead of just the
start does every city or county
that applies for federal subsidy
received one.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
so I'm glad you asked that
question the essential air
services process through the
federal granting program is
extremely vigorous there are a
lot of requirements that have to
be met and on top of that there
is a discretionary elements.
FAA administrator administrators
render to pick and choose those
routes that they decided fund
through the essential air
services program
it's not just technical memory
apply for the funding and it's
granted you have to be a very
long list of conditions as
stated under part three twenty
five.
And so it in once that route is
usually establishes this
essential air services route as
your colleague stated that can
change so qualifications very
progress but once you do
qualified that's higher route is
paid for
in in full so the point of this
amendment is to ensure that for
those drugs that could qualify
persons or services that they
are they are going through that
figures program and getting that
qualification so that we can
best extend of funds that we're
gonna be appropriating for this
purpose to those routes that
wouldn't qualify but that we
still are dearly need throughout
the state especially in our
rural communities.
Mr speaker generally so thank
you very much for that so I I
mentioned and tell me if I'm
correct that perhaps of
municipality applies and
qualifies but there is not money
enough to fund a route does that
happen sometimes.
Mr speaker gentle lady are you
referring to the federal
essential air service program
and the program we're trying to
establish here Mr speaker and
gentle lady I am referring to
the federal.
Mr speaker gentle lady I am not
subject to the ins and outs of
of federal there for
appropriations process but you
know I'm sure funding is limited
in some way and that's why the
application process is so
rigorous.
Mr speaker and generally so that
the concern I have wheels down
to this that there may be
municipalities or counties that
seek that federal subsidy but
perhaps reasons but I I actually
witnessed some of this process
in in my locale and there are
times where everything should be
ago but for some reason it it
that route doesn't come in come
to fruition so Mister speaker
gentle lady I would like to see
a little bit differently which I
think the word choice qualify is
subject to interpretation and
I'd rather see something like
receives if they receive funding
through the federal essential
air service them you know they
wouldn't get that but there are
times when I think in FY two
federal they don't get it.
And may not ever get its they
really would need to have access
to the state program so that's
that's kind of the concern I
have been I I think it's really
more of a work choice issue so
it's clear to everybody thank
you Mr speaker.
Thank you for the debate on the
number.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative Strickler.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
please she'll.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the kinds element thank you
thank you gentle lady.
I'm just wondering if this
amendment how it affects city
Farmington and we recently Mr
speaker generally we recently
did a runaway expansion
improvement to allow for check
service we receive federal grant
and we've completed that project
we're we're to go sharing with
the with the regional airline to
give us some service we have had
services quite some time with
this amendment disqualified City
of bomb Gen probe for
participating and and and and
your bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman if that
particular route.
To Farmington and you've
identified is are already
receiving are qualified for the
federal central air services
program there would essentially
be nothing left to pay for since
the federal government would
pick up the entire top.
So we're we're already taking
care so.
Thank god for to sign Mr speaker
gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman with
regards to the service of that
route yes that does not include
additional infrastructure costs
that are also contemplated
within the purview of this.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker
thank you John.
Is a further debate on the
amendment.
All those in favor the members
signify by saying aye.
Well this
is.
You guys have it the house floor
amendment number one to house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute house bill
three twenty five is adopted.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo you
still have the floor.
Thank you Mr speaker
at this time I am are believe
that we've explained the bill
and I'm open and ready for
questions.
There's a great job
Representative Crowder.
These are the numbers desk
looking back to the various John
curry Representative Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker I push my
button on the amendment I
apologize.
No further questions on the.
That John San Juan your sister.
Thank you Mr speaker is like a
gentle lady
I think we're gentlelady we're
we're talking about the
amendment six thank you can
answer my question the city park
is already benefited from
federal grants to expand our our
runaway I think you're the
cities and go shared some of the
local airline.
In this is kind of your
expertise I don't know if it's a
nine seater or twenty one state
or the you now.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman as right now it is
nine seats.
And that's your bill and and no
probably jumping ahead I know
they're negotiating with the
United Airlines and I'm not sure
if it's a nine state the client
are are twenty one Sikh line up
you may know that off the top
here it Mr speaker gentlemen I
do not I would have to consult
specific essential air services
tables and what they were
contemplating for that route
which is subject to change for
season and the demands of the
river.
Thank you Mr speaker speaker
generally what we're really
helpful that funding was going
to get some more servers and
last year's pandemic out of kind
of put that on hold so there is
some hope that that might that
might be be up ran a shared this
year so thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen.
Next we have the generals Lee
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will
generally you.
Thank you Mr speaker I'm I yield
to the kind gentleman
Mr chair Senator retirement
communities in the story.
Legible this program.
Mr speaker and gentleman those
communities that have airports
that service the type of the
aircraft were being contemplated
at this time.
So we wanted to make we wanted
to make sure that within this
bill we are servicing those
rural communities with the
smaller airports of really
benefit the most from these
funds so I I wish I had a list
for you right now Mr speaker
gentleman but you know maybe we
can talk after the debate.
Sure.
Most of the time already know
the answer to that question.
And by the time you try to grow.
Twelve communities suppression
operation.
Of the time you take out those
with already.
Service and senator surface and
those with no runway available
last with three communities will
don't know what the.
What questions.
And city of Gallup.
Program I believe you mentioned
some sure.
Strict qualifications for this
is to reward general what those
qualifications are.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
list of qualifications is
several pages long it can be it
can be looked up through part
three twenty five of fourteen
CFR but I mean it's it's would
be impossible to memorize
everything that they would check
and on top of that there's also
discretionary elements that is
utilized by the FAA's makers
terminations.
Your correction of waivers or
issue in many instances for some
of these requirements one of
them is tourism and launch or
per day.
Is maximum subsidy of.
Two hundred dollars per
passenger in some cases a
thousand dollars in numbers
another requirement is distance
greater grand ex award miles
from existing airports.
Those criteria X. yes in this
legislation is that accurate Mr
speaker German yes it is.
They're very.
Exercised here.
Whether a small community has
service press one or not is that
actor Mr speaker German it is
accurate.
You describe the two words ends
of Dennis Roch and I all those.
You would please.
Mr speaker domino by dryer
attention to page four of the
bill subsection let's see here.
Section four.
Subsection.
Individual grants awarded rural
air service enhancement grant
program shall not exceed one
million two hundred fifty
thousand dollars per year for
municipalities or counties
existing scheduled air service.
Subsection to exceed one million
seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars per year for New Mexico
counties or towns not served by
existing scheduled air service
or subsection three beers for
infrastructure improvements.
What is it was a very
significant difference in price
for two or more.
Mr speaker John it looks like it
said five hundred thousand
dollars.
Between ten percent match.
Rescue percent March I'm sorry
Mr speaker John I miss
understood the question
That is the difference between
matches correct.
Going back to.
Communities around requested
subsidizes their service.
From Houston Texas for St Onge
director.
Which might express.
New Mexico.
Eligible that surgery makes
trouble for us.
Could you describe what this
legislation.
What else from your question.
Is this program please.
Mr speaker and gentleman
Based upon the brief information
I have on that community I would
suggest to you that you would
not be that committee would not
be precluded from applying for
these types of grant funding if
they were not already qualified
for the central air service
program through the federal
grant.
Okay.
Mr speaker gentle lady one.
Question.
Registrations were.
This.
Representative.
Requirements with
one to four or the value of the
subsidy per passenger.
So the question federal
requirements.
The service structure starts.
Mr speaker and gentle lady is it
possible.
The right circumstances are
state programs.
For.
In order services for one or two
people all.
Just muted or demand based on
this.
Mr speaker and gentleman a
couple things to keep in mind
here is that any contract
Get it on by the department of
transportation aviation Division
which would be the one utilizing
these grant funds and giving
them out to specific care
contracts at those contracts
have to go through a competitive
procurement process reading
process so I'm those types of
costs would need to be built in
by the Kerrier and whatever
contract they would offer to the
state of New Mexico department
transportation through that
process so even if you do have
one or two people on a plane the
cost of the state would remain
the same.
Mr speaker and gentle lady.
There is no requirement.
Transaction a scheduled service
yes.
Requests for.
Transgression juror to order
service.
This is written.
Is not hacked your.
Mr Madam speaker gentle man it
is accurate but I think it's
also important to distinguish of
the type of carriers are often
offer essential air services
scheduled Services are offered
under a specific part of
fourteen CFR and those have
regulatory requirements as well
some carriers that offer
essential air services choose to
do so through other parts of
that same law this very
specifically called on demand
carriers or air taxi operators
and it's actually cheaper for
them to offer the services.
service and it would be to
schedule because if you have a
scheduled service one to be held
accountable for keeping that
schedule even if you have an
empty plane and to you have to
meet specific regulatory
requirements that are required
of the FAA they can be quite
onerous expensive so it's
important that we keep
flexibility within this bill so
that we can continue to serve
our communities with these types
of errors Services over burning
the carriers that are gonna be
betting for them.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
to.
The
is not possible.
One passenger charter or taxi
service is going to be less
expensive.
And the spiritual more
competitive.
Young lady.
pilot plan on.
This issue and.
What Mr speaker and gentle lady
this is all wish we written.
More discretion.
Provision that might be
warranted.
Waiting
for answer more questions and
with that are you.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Eddy County
Representative Brown.
Mr speaker
the gentle lady from Eddie are
yields my question was asked and
answered thank you.
Thank you gentlelady there's
further debate.
A woman from Bernalillo Cibola
McKinley the court.
San Juan influence here.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Thank you madam speaker of a the
unit be able to make.
Thank you madam speaker I yield
to the gentleman from all those
cans.
That's the state of.
Madam speaker and
Young lady.
This.
Service will try to do that the
hopeful Department
of transportation that the
department of transportation
also.
Mr speaker I'm so sorry can you
repeat your question there is a
lot of background noise and I
didn't hear you on on the line
while this Services tied up with
department of transportation my
correct.
Miss madam speaker John you're
correct okay madam speaker and a
young lady no words when we talk
about the department of
transportation we always talk
about the role of water bridges
full for.
this their service would fall
under the department
transportation also revised
Services department
transportation does my correct.
Madam speaker gentlemen you are
correct it will fall under the
aviation division of the
department of transportation.
Okay you know madam chair mother
speaker and a young lady
Posted so is this your service
we're a hauling on medicines of
oil people are really sick or
whatever from one place to
another in in rural New Mexico.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman on those counties this
service is not to make a plan
quite essential the ability to
grant these communities access
to care services would be a game
changer for us it would be a
game changer that would spur
economic development it would
allow for the picture
transportation of crucial good
such as medicines packages
especially those communities
that are
From others and sometimes have
to wait days to get access to
your are essential
Essential items so this would
absolutely help our state in
that it would published from an
economic developer secretary and
also keep our communities
connected are in a much better
way.
Thank you madam speaker nearly
eighty of to me this is central
for a couple reasons I want to
use the house for one just one
example you know they have a ski
vacation up there and how would
how would this help college
I'm bringing people in for ski
season or even not only that
settlement one speaker and in
lady from just recreational
benefits of this part of the
country hello hello that benefit
them.
Thank you miss madam speaker and
gentlemen so the issue of a lack
of air transportation the state
of New Mexico has been public
for decades and it's a problem
that many people have tried to
fix up to the private sector the
problem is that these folks are
just too expensive to operate so
in order to get the benefits of
economic development through
access to these rates the state
needs to step in and supplement
somewhat so that we can get them
going so that we can bring down
the cost and allow those people
that would normally have to
drive three and a half hours
five hours a day just to get
from one place to another and
state they can say that time by
getting on an airplane and
get injured estimate destination
forty minutes a game changer for
businesses of a game changer for
transportation general and for
those people that want to enjoy
our beautiful state thank you do
that as well.
Thank you madam speaker in the
lady of.
Another question on on I've
heard that people have asked
madam chair and I mean Madam
speaker him lady of the whole
distributes the money out.
Could you refresh my mind on how
that money will be divided out
to of people that can now
qualify for this.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentlemen so this grant program
will be appropriated to the
department transportation
aviation provision able then
initiate a competitive bidding
process for those carriers that
want to submit bids to service
routes and then of the aviation
division will choose those
contracts that make the most
sense for the state of New
Mexico so that is how the
process works is not included
the additional ten percent of
grant funding to be available
for some infrastructure costs
because getting folks to
airports means there needs to be
infrastructure there to help
them get on and off the plane.
Thank you
madam speaker nearly eighty
To me with and Fijian lady
distribute the big economic
driver for the state of New
Mexico and especially then the
community or rural New Mexico
which is struggling to begin
with this would be a big
economic goals for them this is
just a common digital rights
required and you know I
supported bill and I support it
in New Mexico and you know the
biggest communities like
Albuquerque Santa Fe Los crucis.
They have pretty much for the
need and matter of fact madam
chair I don't think the schools
as a nurse Silvercity.
madam speaker and gentlemen date
Los crucis does have an airport
I believe but I couldn't tell
you about specific routes that
are active at this time.
Okay thanks for the settlement
of madam chair Madam speaker
Indian lady thanks for your time
and I do for his bill.
Thank you.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Lee County
Representative Pettigrew.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Dona Ana
Representative small.
Thank you very much madam
speaker Madam speaker with the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
you'll please.
Speaker I yield to the kind
gentleman.
Thank you so much madam speaker
the general and and gentle lady
from Bernalillo just a couple of
quick questions Madam speaker
gentle lady I know you went
through this just now but Madam
speaker gentle lady the
department of transportation
will set the grant guidelines
the criteria they will
administer this programs that
actor madam speaker gentle lady
Madam speaker and gentlemen that
is one hundred percent accurate.
Excellent thank you madam
speaker thank you gentle lady
there commission the
representation across the state
gives me confidence their
ability to carry out these large
infrastructure projects also
gives me confidence Madam
speaker gentle lady I I
privilege to two seven committee
where this bill was for and
madam speaker gentle lady we
heard that and that this was
based off of a program in
Wyoming is that your that is
that your understanding
administrative for journaling.
Madam speaker and gentleman yes
this was based off of a very
successful a similar program and
the very real state of Wyoming.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady
the it that importance to a a
very large very rural state
being able to get people to and
from these were all isolated
communities folks want to get
there Madam speaker gentle lady
this again convinces me that
this is something that will be
of particular importance and
benefit to across our state but
especially in some of our most
rural isolated yet desirable
places the folks want to get to
if only they they have that
opportunity Madam speaker gentle
lady.
going back just briefly if
communities have through a
combination of investments and
grant opportunities state
created a route to.
One regional hub Madam speaker
gentle lady they would be
eligible again going through the
D. O. T. process that they'll
set up and administer to then
seek to apply for these funds
for different routes two
different house would that be
your understanding madam speaker
gentle lady Madam speaker
gentleman that would be correct.
Okay great mass figure gently
because we certainly want to
leverage what communities are
already doing I'll just close
madam speaker gentle lady in Los
crucis
our airport does not currently
have this sort of passenger
service it's something we have
an adjacent industrial park that
Has added albeit at a very slow
pace additional businesses and
one of the limitations madam
speaker gentle lady is this very
thing Madam speaker gentle lady
I can only imagine the
challenges that far more rural
communities face across our
state and so this grant program
it's strict and clear guidelines
and the accountability that will
be at the department of
transportation convinced me that
I'm I'm it's very we're
supporting for our entire state
thank you very much by the
speaker thank you generally.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Travis county
Representative Ezzell.
Madam speaker will the gentle
lady from Bernalillo yield.
Madam speaker I yield to kind
gentle lady from Travis county.
Madam speaker thank you very
much.
I'm concerned about something in
your bill on page four line
tier.
It said the passenger capacity.
It cannot be more than nine
percent so that includes the two
pilots so it would be seven
passengers is that correct.
Madam speaker gentle lady no the
the passenger capacity of nine
I'm not more than nine.
The to to those would be the
privates pilot and copilot madam
chair.
Representative isn't that
correct somebody's got applied
to fly the plane that very
specifically says online ten
nine persons.
Madam speaker gentle lady I
intend grant program shall have
a passenger capacity not more
than nine persons a pilot and
copilot are not considered
passengers gentlelady.
That madam speaker I'm gonna
argue with you on that one it
says nine persons so the planes
that come to my mind are the
Cessna caravan.
The plot is PC twelve the king
air B. two hundred so those are
just some of the plants that I
am aware of that would.
Qualify meeting the standard
that has been set there.
Madam speaker.
And gentle lady.
Your your bill also states are
now at for Friday marks said it
anyway you said that you're at
the flights would go here it is
on the first page of your bill
you're talking now line twenty
three three twenty five.
Regional scheduled air service
for rural communities to and
from have airports in the
southwest United States.
One of the things that I have a
concern about here they're
flying into a cyclist safety of
W. for sure what their flying
out of the no into DFW with
these passengers be able to
clear
meet the standards as required
by TSA before they take up from
these new regional.
Airports flying into Dallas
without them having to get there
likely to go through security
again Madam speaker gentle lady
the answer is depends but it is
possible they would need to do
plan to go through security
again.
Okay that was a question I did
have about that did we go wrong
to the population of twenty
thousand residents in the first.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
the first thought that came into
my head was rid us of New
Mexico.
Great area they have a great
little airport up there they
have during the summer months
from the middle of may all the
way through Labor Day weekend
they have or stressing plus all
the other activities that go on
after that they have all sorts
of the golf tournaments that go
or they did until everything was
shattered last year but anyway
they do have golf tournaments
that go on they have the aspen
Kate that goes on going on into
the winter months they have.
Skiing go up there.
And this would be great for
Lincoln County for the village
of right so.
We do have air service coming
into Rossell that would.
This qualifies for a small.
What you're talking about right
here would be qualified to
slides that said back and forth
to Russell because Russell does
have a I believe it's a.
What is that a forty nine
passenger plane I think that
flies out of Rossell forty five
passenger plane that flies out
of Rossell.
Well whenever everything was
still open.
The for the everything was shut
down they were flying in and out
across will three times a day so
with this qualify.
Plying from red does so into
Russell site or Representative
us to Hobbes which robs as a
flight that does get to Houston.
What this qualified.
Madam speaker gentle lady at
will let's go back to page four
I'm not language starting line
three this is a county shop have
a minimum population twenty
thousand persons residing within
a fifty mile radius of the
airport unless the municipality
or county has existed existing
scheduled air service so you
know I don't I'm I don't
represent the area of read also
denied I love it I think it's
the most beautiful areas of our
state
I don't know if they if there is
a fifty mile radius up for this
resident those residents are
within a fifty mile race to the
airport or very have existing
our service but I can tell you
that also those definitely
qualify for that service
depending on where you the
service and you are.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
from Bernalillo therein lies the
problem.
Read that so would be a
fantastic place for this to
happen.
Unfortunately the population is
not.
In the parameters of what is in
this bill.
Lincoln County is that Reich's
in the top.
I counties in size in our state.
And because of.
The lack of population within
that fifty mile radius they
would not qualify.
So we're limiting our economic
development again in our rural
areas.
And this really really
disappoints me.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo can you tell me what
tenants would qualify for the
service.
Madam speaker gentle lady man I
really wish that I had come in
with a list of the this
technicalities that would
qualify in preparation for this
debate
but I have to get back to you.
Well this really disappoints me
because whenever you get to read
it and read what the
qualifications are meant madam
chair and representative.
Of but the tremor jurors are
that have been set forth in your
bill especially whenever you're
reading he won on page four.
Anymore population of twenty
thousand people residing within
a fifty mile radius at their
poor.
And we were leaving a lot of
opportunity out the way this is
structured.
On the unable to help our seats
are more rural communities
because of the summer months
madam chair and representative.
Population.
Representative does so can
actually double.
Because of the districts that
come there during the summer
months during the winter months
the same thing happens.
But they are not permanent
residents.
And therefore that gives me
great great concern.
I'm just.
Right that we are going again
on help to govern or.
I'm not gonna say metropolitan
towns people just watch out.
Thank you very much.
Madam speaker gentle lady I'm
concerned that again all rural
areas that do deserve to be
lifted up.
And that extra help given to
them are being left out because
of that one paragraph on page
four.
The one that would give me great
heartburn right there.
And I wish you did have a list
at the town's that would be able
to benefit from this because I'd
like to know exactly what those
municipalities might be.
In in Travis county madam chair
representative.
We do have the.
Rossel International Airport it
was named that during the prior
to prior to ministrations and
like I said.
The people down there and Chavis
County.
Worked really really hard this
is been about though I think the
first time I started to happen
on this that was my second year
up here and we came up here and
we lobbied we worked hard to try
to get some help to get a major
airline to come in there and we
were lucky enough.
That American Airlines did step
up and they said we'll give it a
try.
And it was the fastest.
Expanding growth that American
Airlines had full for their
smaller size airplane and it was
a forty five passenger whenever
they take it from one trip in
one trip out again or whatever
they have to deport trips in
four trips out again plus
weekend service they saw the
budget.
That American.
What they provided to our
community and what our community
was providing as far as getting
service in and out so one more
time I'm going to stress I like
this bill except for section ET
what.
And therein lies the problem
with this I've still got room I
liked what we're trying to do
here but we are really really
limited state get because I do
see the potential and just the
community I was talking about
Madam chair representative thank
you very much.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close.
Thank you very much madam
speaker members of the body for
considering this extremely
important bill for rural
economic development and at this
time I now move that also I'm
sorry House Appropriations
finance committee substitute for
house bill three twenty five
as amended do now pass.
We are on final passage of.
House appropriations and finance
committee substitute for house
bill three twenty five the vote
is as amended the vote is now
open.
The vote is about to close.
The electronic portion of the
vote is now closed with the
clerk called the members without
a recorded vote.
Representative.
Yes Representative yes
Representative Eli
Representative Ely both yes
Representative Lewis.
Representative Thomson.
Madam speaker madam the curtains
Representative OCS.
Representative Lente both yes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of fifty five in the
affirmative.
A negative.
House appropriations and finance
substitute for house bill three
twenty five as amended has duly
passed.
The house.
All.
We'll be talking about.
You've got rural bills.
We're now going item number two
Representative Andrea Romero are
you ready within our.
Thank you madam speaker we get
to that point.
Your
the record reflect all action
necessary to listen Senate bill
fifty two on final passage has
been taken and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
The gentle lady to explain the
bill thank you madam speaker
this bill simply extends the
date in which the US department
of labor will allow for us to be
able to continue to receive
benefits for those who are
in unemployment situations are
currently twenty one thousand
New Mexicans in this program if
we do not update the state's it
will not be able to receive that
benefit further through
September with that we stand for
questions.
There is debate gentlelady from
Travis county Representative
Ezzell.
Madam speaker of the gentle lady
from Santa Fe you don't.
I will happily you madam
speaker.
Madam speaker gentle lady thank
you very much of what is the
state of New.
State unemployment insurance
fund at the federal government
right now.
About two hundred and twenty
million dollars I'm sorry your
voice changed.
Hafid.
Speaker
gentle lady I forgot to go on
you as you heard it's about two
hundred twenty million dollars
with me is our experts US
secretary bill mccamley from the
workforce solutions office.
The state could Madam tell bill
mccamley he needs to use okay
maybe you're going through
puberty or something there.
Madam speaker gentle lady what
happens if.
If we do yes this bill and the
federal government says of.
Wait just a minute you're gonna
have to pay back this money
where is that money going to
come from.
Madam speaker gentle lady
forgive me while I conferred
with my expert there are no
basically no state ramifications
from any sort of funding
perspective of for this fund
it's entirely from the federal
government we will never have to
pay back any funds.
Madam speaker I I would be kind
of the sanded because that is my
dollar that's going to the fits
right now that is going to be
coming back that is going to
stand this unemployment
insurance.
And madam speaker.
Gentle lady thank goodness.
Thanks for finally opening back
up it's been a year since
everything is been set down it's
been a year since these people
have had to struggle it's been a
year since we were under this
much pressure for a lot of our
people did not know if they
would even be able to sit on
their table much less be able to
go to the stores by.
Madam speaker and gentle lady.
Businesses are started up and
back up people are excited about
that they want to go back to
work.
That I've also been told by lots
of my constituents that they are
opening back up that these
people that are currently on
unemployment really aren't
interested in going back to work
because it's easier not to work
and receive the set appointment
budget Madam speaker gentle lady
are these people actually going
through the qualifications that
they need.
To be able to receive their
unemployment benefits.
Madam speaker generally
absolutely.
And madam speaker gentle lady
can you tell me what those
qualifications are.
One moment tenants urgently.
I'm sorry I thought.
Okay.
Madam speaker gentle lady so the
folks you're gonna turn my
camera for a moment my
internet's unstable so these are
folks that qualify for this
program madam speaker gentle
lady or those who have been
unemployed for twenty
consecutive weeks on their work
they have to have a wage
qualification for those that
have higher wages in the time
that they would be now receiving
these benefits so the folks who
would recall find out of for
this program would be full time
unemployed so they're more
likely to want to go back to
work based on the criteria that
qualify for it for these funds
at this point time and speaker
gentle lady these are folks that
definitely want to get back to
work.
And madam speaker gentle lady I
I do understand that and madam
speaker gentle lady I'm probably
going to make your case for you
right now.
Because of the purchase the
order that has been in place now
for over here.
And it really does hurt be.
To think about all these.
Home grown businesses that have
started up in our state that
were shut down.
That will not be coming back
that did hire local people to
work with at their
establishments whatever they may
be whether it's at a parts good
store whether it was at the
local level company whatever the
case may be some of these
businesses will not be coming
that.
These are the people that I hope
are getting those benefits that
can't find a job because there.
Companies that they work for is
no longer available to me in the
state of New Mexico.
And that's the effect of this
emergency order I do get what
you're doing here I want to tell
certain people that now have
longer have that job made
available important because it
is totally in the past now.
Madam speaker gentle lady thank
you very much for your
responses.
Seen further debate the
gentleman from Lee County
Representative Scott.
Thank you madam speaker will to
review.
I will yield to the gentleman.
Where are just this morning.
There are businesses and
straight to receiving.
For.
Unemployment insurance for
small.
X. what goals for the the
pandemic corrupt.
Just a question I would have is
whether this legislation.
Will have any impact.
On that circumstance or whether
that circumstance is expected to
continue or.
Madam speaker gentleman this
will have no effect on the
hypothetical you just find it.
Speaker gentle lady that's not
hypothetical that's happening
today.
Was testing employers.
The secretary here would you
just.
Madam speaker gentleman he
confirmed that it no it would
not affect what you just
suggested.
Okay Madam speaker generated is
representational touch
nonrecurring.
One moment one moment gentleman.
Madam speaker gentleman's so as
I understand this can get a
little complicated because we
are still entertaining evening
the three year look back period
however since the pandemic
started.
that has not been the standard
operating procedure for how
they're reviewing those
situations so folks are fired
after Senator where are after
the pandemic began in March of
last year then this may affect
them however on.
Sorry it's not affecting them
this forgive me it's not
affecting but that said Madam
speaker gentleman any employer
wants to have their rates looked
at they can work with the
department will work with them
to make sure that they can
review that process.
Thank you
speaker thank you for your
actions in order to to some will
be made to will.
Help with that situation.
Si no further debate the gentle
lady to close.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you everyone for the debates I
now move that Senate bill fifty
to do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill fifty two the vote
is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The electronic portion of the
vote is now closed we're clear
all the members without a
recorded vote these
Representative Anderson yes
Representative Anderson wrote
yes Representative Cadena.
Yes.
Representative okay yes
Representative Eli
Representative Ely both yes
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Stansbury.
By a vote of sixty two in the
affirmative one in the negative
house bill fifty two.
Senate bill fifty two has duly
passed the sounds.
Moving on to item number five
Senate bill one twenty two as
twice and is Representative
Chasey ready for that I don't.
Speaker would you get me to that
point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for playing for
excuse me placing.
Senate bill one twenty two twice
amended on final passage has
been taken and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
Gentlelady to explain thank you
madam speaker.
Thank you madam speaker and
members of the house the Senate
bill one twenty two is a fairly
simple amended to the pharmacy
act removing the prohibition
against non pharmacists use up
pharmacy insignias.
I stand for questions.
Seeing no debate the gentle lady
to close.
Thank you madam speaker I move
that Senate bill one.
Twenty two do now pass.
Sorry gentle lady there is
actually debate the gentleman
from curry Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam speaker will
gentle lady please you.
Yes I yield.
Thank you John generally it can
you help me understand why
they're bringing this bill
forward why are they.
Taking away are giving the right
to use apothecary at different
places besides just the
pharmacy.
Actually there's not a reference
to apothecary anymore it's about
the insignia if you can picture
madam speaker and gentleman the
R. X. we use to designate a
prescription.
There have been a number of
establishments that have use
that
Insignia and we're allowed to do
it but they keep having to go to
the pharmacy board to get an
exception and there's a business
in downtown Albuquerque pharmacy
actually use the our acts at the
coffee shop it's just right next
door and they were told they had
to get
mission from the board so really
this just.
Eliminates the whole
need to go to the pharmacy board
every time there is a request to
make that designation it's not
that somebody's going to pretend
to be something that one is not.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady I under I've always
understood the are ex to be part
of a pharmacy really do bills
but it's you're striking order
Papa carried apothecary shop
does it have a different
insignia than a pharmacy your
line.
You know.
Pharmacists to my experts in
I'm gonna give her a call and
see.
if if she has something that she
would like to have be conveyed
here her name is Monica at us
and she almost around central
purpose.
Thank intentionally.
Madam speaker and gentleman from
curry the reason that the Senate
Judiciary Committee skyrocket.
I thank you very.
It's actually not used.
Anymore to describe a former
state.
And there is actually a
restaurant called the pop the
Kerry and.
That really had nothing to do
with the original intent of the
bill.
But the Senate Judiciary took
the opportunity to strike those
that language.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady the board of pharmacy the
pharmacist endorsed this bill
Mr speaker madam speaker Jordi.
Just a moment.
Interesting generally fall
speaker the board of pharmacy.
Actually eight again.
Duran central pharmacy
permission to use the insignia.
Until she could get the logic.
So without.
Julie endorsing it.
They they certainly agree that
it should be changed.
Thank you gently gently outer
you're a service out there is
clearly week wherever you are
and I know the other night they
asked maybe you'd have to close
down your video questions so we
can hear you better at your
command very broken up.
Generally I I did not I did not
hear an answer to are there two
different
Insignias are logo's for a
pharmacy or an apothecary is
there a difference between those
two I I I didn't hear an answer
to that you're talking on the
and and I Madam speaker gentle
lady I I didn't hear.
Yes they had endorsed the bill I
heard they allowed the lady to
use it but I didn't hear if they
had endorsed the bill generate
might my question and and what
is in the back of my mind.
I'm not sure I can't remember
for sure but in my mind there is
often times a blending of
product within the cannabis
world where there's recreational
cannabis I believe I saw shop up
in Washington state.
That had an apothecary signed.
And I wondered if the the reason
for this.
Striking of the language in the
bill had anything to do with.
The passage of recreational
marijuana within the state of
New Mexico.
Madam speaker intelligent curry
I've turned I actually have my
phone I think that might in.
What so that might I have to
call my business back if you
have another question I can't
answer I think that was creating
the acco.
But I'm speaker and gentleman
from current when I told you
about the pop the Kerry is that
in the Senate Judiciary
Committee they.
They held the view and no would
disagree that apothecaries a
very old fashioned term and it
no longer is used to designate a
pharmacy as it was decades ago
and in.
There's a restaurant somewhere
in New Mexico called the
apothecary so they took the pot
the Kerry out that that wasn't
the intent of the bill.
And I think that without taking
up both the implied consent of
the board of pharmacy by
allowing the Duran central
pharmacy to use the our.
Is there for three years that
and to or it tells the story she
could get the law changed
certainly implies that they are
they have no problem with it.
Thank you gentle lady and and
Madam speaker I'll tell you my
pharmacist at home and and his
son that just flat out the
pharmacy I believe are both
registered as about the care
they they can actually blend and
formulate
pharmaceuticals within their
shop.
I know they they have landed
something for people with a dry
nose and has antibiotics and
extended all sorts of other
things and and half the
community of clothes having
utilize that product but it's a
blending that they are permitted
to do under their apothecary
license.
And
So I'm just very very curious
about.
About this bill.
All that god that thank you for
your answers are.
Madam speaker gentle.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from Eddy County
Representative Brown.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
you'll please.
Yes.
But however also that I have a
better management.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady so I'm just really trying
to understand the reason for the
bill it's
I'm thinking that it's what I'm
reading here and one of the
analyses that currently
establishments that are not
licensed as a pharmacy are
prohibited from using any words
to indicate their pharmacy that
is that correct madam from
Bernalillo.
If you are reading from language
that exists.
Madam speaker and and generally
I'm reading from a synopsis of
the bill and one of the
analyses.
Is.
Okay go ahead.
It reads SB one twenty two
amends the pharmacy act we're
removing the prohibition of
establishments not licensed as a
pharmacy to use quote any other
words of similar import or by an
insignia or device New Mexico so
it's my understanding from
reading this that currently
there's a prohibition against
holding once establishment as a
pharmacy if in fact it's not
licensed as such is that correct
madam and gentle lady.
Yes that's current law.
This is not about yes holding
out as a pharmacy.
Madam speaker gentle lady so do
we have a definition of work
talks about words of similar
import.
It's it's the actual insignia.
That.
You know that this is just a
very small bills and it doesn't
have the entire pharmacy at.
So madam speaker and lady from
I don't know if we have those
words defined in law.
Okay thank you Madam speaker
gentle lady.
So is the Duran established I
think that's near the UNM
campuses I'm not mistaken as is
that really the only reason for
this bill coming before the
body.
Madam speaker and lady from at
eight.
It's for but there are are in
fact.
Give you a little history here
Madam speaker generally I guess
or something wrong your reserves
their reception this evening I
quite catch every word you just
said.
Still looking for the rest of my
answers so hold on thank you.
So there's for example there is
no lounge and hotel called the.
The topic Kerry lounge they got
an exemption from the pharmacy
board to use that title.
So when Durrance wanted to put
the R. X. nine on the coffee
shop it's not actually part of
the pharmacy she had to ask for
an exemption and they a lot of
men to members of the board stat
that the law was archaic and
needed to be updated so that's
the purpose for the bill.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady so every time I've driven
by that little establishment
always been a little bit
confused by it so maybe this
will help clear that up.
Speaker one speaker and lady
from at eight this this
particular establishment is in
old town it's not by the
university.
Thank you madam speaker and
generally support question there
are cannabis dispenser dispenser
dispenser used all over the
state and we may have more of
them of coming would any of
those be allowed to benefit from
this bill.
Terms of what they call
themselves.
I don't know madam speaker and
lady from at eight.
Thank you thank you for your
time this evening thank you very
much Mr speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam speaker what the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
county yield.
Madam speaker I'll think about
it.
Of course I will yield to the
gentle lady.
Madam speaker she says that now
but maybe not tomorrow
afternoon.
Madam speaker and madam chair
I have not read this bill until
you brought it up and I'm
reading paragraph B. of the bill
and.
I'm a bit confused because it
basically says that no person
can have a retail establishment
that uses that name.
Our.
That might indicate to the
public that the places that a
pharmacy in lots of places
licensed by the board under the
pharmacy act and so your example
of of Duran's appears to me that
they would be prohibited from
continuing to use the word
drugstore after their name
unless they are licensed by the
under the pharmacy act am I
reading that correctly.
madam speaker and gentleman I
think I might have confused you
with my debate but Duran's is a
pharmacy.
It's important.
It and.
They have a separate building
across the parking lot it's a
coffee shop.
We're taught that they can't
call that a pharmacy even with
the change in this bill what
what they can do because the
words that are stricken R. the
insignia or devised words of
civil import thank you can use
the R. X. symbol as part of
their logo.
On the coffee shop.
And so madam speaker and and
madam chair of the the coffee
shop portion are actually it's a
pretty good place to live so I
recall correctly
they have to take the words
drug store whatever settlement
outside off but they can still
use assemble is that what I'm
understanding.
Actually you're getting calls on
madam speaker and gentleman
the the actuals restaurant is in
the pharmacy.
But across the parking lot.
Is the separate coffee shop
called remedy.
And there's an R. acts symbol
for the Mike remedy starts with
an R. and they put a little acts
on remedy.
Okay Madam speaker and and madam
chair
I suspect that there are other
former pharmacies around the
state.
That have been converted into
other retail establishments that
probably continue to use some of
the old names one that comes to
mind is a lazy sex or and let me
to and it's a it's a restaurant
now but all over that
restaurant.
Reflex the very things that are
prohibited here because it used
to pay me pharmacists it used to
be a drugstore and I'm wondering
if that advertisement if you
will is now prohibited by this
war maybe it's always been
prohibited by this act and
they're just not paying
attention to it but
I just.
if I read the bill correctly
they can't put up on the wall
drug store for these other names
because they're not licensed by
the under the pharmacy act is
that accurate.
I'm Madam speaker and.
Instrument Act.
Yes but you see the only thing
that's changed here is the
insignia and the words of
similar import not stricken
otherwise you're dealing with
the current law.
Yes madam speaker and gentle
lady I I believe that the.
There's probably a number of
establishments there are.
Are located in old pharmacies I
continue to have words that are
in this bill that we're not
stricken and the maybe they
would I think that would be very
surprised to find out that there
are violations of the statute
what are those needed on there
but I just wanted to see if I
understood this bill correctly
and I yes I'm reading it
correctly thank you madam
speaker thank you madam chair
and and I hope you yield to me
tomorrow as well.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
always do and I
I think your understanding it
correctly it is probably a
surprise to a lot of people.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from drugs although
and Sierra Representative Dow.
Skipper seeing no further debate
the gentle lady to close thank
you madam speaker with that I
built that house bill said
excuse me Senate bill one twenty
two as amended do now pass.
We are on final passage of
Senate bill one twenty two is
twice amended the vote is now
open.
The vote is about to close.
Electronic portion of the vote
is now closed the clerk called
the members without a recorded
vote please.
Representative.
Yes Representative enabled yes
Representative Castellano.
One more time Representative
Castellano.
Yes Representative Castellano
both yes Representative Eli.
Representative Ely both yes
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Yes Representative Hochman Vigil
both yes Representative Maestas
yes Representative my and both
yes Representative Rod Montoya.
By a vote of fifty five in the
affirmative nine in the negative
Senate bill one twenty two just
twice amended has duly passed
the Senate's.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
No objections orders.
The members we have a couple
generic bills.
Okay.
House Bill three to six.
House Bill three to six.
Two zero two number is two two
zero.
Six nine nine point one.
Again the two oh two numbers two
two zero six nine nine point
one.
Representative Lundstrom in
order to House Bill three twenty
six removed from the rules
committee printed and referred
to the appropriations and
finance committee.
SO three twenty eight.
House Bill three two eight.
The two two numbers two two zero
six seven one point one.
Again two oh two numbers two two
zero six seven one point one.
Just a few twenty eight
Representative Maestas is
ordered removed from the rules
committee printed and referred
to the commerce and economic
development committee.
House Bill three to seven.
Bill three two seven two or two
numbers two two zero six four
four point two in a to a two
number is two two zero six four
four point two this is
Representative my Estes us three
twenty sevens were removed from
the rules committee printed and
referred to the commerce and
economic development committee.
Mass Representative Rio.
House Bill three twenty.
Yes Representative re.
I think this is one of the
Townsend's generic bills or our
servers and much more.
Representative Montoya this is
for Representative re okay.
This is house bill three twenty
two to number is two two zero
four three four point one.
Two two zero four three four
point one.
To order removed from the rules
in order to remove will screen
printed and referred to the
education.
Members of house bill fifty.
Ask the fifties or third
reading.
I am referring to the rules
committee house bill fifty is
referred to the rules committee.
House bill one ninety one
house bill one in ninety one.
Is on the third reading calendar
it is.
Referred to the rules committee.
Also two to six is amended.
House bill two to six is amended
item item number one on the
third reading calendar is
referred to the rules committee.
Then last but not least we
adopted the new report from the
appropriations and finance
committee on Senate bill fifty
nine.
We can service the floor
leaders.
The committee report states that
it went from appropriations and
finance committee to the floor
the referrals and Senate bill
fifty nine where the
appropriation finance committee
sense taxation revenue.
I ask unanimous consent to
expunge the Rodius committee
report and replace it with a
committee report the reflects
the bill going to the taxation
and revenue committee not for
hearing objection it is so
ordered Senate bill fifty nine
is now in the taxation and
revenue committee.
Generated from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker it not being eleven
fifty nine AM I move we adjourn
until twelve OO one PM no
objection it is so ordered.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that the rules be
suspended and that the general
show all those present in this
morning session are present in
fact in recession
reintroductions ordered Mr
speaker I ask unanimous consent
that the rules be suspended the
record show that the general has
been read in one of the pro
subject to revision approval of
the rules of business committee
no objections so ordered.
Okay members of we have not made
a decision here about what we
can is going to look like.
This is our last full weekend of
course of the session I'm
refusing to more with floor
leaders with some of our friends
and Senate to make some plans
are I appreciate it was patients
I think it is much more likely
than not that will meet both
days this weekend so after those
the lives are Santa Fe please
plan on being here this weekend
I don't know yet time and we
don't know yet about committees
are this is a creative agency
patience as we work out those
details.
I see us community gentlelady
from Bernalillo Representative
Chasey.
Mr speaker I just wanted to
announce the house judiciary
will be tomorrow morning at
eleven thirty.
Members take note.
Any other announcements.
Okay we did all the nonsense
this morning members thank you
for your work today for those of
you watching from home please to
inquire Committee reports
tomorrow Mr speaker the general
fund universe in a small I
apologize Mr speaker Mr speaker
your house appropriations and
finance committee will meet
tomorrow at eleven thirty AM.
There is a no the gentleman
gentleman from Chavis
entertainer yes Mr speaker
Minority will have a caucus
tomorrow at one thirty
Representative was four
sessions.
Members take note.
Representative Townsend.
I understand the gentle lady
from McKinley San Juan is that
you know it's two thirty
democratic this is a little more
time for committees will start
the floor at three thirty with
the Republicans like to need to
very.
Okay the gentle lady from
McKinley and San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker we will
have a democratic caucus meeting
tomorrow at two thirty Joseph
will send out of the agenda item
is information.
Never say never all right the
gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that the house
Senate recess until three thirty
tomorrow afternoon the
technician again thank you
everyone for good good work
today please be sure to watch
our committees tomorrow
participate in them Ryan zoom.
