Lisa.
The state some.
To call those participating
virtually.
Representative Alcon
Representative out of code it is
geo Representative Alcon is here
Representative Anderson.
Representative Anderson is here
Representative bash.
Here Representative bash is here
Representative bunga.
Yes Representative boom because
here Representative Cadena.
Representative Cadena is here
Representative Chasey.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Harry Garcia is
here Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Representative Miguel Garcia is
here Representative Harper.
Representative Lente.
Representative Lente is here
Representative Lente is here
Representative Lewis.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Here Representative Roger
Montoya is here Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Rehm.
Representative Rehm is here
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here Representative Rubio.
Here Representative Rubio is
here Representative small.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Townsend Here.
Roll call is closed we do have a
quorum let's all rise.
All rights for the implications
done by Representative the
gentleman from Clovis county.
Representative Nibert we do we
just in the pledge of
allegiance.
Hello with.
All.
And Representative Ferrary would
you lead us in the salute to New
Mexico flat.
Gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you madam speaker good afternoon
good afternoon members I move
that we go to the next order of
business messages.
Seeing no objection so ordered.
To read.
House executive message number
twenty five dear speaker Egolf
and members of the house
pursuant to article four section
five B. two of the New Mexico
constitution I'm authorizing for
your consideration during the
fifty fifth legislature second
session submission of a bill
bearing Legislative Council
Service drafting number point
two two one five five eight a
bill amending the process for
required criminal history record
checks set forth in the school
personnel act requiring the
criminal history information
received remain confidential
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor.
Thank.
Message message will be entered.
House executive message number
twenty six.
There's a bigger Egolf and
members of the house pursuant to
article four section five B. to
the New Mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
Legislative Council Service
drafting number point to to to
zero six three a bill clarifying
that professional and
occupational licensing boards
are required to follow the
provisions of the state rules
act when promulgating rules and
the provisions of the uniform
licensing act for licensing and
disciplinary matters.
Providing for expedited license
licensure for persons holding
professional or occupational
licenses from other licensing
jurisdictions.
Revising board of barbers and
cosmetologists and regulation
and licensing department powers
and duties revising certain
licensing requirements
establishing certain fees
extending the sunset date for
the board of body are
practitioners and attending I'm
sorry and amending repealing and
acting and recompiling various
related sections of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan gov for some governor.
Message will be entered.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate bill seventeen
with emergency clause Senate
bill thirty seven and request
the concurrence of the house
respectfully submitted Lenore
and Lara host Senate chief
clerk.
Message will be entered.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker I move
that we go to the next order of
business.
Announcements and miscellaneous
business members so we have a
certificate in honor of George
G..
The land.
Dylan.
the gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker I am so
pleased and so honored.
introduce my friend George jeep
Gilliland who is sitting up in
the gallery waving at everybody.
This is exciting for me do you
want me to read my comments
before you read the certificate.
Madam I'm gentle lady yes I
think that's appropriate okay.
Click to read.
The house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico fifteen
for the legislature second
session two thousand twenty two
recognizes George jeep go and
for us Georgene ko and describes
as long labor history starting
with his apprenticeship in the
sheet metal workers union in el
Paso Texas from nineteen sixty
five to nineteen sixty nine Hey
whereas from nineteen seventy
two to nineteen seventy four
jeep owned and operated
Gilliland metalcraft in
Alamogordo and whereas jeep was
elected the business
representative of sheet metal
workers local union number forty
nine in June nineteen eighty and
served until July nineteen
eighty nine.
And whereas on January third
nineteen ninety jeep was elected
president of the New Mexico
federation of labour American
federation of labor and Congress
of industrial organizations than
sixty seven thousand you members
strong and he served until
September twenty ninth two
thousand one and whereas during
his ten year jeep fought for
three major issues including
opposition to right to work laws
keeping the prevailing wage in
place and re reading an improved
version of the workers
compensation act and we're as
she was inducted into the New
Mexico Democratic Party hall of
fame in February of nineteen
ninety three and whereas Jeepers
elected to the Democratic
National Committee in nineteen
ninety eight is New Mexico's
National Committee then and was
one of five votes for New Mexico
on the Democratic National
Committee and for us jeep was
elected a member of the
electoral college in two
thousand and where as a devoted
Democrat G. believes that no
matter what party a person
belongs to politics representing
we the people should be here at
here to and whereas on September
twenty eighth two thousand one
jeep retired from the New Mexico
federation of labour American
federation of labor and Congress
of industrial organizations and
whereas on September twenty
ninth two thousand one jeep was
elected president emeritus for
life the only of individual ever
elected to the position and the
one hundred twenty five year
history of The New Mexico
federation of labour American
federation of labor and Congress
of industrial organizations and
whereas Jeepers also been deeply
committed to community service
receiving that dollars against
diabetes Distinguished Service
Award in nineteen ninety four
freezing sixty thousand dollars
to fight diabetes hand whereas
in nineteen eighty eight G.
perceive the United Way
community services award and in
nineteen ninety two was
recognized with the United way's
community champion award
recognizing an outstanding.
Individual.
And were as cheap was named one
of New Mexico's one hundred most
influential individuals by the
Albuquerque business first to
twelve years in a row and we're
as passionate volunteered on
many boards and commissions
including the New Mexico mutual
board of directors you savings
bank the independent medical
examination provider selection
committee the United Way central
New Mexico board of directors
and the national energy
management institute Committee.
And whereas G. married Freda
merry spied on October twenty
seventh nineteen sixty eight and
their family includes a daughter
Rhonda Gilliland Lopez has been
clearance Lopez and three
grandchildren ISIS Lopez G.
Lopez and Osiris Lopez now there
for.
Is all by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico that recognition be
extended to George jeep Gil and
wristed fast support of
organized labor and dedication
to community service signed and
sealed at the capitol in the
City of Santa Fe Brian Egolf
speaker of the house Lisa M.
Ortiz McCutchen chief clerk and
Representative Christine
Trujillo.
Thank you madam speaker may
proceed yes gentle lady please
proceed thank you as you heard
deep is yes he is familiar to
the known to all of us was
elected in January nineteen
ninety as the president of the
New Mexico federation of labor
the American federation of labor
and Congress of industrial
organizations Madam sixty seven
thousand at that time it was
sixty seven thousand you members
strong and served until number
of the September two thousand
and one deep is the first and
only individually elected
president emeritus for life to
this organization as you heard
in his memorial in in the speech
earlier jeep was very involved
and engaged in many many
community service even G. but
was also my predecessor I
followed him as state president
after he retired and the it was
hard filling those shoes I I can
tell you jeep is a very staunch
and stalwart Democrat and you
labor member an organizer and I
just want to make sure that
everyone knows that he has
contributed so much of his time
and energy to the state of New
Mexico I'd like to invite you
all to stand and applaud my
friend and my mentor jeep
Gillen.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you members of the body.
Right.
The.
Gentle lady.
Thank you gentle lady.
Thank you so much.
The Gillan's were great it's
wonderful to see you here and
thank you for all the work that
you've done for labor the state
of New Mexico your family we
really appreciate your presence
thank you so much.
Madam chair this is
representative Garcia can we
contribute to the discussion
bungee.
Yes gentleman please proceed.
Thank you madam chair of will
the
Lady from Bernalillo hills yes I
will deal.
Thank you I gentle lady
I need I it's great seeing you
up in the gallery there you've
been
kind of just that fast
Ornament here the capital for
many years we've seen you kind
of a toned down your efforts
In the recently.
But.
gentlelady from Bernalillo madam
chair
I need I give the land as
Kind of
one of most dedicated champions
of labor that I've ever met.
I have the honor of knowing.
And
and Angie best of madam chair is
Kind of but not following his
routine terms of that stress
never seen with tight.
All of these years he's wearing
a tie and suit I've always seen
when he goes up there with the
blue jeans and boots and a blue
collar dress jeep I don't know
if you're going to going up
there and there's a corporate
ladder of what with your with
your student time but the that's
not the final.
You know madam chair
Again
in the in the way that he
approached the legislation
dealing with labor it actually
was one of those folks then.
For labor in our in our
hearings.
he was always real humble.
He was not rude.
And and madam chair and he was
always succeeding.
In terms of our.
Isn't Asian and that's what I
kind of value and knowledge in
jeep is as.
You know that it was a tough
blue collar champion fighter but
real humble.
In his approach and his dealings
with the legislature so G.
graduations on this honor and
focusing on bump into you in the
hallways every now and then
bless you brother thank god
bless your life in your lovely
daughter.
The general earlier
Representative Garrett.
Thank you Mr speaker I have a
very important quick
announcement say Hey book money
put us say all that is happy
lunar new year in career and if
you had a rough start to the
year today February first is the
lunar or Chinese New Year
celebrated would thirty five
hundred years so enjoy it thank
you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlelady the
gentlemanly ever sent Thompson
thank you Mr speaker a point of
personal privilege state your
point I want to announce to the
body many of you have heard the
story of my brother mark who
died at age forty nine due to
poor medical care.
And I had a new great nephew
born this week and his name is
mark mark Lorenzo my two tiny
he's dative Hispanic white and
Japanese he's that he's a United
Nations all amongst themselves
so please can we give a round of
applause to provide you great
nephew congratulations.
And G. thank you for being with
us here today it's nice to see
you and the
taken care.
Thank you and congratulations.
are you is anyone else wants to
wish to offer comment for Mr.
Phil and generally Bernalillo
Representative Chasey thank you
Mr speaker I really appreciate
this opportunity to I looked up
there and I went home
Representative Trujillo you look
the same as you did twenty five
years ago.
And I I look so much worse so I
mean I'm just really jealous.
To thank you for your dedication
to the working men and women of
this state and this country.
Okay.
Is there anyone else for the
coming for jeep.
Okay Mister Mister Joe land is
that lady in the gallery
bothering you.
the gentleman from Santa
Representative Hernandez to make
a motion.
Thank you Mr speaker hi move
that house memorial six be taken
off the speakers table and is
the next piece of business no
objection this order.
What the record reflect election
necessary for placing House
memorial six on final passage
has been taken the gentleman to
explain the Morial.
Thank you Mr speaker
the memorial is innovation in
Rio Rancho day where we are
highlighting several of our
innovative businesses in Rio
Rancho I have some gas in the.
I have some guests in the
gallery today
but I can we get the clerk to
please right now I'm happy to
introduce and asked to stand and
be recognized by the house the
honorable great all more Rio
Rancho.
Welcome.
Matt Geisel the city manager for
Rio Rancho welcome.
Nice to see you again Mr
Secretary.
and Gordon Moore CEO of electro
sonics in Rio Rancho.
the clerk to read the memorial.
House memorial six introduced by
Representative Hernandez a
memorial declaring February
second two thousand twenty two
innovation Rio Rancho day and
house of representatives for
just the city of Rio Rancho
began as a retirement community
called Rio Rancho estates in the
early nineteen sixties and
whereas the city of Rio Rancho
became an incorporated
municipality in nineteen eighty
one and whereas Rio Rancho is
the third largest city in New
Mexico now with the population
of slightly more than one
hundred four thousand residents
stand for as Rio Rancho is
nationally recognized as one of
the best places to live in the
United States and has a variety
of recreational and award
winning quality of life
amenities the residents of all
ages enjoy and.
For as Rio Rancho has a growing
business community that includes
innovators in many industries
such as Intel lectures sonics
inside lighting Reports
manufacturing fair sale
component solutions green theme
technologies majors toolboxes
stainless motors and send specs
is home to the university of New
Mexico health sciences new
cutting edge center of
excellence for orthopedic
surgery and rehabilitation and
well as Rio Rancho is a leader
in education with an excellent
public school district in higher
education opportunities at the
university of New Mexico health
sciences center central New
Mexico community college in New
Mexico highlands university and
whereas through all the
innovation Rio Rancho can be
called the city of vision now
therefore be it resolved by the
house of representatives of the
state of New Mexico the February
second two thousand twenty to be
declared innovation Rio Rancho
day and the house of
representatives representatives
and be it further resolved the
copies of this memorial be
transmitted to the mayor of Rio
Rancho members of the Rio Rancho
city council the Rio Rancho city
manager and the president and
chief executive officer of the
Rio Rancho regional chamber of
commerce.
Gentleman you have the floor.
Thank you Mr speaker I would
like to thank my guests today
for coming of Rio Rancho since I
have been involved for about ten
years has has really.
Rocketed with both population
and the business and lots of
quality of life we have a new
campus park
we have a new senior center and
things that we've been working
on for for ten years are coming
to fruition and I really want to
thank our mayor or city manager
in our city council for that
I also really quickly want to
talk about elector sonics for a
second I learned about their
business about this business
it's in Rio Rancho here recently
and they're actually one of the
leading wireless microphone
manufacturers in the world for
Hollywood TV and film and the
ship all over the world for
Hollywood and Lana film and more
with that Mr speaker I stand for
questions thank you John.
Maybe we can get this with
Lecter sonics to get us all
wired for sound we can ditch the
for my next.
Hello guys on I would be nervous
about was sort of hot Mike
moments might be generated by
that.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
and Sandoval Representative Ely
thank you Mr speaker with the
gentleman yield.
Yes so I Representative a little
bit of Rio Rancho and I was out
of the event center in Rio
Rancho one day and ran into the
mayor and he said have you seen
our new park because I'm such a
competent Representative I said
you have a new park so indeed
they do and it's fantastic.
And as a symbol.
Of the innovation of Rio Rancho.
Everyone to go out to that in
particular.
My brother is an architect I
sent a picture of it and his
comment was one word while.
And so it's a neat thing that
Rio Rancho building itself as a
center of innovation has this
symbol of innovation and so I
applaud the more in the
administration for doing a great
job and thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentleman for
yielding.
Thank you gentlemen is there
further debate.
Senior for the right gentleman
close.
I just want to bring up one more
point about our park we the city
of Rio Rancho just won a
national architecture award for
the amphitheater called the sky
room at our campus park really
shows the innovation that our
city had when we went to design
this so Mister speaker I ask
unanimous consent of the house
that the record show that the
role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative on house memorial
number six.
Kerry no objection it is so
ordered that the record show all
members present and voting in
the affirmative.
We're on final passage house
where six vote is now open.
Representative close by vote of
sixty nine in the affirmative.
Zero to negative.
House moral six passed the
house.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
John.
I want to remind members that
you should be receiving an
email.
You should be receiving email.
Members you should have received
an email from council service
with all of the listing a
listing of all the per capital
outlay projects that you
sponsored by signing those
sponsorship forms please keep an
eye out if you haven't seen it
already please be in touch with
council service to get a copy of
it I know money came through but
we haven't got it yet please do
use one make sure that
everything that you signed is on
the list and if there isn't
something on the list you didn't
sign such as your opportunity to
check I want to make one other
announcements.
members will recall yesterday
during answers to miscellaneous
business the gentle lady from
Eddie made a motion to discharge
a bill from committee I rule
that motion out of order
pursuant to rule seven twelve.
To wanted to and for the body of
what transpired after that.
I had a lengthy conversation
with.
from the council service we went
back and we re read the
relevant.
Rules of the house which is will
Levin we read seven twelve in
Mason's we read several other
rules and masons and we went
back and searched our memories
and could find no instance in
the history of house if which I
am aware in which a motion to
discharge a bill I'd ever been
made
the minority pointed out some
footage of Representative Dow
making a motion there was
similar last year was a motion
to withdraw the committee and
laid on the speakers table that
was not the motion is generally
from Eddie made.
there are some fine points of
distinction between a motion to
discharge that affects the
further operations of a
committee.
If the committee is discharged
from consideration of a bill
then the functioning of the
committee for the duration of
the session is altered that is
not occur when you do a motion
to remove the bill from
committee in place on the
speakers table.
a motion to discharge I in a and
we have really no reason to
believe this is a weird
Contradicted is in order during
that order of business committee
reports however
if the motion is to withdraw the
bill from committee and laid on
the speakers table as the gentle
lady from grant did last year.
That is in order during ounces
miscellaneous business.
So I'm saying this to sort of
give everyone a path if they
want to do that we that would be
in order at this time but if the
minority wishes to do a motion
to discharge for.
whatever reason they may that
that would be in order in.
That order of business committee
reports so I wanted.
The whole membership to know
that we did not stop looking
into this when the session
adjourned yesterday I think we
got it right yesterday and if
you want to remake the motion to
discharge I'll allow that to
happen we go to the order of
business committee reports or if
you'd like to make a motion to
withdraw.
Related to on the speakers table
that would be in order at this
time gentleman from Chavis said
you know Terry thank you Mr
speaker and I would agree with
you on some of that.
I would also point out that.
You and I.
And.
In the majority leader probably
have all taken the.
Opportunity for members on both
sides of the aisle.
When they are making a motion
that is.
Not ordinary for.
than usual that we have all
stood in.
Hello.
A person through that process
that's what I think we should
all do as leaders and had you
done that yesterday.
I think.
It would have been
Something that would have been
to your budget.
Of course there is a two
thousand and thirteen letter.
The lead counsel there are
You know there.
Mason's talks about.
The.
Traditions of the house have
precedence and have issues but
I thank you for looking into it.
and when that time comes I'm
sure for the next person will
the
accordingly.
It and our is generally for
Valencia here can't quite see
because of the.
Gentlelady I apologize for being
grouchy with you yesterday.
Is there are there any nonsense
is anybody want to take the
floor of the gentleman Chavis
and Lincoln for what purpose do
you rise.
Thank you Mr speaker I rise to
make an announcement.
I have lunch Mr speaker with the
chairman of the Senate finance
and he gave me of furniture with
respect to capital outlay of one
point eight million dollars I've
heard in this chamber of may be
slightly higher than that and so
I would like some clarification
as to what number we need to be
shooting for with respect to our
capital outlay projects if
someone in this body could maybe
inform us of that thank you Sir
the gentleman we will get that
information to share with
Chandler will get that
information to your floor leader
shortly I wanna make sure we get
the number right it's about one
twenty million for member but
you'll get the exact dollar
amount then few minutes and then
as a also my understanding that
those will be due on Friday at
five PM that's my understanding
yes of and for our new members
talking you Representative Baca
so we have the capital outlay
request forms that we fill out
turn in.
Tomorrow there will be a bill
for each member it is not an H.
B. but the number is called H.
C. O. numbers one through
seventy so the jump Chavis and
Lincoln you have H. C. O. fifty
nine percent Baca you would have
H. CO eight and that is a
listing of all the projects that
you sponsored.
The third step in the process
are the funding sheets and
thanks to the good legislative
work of the gentleman from
Bernalillo Santa Fe Torrance and
Valencia the sheets are public
documents so that is where you
allocate the members share of
capital outlay to projects based
on project number and amount to
there's a please re write the
project number of the you use
the you know if it's a bridge
across.
bakery to whatever here you
write that down and then you put
the amount from your one point
eight million.
the wish to allocate to that
project those are often done
we're members from Mexico
geographic region for example
those of Representative Santa Fe
County we'll get together what
kind of.
Figure out how to get projects
fully funded from is our
allocations and those need to be
turned in on Friday I I that
then gets put into an amendment
that will be adopted in the
Senate finance committee in the
bill will come from the Senate
with all of the house members
projects Senate members projects
governor's projects a statewide
projects.
That is improvements for members
if we could have just a minute
of your attention
I have just been told that are
you a senator Ben ray Lujan.
Has suffered a stroke.
the went to Christus St Vincent
regional hospital here I was
subsequently transferred to you
and I'm hospital in Albuquerque
he has undergone surgery for I
believe.
He has undergone surgery to
reduce the swelling as a result
of that and he is in the
continuing care of you NM
hospital he is in stable
condition but if we could all
just take a moment to send him
our prayers for a speedy
recovery
if the members of the stand for
just a moment I would appreciate
it thank you.
Thank you members.
Okay.
Hi there any from.
Anyone wish to rise for any
purpose.
You generated many.
In general if you thank you Mr
speaker your housing consumer
public affairs committee will
meet fifteen minutes after we
adjourn the floor very good.
The gentleman from.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business committee report seeing
no objection sort click to read.
Mr speaker years your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee to Mr referred house
bill one sixty seven I've had it
under consideration point Ms
recommendation that do pass and
then through for the taxation
revenue committee respectfully
submitted Georgene Louis chair.
Because of the force her to give
the recognizing of affect in
terms of their X. one individual
human objections were quick to
read.
Sorry there's only one.
Is our motion.
Mr speaker move adoption for
induction favorable commute for
House Bill one sixty seven all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
Also today reports about.
Mr speaker your taxation
taxation and revenue committee
to miss been referred house bill
thirty nine have had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that a do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair of specifically
for for two other active on a
single vote reflect in the
journals of their act on
individually hearing objections
ordered clear to read.
House bill forty seven as
amended to pass.
House bill sixty seven do pass
as amended respectfully
submitted Christine Chandler
chair move adoption production a
favorable committee reports and
house bill thirty nine forty
seven sixty seven all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
This was me.
Three point reductive.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee tomb is been
referred house bill ninety five
has had it under consideration
point I was recommendation to do
path as amended immense refer to
the taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chaff unanimous consent
of the committee pursuant to
gather act on a single vote
reflects in the journals of
their act on individually
hearing objections ordered clerk
to read.
House bill one twelve do pass as
amended and thence to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one thirty five do
not pass.
But the health health and Human
Services Committee substitute
for house bill one thirty I do
pass an answer for to the
government elections in Indian
Affairs Committee.
House bill one fifty two to pass
and then to the appropriations
and finance committee.
House bill one fifty five to
pass and it's to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
House memorial for to pass as
amended.
House memorial fifteen.
To pass.
House memorial eighteen do pass.
House memorial twenty two to
pass respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair.
Reduction we're on adoption of
favorable committee point in
house bill's ninety five one
twelve one fifty two and one
fifty five in an unfavorable
committee report on house bill
one thirty I had a favorable
committee report on health and
Human Services Committee
substitute for house bill one
thirty five and house memorial
spores amended fifteen eighteen
and twenty two all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
This was nay committee reports
are adopted.
Yes.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to women's
been referred house bill two and
house bill three as amended has
had it under consideration point
same with recommendations that
they do not pass for that house
appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three to pass
respectfully submitted Patricia
A. Lundstrom chair Mr speaker
move adoption we are adoption of
unfavorable committee reports
and house those two and three as
amended but a favorable
committee report.
Appropriations and finance
committee substitute for House
Bills two and three all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
This was nay.
Committee point reduction.
Mr speaker Education Committee
to agency referred house bill
eighty seven has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that ado path as
amended and thence referred to
the appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andrés Romero chair members
consent of the twenty first rig
together acted upon a single
vote reflected the journals of
erected on individually hearing
objections ordered creek to
read.
House bill eighty eight.
Pass as amended and thence to
the appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill ninety two passed as
amended and that's referred to
the appropriations and finance
committee respectfully of a
submitted G. Andrés Romero chair
the speaker move adoption of the
committee reports we are an
option favorable committee
report on house those eighty
seven eighty eight and ninety
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
This was may twenty fourth
reductive.
Mr speaker your commerce and
economic development committee
to is been referred house bill
one thirty four has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it do not
pass but that house commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill one
thirty four to pass an answer
for the purpose of the finance
committee respectfully submitted
and Tania Maestas chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
We're on adoption of an
unfavorable committee report on
house bill one thirty four but a
favorable committee report on
commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for House to one thirty four all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
Most was nay.
Committee point about to.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
to is been referred house bill
thirty seven has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it do path
as amended respectfully
submitted Matthew McQueen chair
them specifically for sure to
gather act on a single vote
referred to in the journals of
their acted on a visually
hearing objections ordered click
to read.
House bill one forty six.
Without recommendation and
thence to the taxation and
revenue committee respectfully
submitted Matthew McQueen chair
Senator Stewart adoption a
favorable committee report on
house bill thirty seven and
report with recommendations on
how to one forty six all those
in favor please signify by
saying aye.
This was nay reports are not.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too Mr referred house
bill fifty two has had it under
consideration point that with
recommendation that a do pass
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair unanimous consent
of the twenty first right the
other acted upon a single vote.
In fact in the journal so
they're acted upon individually
hearing objection sort of Kerr
to read.
House bill sixty five to pass.
House bill sixty nine to pass as
amended and thence to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill eighty one.
To pass Representative
respectfully submitted Gail
Chasey chair.
Mr speaker move adoption of the
committee reports here on
adoption a favorable committee
for some households fifty to
sixty five sixty nine is amended
and eighty one all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
All this was me committee point
about the.
Mr speaker echo culture thank
you as and water resources
committee to it's been referred
house bill forty one has had it
under consideration point same
with recommendation that a do
pass and that's referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted Derrick
J. Lente the chair.
Unanimous consent of the
committee point read together
act on a single vote reflect in
the journals of their act on
individually hearing objections
ordered clerk to read house bill
sixty six to pass.
And then city appropriations and
finance committee respectfully
submitted chair Derrick J. Lente
chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we are
honored option a favorable
committee reports and house
bill's forty one sixty six of
the favor please signify by
saying hi.
Was was made me point about.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business introduction of
legislation interjections
ordered clear to read.
House bill one eighty one
introduced by Representative
Chatfield dial Crowder Simona
and black in act relating to
public funds requiring the state
to make payments in lieu of
taxes to political subdivisions
when acquiring real property
making appropriation house bill
one eighty one introduced by
Representative Chatfield dial
Crowder Zamora and black.
One eighty one having been read
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuit to article
two section five B. one of the
constitution order for printed
and referred to the government
committee then to taxation and
revenue.
Still one eighty two introduced
by Representative Rehm and act
relating to public schools
providing for the redistricting
of certain school districts
requiring a redistricting plan
created a task force requiring
the secretary of public
education issue a redistricting
order providing for appointments
and elections of local school
boards house bill one eighty two
introduced by Representative
Rehm.
Yes when they need to having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the rules committee.
House bill one eighty three
introduced by Representative Rod
Montoya Representative Townsend
dread Castellano and brown and
act relating to taxation
changing the distributions of
the motor vehicle excise tax.
The one eighty three introduced
by Representative Rod Montoya
and Representative Townsend
Madrid Cristiano and brown.
House bill one eighty three
hundred twice by title I
determined to be germane pursuit
to article four section five B.
one of the constitution order
printed and referred to the
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee
that's taxation revenue.
House bill one eighty four
introduced by Representative G.
Andrés Romero and act relating
to public schools creating the
micro credential pilot project
providing reporting requirements
making appropriation house bill
one eighty four introduced by
Representative G. Andrés Romero
as for one eighty four having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane pursuit
to article four section five B.
one of the constitution order
printed and referred to the
Education Committee that's
appropriations and finance.
So one eighty five introduced by
representative Lente and act
relating to public education
requiring the public education
department to develop a
comprehensive education plan to
transform public education in
New Mexico to meet the needs of
native American students English
language learners students with
disabilities and low income
students making appropriation
house bill one eighty five
introduced by representative
Lente house bill one eighty five
having been read twice by title
I determined to be germane
pursuit to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order it printed and referred to
the Education Committee then to
appropriations and finance.
House bill one eighty six
introduced by Representative
Herndon and act making
appropriation to the economic
Development Department to
contract with community economic
development centers to promote
the expansion assistance theme
growth of local farms ranches
community kitchens and food
entrepreneurs and the production
and distribution of New Mexico
agricultural products house bill
one eighty six introduced by
Representative Herndon house
bill one eighty six having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuant to
article four section five B. one
of the constitution order
printed and referred.
To the agriculture safety is and
water resources committee events
appropriations and finance.
House bill one eighty seven
introduced by Representative Dow
black brown Pettigrew and Scott
and act relating to children
requiring the children youth and
families department to take
action in the case of a missing
child house bill one eighty
seven introduced by
representatives dial black brown
Pettigrew and Scott house bill
one eighty seven having been
read twice by title is ordered
not printed and referred to the
rules committee.
So one eighty eight introduced
by Representative Dow and lord
and act relating to children
amending the abuse and neglect
acts to limit records and
information concerning a party
to a collect reviews proceeding
that are confidential and closed
to the public house bill one
eighty eight introduced by
Representative Lord excuse me
introduced by Representative Dow
and lord house bill one eighty
eight having been read twice by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
One eighty nine introduced by
representatives Baca and dial an
act relating to vehicle quality
assurance amending the
definition of motor vehicle and
the motor vehicle quality
assurance Act to include
recreational vehicles and
recreational travel trailers
exempting trailers from the
waiver of the implied warranty
of merchantability for damage
that results from towing
Hospital one eighty nine
introduced by representatives
Baca and dial.
House bill one eighty nine
having been read twice by title.
Even though it's a fantastic
idea I have to ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules committee bring it back in
the sixty day session.
One ninety introduced by
Representative Chandler and guy
a ghosts and act relating to
taxation creating the twenty
twenty two income tax credit for
nurses employed by hospitals in
New Mexico house bill one ninety
introduced by Representative
Chandler and Gaydos.
Since last.
One ninety.
They've been read twice by title
I determined to be germane
pursuit to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order it printed and.
Referred to the taxation and
revenue committee.
House bill one ninety one
introduced by Representative
Gaydos Representative Gail
Armstrong and Representative
Hochman Vigil an act relating to
licensure clear from the
professional and occupational
licensing boards are required to
follow the provisions of the
state rules act when
promulgating rules and a
provision provisions of the
uniform licensing act for
licensing and disciplinary
matters providing for expedited
licensure for persons holding
professional or occupational
licenses from other licensing
jurisdictions revising board of
barbers and cosmetologists and
regulation and licensing
department powers and duties
providing certain licensing
requirements establishing
certain fees extending the
sunset date for the board of
body art practitioners amending
repealing and acting and
recompiling sections of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight house
bill one ninety one introduced
by representative Gallegos
Representative Gail Armstrong
and Representative Hochman
Vigil.
The metropolitan Los crucis
phone book.
Having been read twice by title.
House bill one anyone having
been read twice by title is
germane pursuant to house
executive message twenty six.
I ordered printed and referred
to the.
Government elections and Indian.
Initiative pretty refer to the
conversation Development
Committee this government
elections in Indian Affairs.
One ninety two introduced by
representative Ely and act
relating to towards clarifying
that abatement shall not apply
to assault or assault and
battery causes of action house
bill one ninety two introduced
by Representative you live.
House bill one ninety two having
been read twice by title is
ordered I ordered not printed
and referred to the rules
committee.
Senate bill thirteen introduced
by Senator Lopez and
Representative Andrea Romero an
act relating to missing persons
secreting the missing in New
Mexico event.
Declaring an emergency Senate
bill thirteen introduced by
Senator Lopez and Representative
Andrea Romero.
The.
Someone please tell the Senate
that the first Senate bill in
the house is getting a single
committee referral.
Please tell the Senate Senate
bill thirteen.
Is referred to the governmental
actions and Indian Affairs
Committee only.
Senate bill seventeen introduced
by Senator Ingle endorsed by the
New Mexico financed Authority
oversight committee and act
relating to finance authorizing
the New Mexico finance authority
to make loans or grants from the
water project fund for certain
water projects declaring an
emergency Senate bill seventeen
introduced by Senator Ingle.
Senate bill seventeen having
been read twice by title is
referred to the appropriations
and finance committee.
Senate bill thirty seven
introduced by senator Nancy
Rodriguez endorsed by the New
Mexico finance Authority
oversight committee and act
making appropriations from the
public project revolving fund to
the drinking water state
revolving loan fund the
wastewater facility construction
loan fund and the cultural
affairs facilities
infrastructure fund Senate bill
thirty seven introduced by
senator Nancy Rodriguez Senate
bill thirty seven having been
read twice by title is referred
to the appropriations and
finance committee.
House bill one ninety four
introduced by Representative
Hochman Vigil and act relating
to taxation distributing a
portion of the liquor excise tax
to counties for the provision of
alcohol and substance abuse
prevention and treatment and a
portion to the county alcohol
and substance abuse prevention
and treatment fund making
appropriation house bill one
ninety four introduced by
Representative Hochman Vigil.
House bill one ninty for having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane pursuit
to article four section five B.
one of the constitution order it
printed.
And referred to the government
elections and the Indian Affairs
Committee thence appropriations
I'm sorry that's taxation and
revenue.
We accidentally skipped one
ninety three so forever's first
on the hand property markets one
ninety three.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objections order members that we
have a committee before the
needs to be expunged and
replaced I understand the this
is been brought to the attention
of leader Martinez leader
Townsend is for house bill
fifteen.
there is a typographic error in
the committee report
And so I would like to expunge
the previously adopted taxation
and revenue committee report for
House Bill fifteen and replace
it with a corrected copy that
was reviewed by the leaders
Townsend and Martinez earlier
today.
Is objection hearing none it is
so ordered.
Speaker the gentleman from
Bernalillo mistaken not being in
the fifty nine AM I move that we
adjourn until till one PM House
condor.
Mr speaker gentle lady you Mr
speaker I ask unanimous consent
that the rules be suspended and
Joe show that all those present
in the morning session are
present in this afternoon
session section is ordered.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
guardian I ask unanimous consent
that the rules be suspended and
the record show that the general
has been read in full and
approved senator Reid to
revision and approval of the
rules and order of business
committee no objection is so
ordered.
Good morning everyone.
Okay we have a gentleman from
Cibola and McKinley chairman
Alcorn.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
labor and there is no military
affairs committee will meet
fifteen minutes after we get off
the floor a house bill one day
and then house memorial twenty
at the request of the sponsors
had being rolled over house bill
one in in the house memorial two
and the I rolled over to a later
date thank you Mr speaker.
Members take note the generated
from Bernalillo Representative
Thomson thank you Mr speaker of
the house health and Human
Services will meet tomorrow
morning at eight thirty thank
you.
Members take note the gentle
lady from grant Hidalgo and Luna
thank you Mr speaker it is
Deming and Luna county day in
the capitol unfortunately our
delegation chose not to come up
to to an abundance of caution
but hopefully you will receive
the gift on your desks this
morning and attached to it was
some information on legislative
priorities for my area so I hope
you'll take time to read it as
you enjoy your gift thank you Mr
speaker enjoy it responsibly.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Lewis chairman
Lewis thank you Mr speaker the
house government elections in
any affairs will meet tomorrow
at eight thirty we don't have a
chance to put our agenda and the
golden rod so we will be meeting
on house joint resolution nine
and house bill one thirty five.
Members say no the other
gentlelady from Bernalillo
chairwoman Chasey.
Thank you Mr speaker on we don't
have the house Judiciary
Committee
that gender posted yet for
tomorrow but I wanted to ask the
sponsors of all bills that will
if it's a it'll be on online
shortly
please let us know the experts
are that you need on the panel
with you it's really a more
efficient if we get those names
and their email addresses in
advance will be able to go a
little bit faster so let us know
your experts hi Committee
assistance increase as I some
point if you want have some with
you please let the folks know as
early as possible so that your
experts and get an email with
the appropriate zoom link the
gentle lady from Los Alamos
Representative Chandler thank
you Mr thank you Mr speaker
house taxation and revenue will
meet tomorrow at nine AM.
Members take note are there
other announcements.
Once.
Going twice.
The gentle lady from Valencia.
Mr speaker since today is the
beginning of the new Chinese New
Year and it's the year of the
tiger have a question.
State your question why did the
tiger lose at poker.
The general anyway he was
playing with the need to.
This could and and generally act
was also my understanding that
today's national grouch
forgiveness state was I mistaken
on the.
You know what I think it should
be a national holiday thank you
Mr speaker the gentle lady
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
the house and in recess until
eleven thirty tomorrow morning
thank you members for the work
today of please be sure to watch
our.
Committees work this afternoon
and members please remember
tomorrow we're back to our
regular eleven thirty eastern
time on the floor.
And tomorrow is the last day to
introduce bills.
So get all your ideas on paper
it then turned in.
Enjoy the rest your afternoon
have a good evening we'll see
more the house is in recess
until eleven thirty AM tomorrow.
