One PM no objection it is so
ordered.
Speaker I ask unanimous consent
that the rules be suspended in
the the journal show that all
those present in the morning
session are present in the
afternoon session no objection
it is so ordered was because
that was consent that the rules
are suspended and that the
record show that the journal has
been reading fall and approved
subject to revision approval of
the rules in order of business
committee heritage action it is
so ordered.
General release things become of
them go to the next order of
business committee reports no
objections sort.
The clerk to read.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to is been
referred house bill one has had
it under consideration report
same as recommendation that a do
pass as amended respectfully
submitted Patricia A. Lundstrom
chair move adoption production a
favorable committee report on
house bill one as amended all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
All the supposedly Reports
adopted.
Gentleman from Bernalillo is
becoming that we go to the next
order of business third reading
of legislation during.
The we've unanimous consent to
waive the twenty four hour rule
for house bill one so we the
that rural suspended.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
You Mr speaker I move that we go
to the next order of business
third reading of legislation
during a projection is ordered
members you'll find your desk a
copy of house bill one.
And the the spreadsheet showing
the funds that are being
appropriated in the bill yeah
and it is on line as well for
the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House the one is amended on
final passage is been taken the
gentleman to explain it all
thank you Mr speaker and members
before his house bill one the
food bill which appropriates
five million nine hundred and
sixty thousand eight hundred
dollars for expenses.
For the twenty twenty to
legislative session.
The amount includes.
Ten million three hundred ninety
two thousand two hundred dollars
for the Senate.
Million four hundred sixty five
thousand eight hundred dollars
for the house of representatives
in one million fifty eight
thousand eight hundred dollars
for the Legislative Council
Service for session expenses and
for running the joint build
rural rural rural and
Legislative switchboard.
The bill also includes the
annual appropriations for the
permanent legislative committees
and the expense of the
legislative department not
provided for in section one of
this act for fiscal year twenty
to in subsequent years as
follows.
One for the upgrade of the
Legislative processing system
one million five hundred
thousand dollars for Legislative
Council operations in fiscal
year twenty three seven million
four hundred fifty thousand nine
hundred dollars for interim
legislative expenses one million
dollars.
This year's session prep one
hundred fifty thousand dollars.
For a statewide legislative
internship program fifty
thousand dollars.
S. and fees of national
organizations to which the
legislature belongs.
At eight hundred thousand four
hundred eight thousand dollars.
for this information system one
million seven hundred twenty
three thousand four hundred
dollars.
For audio visual committee room
and websites webcasting upgrades
two hundred fifty thousand
dollars thank you Mr speaker in
a previous committee.
That appropriation was amended
so that it comes out of provided
cash balances instead of general
fund.
For capitol buildings Planning
Commission one hundred fifty
thousand dollars into the Senate
rules committee thirty five
thousand dollars.
While also making appropriation
to the legislative finance
committee four million eight
hundred forty three thousand
nine hundred dollars to the
legislative education study
committee of one million four
hundred thirty seven thousand
eight hundred dollars to the
house of clerk's office and
house leadership staff offices
one million eight hundred three
thousand one hundred dollars to
the Senate chief clerks office
and Senate leadership staff
office.
One million eight hundred
seventy five thousand seven
hundred dollars and for the
legislative departments share of
continued ongoing development.
In partnership with the New
Mexico compilation commission
this publication of the New
Mexico senator annotated to
seventy eight.
Four hundred thousand dollars Mr
speaker with that.
All the questions there's debate
the gentleman for San Juan.
The speaker does German from
Bernalillo county yield to the
gentleman from San Juan thank
you the speaker and and
gentleman
That is up to the session there
was some discussion between the
speaker's office and the
minority office about
the increasing pay for
legislative staff during the
session course at reflected in
this budget Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman in the
special we appropriated to
recall three hundred fifty
thousand dollars I believe for
leadership staff statewide
increases are generally included
in house bill two.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
and gentleman that's okay so
I'll be looking for that house
bill two I did I was looking for
that increase I knew the amount
and I didn't see it reflected
here so okay thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman.
This
Representative Anderson.
It's not as chair okay here is
the gentleman from Chavis the
end result.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
will the gentleman yield speaker
I yield.
German
Need to bring this bill I think
it's always so important that we
move our feet bill through in an
expeditious way and and I
appreciate you doing that I did
want to ask on one of the
smaller appropriation items it's
entitled legislative internship
program and.
I'm of the as I hope you are
hard believer that.
That.
That in turn program servers New
Mexico well.
Not just in the legislative
branch within the executive
branch as well and I was curious
whether that six point six
percent increase would be
sufficient and just appreciate a
comment on that please.
Thank you Mr speaker we get
generally lost students
interning for about three months
and then college age students
for about six months Mr Burciaga
director of the health services
my experts believes that that is
enough and and you know like you
I also appreciate the use of
internships as an opportunity
for these young people to come
in and get a feel for what it's
like to be in here.
Thank you for that response and
the I look forward to of voting
on your bill thank you Mr
speaker.
Thanks to the gentle lady from
Otero.
Thank you Mr speaker does German
formerly of you I yield to the
gentle lady from all that all
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I'm just a question on
this handout that we receive the
that has the chart on the front
on the yellow page.
House word it lists out the
different appropriations for the
different years my my question
remains is on the per diem.
For twenty twenty one the
appropriate amount was.
Significantly less than twenty
twenty one and then twenty
twenty two it looks like it's
more in line with twenty twenty
so can you give me any idea of
what happened in twenty twenty
one for per diem chairman miss
internet that's because of the
the different sessions right so
the twenty one session within a
sixty day session the twenty
twenty ten to twenty twenty two
would have been a thirty day
session.
Thank you for that gentleman Mr
speaker John I just thought I
was curious on that because I
would I would have thought that
the per diem since we were.
Mostly
virtual last session that that
that number would've been less
so I appreciate your interest
thank you.
Senior further debate the
gentleman close.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that house bill one is amended
do not pass.
Okay members is going to be our
first to sort of.
This is gonna be our first
hybrid voting so we're going to
have the vote by our but is that
our seats and we do have some
members of the logged in by on
zoom so once this electronic
questions done the chief clerk
will call the members who are
present by zoom.
We are final passage of house
bill one is amended the vote is
now open.
Representative close.
Those include five hundred
fifty.
Six the furnace you a good house
bill one is amended with an
emergency clause.
Has passed the house.
Hello sorry we need to call your
numbers and.
Representative Deborah A.
Armstrong.
Representative bash.
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash votes
yes.
Okay.
Representative Benham.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative yes.
Representative Cook.
Representative Dow.
Representative Harper.
Representative Harper votes yes
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Lujan.
Representative Nibert.
Yes Representative Nibert votes
yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero votes yes
Representative Strickler yes
Representative Strickler votes
yes Representative todos us.
Yes Representative off of both
yes Representative Zamora.
Representative Hernandez.
Representative Hernandez both
yes.
Okay with the voters and closed
with a sixty three informative
zero to negative house bill one
as amended with an emergency
clause has passed the house.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objection it is so
ordered.
Members everywhere so they cited
for Committee changes we decided
to say one an answer right now.
we inadvertently double books
Representative at at a so she
will of course remain chair of
rules of the land grants and
cultural affairs per second
committee will be the Education
Committee so she will depart the
agriculture just take years and
water resources committee and
will join the Education
Committee.
Three no objection is ordered.
Are there any nonsense.
Members we are because of the
relatively late our we are going
to start tomorrow and introduce
the bills that have been
provided to the chief clerks
office we'll do bill
introduction tomorrow.
we come on the floor about
eleven thirty I think that do
any committees wish to announce
any meetings.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Lewis thank you
Mr speaker the government
elections an Indian Affairs
Committee will meet of the
assumed at nine fifteen AM for
our organizational meeting.
Take note gentlelady from
Bernalillo Representative Chasey
yes thank you Mr speaker of the
house Judiciary Committee will
have its organizational meeting
on Friday at one thirty PM we
will not meet tomorrow and of
course will follow the procedure
with which will also become
familiar.
Members say no the gentle lady
from McKinley and San Juan thank
you Mr speaker house
appropriations and finance
committee will meet tomorrow at
one thirty thank you generally
is your team they returned from
bios yet.
Were you listening earlier Mr
speaker maybe.
I'll tell you really what we
don't need to get back in the
thank you.
That we don't have a Santa Fe
bios a Santa Fe anymore so
there's a bit of a drive back
from Albuquerque so hopefully
they'll be everything we've act
by tomorrow.
we would need to.
Members of the house would you
please join me in congratulating
our new house parliamentarian
Andrea Romero.
Any other answers gentlelady
from Olympia.
I'm sorry the gentle lady from
Sapporo.
Mr speaker I just have a
question and I'm not sure this
is the a point of personal
privilege to take but on the
vote Mr speaker I thought we
were only allowing people to
voice vote if they were remote.
I just a clarification.
Yes so generally we had if you I
think you were me like out of
the room or something and the
vote was technically open until
I close it I I don't see the
harm in letting someone vote if
they're here if they did make it
back to the room into we also
just come back from recess
subject to call the chair would
be delighted to get back from
the annex or something so I I
didn't see the harm in it thank
you Mr speaker I I'm just
curious if that's going to be
the typical or if for.
I'm just I just want to make
sure I know the rules sure so I
think we're going to err on the
side of the making it easier to
vote you know and so I I don't I
don't see the harm in it and if
somebody you know what's going
on the floor and and the speaker
vote after the electronic forces
closed I don't I I I'm not
inclined to bar them from
voting.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady are there other
announcements or questions.
Okay.
The gentle lady from sentencia.
Mr speaker quick question do you
know why the police arrested the
Turkey I don't anyways they
suspected foul play.
Yes the independent floor leader
is giving you a.
Right of applause his entire
caucus has your back.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
thank you Mr speaker I move that
the health center reduces until
eleven thirty two moral morning.
Thank you for a very good for
state.
It's been really nice to see you
all here we'll be back in this
chamber at eleven thirty AM
tomorrow morning have a good
evening.
