The clerk to call members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Here Representative Alcon is
here Representative Anderson.
Representative Anderson is here
Representative bash.
Here Representative bash is here
Representative oompah.
Here Representative boom guys
here Representative Cook.
Representative Crowder
Representative Crowder is here
Representative dela Cruz.
Here Representative dela Cruz is
here Representative Dow.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Figueroa.
Representative Figueroa is here
Representative Doreen Gallegos.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Representative Miguel Garcia is
here Representative Harper.
She is here.
Representative Harry Garcia is
here.
Representative and on this.
Representative Johnson.
Representative Lane.
Representative Lane is here
Representative land day.
For the Representative Lente is
here Representative Lewis.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Maestas.
Representative Maestas is here
Representative Martinez.
Representative Martinez is here
Representative McQueen
Representative McQueen is here
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya is
here Representative Roger
Montoya.
Representative Roger Montoya is
here Representative night for.
Representative Nibert is here
Representative Pettigrew.
Here Representative Pettigrew is
here Representative Andrea
Romero Representative Andrea
Romero is here Representative
Roybal Caballero.
Programs Representative Roybal
Caballero is here Representative
Scott.
Representative Scott is here
Representative small
Representative small is here
Representative Strickler.
Representative Terrazas.
Representative Thomson.
I'm here Representative Thomson
is here Representative Ted
offices here.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Dow is here.
Representative Gallegos
Representative Gallegos is here.
On the representative Thompson
here.
printed.
Representative close by the
fifty ninety I'm sorry.
Well because because you have a
quorum.
Members please rise for today's
indication.
Produced by the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
earned.
There have been the father thank
you for your abundant abounding
grace protect insured you're
loving life with those who have
been victims of violence provide
them with comfort and healing.
Take care health care workers
are police officers and our
military thank you for today
opportunity to love to lead them
to be all of that to want us to
be thank you for your
everlasting presence sign among
us in a way that the doctors
without and within may be pushed
back it is in your most blessed
name we pray amen.
Thank you generally with the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Maestas please
leave is the pledge of
allegiance.
I pledge allegiance.
The gentleman chose the
Roosevelt please leave this in
saluting New Mexico I.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Good morning Mr speaker good
morning members I move that we
go to the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objections order the
gentleman from you
Representative Madrid Mr speaker
I ask unanimous consent that
house memorial forty two.
From the speakers table.
In order the next order of
business.
Actions ordered for the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House
memorial forty two on final
passage isn't taking the
gentleman to explain the
memorial.
Members of the body.
Recognize and acknowledge and
agree taxes of the state I'd.
Come from for about and and and
and those are potential manner
of Southern New Mexico several
high school.
You have been here.
Using
mathematical considered the high
school.
Same calling the concerned when
open a high school together back
in two thousand and five Senator
so after a long twenty years in
schools without saying that I'm
not surprised we had a beautiful
conversation prior to coming on
the floor and the band as well
as all the hard work is is
students and I think that says
it all of the kind of content
care to this gentleman is
perfect for trade and moved up
to to our young people shop
around and I just want everybody
to understand the we are proud
people of the south and this.
In the south is not without of
course continues like this of
the south records all proud
thank you folks.
And the need to gentleman and I
believe that Mr moving here is
up in the gallery please please
stand up and provided that you
all can walk me to the house
both.
Graduations.
Is.
With the war.
Certainly the clerk to read.
House memorial forty two
introduced by Representative
Madrid a memorial recognizing
David Lee you being there
recipient of the twenty twenty
golden apple excellence in
teaching award for as David Lee
you building or a mathematics
teacher at chaparral high school
in the Gadsden Independent
School District.
Was the recipient of a twenty
twenty golden apple.
Excellence in teaching award and
we're as David has been teaching
at chaparral high school posso
since the schools opening in two
thousand five and we're as the
golden apple foundation of New
Mexico names up to seventy
jurors each year from across New
Mexico for the golden apple
excellence in teaching award and
for as those who are recognized
or representative of the
talented teachers in New Mexico
classrooms to inspire students
to new heights of learning.
And whereas David actively seeks
a new resources and has created
a learning environment for
students that is engaging and
authentic and whereas David was
inspired to begin a teaching
career while he was studying
civil engineering at the
university of Texas at el Paso
and we're as we're teaching a
summer program David begin to
hear students talking about not
being good at math and for as
David wanted to challenge the
notion that skill in mathematics
and sciences is for a certain
type of student for the building
goods that being good at
mathematics is genetic and
whereas David wanted to
reinforce there's teaching that
every student can at the very
least learn if not excel in
mathematics science health and
engineering and for us David
eventually changed his major
internist collar ship from the
national aeronautics and space
administration to teach
mathematics.
And whereas according to David
one of the funniest things I've
found challenging is whether
student thinks that they have a
high ability or low ability they
all have the opportunity to
learn I kind of embrace that
challenge.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico the
recognition be extended to
chaparral high school
mathematics teacher David Lee
you Bangor recipient of the
twenty twenty golden apple
excellence in teaching award.
And be it further resolved that
a copy of this memorial be
transmitted to David Lee you
being
Thank you German you have a
four.
Thank you Mr speaker I now move
that house memorial forty two.
To help us right now as the
unanimous consent of the house
for the record shows an old has
been called in only move present
voting affirmative.
The gentleman the the motion is
that the record show all members
present and voting in the
affirmative hearing no objection
is so ordered the vote is now
open.
Voters are closer to seventy in
the affirmative zero negative
house memorial forty two was
passed the house.
Legislation.
The gentleman from.
Curry Divock what Lupe's
Roosevelt and send me go.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
I just.
Mr speaker I ask unanimous
consent that house joint
memorial one be taken off the
speakers table and made the next
order of business.
The the motion is to make.
House joint memorial one the
next order of business.
No objection it is so ordered.
The record reflect on to
necessary for placing House
Joint Memorial one on final
passage is been taken the
general to explain memorial.
Thank you Mr speaker and and
house joint memorial one.
We take into consideration.
The issues that we have across
the state with water.
When when farm policy is set.
At the federal level it dictates
what kind of crops.
We grow in the state of New
Mexico.
Dictates.
How these crops are insured.
And it dictates conservancies
and conservation it for efforts
made by farmers and ranchers.
For us the New Mexico
congressional delegation.
When making these policies.
To take into consideration our
situation in the water issues
that we face today.
And then the farming practices
that we do and how we could
alternates and and change those
farming practices and improve
them.
The state water in the state and
that's what this memorial
memorials about with that we
stand for questions.
Thank you gentlemen is there
debate on oriel.
Seaman Germany close.
Thank you Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent of the house
let the record show that the
role has been called and all
those present voted in the
affirmative on house joint
memorial one.
Very well the motion is for.
The record reflect all members
present and voting in the
affirmative.
No objections so ordered the
vote is now open.
Representative closed five of
seventeen from zero to negative
house joint where one is passed
the house.
The gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Romero.
Thank you Mr speaker
many of us in this body had her
disparate Lee the news yesterday
of the passing of more have yet
Gonzalez.
Who was a great friend to many
of us and an inspiration to so
many I know in the city.
For the truly engaging.
And.
Walking in true belief.
And emulating the type of person
that we wanted to be in the
world.
More have yet Gonzalez was.
Thank you to hurt a huge a huge
person as he walks in is truth
every single day.
And I just want to take this
time Mr speaker to remember him
and remember
what he truly brought to the
city to the state he was the
chairman of the Democratic
Party.
He transforms the city in many
ways by trying new things by.
To be experimenting with the
halls of government and how we
might be able to see a better
worlds that we live in.
Mr speaker more vehicles all as
was young he was a young person
to so many of us and.
And how he was able to make so
much change in such a short time
for our state and for.
Is community.
Key service lastly at the
Christus St Vincent hospital for
the
For the foundation there.
Allen's.
Became a patient.
Though.
He is live on this earth was
short his legacy is his impact.
And spirit sophist forever you
Mr speaker and I just want to
share that my heart is broken
and I know so many are in so
many that stood on his shoulders
that were able to be here today
in politics and policy in
community activism were inspired
by him and and for truly
Truly indebted to him for for
what he gave us.
with that Mr speaker I just I
just wanted to share my heart
and
my time with my friends have yet
who I loved and who so many left
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you.
The gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln.
Thank you Mr speaker speaking to
the gentleman from Bernalillo
earlier and he wanted to me to
remind everyone that there is a
Jersey on your chair may be we
need to brag a little bit we've
held that trophy now for four
years I believe gentleman from
Bernalillo forty four correct in
our memory and we need to let
the Senate know that we have
held that for four years next
year will be the fifth so
despite the fact that we haven't
played a game last two years we
still have the trophy.
The secretary of state was
speaker point the chair will
appoint a committee of three.
Representative is my Estes
Representative Nibert and
Representative Romero to inform
the Senate that we continue to
assess the winner's trophy
speaker just point of point of
order I think the.
Sponsor on the jerseys wrong.
The sponsor of the jerseys of
the law I think it's supposed to
be levels.
The law that allows those do not
have the trophy it's the Ag he's
in the house that have the pro
for you Sir okay so and so the
the committee hearing no
objection Representative Maestas
Romero and I were please inform
the Senate that we possess the
trophies.
In.
I'm not I'm not joking please go
talk the Mr speaker on that
point.
Mr speaker the one that point
might we also send
Representative small to recreate
the photo that we've seen in the
members lounge of his infamous
moment with Senator souls please
Mr speaker.
I think the behind the just
fine.
okay the gentle lady from doing
in a.
Good morning Mr speaker on that
note this morning at NMSU's head
football coach is in the house
Mr kill is an accomplished coach
having been named the big ten
coach of the year in twenty
fourteen with Minnesota and
national coach of the year in
two thousand four while he was
in southern Illinois is.
University we're excited to have
such an accomplished a football
coach leading as to what I'm
sure will be many pictures
please go Ag these.
I also want to the welcome our
guests in the gallery coach kill
we have one of the new regents
from New Mexico State University
Arsenio Romero and we have is
Mario Moshe and assistant
athletics director Brancard
right please and wave it as an
let us welcome you to the house.
Mexico joint apologize for floor
leader Martinez early remark.
The the entire US
representatives we welcome you.
Today is C. N. M. day.
Enjoy your.
I strive.
Joy the enjoy the things the
left in office we love seeing
them.
Are there other announcements.
Okay.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker move that
we go to the next order of
business committee reports no
objections so ordered.
Thirty three.
Mr speaker your government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee too has been referred
house commerce and economic
development committee substitute
for house bill one ninety one
has had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that a do pass as amended
respectfully submitted Georgene
Louis chair unanimous consent of
the committee prefer to gather
act on the single vote
reflecting the journal so
they're acted upon individually
hearing objections order click
to read.
House joint resolution nine.
Do not pass the house government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
joint resolution nine do pass
and institutions.
House memorial thirty I do pass
as amended.
And Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill six
as amended do Path and thence to
the Judiciary Committee
respectfully submitted Georgene
Louis chair move adoption we are
adoption of a favorable
committee report on house
consumer and House covers
economic development the
substitute for house bill one
ninety one an unfavorable
Committee port on H. J. R. nine
but a favorable committee report
on government elections in
Indian Affairs the subsidy for
HDR nine federal claim
porterhouse more of thirty five
and if the rules committee
report on Senate bill a Senate
floor subsidies Sen finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill six as amended all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
Well as was a three point are
adopted.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to ms been
referred house bill seven as
amended has had it under
consideration for thing with
recommendation that a do pass
respectfully submitted Patricia
A. Lundstrom chair unanimous
consent of the committee prefer
together act on a single vote
referred to the journals of
their act on individually
hearing objections were required
to read House Bill seventy nine.
To pass.
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill one
sixty four two passed as
amended.
House bill one sixty five as
amended to pass as amended.
House bill one sixty six to pass
as amended.
House health and Human Services
Committee substitute for house
bill one seventy five to pass
respectfully submitted Patricia
A. Lundstrom chair.
Move adoption we're adoption of
favorable committee reports on
house bill seven as amended
seventy nine Energy Environment
natural resource committee
substitute for house bill one
sixty four house bill one sixty
five as amended one sixty six
and Health Human Services
Committee subsea for House to
one seventy five all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
Posibles may twenty point
reflected.
Mr speaker Judiciary Committee
too is been referred house bill
I have had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that do not pass
but that house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill five to pass respectfully
submitted Gail Chasey chair.
Speaker move adoption Verint
option of an unfavorable
committee report on house bill
five but a favorable committee
reporter Judiciary Committee
subsea for House Bill five all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
This was me reports are is
adopted.
Mr speaker your role development
land grants and cultural affairs
committee to is been referred
Senate bill one forty one has
had it under consideration
reports it was recommendation
that do pass sentence referred
to the government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee
respectfully submitted Susan K.
and at a chair.
Mr speaker move adoption we're
adoption of federal committee
for instead of the one forty one
all those in favor please
signify by saying hi.
All this was a three point about
to.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Instagram we go to the next
order of business messages no
objections so ordered her to
read.
Message from the Senate.
Mr speaker I'm directed to
inform the house of the Senate
as passed Senate bill two as
amended Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill thirty five.
Senate bill thirty six.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill one
oh three.
Senate bill one seventy four as
amended Senate joint resolution
ten and request the concurrence
of the house respectfully
submitted Lenore and Lara host
Senate chief clerk Mr Richard.
House executive message number
twenty nine dear speaker Egolf
members of the House pursuant to
article four section five B. two
of the New Mexico constitution I
am authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
initiatives every Bill bearing
Legislative Council Service
drafting number point two two
two five six three a bill
increasing the maximum amount of
pension available to be earned
by members pursuant to the
public employees retirement act
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor message
of inter.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr Gramm of the go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation.
During a projection sort of.
to read.
House memorial fifty two
introduced by Representative
daylight Cruz a memorial
requesting the higher education
department to conduct a study to
determine the feasibility of the
provision of a low cost loans to
graduate students house memorial
fifty two introduced by
Representative dealer Cruz house
memorial fifty two having been
read twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Education Committee.
House memorial fifty three
introduced by Representative
dealer Cruz a memorial
requesting the property tax
division of the taxation and
revenue department to work with
county assessors to to determine
the direct financial impact all
property owners in the county of
capping the valuation of the
primary residences of persons
age seventy five or older who
have lived in the residences for
at least twenty five years house
memorial fifty three introduced
by Representative daylight Cruz.
The.
The
house memorial fifty three.
House memorial fifty three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the taxation and revenue
committee.
Senate bill two as amended
introduced by Senator Cervantes
an act relating to the judiciary
allowing for the appropriation
of money into the judicial
retirement fund and the
magistrate retirement fund
increasing certain service
credit multipliers provided in
the judicial retirement act and
the magistrate retirement act
providing the justices of the
state Supreme Court shall each
receive an annual salary equal
to the annual salary received by
New Mexico federal magistrate
court judges removing salary
formulas for magistrates making
appropriations Senator Senate
bill two as amended introduced
by Senator Servan tastes.
Rural.
Senate bill two is amended
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
thirty five.
And act relating to protective
arrangements revising procedures
for the appointment of temporary
guardians and temporary
conservatives for allegedly
incapacitated persons
clarifying reporting
requirements Senate Judiciary
Committee substitute for Senate
bill thirty five.
Senate Judiciary Committee says
two percent bill thirty five
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Senate bill thirty six
introduced by Senator Stewart
for the legislative education
study committee an act relating
to educational retirement
increasing certain contributions
to the educational retirement
fund Senate bill thirty six
introduced by Senator Stewart.
Senate bill thirty six having
been read twice by title is
referred to the Education
Committee and some programs and
finance.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill one
oh three an act relating to the
workforce solutions department
providing for criminal history
background checks for employees
finalists for employment
contractors and subcontractors
of the workforce solutions
department under certain
circumstances providing for
limited use and requiring
confidentiality of information
obtained through the background
checks providing for denial or
termination of employment based
upon information obtained
through the background checks
repealing section nine dash
twenty six dash fifteen NMSA
nineteen seventy eight being
lost two thousand seven chapter
two hundred section twenty three
providing a penalty Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill one of three.
Senate Judiciary Committee so
supercenter one of three having
been read twice by title.
Is referred to.
The Judiciary Committee.
Senate bill one seventy four as
amended introduced by senator
Munoz should Senators moon yo's
Shendo junior and Pinto and act
relating to motor vehicles
requiring truck tractors
attached to a free trailer to
drive in the right hand lane on
interstate highways providing a
penalty Senate bill one seventy
four as amended introduced by
senators moon yo's Shendo junior
and Pinto.
Senator one seventy four.
As amended is referred to the
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee.
Senate joint resolution ten
introduced by Senator Stewart a
joint resolution proposing to
extend the lease for the downs
at Albuquerque incorporated
Senate joint resolution ten
introduced by Senator Stewart.
Senate joint resolution ten
having been read twice by title
is referred to the government
elections and the Indian Affairs
Committee.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr chairman we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
Okay members who were about to
the third reading in a minute.
Representative Scott
Representative McQueen asked
that we hear house concurrent
resolution one about publishing
agency and Alice sees on the
website if we haven't discussed
it with leader Townsend is there
any concern about this that we
can send over the Senate.
Okay gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business third reading of
legislation.
Sorry gentleman that was my
mistake of.
Thank you Mr chairman Goodling
Services announcements and
miscellaneous business thank you
Jennifer really.
Thank you.
S. H. C. R. one is on the
speakers table gentleman from
Bernalillo Santa Fe Torrance and
Valencia for what purpose do
rise thank you Mr speaker ask
them to send the boys to take
house concurrent resolution one
from the speakers table make it
the next order of business no
objections order but the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House
concurrent resolution one on
final passage has been taken
gentleman to explain the
concurrent resolution.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
members of the body this is a
concurrent resolution.
I've never done a concurrent
resolution before and I don't
actually recall hearing one in
the chamber the concurrent
resolution is how we change
change.
The joint legislative rules.
So this this rule change has the
is propose because we we the
circuit facing the same issue
over and over again it makes two
significant changes.
First it takes the HSD analyses
in the committee in those cities
and when they're ready when
they're done.
Will post them on the ledge of
legislative website along with
the FIR so we currently posed
the fire are we don't post any
of the analyses that go into it
which are all public documents
but there's no practical way to
access them.
The second thing it does.
Is it simply follows the same
process with proposed amendments
and propose committee serves
directed to committee.
So is the general practice of
the committees to require a
written amendments or committee
so the twenty four hours in
advance so we can be strictly to
the committee.
The idea is at that point when
it sent out to the committee.
It would also be posted on the
website.
Because we routinely have the
situation where there's a bill
with me there something as
controversial or something
that's a mistake can you fix it
in an amendment.
And the public comment and all
the the lobbyists and members of
the public so you all I haven't
seen the amendment I don't know
what to.
So this would fix that by making
it publicly available.
It is similar to process we
already have for floor amendment
because those on the website.
That's it would follow that same
general process.
And with that Mr speaker if I
may I'd love for my co sponsor
Representative Scott to see if
you were to.
Gentleman fully for a few words.
Thank you Mr speaker.
What is
this with is essential change
not only.
For transparency.
With respect to these analyses
and the proposed amendments for
the work flow associated with
this body.
Because now the unwieldy process
of going to share file to pick
up in months to pick up to
substitutes.
Is not particularly transparent.
Or is it handy for our own
purposes.
So in the interest of making
this information available to
the public in the interest of
improving our work flow I
believe this will be very
beneficial changes thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you Geraldine no further
debate Germany close.
Mr speaker members of the body I
move that the house concurrent
resolution one do now pass.
Where are final passage of house
concurrent resolution one.
The vote is now open.
In the year.
The clerk to call members
without a recorded vote
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Akan votes
yes Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative um call.
Yes Representative boom go votes
yes Representative Castellano.
Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook both yes
Representative Dow.
Yes Representative Dow both yes
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente both
yes Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid votes yes
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes Representative Pettigrew
votes yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is yes Representative Thomson.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes Representative Trujillo.
Representative Trujillo votes
yes.
Representative closed with a
sixty four the affirmative zero
negative house concurrent
resolution number one is passed
the house.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker and we go
to the next order of business
third reading of legislation no
objections so ordered.
Members we're going to as I said
yesterday we're going to pick up
where we left off which means
we're gonna start item number
one gentle lady from million are
you ready on that.
Yes Mr speaker might you get me
to that point.
The record reflect all action
necessary for placing House Bill
eighty two is amended on final
passage the taken the gentlelady
to explain the bill.
Thank you Mr speaker H. B.
eighty two is a pretty
straightforward piece of
legislation it extends an
already existing gross receipts
tax deduction for dialysis
facilities from now from the
original expiration date of
twenty twenty two to twenty
twenty thirty two excuse me this
legislation also updates amends
the definition of dialysis
facility thank you Mr speaker.
Additionally there is debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Eli.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
the gentle lady from Dona Ana
field yes Mr speaker I yield to
the gentleman from San Juan
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady Mr speaker gentle
lady from Dona Ana can you give
me a little bit of history do
you know when this G. R. T.
exception was first enacted Mr
speaker gentleman I believe it
was in two thousand and
fourteen.
Mr speaker gentle lady from
Dhoni on as I understand it
there is
if we don't pass this bill it's
gonna sunset essentially is that
right.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
that is set to sunset and on
July one of twenty twenty force
on about eighteen months.
Mr speaker generated from Dona
Ana I noticed
in the committee or let me put
it this way Mr speaker the the
bill as originally dropped I
think maybe this a permanent
exception and then it looks like
there was a change in committee
can I get some understanding
about the rationale for the
change Mr speaker and gentleman
certainly as originally
introduced this.
Legislation intended to make
this G. R. T. deduction
permanent as as you might see
looking at the section of law
none of the other facilities are
provider types in that section
of Los still have a sunset so I
was originally imagining in
terms of tax policy it would be
fair to make their deduction
match the others in the section
of law but given the cut careful
consideration and tax policy
framework moving through our to
our tax committees in a
bipartisan this way this year it
seems appropriate to extend the
continuation of that subset
instead of making the
elimination permanent.
Mr speaker generated for Dona
and can you share with the body
what the new date is the new
sunset date.
Mr speaker gentleman I believe
the new sunset date is July one
two thousand and thirty two.
Mr speaker gentle lady from Dona
Ana and can you.
Maybe just give me some insight
because the way I understand
sort of our our general approach
move for with regard to tax
policy is I think we're trying
to broaden our tax base and not
more with
so can you just walk me through
the rationale as to why you
think this is is good for New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman certainly are.
If you've listened in on our tax
committee conversations we've
certainly talked about what
moving towards a broader tax
base would be for New Mexico and
certainly Representative Harper
eight are way in describing our
current tax system as as a Swiss
cheese full of G. R. T.
deductions around every corner
I've often been caught Mr
speaker gentleman saying that
whether or not you have a G. R.
T. deduction in New Mexico
depends on who you're lobbyist
was Mr speaker and gentleman I
was interested in picking up and
sponsoring this bill in
particular because it exists in
an already established section
of law that allows for the
detection of gross receipts tax
for certain medical and health
care services this is just one
provider taper organization
within that section of law and
in particular Mr speaker and
gentleman if you know anyone
that might need dialysis
treatment dialysis treatment is
truly lifesaving care for The
New Mexicans that are reliant on
and and based on certain
Gallegos us so for me Mr speaker
and gentleman when I looked at
the other sections of our within
the statute and the other
provisions we already have in
place I was also convinced that
this part these particular
groups that that offer dialysis
in New Mexico have honored their
commitments and done a lot to
expand care particularly in
rural New Mexico for those for
folks that truly are surviving
because of their dialysis.
Mr speaker tonight from Dona ana
all right in the the reference
of law that you referenced that
with regard to other medical
services are are those services
that have a a G. R. T. carve out
of those are those permanent.
Mr speaker and gentleman yes
every bit everybody else in the
section of is permanent.
Mr speaker generally thank you
for the debate on me for the
questions.
There's further debate the
gentleman for San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you speaker does agility
familia yield.
Yes Mr speaker I yield to the
other gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you gentlelady.
I I do rise and support of this
bill but I I do want to
Discuss the process that we went
through in committee and hoping
that members who do not serve on
tax.
if they're going to bring a bill
similar to this forward to
understand going forward to kind
of what we're looking for for
years we've been working
together
in a bipartisan fashion to try
and bring some sort of
oversight.
And some sort of reporting
mechanism that we can follow to
make sure that
everywhere were putting tax
policy where there's a deduction
or exemption.
Or a rebate that there's just
sunset on all of those bills
and all of that legislation for
the purpose of coming back prior
to the sunset
heading that we can go and do a
review of the legislation and
see how effective the exemption
or the rebates
for the credit how well has has
it been effective has been used
has it been
Used properly and madam speaker
and gentle lady the majority of
the discussion in committee
around this was as you brought
up gentle lady that other
exemptions and credits for other
medical.
Service providers.
For questions of law covered
under that section currently do
not have the bay sunset I
believe that was why you were
looking at this Mr speaker and
gentle lady as a.
Equity issue is that that would
be I I'm.
Lee I'm stating awards properly
is that correct Mr speaker
gentleman it's certainly already
been a long morning and it's
been a minute since we're in tax
committee but I think I
especially talked about fairness
in our tax code thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman thank you
Mr speaker and gentle lady and
and the issue that we have it is
quite frankly we still have too
many.
Tax credits and and exemptions
and just tax policy that is the
current that previously was put
in place that we've we don't
have under review and so in
reality I believe the tax
committee overall has general
consensus that we like to have
more sunsets on those rather
than not have sunsets on the new
provided the new credits and
that's gonna direction we've
been going but miss a gently
that's that comes of the crux of
the debate that we had in the
committee and that is that that
this
credit doesn't go away.
For eighteen months.
And the speaker and gentle lady
the the idea is what we did and
we have not done a review.
Of the effectiveness of this
credit.
And by coming in eighteen months
early what we've done kind of a
short circuit.
Process of review that Mr
speaker and gentle lady the the
big.
One of the problems we had was
of and I and I know COVID going
on so I know they're people
working remotely but TRD did not
present us any of the reporting
criteria that we that we are
expecting and that
or just asked to renew this.
Sunset for another ten years
without any review
so madam speaker Joe I do and
I'm sure you remember that being
the the majority of the
discussion in tax committee Mr
speaker gentleman yes I
appreciated when we had HB
eighty one in front of our house
tax committee that thanks to the
gracious leadership of terror
Chandler as well as
Representative Harper yourself
it actually turned into a much
bigger conversation about the
potential processes and
standardization that we might
begin to navigate and move
together so that we can answer
these critical questions in a
way that is consistent and clear
first of course for the
ourselves as members as we go
into these review processes and
ultimately hold that vote that
becomes the review of a policy
proposal like this but also so
that advocates and and others
out there would understand those
expectations about what review
would look like and what
opportunities might be
available to to consistently and
in a timely way review proposals
like this through the rest of an
interim committee process.
Speaker and gentle lady I I
appreciate that and I believe
you brought up a good point and
I think it's probably going to
affect have a tax policy
consideration in the future I
believe
As you stated.
the concern from the dialysis
providers of that benefit from
this was the idea of consistency
and and and being able to know
ahead of time what to expect and
all business all business
really reliability and and the
ability to predict the future is
what they're all looking for so
I do believe something that
we're gonna look at very closely
going forward in tax committee
is maybe doing that through
doing that review ten years out
so that.
Maybe we can find some comfort
to those who are facing a a
sunset but miss are generated I
think the.
The the big heartburn that we
had was.
The review information.
Was not provided and the reason
that I was not provided was
really spacious.
we were told that
that information could not be
provided to us because it had
too much personal information
and
Madam speaker gentle lady we're
we're not looking for any ones
tax records for not looking for
anyone services we're dealing
with health care we're not
looking for any thing that would
cause us to be in violation of
of hip.
What we're looking for Mr
speaker and gentle lady and and
I believe TRD knows this is
we're looking for statistics
were looking did the dollars
however the dollar spent.
and was it a good use of
taxpayer money and so Mister
speaker and and and gentle lady
I think we we did identify and
and I I I think probably TRD the
real reason that they were not
able to provide was likely they
didn't have enough time or
enough notice to even think
about this
And that the.
A lot of state agencies are
understaffed right now and a lot
of folks are not working in the
office working from home and so
I think.
I'm willing to give a pass.
On this right now but going
forward this is this is
something we have to address if
we're gonna have good tax policy
there has to be away Mr speaker
and gentle lady to review.
Whether or not our intended
target whether we're hitting the
target with these taxpayer
dollars.
That looks like you won respond
that the speaker gently Mr
speaker gentleman thank you and
I certainly am in agreement this
little tiny bill did raise some
much more substantial questions
to your point here
it what we've heard from TRD is
because there's such a
relatively few small a small
number of organizations that
actually provide dialysis and in
turn filed for this deduction
that it would have potentially
compromise that the
confidentiality that we've
committed to and is expected
within someone's tax filing I
would just want to clarify that
I've I've certainly had experts
and organizations along the way
that are willing to be very
transparent forth coming from
their end about their record
keeping and and contribute to
the two reviews that way but yes
it does raise the question about
how significant this may be
within TRD and potentially it
provides us an opportunity to be
creative and consider a solution
to this moving forward so that
we have the kind of data we
would otherwise expect when
facing a decision like this
thank you Mr speaker gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The gentle lady I I do
appreciate the see you you
we just had a good conversation
in committee on this side one of
the reasons I want to have this
conversation in front of the
body is
there will be organizations that
come to you and they are going
to be facing a sunset
in years past and you know this
very well with the osteopaths
the laws that were in place
couple of years ago I of the ASU
has actually came and said
please don't renew our sunset.
Provision this time they have
been rolled over for forty years
each time a sunset came up they
so we just renewed it we just
gave another ten years without a
review and what happened Mr
speaker and gentle lady of the
osteopaths were.
In a position where there they
were.
There regulations that they were
serving under the board that
they were seven serving under
the disparity between them and
Andy's had grown so much it was
at the point and hospitals that
Indies could supervise oldies.
Staff if the if the osteopath
was not president but in the
reverse if an OD was on staff
and M. D. had staff that was
there and they were and
the of the Indy was not present
they could not then manage that
staff because the qualification
was two different
service speaker and gentle lady
there are there are other
consequences facing the industry
sometimes that especially where
there's boards and where there
are
parameters they've gotta serve
under.
they we have to do these reviews
it's good government and I've
quite frankly I think the public
expects it and and and they
deserve it so but so we just
briefly the speaker gentle lady
is there.
Was there any information
provided to you after the
discussion by.
Maybe the lobbying organizations
or how we are you able to at all
today maybe to percent maybe a
little more light on how the
dollars were spent.
I yes Mr speaker and gentleman
certainly as I've had those
experts by my side in those
rooms and and committee I maybe
be a little bit delayed in
providing some of that but but
for me that really convincing
piece of this was that in the
conversation to get these folks
this deduction in twenty
fourteen they talked a lot about
the need to expand care
especially out towards rural New
Mexico and one of the things
that I've learned through this
process is that when someone
needs dialysis they need at a
minimum of three times a day so
for folks farther out that means
they they set and schedule their
whole lives around this since
this legislation went into
effect they have been able to
open an additional seventeen
dialysis clinics the negotiation
number at the time I believe was
a commitment to get I think
seven.
and and looking at the numbers
and and it also used to be said
dialysis patients regardless of
age also become eligible for
Medicare so of course there's a
lot of interplay on those
reimbursement rates based on the
Medicare dollars but they say
and and credit this deduction
being the primary reason that
they were able to expand and
open an additional seventeen
clinics across the state in less
than ten years.
The speaker gentle lady that is
a great report.
That would surely again my vote
had where in committee and
really that type of of
information coming from the
industry is helpful as well
especially absent.
Something from within the
administration that that needs
to be provided hopefully as we
come out of.
the trying times we've been in
that that.
This will be a problem in the
future but I do suggest to to
every member if someone comes to
you and ask you about extending
a sunset you need to be aware
that this is going to be a
conversation in tax and and I
see madam chair I can't hear
from tax the floor and I I would
suggest that chair something
that we do every year is a.
Training for and a van and a
reminding attacks a committee
members of what our policies are
what we're looking for what
we're trying to do that I I
would suggest madam chair in the
future that might be something
you offer to the entire
membership who wants to know if
they're gonna have a bill that's
going to come before tax Mr
speaker
I I think that would be
beneficial because I every time
we end up at this time of the
session and people are bringing
bills before tax one thing that
is remind everybody has to be
reminded over and over and over
and over again is if your bill
has a fiscal impact it's going
to go on the table it doesn't
mean it's dead so don't it's not
like the table in other
committees that when it goes to
the table and tax we're trying
to find out what we can afford
what's available to end up in
the total budget eventually
house bill two.
And that we have a big omnibus
bill that comes out of tax.
And I hear it every year that
I've served on tax because we
have this training Mr speaker
and gentle lady I believe it's
import for the entire body to
know when they come to the
committee.
You're facing kind of a
different animal that that is
different to other committees of
speaker gently I do I I I I I
will support your legislation
thank you for giving me and the
body.
What relief is what we're
looking for in tax committee is
was the money used wisely can we
can we confidently re issue a
sunset and can we be confident
that at the very least based on
past history we believe those
dollars we spend wisely so the
speaker generated by I support
legislation.
Thanks to the gentleman from
Lee.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
German lady from the menu yes Mr
speaker yes to the gentleman
from the.
Also her disability taxed just a
couple of questions have come
of.
Subsequent to the to the
hearing.
How many of these facilities are
located in the state.
Mr speaker and gentleman sure
I'm just going to review my
materials really quickly to make
sure I get that number accurate.
And the piece I know off the top
of my head is that we have over
four thousand New Mexicans
relying on dialysis for
treatments.
And what I have here in front of
me I'm sure an expert will
correct me if I'm wrong is that
currently we have fifty nine
dialysis facilities in New
Mexico so Mr speaker and gentle
lady there's a total of fifty
nine facilities can you tell.
There's more to associated with
the hospital.
And that might already exist.
G. or W. Mr speaker gentlemen
I'll will work to get your
information on the hospital
question but what I have in
front of me says that thirteen
of those were non for profit not
for profit entities that were
already exempt so fifty nine
minus thirteen leaves leaves
those folks that have become
eligible for this deduction.
Thank you
Mr speaker and gentle lady the
rest of the balance
for training facilities for all
for profit.
The ex if you will associated
with hospital Mr speaker and
gentleman that's my
understanding that yes these are
free standing facilities not
associate with the hospital.
Speaker and gentle lady.
Forward in the interest of
para que with all the facilities
providing somewhat similar
services contract to score goals
of our facilities for me.
Mr speaker gentleman I'm not
quite at least HB eighty two
they're potentially with
different arguments when this
was established in twenty
fourteen but this is in front of
you today because policymakers
that a decade or so ago maybe
the district the the the
decision to allow these dialysis
facilities the G. R. T.
deduction I'm working to extend
that out so that we can continue
seeing that that investment in
new facilities and continuity of
care for our families I know on
parity was to say that when I
originally introduced this
legislation before we amended in
the tax committee I had works
are intended to make the G. R.
T. deduction permanent because
the other folks within this
section of law have a permanent
deduction but then given are
really insightful conversation
and and commitment to the kind
of review and justification the
sunsets deserve I've been
amended it to be just an
extension of the sunset that
already exist today.
Representative Jen Leasure for
the July one last question
approved Representative Senator
Wirth.
Significant benefit to the rural
communities contract currently
held of these facilities are
actually located in communities
considered to be rural.
Mr speaker gentleman I'm gonna
wait a second for my experts to
weigh in with that one I want to
make sure I get it right.
So Mister speaker gentleman we
have a couple of providers that
do these dialysis facility
clinics one of them is for
sending us another one is da
divvied up on their for setting
aside at least twelve of their
clinics are what they consider
to be in rural New Mexico.
Speaker thank you very much John
legend for your answers I can
support this legislation thank
you.
This for the delivery.
Thank you Mr speaker will gentle
lady from donor to please you
yes Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Kerry
it is have one question it and
it has to do with your
definition of dialysis
facilities.
It's on page four line nineteen
curious what the difference is.
In the code of federal
regulations that was stricken
and the definition you've
provided below
what why did you change what is
the difference between those two
definitions Mr speaker gentle
lady.
Mr speaker gentleman of course
I'll also look to my experts to
clarify but as we saw it it
wasn't a difference in content
but that the drafter in eight
council here how we had a
reference to forty to see point
FY are wanted to omit the
specific site so what we've done
here is actually just a name
what the intention was instead
of fighting the federal law.
Okay so Mister speaker gentle
lady I I think I heard you say
they're they're very very
similar or verbatim similar you
just change the for the full
definition is that a reference
to a code is that correct that's
my understanding Mr speaker
gentlemen yes thank you very
much I was curious thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you John next the gentle
lady from Bernalillo Sandoval in
Santa Fe thank you Mr speaker
will the
gentlelady please yield.
Yes Mr speaker get deal to the
gentle lady from some of us
Santa Fe New Mexico counties
thank you
So I was looking through this
I'm gonna tell you one of the
things is always surprised me is
the fact in the state we tax
medical.
services in the state I think
it's one of the few states it
actually does that and I'm on
board with your bill I would
love to actually see it for all
medical services I don't think
we should be charging G. R. T.
tax for anybody who's receiving
any medical care medical
services and it's kind of
surprising in the state that we
actually do that I was quite
frustrated when I found out
about that so I I don't have
much to say and other than I do
appreciate the bill I will be
voting yes on it I just I would
love to see it expand to every
single type of Medicare that we
have in the state of New Mexico
for all fairness and thank you
that's all that I have seen no
further debate gentle lady to
close.
Mr speaker I move that the H. B.
eighty two as amended do now
pass we're on final passage of
house bill eighty two as amended
the vote is now open.
That.
This portion of the vote is
about to close.
The clerk of the members without
a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative Allison.
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative bunga.
Yes Representative bongo votes
yes Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook votes
yes Representative Dow.
Yes Representative Dow votes yes
Representative Eli.
Representative Ferrary yes
Representative Ferrary votes yes
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes representative Lente.
Representative Lujan yes
Representative Lujan votes yes
Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid votes yes
Representative night for.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes representative
Thompson.
Yes Representative Thomson both
yes Representative Townsend.
Representative Zamora.
Representative Zamora votes yes
Representative Allison
Representative Allison both yes
what is a close my motive sixty
one the Fuhrman of zero and
negative.
Also eighty two as amended has
passed the house.
Next to that item to gentlelady
from Bernalillo are you ready on
that item.
Representative Dixon.
They generally for early reserve
figured is going to present that
item of the record reflect all
action necessary for placing
House Bill sixty nine as amended
on final passage has been taken
the gentle lady to explain the
bill.
Thank you Mr speaker this is a
bill clarifying Topshop some
metal theft with that'll stand
for questions.
There is debate the gentleman
from Bernalillo nice try.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Freeman.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
yield.
Yes Mr speaker I will yield.
Mr speaker and gentle lady from
Bernalillo I want to make a
couple suggestions to improve
your bill let's go to page four
and five and I want to ask you
one of the things I've seen is
that
street lights that are marked
down from a traffic collision
our cut up by individuals and
taken.
To a
taken to a recycling area and
sold their cover street lights
in your bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
are not excluded the to be
covered in the definition
section.
Mr speaker if you would look on
page four line seven a traffic
directional or controls sign or
signal is listed.
The Mr speaker and gentle lady
from Bernalillo I don't believe
that that's in the definition
you have said a highway for
street sign they're not assigned
there are white.
Mr speaker and gentleman it is
still a traffic control device.
So it is covered under house
bill sixty nine.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
show me where it says traffic
control device.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen this definition online
seven comes from the regulated
materials act and we do believe
it covers your question.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
don't believe it is that should
be listed there that's something
you may want to think about the
future of the move to another
problem Madam speaker and gentle
lady from Bernalillo list stay
on page four let's go down to
one twenty four and we talk
about second hand dealers.
So in New Mexico if I wish to
take a.
Vehicle and recycle it.
And I have the vehicle in its
complete form.
I'm just take the title with me
you to recycle it.
If
an agency these individuals who
advertise all move all remove
your junk car if you don't have
the title.
What they do is cut the car in
half.
And so you can take in the front
half in the morning and you
don't need the title and the
back half in the afternoon.
This is a real problem the PED
auto theft of.
Tract one individual who is
three years ago.
Who was one hundred percent
disabled.
And and Bernalillo county.
In six months.
He and recycled sixty thousand
dollars worth of vehicles in
that manner.
Does your bill cover that I
think it needs to say in part or
whole something like that.
Mr speaker and gentleman of the
situation you are describing
would be covered under the
second hand auto dealer statute
which is a different statute
from this one.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
from Bernalillo I think it's
something else you could address
in here because this part of the
auto theft problem what they're
doing is finding these vehicles
and then taken without
permission and cutting them in
half in recycling but.
Anyway Madam speaker gentle lady
I'll go ahead and move on I have
an amendment that's being passed
out in a way you can tell the
members get the amendment and
then I'll explain the amendment.
Sorry gentleman I did reset.
Yes Mr speaker in the body this
ammendment
we're looking at are going to be
moved to the amendment.
Yes Mr speaker I will move
it is two two two six four five
point one house floor amendment
number one to house bill
sixty nine okay and I just for
roll call vote on all items on
this time.
Okay gentleman to explain the
amended this is probably a good
point in the debate to explain
why we're gonna allow
consideration of this amendment
could with this kind of wraps up
a bunch the concepts that we've
been talking about prior in the
session about whether a bill is
was not germane and how
equipment along the process
affect the substance of the
bill.
If you'll recall we had a few
instances on the for the house
where whether or not a bill
continues to be germane has been
raised and we have taken the
position that once a bill is
determined to be germane than
any amendments that occurred to
that bill throughout the process
are permissible and the decision
that I am making at this point
is whether or not the amendment
is in order.
Under the.
Rules that are applicables to me
and then amendments during a
sixty day session in other words
is this or is this not germane
to the bill.
The determination is not whether
or not the amendment is germane
to the house executive message
does that make sense gentleman.
Yes Mr speaker okay so buy a
house I just want to point out
that.
In order to be consistent.
With the earlier decision on for
example house bill one thirty
two.
where it was sure maybe
beginning in amendments were
made with reference to the
appropriation that was allowed
because the bill once determined
to be germane stays during the
through the entire legislative
process I am applying the exact
same principle to your amendment
right now do you understand and
agree with the gentleman.
Mr speaker I do thank you okay
the member has a passed out the
two two numbers triple to six
forty five point one gentleman
to explain the method.
Mr speaker and members of the
body when we look at the session
one of the things that we've
spoken about is we're going to
be tough on crime and started
dressing crime.
All over the state of this
amendment creates the crime of
organized retail crime.
State and.
that will be placed in the title
on page one wind thirteen after
regulated materials.
Then what we do is we go to page
four between winds fifteen and
sixteen and we insert a new a
section three.
A new section of chapter thirty
article sixteen New Mexico
state.
Annotated nineteen seventy eight
to read.
Organized retail crime
penalties.
A organized retail crime
consists of one or more of the
following acts committed as part
of a concert concerted effort
with one or more conspirators
for a coordinated plan to
deprive a retailer of the
merchandise on two or more
occasions or deprive multiple
retailers located in the state
of merchandise over the span of
one year.
Number one will fully taking
possession of merchandise with
the intent of converting the
merchandise without paying for
the merchandise to willfully
concealing merchandise with the
intent of converting the
merchandise without paying for
the merchandise three will fully
all three million labels price
tags for marking upon
merchandise with the intention
of depriving the retailer of all
or part of the value of the
merchandise for for.
Willfully transferring
merchandise from one container
in or which the merchandise is
displayed to another.
Container with the intent of
depriving the retailer of all or
some part of the value of the
merchandise.
The where we're convince
organized retail crime when the
aggregate value of the
merchandise taken concealed
altered or transferred is two
hundred and fifty dollars or
less is guilty of a petty
misdemeanor.
C. whoever commits organized
retail crime when the aggregate
value of the merchandise taken
concealed altered for
transferred is over two hundred
and fifty dollars but not more
than five hundred dollars is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
The.
Whenever whoever commits
organized retail crime when the
aggregate value of the
merchandise taken concealed
altered or transfer is over five
hundred dollars but not more
than two thousand five hundred
dollars is guilty of fourth
degree felony.
The programmer commits organized
retail crime when the aggregate
value of the merchandise taken
conceivable the part altered or
transferred is over two thousand
five hundred dollars but not
more than.
Twenty thousand dollars is
guilty of a third degree felony.
Have you ever commits organized
retail crime when the aggregate
value of the merchandise taken
concealed altered or transferred
is over twenty thousand dollars
is guilty of a second degree
felony.
Section G. is changed in this
section number one actor grid
activated value means a total
value of the merchandise taken
concealed altered or transferred
from the retailer or stand of
one calendar year.
To.
Retailer.
Means a person or business that
sells goods to the public for
the use or consumption rather
than for resale.
And then remember the succeeding
sections accordingly.
This.
Legislation was taken before the
courts and corrections interim
committee.
There was a previous
a presentation by retailers.
The retailers
Also requested the and I did
that it the committee endorsed
that was endorsed.
It was a point in correction and
doors piece of legislation.
So why do we need this.
Here is the emails that I
receive from.
store employee from Smith's his
name is Kim and it says good
morning.
I'm an employee at one of the
Smith's food and drug locations
in Santa Fe I see that the house
bill twenty nine is stalled out
for the moment please consider
supporting and pushing it until
now and
you yourself and other members
of the House have objected
strenuously to the reading of
letters during debate I would
ask you to kindly refrain from
doing so.
Okay Mister speaker anyway as an
employee of students and he's
talked about the problem that of
shoplifting and how dangerous it
is gotten inside the store.
They're also talking about
making it part of the discussion
of their union contract with the
smis Kroger's.
We don't have to go very far has
to look at the examples of how
it's out of control.
Last week and we saw on the news
Wirth miss Stewart in
Albuquerque had employed.
A or hired a security firm to
find stores security.
The security guard stopped a
male who was trying to exit the
store where the thirty pack of
beer.
During the scuffle.
The mail pulled out a handgun.
The security guard was able to
get the hand gun away from this
individual.
Who then swarmed and was able to
get out of the store.
And it is cold hearts returned
with another farm trying to
retrieve the firearm that had
been taken from the shoplifter.
This last week in there was a
multi agency.
Well done in Albuquerque trying
to address shoplifting and they
targeted home depot over the
weekend.
This was part of a the AG's
office the alcohol tobacco and
firearms state police and then
the local agencies.
What they did is they made
sixteen arrests.
They recovered four stolen
vehicles one hand gun one bullet
proof vest.
In several felony warrants in
the probe probation violations
of those that were arrested.
The night
are turning general Hector
Balderas was on the news.
Asking the legislature to please
pass this legislation it is
needed and we need to really do
that.
Every one of us.
I have witnessed this out of
control shoplifting.
Our constituents have contacted
us and complained about the out
of control shoplifting.
We and our paying constituents
are Payne an increased price of
the products in the store to pay
for this staffed.
Mr speaker with the I will stand
for questions.
Okay first co sponsored
gentlelady from Bernalillo is is
a friendly amendment no Mr
speaker it is not.
You were saying the further or
shall I go to debate.
Mr speaker go ahead to the
debate very good gentleman from
Bernalillo Representative
Maestas thank you Mr speaker
will gentleman from Bernalillo
yield Mister speaker I yield to
real good friend of mine from
Bernalillo thank you Mr speaker
gentle from Burley appreciate
that the.
The I think I agree with with
the sentiments and the policy
behind this bill let's talk
about it briefly to this
If this were a standalone
building they receive an
executive message this this
session.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo that is part of the
problem no it did not receive it
thank you Mr speaker John from
Los ended
And
This is for a standalone bill
has it ever been introduced.
In the house before.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
reduced by introduce this bill
for the courts and corrections
Committee in this session.
You Mr chairman I'll sell it so
it hasn't been introduced before
and I that answers my next
couple three questions has it
ever passed a single house
committee for and the answer is
no has ever passed the house
floor before and the answer is
no so it hasn't been vetted by
any house committee hasn't
invented by the house Judiciary
Committee
and it creates a new crime
I just like to ask the body Mr
speaker deliberate when's the
last time it is so difficult is
a monumental task.
To create a new crime in statute
because it's a could you ask
yourself what if it wasn't a
crime under years ago I should
be a crime today but with what
with the technology with this is
factual circumstances with
situations in the modern world.
We have to we have to be
creative with our statutes
whether states times when we
have to create a new crime to
fit a new factual circumstances
the bill that's that's right for
us today Mister speaker Jennifer
Mario house bill six ninety does
just that on two fronts it
creates the crime of the
Topshop.
So that differentiates between
just possession of stolen motor
vehicle the joy riders and the
actual organized criminals that
are still dismantle and and and
market automobiles it also
creates a new crime and metal
theft dealing with the standing
of catalytic converters the
damage that's done from Senate
copper from PNM box or whatnot
and and that that petty larceny
theft creates felonious damages
and and and
To communities to people and to
society and so the bill before
us house bill sixty nine is a
huge lift in a thirty day
session
we have to get it passed we have
to get it passed to put a third
to put a bill that's never been
vetted that's never been passed
it's never been analyzed.
I think jeopardizes house bill
sixty nine Mr speaker gentle
from Bernalillo and so I
two respectively stand opposed
to the to the amendment and as
the body to do the same thank
you Mr speaker thank you general
right now.
Mr speaker can I respond to the.
You have the floor the gentleman
is thank you for I was about to
call the gentleman from Lee if
you'd like to see something
that's fine.
Gentleman from.
Mr speaker earlier I.
When you start talking.
So who are.
Mr speaker earlier.
Mr speaker I would say that it
will be vetted right now with
all seventy members and I would
also take you back to what I
said earlier.
That this weekend in their
sixteen arrests they recovered
four stolen vehicles these
people are doing the same crimes
yeah we've got to address this
globally not just one little
isolated incident.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The gentleman from the
Representative Pettigrew thank
you Mr speaker this is the
gentleman from Bernalillo yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the friend
of mine from really.
Thank you very much
Mr speaker and gentleman can you
tell me how many years the use
of.
Attempted a chop shop bill
within the New Mexico
legislative body.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee I actually have an introduce
that bill I introduce the
legislation that created the
auto theft authority which is on
the books but this particular
bill I've been a co sponsor of
in the past.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Seldom share personal stories
appear but last weekend we had
the opportunity to spend Sunday
on our own and so.
My my wife and I Mr speaker and
gentleman
The opportunity to to to go
enjoyed downtown and the
positive area and
Mr speaker and gentleman we
we're in one store in the I was
I was jokingly.
The good shooting back and forth
with one of the stores
the incident on on a price on
something and the the guy just
looked at me and said you know
describieron.
Fund said excuse me.
Governor Nathan going to happen
to you the police are going to
come not a big deal.
Mr speaker and gentleman you
have a response the.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee this is exactly what is
occurring in the state that of.
Store owners or toner people not
to go ahead and get in
confrontations because they
could get injured just like the
incident last week and where the
security guard took the gun away
from the shoplifter.
That is happening all across the
state.
And so
what's happening is these
individuals are stealing all
this property they do multiple
crimes criminals don't have if
you will one simple profession
you know its it's involves
different of different avenues
of criminal activity so yes
you're I I'm not surprised you
know they're frustrated the
store employees are frustrated
they can't do anything.
Mr speaker and gentleman that.
I was striving to with this Mr
speaker and gentleman can you
tell me how your amendment to
this helps us and helps the
business's still with us.
Mr speaker and gentleman from we
the criminals understand the the
loss better than most of us here
to.
When I would rest one and
particularly if they had been in
through the system a little bit
they could tell me what the
penalty was for what they did.
What the plea bargain would be.
And how much time they would
spend in prison they were a new
that just going in.
But.
The.
The criminals what they're
really doing they understand
they gotta keep that under five
hundred dollars.
If it's over five hundred
dollars then it's a felony.
So what they're doing is they're
going store to store.
Stealing under five hundred
dollars and then selling this
merchandise either it fully
markets online for supplying it
to others who are selling at.
And that is why we're activating
aggregating all of the your
staffs so that we can bring it
to the felony level.
Mr speaker and gentleman I
appreciate your amendment I have
Representative of the
Representative Scott and I both
have a constituent of business
in New hops the has had over
twelve this within the last
twelve months.
And then Mr speaker and
gentleman these people literally
walk in.
Grab a pair of those.
Grab a jacket grab a TV.
And then walked out.
And we have no way to deal with
them R. Hobbs PD R. DA has no
way to deal with them their
hands are tied.
Mr speaker and gentleman can you
tell me how if if we were to
able to add this into this piece
of legislation could you tell me
how that would help my police
department and how that would
help might be a.
Help solve some of those crime
problems in Hobbs New Mexico.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee absolutely.
So the the the criminals
understand to keep the.
Amount under five hundred
dollars.
Now this is not to say that
they're not stealing over five
hundred they understand that's a
felony and if you're not going
to stop me for this you're not
going to stop me for that.
But we're going to aggregate all
these together we have store
video and so now we can go ahead
and identify you and we'll have
a video of your car we're gonna
have video of your co hearts and
we're gonna start tracking you
in adding this up.
That way we can address this
let's look at one of the
incidents that I described last
week and the stealing of the
case of beer.
So that individual the the
criminal pulls a gun.
Had he actually shot and killed.
This is the guard.
It would be wanted for murder
not for shoplifting.
We wouldn't be putting him in
jail for the period of time of
this amendment for theft we've
been putting him in jail for
life.
And so when we look at the cost
of this we've got to get
intervening early rather than
what these escalate to the point
that their murders and then put
people in prison for life and
that's what I'm seeing more and
more is.
Our murder rates are high.
And therefore we're putting
people in prison for thirty plus
years.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman I just I am.
I appreciate your amendment I
appreciate the way that you're
trying to deal with the with
problems of my own area.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
concerns me that.
We want to look at BMO.
A piece of legislation from one
very specific item we've seen
this over the last couple of
days that additional for the
specific topic for this deals
with the specific area no this
is a bad amendment because it
doesn't deal with why hi put
this piece of legislation in at
the end of the day this is Mr
speaker and gentleman this is an
issue and we have family members
Mr speaker and gentleman that
are shopping in the store for
this stuff is happening where we
potentially.
We can have an armed robbery
and then we can have somebody
heard and because it wouldn't
part of the original
legislation.
We're not gonna hear I think Mr
speaker and gentleman I think
that that's the.
An incorrect approach to the way
that we should look at things I
appreciate your your amendment
and I will be supporting the
thank you.
Thanks for the gentle lady from
Chavis.
Thank you Mr speaker of tangled
the court under management this
sorry about that Mr speaker will
the gentleman from Bernalillo
you'll please.
Mr speaker I yield to my
colleague to my left.
Mr speaker gentleman.
I.
I understand what you've been
talking about here the retail
crime the organized retail
crime.
Unfortunately.
I don't like it same to step
into early retail we have
organized crime that is going on
in our rural areas as well and
one more time we do have this
urban rural divide.
But whenever people come in in
the dead of night.
In the.
Tap into a diesel tank for the
fuel is to be used for the
tractors and they steal anywhere
from five hundred gallons to
thousand gallons during one
night.
That is a huge deal with the
price of diesel right now also
whenever they of.
Still bales of alfalfa.
It's not just retail crime that
does go on.
Mr chair Mr speaker and
gentleman
we see this happen all the time
out there and.
What we usually end up hearing
his will there's nothing we can
do unless you have proof.
And so our hands are kind of
tied to I don't know if it's a.
Going to be at I know it will
keep escalating Mr speaker and
gentleman.
That we have to have a starting
point and that's for this for
your amendment is leading.
Mr speaker we've seen on the
news national news of the what
they call the smash and grabs
and
If we don't do something now to
curtail the activity by allowing
our law enforcement to really
get after it it's going to get
worse and worse until.
As you pointed out before the.
Retail owners will take this
matter into their own hands and
Mr speaker gentleman I think
this is a good bill but we don't
need to save retail crime thank
you very much.
This gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you speaker this gentleman
from Bernalillo and Sandoval.
Mr speaker I yield to by calling
from San Juan.
Thank you Mr Gramm gentleman
Representative Ezzell.
Mentioned the smash and grab
new crimes that we're seeing all
across the country
We haven't seen that as bad here
yeah but that it that does
appear to be what's coming that
does appear to be some of what
is happening.
And.
That's that's the real concern
Mr speaker and gentleman.
For me.
Is.
It's just getting more
dangerous.
For the symbolized.
To try and live in a
civilization
the speaker and gentleman the
the law abiding the people who
are just going to work.
just trying to provide for their
family.
we look at these retail
locations that you're talking
about
lot of minimum wage employees
there a lot of some that are not
maybe minimum wage but not
higher up on the pay scale.
service speaker and gentleman
I see these places of business I
see these places where people
are able to work that it's
become more dangerous for them
just to try to provide for the
family.
so Mister speaker.
Life in America really changed.
In two thousand and one
September eleventh two thousand
and one.
And we have today.
If you want to go to just get on
a plane and travel.
The contortions we have to go
through now we're just
unimaginable.
Prior to that
the the the idea that I can.
Essentially almost the forest.
If if's if so desired by the TSA
Mr speaker and gentleman the
comic accommodating we have
become a custom.
To this invasion because a few
people some box cutters were
able to do what they did.
And now.
Everyone.
Thanks for.
And what I see happening now Mr
speaker and gentleman I and I
and and correct me if I'm wrong
but I understand now if you go
to some of the stores items that
used to be available to look at
pick up the box read the
specifics on the box for now.
We had a cage.
Is that is that what's happening
now in some of these retail
stores in particular in
Albuquerque.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan you bring up a real
good point about what we've
watched on TV that these masks
mobs going into stores.
The end of you know a to say it
this way it's coming to New
Mexico.
Because we don't have any teeth
in our laws we can't help law
enforcement we can help the law
body shopper.
And I agree then is store is
very dangerous with this type of
activity.
We've had an incident in
Albuquerque aware of an
individual gone into a store I
shoplifted a citizen
confronted him.
And that shoplifter shot in now
thank goodness he didn't die
but.
Intervene before if you will
that the vigilante ism begins to
take on the problem.
I spoken to officers who have
worked security details over
time.
Different stores.
In what they're doing is they
there's multiple people
involved.
So what they'll do is so go and
create a disturbance with a
of store employee to draw the
police officer over to another
area of the store.
While there co hard runs out
another door with the stolen
items.
And that is one of the
occurrences are happening so
yeah it's a it's a well
organized group it's organized
crime and we need to treated as
such.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
I look back on that what
happened in two thousand and
one.
And how that happened on that on
those airplanes.
Box cutters literally box
cutters and everyone sat.
And let the terrorists do what
they were going to do.
Mr speaker and gentleman now
what I see and you say this is
coming to New Mexico I would say
it's been in New Mexico.
Mr speaker gentle we've seen.
The square.
Taking over right here in Santa
Fe couple of years ago.
And historical statute.
Destroyed Mr speaker and
gentleman same thing in
Albuquerque two years ago.
Mobs coming in and.
The police let me rephrase that
the the mers of these
communities saying to the police
don't do your job let them let
it die down let it happen the
agency speaker gentle and where
we're headed in others thank god
it hasn't come here yet.
But in other states what we've
seen as worked we're telling
people Hey if somebody comes in
and they're gonna steal from you
even get into your home let them
do it.
There's gonna take what they
need and they're going to go Mr
speaker and and and gentleman
the problem is let's look back
let's let's not forget history.
A few people with box cutters I
guarantee you we did need TSA.
I guarantee you today if I'm on
a plane.
And there's somebody with a box
cutter trying to take over I'm
not going to sit in my chair to
we crash landed to a state
capital or to the Pentagon or.
He will look at the heroes Mr
speaker and gentleman of the
plane that crashed in
Pennsylvania we look at those
folks heroes because they they
didn't sit back and just take it
Mr speaker and gentleman we're
heading down that road where as
we continue to be soft on crime.
We're heading down the road to
anarchy.
And the residents and the people
have no choice.
If we have the shackles let's
let's rephrase that we have the
handcuffs on the police
officers.
The people have no choice but to
defend themselves and defend
their property Mr speaker and
gentleman I I don't believe any
of us want that one I I don't
want my.
Children.
My adult children to be in a
position where they're having to
risk their own lives to defend
life and limb or property Mr
speaker and gentleman but what
we see happening now and and I
and I noticed the governor
today.
Trying to interfere in the
business of this chamber and the
other and and and the
legislature this morning in the
paper saying that the
legislature is is not doing our
job being tough on crime and
we're not taking up any of her
of bills and we're not taking it
serious and Mr speaker I just
say to her how to how dare you
governor the so we have
separation of powers here.
She's not been paying attention
for the last several years this
chamber doesn't care about
crime.
This chamber doesn't care about
being tough on criminals this
chamber coddle criminals and
tells the public to allow the
crime to happen in their
presence.
Mr speaker and gentleman this is
a theme I was really helpful.
That we were going to come in
here and we were finally going
to allow the the the police
officers to to to be able to do
their job and that when we call
nine one we can expect that they
would be there to help us Mr
speaker and gentleman we're
heading down this road and I
would hate to see it.
We had an entire city in Oregon.
Two years ago that was taken
over they read the downtown the
the police stations and
government offices were taken
over Mr speaker and gentleman
this coddling of criminals.
This continual.
Being soft on crime and then.
We did last night I appreciate
it we through a few more
dollars.
Police officers were
dissatisfied in their work.
Because we have we have made it
so hard for them to do their
jobs I do appreciate the
legislation I wish it on father
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
believe that your legislation.
Gets us further down the road of
allowing the police to protect.
The citizenry.
So Mister speaker and gentleman
who I I said a lot there do you
have any response to any them
speaker Jim Mr speaker and
gentleman from San Juan yes
One of the incidents that I
could point back to in time so
late seventies I believe it was
It may have been the early
eighties the city police went on
strike.
And the criminals had a field
day.
The criminals right now know
that they can have a field day
because nothing's happening.
We
we've emboldened them.
We're seeing more of them armed.
Which is a real problem.
And if we don't start acting.
It's going to get way out of
control.
And so I mean we've got a look
at this problem as far as my
colleague pointed out the you
know the theft of diesel fuel
it's a global issue.
It's themes don't just do one
thing they're looking for
opportunity if they're given an
opportunity they're going to
steal.
Whatever the item is and the
sense of later.
So Mister speaker and gentleman.
I'm I'm so disappointed for my
for my children and my
grandchildren in the in the
America that we're living in
today.
when I was a child literally.
The out way past our before
parents would call you to come
in
and and you came in that because
it was safe outside they were
worried about the things they're
worried about now.
Mr speaker and gentleman we've
we've had discussion on on on on
some gun control measures and
speaker John as we were talking
I used to drive to school in my
pick up with a gun rack in the
back of a pick up.
And I and and and one of those
that bench seats that had where
you could stick another gun
under the seat.
And Miss speaker German I'm many
days I have three guns of that
vehicle and I pull on the
campus.
And I leave it unlocked.
And if and if the speaker and
gentleman if if myself and
another person had a had a
fight.
And we we we settle that
literally behind the gym with
this.
Something that was not a
permanent problem and then we go
probably be hanging out with
that same person on the weekend.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
world it is different in part
because what we've done is we've
started blaming the wrong people
and we started putting.
The the restrictions on the
wrong people this the the the
law abiding citizen.
What we've done is we've decided
even yesterday we found a way to
get criminals out of jail
quicker.
We did that last night.
And how do we how do we
manipulate system to to make it
to where we're actually paying
them for being incarcerated
should go against their their
fines and their fees Mr speaker
and gentleman I I I know at some
point this is the C. citizen
review will revolt and we'll see
it.
In the elections I just hope
it's sooner rather than later.
We have a response that a
speaker gentle.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
San Juan yes in the end of the
same error that you went to high
school I did too.
And what if any boy in a high
school that didn't have a pocket
knife.
One of the things that has been.
Sen here with the been talking
about there was a report from
the LFC which I was critical of
I think they looked at some
areas but did look at it
globally.
One of the things they said in
that report is the perception of
justice for their actions well
if we if we pass this there's a
perception are going to go to
jail for gonna come after you.
Last week in.
If you will the Attorney General
who's requesting this
legislation be passed.
Educated sixteen of a.
That you're going to be
prosecuted.
And so of absolutely we need to
we need to get tough on crime
we're gonna have to slow down
the criminal activity.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman I'm I'm I'm concerned
for.
America could look look like in
a few years
we've literally over the last
two years.
made it to where people.
Are used to being at home
instead of going out in public
we've made it to where Amazon
and GrubHub those are that's how
we live now Mr speaker and
gentleman I I I.
I used to watch sci fi movies
and and thriller movies ten
fifteen years ago that I'm
starting to see.
Our streets are starting to look
like some of those things a mad
mex and Aereo is in our future
we go down this road and and I
it's going to be Mr speaker and
gentleman where it will no
longer be living.
Mr speaker.
Will be surviving.
And that is the way to live.
Locked away in our homes because
it's on safe to go outside we've
made it to where we do not want
to be among other people.
And for good reason.
It's dangerous.
And the people who are seemingly
who we are doing everything for.
Are the people.
I don't care about society in
the way that you and I care
about society so this speaker I
support your your measure and I
I would hope.
To see the body look at this and
say.
At what point we're gonna draw a
line in the sand at what point
are we going to determine than
us is enough.
And Mr speaker I hope it's not
at the point where to the point
where
find on airplane today if I see
somebody with a a nice and
they're going towards the
cockpit I'm out of my chair and
there's going to be a fight on
that plane because I'm fighting
for my life and Mr speaker and
gentleman I I this is not a life
and death.
The rules per se but the
consequences are there the
consequences of inaction are
there so I fully support your
measure Mr speaker thank you
gentleman.
Gentleman from Lee.
Thank you Mr
thank you gentleman from
Bernalillo yield.
The speaker I yield to my
colleague from Eddie.
Surely.
The crime of shoplifting.
Is already uninsurable by some.
Could you describe that
something.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee so the current statutes when
I read the penalty statutes here
basically that's exactly what
shoplifting is being punished by
but what the criminals of
understood is don't get over
five hundred dollars because
it's not a felony and the police
are going to be involved.
And that's what they're really
doing is going under five
hundred to this store to that
store and on and on.
And it is an activity that is if
you would like us going to work
they go to work and that's our
daily work scheduled to go to
the store to store.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Is there any further
disincentive so above five
hundred dollars course that the
only break point with respect to
this retail clients.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Willie right now so I hundred to
twenty five hundred is a fourth
degree felony twenty five
hundred above is a thirty third
degree felony and then ten
thousand and above is a second
degree felony.
So it goes eighteen months three
years than nine meters.
Gentleman.
Your.
The issue
to this piece of legislation
would encourage the
disincentives.
This.
Mr speaker and gentleman from we
exactly what is currently
happening if you wanted to
prosecute the person H. self is
one incident.
And you you could you would have
to file multiple misdemeanors
and court.
You you shoplifted at this store
and you stole I'm making up
numbers three hundred dollars he
shoplifted at this store and
stole four hundred dollars he
shoplifted at this storm she
stole two hundred dollars and
they would take all of those and
it would be an individual trial
also for they could be they
could move the defense could
move to try to separate the H.
K. out so their individual.
So.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
ability to group rate is full
Vigil cross.
Is a very important piece of
this amendment would that be
correct.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee exactly if we start to add
them all up then we're going to
get to a felony level real quick
and then they kind of rises to
the top of the rack if you will
on prosecution.
Mr speaker.
Gentleman from a procedural
standpoint is it possible.
To take a criminals day's
activities for example national
grid them into one
significantly higher criminal
level and then prosecute one
case can we do that now.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Lee currently no each one is a
separate offense or separate
incident so they have to make
each one a of a case for the
court.
Now they generally charge
multiple crimes on a case but
it's each incident is expanding
on its on its own in this like
you pointed out we're going to
we're going to aggregate all of
of.
So did you go to the store and
steal two hundred dollars then
you went to this store and stole
three hundred miss one you stole
four hundred an hour seven now
we're nine hundred dollars so
you've committed a fourth degree
felony.
Speaker gentle.
Read the papers every morning.
In my home community and.
In Albuquerque and it appears
that this is becoming an
epidemic.
In this state around the
country.
I
long past.
For the message to go out Mr
speaker and gentleman that this
is not acceptable.
And thanks for weeks.
To be incarcerated.
To use.
Insurance.
At a group rate and level of
activity thank you Mr speaker
thank you Joe gentleman from
Bernalillo.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move to
table the amendment okay so no.
Okay we're on a motion to table
the amendment voted yes it will
be tabled a vote of no we will
be back to debate on it.
The vote is now open.
This forces the voters at the
close.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes.
Representative Alcon is a yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash is yes
Representative boon Kerr.
Yes Representative will guide
the yes representative Cadena.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield is a no
Representative Dow.
No Representative Dow is a no
Representative Harry Garcia.
Representative Miguel Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
is yes Representative and on
this.
No Representative non this is no
Representative Lente.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
is yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is a yes representative
Thompson.
Yes Representative Thomson is
yes Representative Trujillo.
Yes yes.
Representative Trujillo as an
adamant yes yes yes
Representative Chasey yes
Representative Chasey is yes.
Close to five hundred thirty
nine in the affirmative twenty
for the negative the proposed
amendment has been tabled.
Good generally saw the floor
thank you.
Mr speaker I was hoping that we
would send a strong message that
this is a session where we're
going to deal with criminal
activity.
That we're going to support our
constituents and making their
activities at a store.
safe to go and shop.
And support of our business
owners.
Unfortunately.
This is just gonna help embolden
the the criminals and it's going
to continue.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of this body.
Thank the gentleman next to the
gentleman from doing anna grant
and Sierra.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
please feel.
Mr speaker I will yield to the
gentleman.
Which is just.
My question of
Mr speaker gentle lady as I was
reading here where it says
Thank you for crimes with fair
market value of the material
stolen and then it just goes on
and explains that phone it says.
Of the material stolen so in
other words the fair market
value of the material stolen can
you explain that to me just a
little bit better and I just.
I think I know I understand but
I want to make sure I hear from
you please madam speaker Mr
speaker.
Completely.
Mr speaker.
And gentlemen it is I believe if
you're referring to page three
lines one through four if you're
looking at the bill it refers to
materials damaged or stolen.
Mr speaker gentle lady soul
someone goes over there and.
And I'm gonna give these
examples because our own
understand although then pull
the wires out of a.
For rental or something that is
not being rented and they go
through their in the full wires
on the wall and so forth.
The value of the wires that for
market value it scrapped.
For the for the damage convicted
it contributed to that building.
Mr speaker and gentleman
I'm gonna be for I answer your
question Mr speaker I was remiss
in not introducing my expert
witnesses on the floor with me
today so I would like to do that
Jason Weaks is is an attorney
representing and here
Representative is a lobbyist for
the responsible metal recyclers
initiative and we have the
commander Aaron Jones of the
investigative services division
of A. P. D. a special welcome to
him as it is his first time as
an expert witness on the floor.
Now Mr speaker and gentleman
thank you for your patience for
that.
In answer to your question it is
both it is the fair market value
of both the damage and the
metal.
Thank you Mr speaker gently so
they would go and account for
the metal I guess at the
recycling plant the value there
and the construction cost to
repair that building is that so
I understand that right Mr
speaker gentle lady.
Mr speaker and gentleman at fair
market value is determined
during evidentiary hearings in
the court process.
Speaker gentle lady but I'm
trying to.
Trying to calculate I'm a
numbers guy so my calculation is
based on what I'm reading here
that material stolen less than a
thousand dollars and so I'm just
trying to establish to make sure
I'm asking the right questions
are not going off into some
tension Mr speaker gentle lady
that's really what I'm asking
that question so you say it's
established in court.
But being that you have your
expert witnesses
Mr speaker gentle lady can you
explain that to a guy that
doesn't understand that quite
that good and you just want to
know if.
Does it include the value
because of it was fun and all
gonna come so let me let me go
back I'm gonna explain
something.
Mr speaker gentle lady I have a
constituent in my.
In my district who has had a
little home that was given to
her when her mother passed away.
If you just call me honestly two
months ago and said I'm in
trouble the came into my house
multiple times it was my
mother's home.
And my father mothers home too
fast on nobody's been there and
they went in and they stole all
the metal pipes all the wiring
out of the home so what I want
to understand is what with the
valuation how would that be
calculated.
Madam speaker and gentleman it's
calculated with the replacement
value for the items stolen as
well as the damage done.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
so I'm not sure of a few a few
things that.
That was one of the stories Mr
speaker excuse Missy here madam
speaker gentle lady that I
wanted to share with you
another story is it's hit home
my son who's a.
Twenty two years old.
He said he was about the card
given him and his first car and
he took good care of it and it
was time for him to.
Another car and so he he put on
the side of the road and you put
a for sale I move at the end of
our street.
And it's on the in the hi we run
by their.
And of course it's a lesson to
both him and.
That
The call tell you a story told
son make sure you bring the car
home at night.
And
Madam speaker gentle lady isn't
all it the I said yes Sir that
in.
Is it was okay for one night it
and bring it home they bring it
home and sometimes it would
bring it home because you get
busy.
One one morning
Madam speaker gentle lady the
guy that I walk with at six in
the morning we want the dogs
together he tell me I don't want
that morning this is a I wanted
to know that your son's car
sitting on blocks.
Taking this car park in the
front.
It was very devastating Madam
speaker gentle lady to see my
son who Dallas is money first
down payment for the new vehicle
watch and learn our lesson of
not leaving this car.
And so the just for the car part
of the story that I have the
just recently happens I went to
visit my my daughter in was in
the airforce Madam speaker
gentle lady and I was I was
driving through state after
state and I got to the place
were fees at and I parked at the
RV park in my motor home.
The my wife you know I'm not
gonna look for a for a place to
change oil because will be real
simple here they have those
mobile units besides that the
performance of all of the calls
mobile unit to help me.
And I called the mobile unit and
they tell me we can't get we
can't change oil for two weeks.
C. gonna be kidding.
is there anyway I can pay to
come out and you know expedite
this I got a full drive back to
New Mexico I want to make sure
the oil changed.
This is.
All right now.
All of our places in every place
I call with the same.
They were so busy and replacing
all the catalytic converters on
motor home after motor home to
have been stolen.
Another story.
Madam speaker is as you know on
I you won't know.
I'm a fuel director.
And there have been times that.
The cemetery my district in Los
crucis.
That's cemetery they had.
People go through there and
stole all the bronze vases.
Out of the cemetery.
Is the only Senator they've done
that and what the phone I don't
know in the cemetery or anything
but it's it's pretty shattering
when I go to a grave side to see
that a person up not only the
the not only the the vases what
the bronze markers are missing
from the from the people's level
once again.
That's shattering because I I I
would lose it I was there for
greenside and I see people just
all over looking at their graves
and and these some of these
people have paid the cemetery
twenty five hundred to five
thousand dollars and and I know
that the the the value of that
metal recycled is is is very
little.
But to replace is very high.
My family come from they're
they're all contractors on the
one that went rolled in one of
my own and did the madam speaker
gentle lady in the fuel business
just because by chance and but.
I don't know how this is
happening so often.
What a month and a half ago my
my brother has a Mr Stewart
keeps all these materials.
And they stole I don't know how
many trucks of building material
from his Mr.
Metal wired you name it it was
gone.
So it's happened to my father
he's got another another yard
also jumped the fence and then
the same I want to go on and on
about the stories with these a
personal accounts madam speaker
gentle lady that that I
personally know and so for that
I'd like to you know ask you if
you consider an amendment.
We're
I lost moment here.
Disappeared give me a moment
madam speaker gently.
A gentleman while we're working
on that there's been a request
for the gentleman to be able to
remove their coats and.
It is so ordered.
And gentle ladies as well.
Sorry madam speaker gentle lady
I had final highlighted and so
forth but anyway
so I'd like to I hope that you
entertain this I think it's
something that's fair
This is a the amendment foreman
meant and I I you tell me when
you like for me to give your the
to to to number.
And basically this this
ammendment would help us on page
two line seventeen strike the
closing on I'm sorry can you
just give us the second we need
to get this uploaded to the
website so just read the two oh
two number for now and then we
can give an explanation on the
amendment just a little bit
thank you madam speaker.
Point two two six four zero
point one.
Thank you this is the second
here absolutely essentially.
Okay gentlelady from Bernalillo
is this a friendly amendment.
No madam speaker it is not madam
speaker I was hope that I could
talk a little bit more about the
about it before now I can read
it and I got stopped that's why
madam speaker can I at least
read what I'm doing Sir John and
so we went to introduce the
amendment and then I have to
sponsor is friendly and now you
to have a chance to explain your
amendment.
Thank you madam speaker.
I was hoping that
I'm always a friendly guy and I
thought it was going to be a
friendly amendment.
All right we'll try to make
people smile around here madam
speaker the the amendment is on
page two.
Line seventeen strike the
closing quotation marks between
line seventeen eighteen Sir the
following new subsection.
He any person was guilty of
operating a chop shop should be
required to provide restitution
to the owner of the unlawfully
obtained motor vehicle for
vehicle as defined in the motor
vehicle called.
Number two.
From the on page four line
fifteen strike the closing
quotation mark and all and
between the lines fifteen and
sixteen insert the following new
subsection any person who is
guilty of of criminal damage to
property by sector attempted
theft of regulating material
shall be required to provide
restitution to the owner of the
reputed regulated material and
the owner of any real or
personal property damage by that
by the theft.
Gentleman is there any debate on
the amendment.
Gentleman from all those
counties Representative Zamora.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you.
Representative from Dona Ana.
Grant and CLR for bringing this
ammendment forward so what is it
that you're trying to do with
this ammendment in layman's
terms.
Mr speaker gentleman friend
marketing
What what I'm trying to do here
is just make those people whole
people hold and.
In response to me all Mr speaker
is very very important.
Sometimes getting away from that
with our children.
Teacher I teach my children that
responsible is very very
important and.
Look.
I'm not trying to find ways Mr
speaker to.
Incarcerate people I'm trying to
find ways that we can actually
come together to provide means
that that would deter people
from creating crimes and hurt
the innocent such as that lady
who her mom's house was
destroyed and I personally know
I've been in the home.
So madam speaker and gentleman.
So in your amendment.
You're telling me.
The property that has been
damaged.
Will either be fixed or
replaced.
In some manner pretty close to
what it was to begin with.
Is that is that correct that is
correct
Mr speaker German I'm just
trying to find a way that that
person you know we all
so let me go the little further
we we think well Mr speaker
would gentleman I have insurance
it'll cover it.
The the lady had insurance but
it in cover.
For deductible.
It covers some of the other
damages and stuff and and then
some people fall underneath that
deductible.
In damages.
Some things are not covered such
as the lost base of bronze vase
at the cemetery or the
the bronze plaque there's no is
insurance covering that Mr
speaker.
And madam speaker and and
Representative.
I also believe that there are
some things that aren't covered
by insurance sometimes we have a
vehicle we're not using at the
time.
And it's not against the law to
keep it.
And.
Keep it in storage maybe in your
backyard.
And therefore I see this
ammendment working.
For the landowners.
For property owners of whatever
kind of property it is.
To get some kind of
compensation.
And I don't think it's nothing
but right for the state.
For people that have had some
kind of encroachment of this
kind.
To be constant compensated for
what they've lost.
Because sometimes.
Not only holding the criminal
responsible.
Would be good but it would also
be good that that person.
Doesn't suffer losses.
And they have to pull it out of
their pocket.
I think this is a good amendment
alike it
Can you explain.
The last party amendment on on
the.
On the for any person who is
guilty of a criminal damage to
the property by the.
Of regulated material.
Can can you explain the
regulated material part of the.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
gentleman so that's just like
the you know was defined earlier
the metal on the different types
of metal so you know for
instance that that late the poor
lady that the car cut all her
copper pipes put all the wires
are that's that's to define what
property what what that exactly.
Regulated material so this is
defining those metals those
metals author regulating
the same is and the perfect
example of you again for all
those all those people who
sometimes they'll put just minor
the reason that we do serve
their insurance those those are
those are these part time in
that in that lot.
The reducer their insurance
sometimes when.
Perfect example if somebody runs
around and what that you're not
using it the chapel a catalytic
converter that's a lot of money
to replace and and that would
come out of the person's pocket.
And and madam speaker and
gentleman and that's exactly my
point I was getting at.
Is not only the regulated
material but when they when they
go into the into the house.
Reporter on to an RV.
And they take the catalytic
converter perhaps.
The fraction.
It's it's going to be a fraction
of the cost.
What they sold it for and what
it cost the owner to replace
that.
For instance in the house.
They might walk off with.
Fifty dollars for the copper.
But it would cost an enormous
amount of money to repair the
walls.
To get the the a permanent.
To get a contractor out.
To repair the walls.
Clean up the house.
Would take an enormous amount of
money and that's why I like your
amendment is because if we put
it into this bill then it would
make.
The the vandals or the or the
thieves.
Responsible for replacing that.
And I think that would deter
crime.
Make a ride for the landowner.
I believe your amendment is a
good amendment.
And I hope that the body looks
at it that way.
In the men's the bill thank you
madam chair and thank you.
Representative.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
are the seed kid and kid CCM
also see.
To see more from the last close
system also noted the and all
For the general election to.
In this case study but are you
learn this CM also see the local
bus services additional show I
love constructive symbol fund up
in that.
can no I don't know so
unemployment programs you want
to see you the state even look
up asa is locust almost get in
about are the kids can also
Bowen implements wrong this can
or cannot support one and in a
letter sent on a in fact says
what when we the solemn.
Yes in most of course is in in
in in in the first on the Los
thank you know Superman brimaz
intensive full could come into
mobile features gonna serve when
him to that's what I'm saying
Madam speaker gentleman for
those to telling him in Spanish
it we continue down this road
continue down this road of not
holding people accountable not
so much to incarcerate them more
to show them given the term them
limits care them it should not
because we wanted classroom but
more so to change our lives
because you know they start a
little bit start little by
little increasingly this isn't
that bad I think it in trouble
probably all right I did last
time in catching.
And then they're doing something
serious and now we've got a
young man or young woman.
For a person that.
Started out with something very
small ending up in in prison and
I don't want to see that so.
Thank you.
Gentleman
from Bernalillo.
As as as well as speaker at a
proposal to see you in in the
present that I moved to William
and.
No we can roll call vote for
for.
Okay there's been a roll call
vote requests on this ammendment
is there further debate on the
amendment.
I've already moved to table
side for the motion and Spanish
my apologies okay we are on
final debate of the house for
amendments to one to house bill
sixty nine as amended the vote
is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The clerk to call those members
who without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative Gail
Armstrong.
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative um cough.
Yes Representative will go both
yes representative Cadena.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Dow.
Representative Ely.
For.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
both yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative and on
this.
So Representative Hernandez both
no Representative and at a.
Representative votes yes
representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis both
yes Representative Roger
Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
both yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
votes yes representative
Sarinana.
Representative Thomson.
Is that representative Thompson.
Two year old ready for now.
And how do you vote.
Yes Representative Thomson votes
yes Representative Trujillo.
By a vote of.
Madam speaker.
Representative Crowder
Representative Crowder votes no
Representative Crowder votes no.
Representative Dow votes no
Representative Dow votes no
Representative Eli.
Yes Representative Ely votes
yes.
By a vote of thirty nine in the
affirmative twenty and the
negative the.
Amend for amendment one to house
bill sixty nine as amended has
been taped.
Representative editor you still
have before.
Just.
Madam speaker I have a apology
to everybody for doing this not
for my amendment but for not
allowing enough time to eat.
Zoom like everybody's on eating
so.
Some of those interventions
thank you very much for
entertaining at least the the
the conversation and god bless.
Okay we're back on the bill
there's further debate the
gentle lady from Travis county
Representative Ezzell.
Madam speaker thank you very
much for the gentle lady please.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from Janice.
Madam speaker thank you very
much in regards to your bill I
don't have an amendment okay I
don't have an amendment but in
regards to your bill.
On page two of your bill line
twenty is starts out new
material and then it goes on to
list what everything is and
everything all following on page
three line twelve for the
purpose of this section aluminum
material means wire or quilt
drugs made from aluminum and
alumina hello you for an
aluminum by product.
So madam speaker what I do want
to point out I'm going back to
this rural urban divide.
Irrigation pipes made out of
aluminum that are quite costly
now and the reason I bring this
up.
Is because this happened.
On our farm.
Are your Gator was out he had
been set and tubes he had walked
to the opposite end of the field
to make sure that the water was
getting all the way down there.
And then all of a sudden all of
the water stopped.
Group the people had come by and
had stolen every aluminum
irrigation to there was at least
seventy five.
Education tubes in the field.
Later on that year.
All these farmers.
Out on cotton would.
At all the copper wiring stolen
out of their pop motors.
And that's over for in that
particular area that's over four
hundred feet of copper wire that
was stolen.
So I hope that that is
applicable to whenever you're
describing what these things
are.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
Another thing that I got really
this is.
A little bit emotional for me.
Last week I had to attended
funeral an artesian well we read
the cemetery.
Of course we do visit my parents
grave my grandparents great my
great grandparents graves and my
great great grandparents graves
down there.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
Markers for my dad's grave.
And both my granddad's graves.
That designated that they were
better in of our four course had
all been stolen.
I walked around to several of
the grades that I knew for
veterans as well and all of
those that markers had been
stolen I went to the office
there and inquired about it and
evidently there had been a rash
of thefts from the cemeteries.
Of the markers there were
honoring these brave soldiers
that fought for the pre freedom
of our country and that's
deplorable.
These are made out of bronze I
know what was happening with
them they were being melted
down.
And to me that my heart hurt my
heart.
But.
And I'm just upset about it.
Madam speaker gentle lady I'm
going back to your bill now I
didn't mean to get off subject
there but this is what we see
continually happening.
And it's very bothersome to me
whenever you're listing.
Going into the truck shops and
everything I'm assuming that.
And this is going on in the
rural areas of our state
tractors are being stolen does
this fall under the realm of
what your bill to is trying to
cover.
Madam speaker and gentle lady if
you're referring to section one
of the bill.
Tractors are defined as vehicles
in the motor vehicle code to so
they are included in the
statute.
Okay madam speaker that's for I
was going with this because
into the mode of motor vehicles
a code it does sieve vehicle
that is still for sale propelled
and every vehicle that's
propelled by electric power
obtained from batteries or from
overhead trolley wires but not
of operated upon rail.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
I'm also assuming that this does
include off road or all terrain
vehicles that are used out on
farms and ranches is that
correct.
Madam speaker gentle lady yes it
does and madam speaker gentle
lady that often occurs out the
route it happens more often than
not out in the rural areas as
well another thing that we have
seen but I don't think your bill
covers it we're seeing now and
it's been happening quite often
for the past several years.
Stop trailers horse trailers and
flatbed trailers being stolen
that they are not self
propelled.
They're not driven by a battery
so how is that going to be
covered because they are being
stolen they are being
disassembled to various parts
off of them stolen so I wonder
how that is going to be
addressed madam speaker and
gentle lady.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
give me a moment to confer with
the expert witnesses.
Madam speaker gentle lady under
the motor vehicle code there's a
definition for motor vehicle to
which the gentle lady referred
there's also a definition of
vehicle and trailer would fall
under that.
Madam speaker I'm not too sure
that those are not I would like
for you to check on that for me
please if you wouldn't mind.
Madam speaker and gentle lady do
boats fall under this as well.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
can confirm that trailers are
considered vehicles and are
prosecuted as vehicles under the
motor vehicle code one more
minute to answer the question
about boat.
Okay madam speaker gentle lady
thank you very much because my
concern there is we do have to
have our trailers our our
trailers are livestock traders
are flat bed trailers we do have
to have them losses boat trader
has the last that they are not
powered on their own accord  the
boat only if it's put on water
those are also being stolen
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
guess are concerned about the
rural areas of the state
and you know what we do exist
there is a rural area of New
Mexico madam speaker gentle lady
and we are being hit the same
way.
What we are also seeing the
rural area is people.
Okay this happened to the
neighbor of ours not too awful
long ago.
The wife is coming back from
town noticed a vehicle parked
over behind the vacant house on
their property we're hired had
used to live she pulls over
there there is a pickup parked
over there with this with the
long a flat bed trailer on and
he was busy loading up hi.
Two and seven eighths inch pipe
in two and three eights and I
and all of you all know what the
cost of steel pipe is.
She has quite the guy was doing
he said well I'm just.
This pipe up and she said do you
have permission to load it will
they haven't said anything yet
so I came out here this is my
third load.
She got in since
she called her husband he was at
the back into the pastor he the
the branch he said I can't get
there in time called the
sheriff's department she did.
And
The shares Department so we'll
be out there is will she waited
like twenty or thirty minutes
caller has been back and she
said the girls are here in room.
We are a.
We're manure restraining him
from leaving.
All and to get action.
And this is nothing against our
sheriff's department because
they do a great job.
That the has been called the
city need to get out there my
wife is being threatened.
Ken's may be involved.
It wasn't very long before the
sheriff's department was there
come to find out all the loads
that he had stolen from inside
that house and outside that
house totaled over twenty five
thousand dollars.
That's a big deal out of
somebody that is trying to make
improvements that they had paid
for all this stuff.
I'm tired of making it easier
for the criminals madams speaker
gentle lady.
We do have to get tough on crime
what else is happening out in
the rural areas just for you all
this information a lot of these
farmers now.
And renters have metal shops.
They lock their shops at night
because he knows he's going to
show up in the middle of the
night and try to steal anything
they can get their hands on.
Some of these.
Groups of these are doing.
Is there going to the backside
of this metal building.
And they've got to cut toward
each.
The cut inside of the shop.
They're still and everything in
there.
So madam speaker gentle lady.
Whenever there Tate stealing all
the tools anything they can get
their hands on and then going
down and trying to sell it for
what is help me.
Is marking all of our tools
everything that's out there.
In a very inconspicuous spot but
where we know it's more words
engraved.
But we have to stop crime we
have to put a stop to the
kitchen release program we have
to get tough on crimes and we
have to quit state and you bet
people don't do that anymore
this is unacceptable.
I've worked my **** off all my
life.
And I'll be damned if I'm going
to let somebody to just come in
and walk away with thank you
madam speaker.
There's further debate on the
bill the gentle lady from Otero
county Representative black.
Thank you madam chair does the
generally the gentle lady from
Bernalillo yield.
Madam speaker I will yield to
the gentle lady.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady.
Madam speaker generally roughly
do you know how many shops have
been for better words busted I
guess in the last year
gentlelady.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady of the answer to
that question is actually very
difficult to get to because we
have not yet delineated
operating a cop shop as a crime
therefore we don't collect those
statistics on it.
Thank you gentle lady and madam
speaker so generally this bill.
Is basically it's going to
define what a chop shop is
verses a recycling center or a
legal salvage yard or something
like that is that correct gentle
lady.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
this bill does define what a
chop shop is.
Thank you for that gentle lady.
and madam speaker so gentle lady
I don't see a problem with your
bill.
I would however like to propose
an amendment.
It's on its way.
Okay generally what we're
getting this passed out to do
things a little differently than
last time can you give us the
two oh two number first and then
you can explain the amendment
what we're getting it passed out
and uploaded online yes madam
speaker of the two oh two number
is two two two six four three
dot one.
Related to explain the
amendment.
Thank you madam speaker so
basically what this ammendment
is going to do.
Is it's going to make it tougher
on the criminals.
We unfortunately Madam speaker
and gentle lady so far the
session we've been kind of soft
I'll be honest with you.
the governor's even saying that
we're being lenient on crime.
So what basically this amendment
will do is it's going to make
all the.
Definitions of the.
All the penalties in the bill
are going to be increased by
one.
So a petty misdemeanor will be a
misdemeanor.
A misdemeanor will be a fourth
degree felony.
And so on.
Okay jali thank you give us a
second while I get this online.
It's optimally going to go now
to the representative from
Bernalillo Representative
Figueroa is this a friendly
amendment.
Madam speaker and gentle lady it
is not a friendly amendment from
a very friendly gentle lady.
Okay is there any debate on the
amendments.
Gentleman from Bernalillo that
is requirement to table the
amendment I forgot can I have a
roll call.
The delay has requested a roll
call vote.
Right now we have a motion to
table tools for minimum one to
house bill sixty nine as amended
the vote is now open.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yes Sir yes.
That is about to close.
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon is a
yes Representative Gail
Armstrong.
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash is a yes
Representative will grow.
Yes Representative because the
yes Representative Dow.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Is Representative Harry Garcia
is yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
is a yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente is yes
Representative Lewis.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative McQueen.
Representative McQueen is yes
Representative Roger Montoya.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is a yes representative
Sarinana.
Representative Thomson.
Yes Representative Thomson is
yes Representative Trujillo yes
Representative Trujillo is a
yes.
Okay bye voted thirty nine in
the affirmative twenty two in
the negative house.
Representative Dow is no.
Okay.
Thirty nine votes in the
affirmative twenty three votes
and the negative house floor
amendment number one to house
bill sixty nine as amended has
been tabled.
Representative black you still
have the four.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentlelady from Bernalillo I
wish you well with your bill I
do wish we could have got this
amendment passed I think making
people accountable for their
actions is very important and
perhaps that would slow some of
the crime down thank you thank
you madam chair.
Okay we're back on the bill
there is further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Maestas.
All that I stand up thank you
madam speaker allegedly from
below yields.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you madam speaker deliver
religious Weston and strong
support when I think everyone's
put time and effort into these
this bill of these two bills
have passed the house
individually join together the
in this rapid special session
this is imperative that we pass
this tonight is maybe what the
one of the most impactful policy
bills during the session to
really crack down on organized a
chop shop crimes as well as as
the phenomenon of of metal theft
causing a massive amounts of
criminal damage so so I think
that generally madam speaker
from Bernalillo familiar ship
and and and getting this done
this is a tremendous tremendous
public policy changes going to
it's going to move our state
forward thank you.
Further debate the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Santa and Santa
Fe counties Representative Lord.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady please yield her
time.
Madam speaker I will yield to
the gentle lady from all of
those counties thank you.
Madam chair and.
Madam speaker it's Madam speaker
thank you.
And representative so.
This is a.
A bill that affects my backyard
I have a new district have been
moved into Torrance County.
And a couple years ago the hold
on my glasses slipping down my
the Albuquerque please.
Found a salvage yard.
Out there in that district.
With two hundred and seventy six
vehicles.
That were possibly stolen with
the right off the bat they found
twenty.
So we do have an issue in my
district where.
And I've heard this because I
talked to law enforcement to we
do have a huge issue with chop
shops that are going on
regulated they're not they're
not be looked into.
And they said that the law
enforcement officers are told
me.
That.
One of the big problems is that
there's not enough law
enforcement resources because is
our out in very rural areas.
So.
When they went into this area to
go look at some of the cars
which had been sitting there for
ever out there.
And I'm not blaming anybody for
this and they were sent on a
very rural area probably hard to
see.
This person not only was.
not only was he having a bunch
of stolen cars he was also
involved with criminal activity
and was also according to one of
the officers I talked to is went
there was a dangerous criminal.
So madam speaker and and
Representative this does affect
my district.
And.
One of the other big issues that
we have.
Is not only is that affected my
district is for acting all over
the state and it comes back to.
The issue that we have been too
soft on crime and we don't have
deterrence so what I'm finding
and speaker Representative is
that throughout the state it's
it's not just the chop shops
it's so many other things that
we need to be tougher on.
Madam speaker and and
Representative
Even our governor on the front
page of the newspaper today seem
to be very frustrated about the
fact that crime is such an issue
and I think place the blame on
the wrong people but
She wrote a scathing article
this morning about what is
happening and that we are not
pushing the issues forward so
this is one of the bills that
will actually help with what
we're all trying to do and
speaker Representative.
We're trying to at this point
it's made tougher on crime that
has been the whole theme running
forward throughout this entire
session so one of the things I
was looking at in this bill.
Can you explain to me.
If someone were to go and they
were to see it was a chop shop.
What would the charge be for
that and and the possible time
frame for if they were convicted
of those charges.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
would direct you to page two of
the bill and first madam speaker
let me say thank you I
appreciate the support of the
gentle lady and members of this
body in our debate today around
the issue of keeping people
safe.
And statutorily addressing
crime.
Across New Mexico with respect
to pop shops the first line of
page two.
Mentions third degree felony.
Thank you madam speaker and
representative so what is the
and I do appreciate that it is a
third degree felony what is what
would be the the sentencing for
a third degree felony.
Madam speaker gentle lady.
three years.
madam chair and representative I
think it's six can you double
check with your experts would be
six years.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
the expert witnesses are adamant
it's three years thank you madam
chair representative I
appreciate the admin part in
that.
Okay so we're looking at three
years SO many as a chop shop so
what I hear from a law the law
enforcement officers is that
these people are not just doing
chop jobs usually there's a lot
more things going on sometimes
as I'm looking I've been
researching it's amazing the
things you learn as a
representative because you're
constantly researching these
bills and some things I've
learned from a local on for
serving online a lot of times
there's other things going on is
there anything in here to
address
organized crime or criminal
behavior in in this bill.
Madam speaker and gentle lady in
the pursuit of evidence to
prosecute this kind of crime.
Evidence of other crimes as you
stated.
It is often found so.
Because occasion can anchor many
charges all of that they provide
evidence for.
Okay
so madam speaker and
Representative what I would like
to do is I have an amendment
what I'm trying to do is I'm
trying to take this bill that
you have which I do agree with
this going in the right
direction and to deal with
Topshop issues.
What what I would like to see as
I like to give even more teeth
because a lot of times these
people that are doing this are
involved in criminal activity or
criminal organizations and
organized crime so what I would
like to see just to add into.
This bill I'd like to add in
Madam chair representative
racketeering
racketeering is something that
we could use to get.
When they do their investigation
they could look at what's
happening do the detective work
and when they do discover that
there is a racketeering involved
they can also tie that in Madam
chair and representative with
this with this bill the other
thing that racketeering does
that your bill doesn't is it
allows home when we pull this up
one second.
Adding racketeering thirty dash
forty two dash one through six
allows for civil remedies
something that aren't included
in your bill madam chair and
representative so now with that
and there a person who sustained
injury would have a way to
collect fees.
In a civil lawsuit or they
wouldn't be able to do this with
the chop shop.
So madam chair and
representative.
The amendment hopefully if it's
been passed out.
Is point two two six four four
point one.
And I want to move house floor
amendment I think we are at
three.
Still one okay one to house bill
sixty nine.
What the roll call vote.
Okay and gentle lady has
requested a roll call vote and
has it at the to to number give
us a second to get this uploaded
online we will continue with the
amendment thank you madam chair.
Speaker.
Okay ready gentle lady dear
Representative Figueroa my
apologies forget forgetting
earlier is this a friendly
amendment.
Madam speaker no this is a
redundant and the laws so it is
not friendly thank you.
Okay is there any debate on the
amendment.
Can I claim the amendment now
Madam speaker.
I apologize my apologies delay
the entire party done that do
have further to say about it
thank you just briefly so if you
look on here what we're doing is
just on page one line thirteen
after some of calling we're
inserting amending the
definition of racketeering it
goes forward to explain all the
definitions of racketeering and
then on paying each the third
page it adds operating a chop
shop and it will also allow for
Senator remedies I stand for
questions on this.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker I move
to table the amendment.
Okay we're on a table in motion
for a house floor amendment one
to house bill sixty nine as
amended the vote is now open.
The vote is about to close.
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash food yes
Representative um carro.
Yes Representative Google votes
yes Representative Dow.
For you know Representative Dow
votes No Representative Fajardo.
Representative Fajardo votes no
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
both yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative and on
this.
Representative Hernandez votes
no representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lewis yes
Representative Lewis votes yes
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
both yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero votes yes
Representative Thomson.
Yes Representative Thomson both
yes Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo
votes yes.
Okay with a vote of forty two in
the affirmative twenty four and
the negative house for amendment
one to house bill sixty nine as
amended has been tabled.
And ladies so I before thank you
madam speaker I think the
experts for and representative
for letting me know it's three
years because it's even worse I
was thinking six years was not
enough of so I apologize my
apologies to the people at home
I'm trying to make it tougher on
crime but I just.
Not happening so thank you very
much of my time.
Si no further debate gentle lady
to close.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you body for spirited
debate about serving the people
of New Mexico it is past time we
get this tool in the hands of
law enforcement.
I move that house bill sixty
nine as amended do now pass the
house
we are on final passage of house
bill sixty nine as amended the
vote is now open.
The.
The vote is about to close.
The clerk to call those members
without a recorded vote
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon votes
yes Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash both yes
Representative Blanca.
Yes Representative global yes
Representative Dow.
Yes Representative Dow votes yes
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
votes yes Representative
Herndon.
Representative Herndon votes yes
representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Lord.
Reluctantly yes.
Representative Lord votes yes
Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis votes
yes Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
votes yes Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
votes yes Representative Rehm.
Representative Rehm votes yes
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is yes Representative Thomson.
Yes Representative Thomson both
yes Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo yes
Representative Rod Montoya yes
Representative Rod Montoya votes
yes.
Five of sixty two in the
affirmative I and the negative
house bill sixty nine as amended
has duly passed this house.
We're now moving on to item
number three gentle lady from
Santa Fe are you ready and madam
speaker.
We get to that point.
For the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
Senate bill thirteen on final
passage is been taken is now
subject debate amendment or
substitution this creates.
I'm sorry I did on the internet
scratch that were to go to item
number four on the counter.
gentlelady from Bernalillo are
you ready Representative
Sarinana is saying madam
speaker.
Please give me to that point
please.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill thirteen as twice
amended on final passage is been
taken that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
gentlelady to explain the bill
thank you madam speaker house
bill thirteen twice amended
creates the teacher residencies
changes bill creates a teacher
pipeline which adds more
teachers to our workforce with
for that exam first the
questions then speaker.
There is a gentleman from Santa
Fe County representative for.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentle lady health I do yield to
the gentle Madam speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady I was not in any of the
committees this bill came
through and I would just love to
learn more about this new
teacher pipeline can you please
explain to me what this changes
in current law I will thank you
madam speaker and thank you kind
gentleman this bill currently is
is a bill to bring alternative
license to people who want to be
teachers into the field with
this change we're adding on
fourth year
in a a fourth year students in
the tier program to come into
the field and it's it's changing
it was a grant now it's a
permanent program we're trying
to get permanent it's
twenty thousand dollars
appropriation the the state been
that each teachers currently get
is getting is twenty thousand
we're changing that to thirty
five thousand in hopes that
whoever comes into to this
residency program would have to
take a second job.
it pays for the thanks committee
skilled.
Second year or third year level
teacher to be a mentor to the
resident
What else would you like to.
So as we originally thank you
this is helping me to understand
this much better so.
A state us teacher Mr tutor is
assigned to be a mentor of this
new resident that's that's great
to hear because I want to make
sure receiving mentor ship and
and we all know that whatever
you know in a job that it's a
challenge to find your your
bearings especially the
classroom of the speaker and
gentle lady so
is this.
Based off of a pilot that we
already have going on right now.
Madam speaker and kind of yes it
is and it's a year long program
where we have a level two or
level three highly skilled
teacher I'm working with an
undergraduate final year or an
alternative licensure per
teacher resident and they were
together for a whole year so
they learn everything about
teaching from pastor management
to how it's the really looking
a kid social and emotionally
it's a great program because it
teaches them over the entire
year what happens from testing
to you know going to assemble it
what happened you don't test on
a given a test on assembly day
because because I paid attention
there's a whole bunch of things
that happen during this year
that they learn from it's a
great program because when they
come out they are not only they
not only know how to teach and
have gone through the program
for a year but they have a
different kind of confidence
because they know when they're
when they're done and they go to
their own question they're ready
on day one.
Mr generally this is the sounds
wonderful I mean I'm I really
appreciate hearing about this
how long has this pilot been in
place you know madam speaker
gentle lady Mr madam chair and
kind gentleman I think the pilot
maybe three to five years it's
been thank U. N. M. C. N. M. and
an issues been and.
Mr Julie thank you and and did
we actually passed legislation
to enable this pilot or is this
something that the PED you know
something that executively was
done if we passed legislation
two years ago for the pilot and
this is just to make it more
permanent.
Thank you madam speaker Joanne
I'm also hearing from my
colleague did this was first
passed in two thousand three
at least the the neighborhood
unable and I don't know if there
was subsequent legislation that
added to it met Mrs as a
familiar that is speaker I'm
kind of I'm not maybe the
mentoring part of it but not the
residency part of it.
That was two years ago.
Madam secretary general thank
you because this is sounded
familiar and I just want to say
I know that.
spiritually.
I have some concerns with the
the way that our educators are
I guess the program a to get a
and and and education degree I
have some concerns with how that
structure Mr gently I really
feel like we spent a lot of time
talking about children and how
we develop and how they learn
and we spent very little time
actually teaching a teacher how
to teach and teaching upper a
you know a new teacher the
material that they will teach
the to be experts in that
material and then having that
experience so Mr Joyce I really
like hearing about this this
residency program or they
actually have a year in the in
the classroom.
You know that I mean.
Not not just being you know
thrown into the that the pool to
sink or swim but having a
teacher there to help Mister
Jerry this this sounds really
sounds sounds great I think
could really have an impact on
the ability of our new teachers
were coming on the system to do
to be more prepared and be ready
to hit the ground running when
they actually start teaching.
Madam speaker and and madam
speaker gentle lady than so
in this bill.
For taking the pilot program and
making it more permanent to my
understanding that right Madam
speaker kind of that is the
intent yes we need this this is
a great program this is the way
we want New Mexico's fourth your
teachers to we would like to
continue this for every teacher
because this is this is the way
you solar with a full year of of
training.
You Mr just madam speaker and
generally thank you and.
Thanks for if I'm wrong but my
understanding is
outside of this pilot program
those who are going through our
the the colleges here for an
education degree so we have
right now a one semester kinda
internship requirement is that
correct.
Madam speaker kind of they do a
student teaching is that what
you mean thanks very much for
your joy that's that's exactly
right they have like one
semester of student teaching.
and so Mister speaker and gentle
lady does this.
One year residency
does it cover that student
teaching requirement for is that
it is this in addition to.
madam speaker and kind of made
it covers it so they do the
first semester is class work and
going of I think the visit and
then the second semester is
being in the car no the whole
thing is sorry the hopes are the
when you're explained his I did
that and we did it that way but
this one is they do a whole year
without mentor teacher for that
but not really mentor of IT
skills second third your tier
they work with them the whole
entire year with slowly weaning
away from them hi okay so madam
speaker joy thank you for that.
So then the.
The other question I have that
is so obviously have the degree
is set up with you know
different semester blocks and
they already have one block set
aside for.
Student teaching.
so so that the the question is
now that they have an option for
using two semesters essentially
a full year for this how does
that work with completing other
requirements the other credits
required for the degree Mr
and speaker in condemning the
still do go to go to class the
university they still take
classes but they are in the
classroom with the the mentor
teacher okay so masterfully
thank you for help me understand
so they're still rules and
taking courses maybe it's a
slightly wider load but I guess
my real question is madam
speaker and and and gentle lady
our system here long program are
we expecting it to take for and
that four and a half years to
graduate or can we still
graduate four years.
madam speaker kind of them and
they still graduate in four
years.
That's great to hear that those
that is excellent
And then
Then speaker gentle lady had
mentioned that right now under
this
This program is this pilot they
were getting a stipend of
twenty thousand a year but this
will change it to thirty
thousand a year.
And you can count on thirty five
thousand here in hopes that they
don't have to take on a second
job.
So thank you Mr generally that's
that's great I know that when I
was getting my master's and PhD
degrees you know twenty years
ago we got a stipend it was
about thirty to thirty five
thousand dollars and I was very
helpful
so I'm I appreciate hearing that
we're doing this similar for for
those who are wanting to become
teachers so minister gentlelady
how much
has this cost these last couple
years and I mention this is
coming from the general fund.
Madam speaker kind in with we've
gotten a million dollars each
year for two years the program.
Mr jelly so a million dollars in
and is that sufficient to cover
or whether it was there a
balancer.
Madam speaker can determine so
we have to programs at one at
UNM and one in mission that's
what we to fund for this year
last year okay so some master
gentle lady so the two programs
that are
and with you when you NM and
that those dollars came from the
budgets of those universities.
Madam chair and gentleman from
the PED to those institutions
are okay Madam speaker and
generally thank you for that
clarification so so now we're
looking at roughly doubling the
stipe and we're expecting
roughly.
Two million dollars for UNM and
two million dollars for an issue
going forward is that correct or
she shaking her head contract
me.
nabs the madam chair Madam
speaker and condiments so this
is a program where we can bring
more teachers were expanding the
program to more than just NMAA
you ma'am we're trying to bring
as many colleges that have a
teacher preparation program in
them so it depends on how many
we get and and hopefully we can
get quite a few so some as we
usually I'm just asking because
I'm trying to understand what
for what I think is amazing
program how much this will
actually cost one is really
fully implemented Mr Joe do you
have to have an idea we rode out
to different universities and
more people are doing that kind
of what is the expected cost.
Madam speaker and kind of in
with the current appropriation
that's in house bill two is five
million begin Representative we
can has about a hundred twenty
five residents with.
So madam speaker generally that
that sounds about right in
office starting at one million
for UNM one million for MSU Year
roughly doubling the stipend not
quite but roughly doubling so
that gets you up to get a little
less than four and then you're
going out to different
universities and hopefully
increasing participation so five
million sounds like a great
place.
for this to start and an agency
speaker gentle lady I I would
even sing said you know as this
continues to roll forward and
and we have more people
participating you know this
might increase up to maybe you
know maybe ten million but
that's a I think that's a great
thing right I I think that's a
if we look at the return on
investment you know where we put
money especially in education in
the state I think this program
would really just showing to be
one of our top return on
investment performers I'm really
really hoping that this helps
not just to help our teachers to
know what they're getting into
but help them to be prepared for
it perhaps help with retention
of teachers
Speaker and gentle lady could
you maybe talk a little bit
about.
Is there a process for choosing
good as you said to your story
teachers to be these mentors and
and do they receive some some
benefit for for signing on to be
a mentor.
Speaker kind of the estate
there's a two thousand dollar
stipend for the teacher more the
level two and level three is
when you your view been teaching
you have the skills
and I'm not sure if there's
anything else that know the
criteria right now.
Mr speaker and gentle lady thank
you for that I'm I'm glad to
hear that we're also helping the
mentor teachers out because
obviously I mean you know I've.
It just looking at my own
experience you know I've had
lots of insurance comes through
my lab and I love that because I
can help you know the shape
someone who's about to go into
the sciences.
It takes extra work
you know I I only had a few in
terms that came and hit the
ground running and actually gave
me more than I gave them
and that's okay because it's
it's part of helping the next
generation so other speakers
really I'm glad to hear that we
have a two thousand dollar
stipend to those who are helping
out Mr Julie you so the third
other than that there's not
really a trade teria it would be
nice I don't know if any of a
statue but would be nice if a
principal or a school
administrator who's helping to
select.
Mentor said they choose a good.
Mentor I know all of our
teachers are are good but you
know those who were exceptional
to teach their tricks of the
trade I I sure hope that that's
that's happening
so the speaker and gentle lady
is there any another kind of
making this permanent and not
not a pilot anymore.
do you see any other have
lessons learned as part of this
pilot XP experience that were
including in in this bill or for
to make the program better any
changes that we've seen.
Mr speaker kind of the stipend
helps and it is a recruitment
and retention we're hoping for
both we have over thousand
passions without teachers so
what we're ever we can do to get
are good people in working with
our best teachers are level two
level three highly skilled
teachers so we're trying to do.
Okay Mister speaker gently thank
you yeah I know that often pilot
program turned out to be really
really successful because
they're small in their focus to
and when you're old enough to
bigger programs they can have
thinking often struggles
So I was just making sure that
if we have learned any had any
lessons learned order this pilot
that we make sure we adopted
those so that this can be as
successful as as possible.
so Mister jelly I just encourage
you to continue to you know be
on top of this program so it can
be successful Mr Julie I think
just my last comment
and I know this isn't directly
related to your bill but I've
I've course have come from a
family of teachers both of my in
laws you know just recently
retired from teaching it's a
CNMI my father my mother in law
to my sisters and one of my
brothers is a tier one
elementary one of high school
and one in to elementary and one
high school.
And when I talk to them about
their have their training their
education.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
It's clear to me that there
could be a greater emphasis on
the fundamentals.
Right that we're we're not just
teaching you know how how a
child's brain develops and how
you teach them but we make sure
that the teacher is actually
fluent in the language of mass
and understands clearly
chemistry in the sciences and I
think if we spent more time I
mean agency because really I saw
a great study that came out that
said.
Girls and boys actually have the
same mathematical aptitude.
Until about middle school.
And then what happens in middle
school the the
the.
Session of this research was
that if they have if or if there
are female math teachers who are
not confident in their ability
to do mass.
That reflects and the female
students internalize that and
that's when we start seeing the
divide between female and male
on mass is nothing to do with
their ability to mass it's it is
an internalization of perhaps a
teacher feeling not as capable
and so I really really hope that
in addition to this program we
look at what's what's have
classes on mass so that.
Those going through the teaching
education experience.
Get that self confidence and and
are fluent in in that language
of master spiritually I'd love
to hear sites.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman of the you know when I
was teaching middle school I I
had a class that was always the
let me do what I kind of wanted
to all boys all girls in the New
Mexico just what I saw was the
boys to think differently than
girls and there was this
hierarchy of who is the smartest
the girl.
without having to worry about
you know what anybody else
thought they excelled they got
the same answer they just did it
differently but they didn't have
to worry about anything else I
think it's more.
For girls.
What they hear at home you know
a lot of girls here and I'm just
talking to one of my students at
home she heard she was pretty
her brother her she was smart so
it starts early moms everybody
has to say you know they have to
look at a more than just be
pretty they have to let them
know they're smart and they can
do anything that's how my dad
was with me and
But.
I think maybe start a little
earlier as far as confidence but
it does start with mom saying I
can do this you can do this or
that say you can do anything but
the I think that's where it
starts.
Mr speaker gently thank you for
your thoughts on that and I and
I completely agree with you and
I know the study that I saw you
know really resonated with me
but I'm I know there's other
studies out there too that this
isn't just like the the silver
bullet right this is a multi
faceted problem the speaker and
and generally and I sure hope
that you we have lots of
families like yours that to you
know.
you know tell our kids that they
can excel and do great things
and spiritually I just.
I really do think though that we
could spend less time in a four
year degree.
talking about the latest and
greatest methods of teaching.
yes we need some of that when
you teach people how to teach a
greater focus on learning the
material so that our teachers
are experts in the material as
well as just experts in
teaching.
Thank you Mr secretary generally
their general from once you.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
gentle lady eight the help
please yes I will yield to the
pandemic from Valencia.
Thank you generally does that
this bill that comes to my
committee and I did have an
opportunity to talk about it so
my questions are gonna be more a
highlight in some of the issues
that are brought up there I will
say this is that any bill.
The the.
Thanks to address our teacher
shortages and get highly
qualified highly qualified and
well for the teachers are costs
into something that I support.
so my questions are getting more
to highlight areas of this and
then talk about some of the
other issues that kind of we've
never really addressed in
committees self.
Use the Mr speaker and gentle
lady which are the approved
programs currently in New Mexico
that would qualify to be part of
this teacher residency programs.
Mr speaker pandemic could you
elaborate on that would be
meeting with professor right now
he said that right now you've
mentioned them as far as the New
Mexico state but
that help the gentle lady.
Thank you Mr Mr speaker can.
Thank you Mr speaker kind of
moment so the universities or
colleges that we that have a
teacher program would apply and
then depending on the criterion
if they fit all the criteria in
the bill they they could give.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally
As you may know we do have a
number of colleges that may be
outside of the building the
colleges outside Grand Canyon or
some of these other colleges
that are thought Mr Lee housed
in New Mexico but they still do
have programs that are working
towards
teacher licensors also sometimes
we do get student teachers from
these colleges with those
universities also be eligible to
support or sponsor students in
the server.
Mr speaker can determine in the
bill it says the public
post secondary educational
institution or for tribal
college of form a partnership
with the one more districts so.
Public message for tribal.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally.
The other question that I
brought up in committee was just
about the issue of benefits for
these implements if you are I do
understand the remember the my
myself.
Even though is now some thirty
years ago.
Coming out of college are
finishing up college that the
struggles that so many of our
our our teachers our students
face and also those that are
alternative licensors maybe that
our second career maybe the
transition from a job that has
benefits into one where they met
other coverage so Mister speaker
gentle lady.
I bought of us can talk about
the
if the person be eligible for
benefits a teacher residencies
health dental life for any of
those other types of insurances
thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman because they are still
students they would not be
eligible through the schools the
maybe to the university of their
students and have the the plan
there but not to the school
systems.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady the other question I
talked about was in our building
okay so remember like many
teachers I came under the twenty
five year retirement which is
like the wonder why I'm still
there after thirty years now
right so from the question I had
and actually addresses the
solvency is for these two to
residents is it possible for
them to pay into the ERP and
then have that count as
contributions which order
solvency and counselors are
thirty years.
Thank you Mr speaker kind
gentleman these are stipends not
salaries some L..
Thank you gentlemen thank you Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker gentle lady I I
thought I heard the number about
about a hundred twenty five the
five million dollars a basically
fund about a hundred and twenty
five.
Teachers that correct generally
speaking kind of that is
correct.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady.
Have a plan to address how these
two hundred twenty five students
will be dispersed across the
state.
I mean if we look at this APS
alone is down some four hundred
teachers.
So I I just want to make sure
there's a if we're looking at
this is a systemic a statewide
issue is there any plans in
place of how these students
teachers will be sent across the
table in Clayton or the house or
allied or down there in the
bill of cheaper Quemado is
required for that the gentle
lady.
Speaker can determine we are
looking at high need areas and
feel content feels so special ed
math science
Mr speaker kind of the ins the
sorry.
Hired with institutions also
work with the the colleges and
universities to place these
teachers but we are looking at
the the need I I can't.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
generally and I think we know
that that as somebody in HR
myself using my pipeline is to
get students to teachers okay
and that it was with the
pipeline but what happens many
times like in these large cities
like Albuquerque Los crucis they
could very well because they're
the ones producing the highest
number of people that may be in
this program.
They may take the bulk of that
and so my my question is and
maybe much a suggestion as we
look at how we can make it kind
of more fair and equitable so
that we do need some as far our
remote areas of the state.
Mr speaker and gentleman well
are looking at rural like
western and eastern to to fit
into this also so you know we
will have them as many as we can
where we need them.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentle lady I I do appreciate
that because I do know.
That there is a need everywhere
and it's and actually it's even
a greater need in some of the
smaller districts that do not
have the resources they may not
have the numbers of staff in
Canada to choose from.
Mr speaker gentle lady now I
know that you guys actually had
support in is this is more to
talk about the highlights which
groups have come forward in
support of your bill for this
teacher residencies of for
example maybe the
superintendents association
could you please highlight the
groups that are in support of
this bill.
Thank you Mr speaker kind of I
know PED because we work
together with the the unions and
NMSU and UNM.
Mr speaker condemned also the
school boards association and
the superintendents association.
Are in favor of this thank you
Mr speaker generally because I
think that's important okay I
think that one of the things
about it is and having sat on
the other side and being the
receiving end of legislation.
Is that sometimes we want to
hear it sounds very good but
when it comes down to the
district level the requirements
are somewhat complicated and we
don't get the number of people
that we have because we have not
only a
shortage of teachers we have
four we have a recruitment
issues of teachers and also
retention of for teachers as
well.
Mr speaker gentle lady can talk
about thank compensation choose
to ensure diversity that will be
sponsored to.
The cost of fifty thousand
dollars is that correct gentle
lady Mr speaker and gentleman
there's this according to eater
who will be receiving fifty
thousand dollars that will
coordinate everything between
the students in the schools in
the districts and the
university.
Thank you Mr speaker thanks and
gentle lady now the coordinator
because again we did you that's
kind of self of fellow educator.
That would be the responsibility
of this coordinator to provide
the field supervision for this
tier resident candidates are or
house the supervision gonna fall
is going to be between the
district and the university.
Mr Mr speaker kind of that's
exactly correct.
The district and the university.
Thank you Mr speaker now will be
only currently internally I'm
sorry will be also be of of the
current valuations as you like
other changes are you guys have
how these teacher candidates
will be evaluated as they are
deemed to be successful having
participated in this program.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that will be the
responsibility of the
institution because they're
still students with the
institution.
Thank you an amber and miss you
to value and I believe we're
gonna also look at student
scores over over a couple years
to see how that student teacher
did and how the resident did
over the several years other
students did with them as a
teacher.
Thank you Mr speaker thank the
gentleman that I think that's an
important thing because as we
know or maybe you don't know is
a.
Many of our teachers they
actually no matter what program
within the first three to five
years we we say that if we get a
student or teacher through five
years the chances of them stand
long profession are much
greater.
So I do think that it would be a
good data point to look at is
how does this the the students
successful how do they stay in
the profession as opposed to
those who may be I'm not a part
of this or more traditional
route.
Mr speaker kind of they are
required to stay a minimum of
three years for the site and and
I really think this program
because they're getting such a
deep.
Training and for a whole year
and understood getting to
understand kids and you know the
question management and so much
it makes it easier to stay
because they have a confidence
and they're ready to do.
I think a lot of teachers are
there some things coming out of
the the universities aren't
quite ready but these ones will
be ready.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
inject it again and I I I
support this bill I supported
and committee put in so I I do
stand in support of this bill
but I just want to make sure
that we the the people out there
that they understand as far as
what is being asked how this is
different okay.
And what the intended
Thanks to the school for this
bill will be so thank you gentle
lady thank you Mr speaker I have
no further questions.
Thank you John fully.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
chin lady from Bernalillo
speaker pandemic I will yield to
the gentle family.
Speaker gentle lady.
Plants that are you.
Strangers in my home district.
Is to choose calling the roll.
Mexico education system with a
degree.
Can not just to licensure
examination.
Totalement Mr speaker and gentle
lady how.
Spence of legislation would
serve.
To help mitigate that.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman the bill doesn't
really address that but by the
time they leave this they should
have enough skills to pass those
exams.
The federal.
It's with respect to these
information requests.
Would.
Perspective teacher.
For example.
For licensure exam.
Mr speaker kind dominos the same
deadlines would apply.
Transaction through and progress
of your bill.
General Motors are rude to
section businesses.
The requirement would be to hold
a bachelor's degree.
And has been stricken from my
copy of this and then the next
census bureau professional from
start to finish their education
I have a strong content
knowledge.
This concurrent with each or is
that and more.
Stir Mr speaker condemning you
repeat that one more time I'm
sorry so I think it depends on
the version of the bill which
but.
What version do you happen to
know.
Germany I have once.
It is.
Context on the website.
Gentlelady maybe a year but it's
not.
Based on your microphone thank
you Mr speaker and so the first
thing is.
So they cannot hold a level one
two or three license so they
cannot be in the to to build.
Degree being a professional from
outside that is the alternative
licensure portion of that a.
And then.
Don't ask me a question one more
time.
Under section of the paragraph.
To Instagram.
Currently
with professional experience
hold your sentence for sentiment
or poor Mr speaker and gentleman
that is and and they work
together about six degree and
then we want certain content in
a special they what they have to
have special.
The alternative licensure.
Thank you for that so.
Just as an example had been
hired.
To teach math.
Two new highrise high school
level.
Provisions for.
Licensure I proved to know.
Something about the subject
matter.
I think it's kind of those
that's the eligibility
requirements right and we would
want someone who.
We have labs all over you know
as someone who is immersed in
math and does it well.
Thank you Jim Lehrer for
answers.
Through the gentleman from San
Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker Mr speaker
will the gentle lady finally
you.
Mr speaker will deal to the
pandemic my co sponsor that
gentleman from.
Thank you Mr speaker speaker
thank you gentle lady so ask a
few questions just to highlight
some of the the other aspects of
the bill that maybe work talk
about some members.
Know how how important is
program is
the first thing I want to ask is
on page three of the bill.
subsection C. I know just
noticed it strikes up the
language team mentorship and and
puts it in its place co teaching
as opposed to mentorship Mr
speaker generated can you talk
about what that concept means in
an actual classroom.
Thank you Mr Mr speaker and
gentleman so it's not a
mentorship program is of the B.
co teaching in the work with the
whole year together and then
slowly that expertise or will we
them off so they can go on to do
it themselves so they're ready
to be in a class next year all
by themselves.
Mr speaker and gentle lady how's
that different from the current
model that we have.
Mr speaker and gentleman before
we a load of a master teacher to
have more than one mentees now
we're doing a one on one there's
only one teacher to one
president.
Mr speaker gentle lady so if if
on the minutes on the man T. I
guess maybe
Mexico teacher upon the college
students like paper cuts in
those terms in your the level
two or level three licensure
than
you and I take the same
classroom for both semesters
that correct.
It is Mr speaker kind of that is
correct Mr speaker generating
one of the things I think maybe
is is helpful I remember as a
elementary school student and
having a student teacher for one
semester and the regular
teachers there for a couple
weeks as I recall maybe longer
but that's what I remember.
And and basically we had a a new
teacher for the rest of that
semester.
And then at semester break we
got our establish teacher back
and and the
The student teacher was then
done and she was placed into a
different classroom or maybe got
a job somewhere else and I I
just remember that this that
being.
Maybe disruptive is is is a
little overkill but I remember
It interrupting that process of
having you know two different
teachers within the same school
year when you're trying to learn
the same content material so I
think this is concept helpful to
from that perspective.
As far as.
The the level to level three
teacher herself Mr speaker does
she have any more of these
classrooms or is this this is
her full time job.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
will be her full time careful
time job.
Mr speaker gentle lady the next
question I have is on page four.
There's some new language in
there about a statement of two
thousand dollars for level two
and three teachers can you speak
to that.
Mr speaker and gentleman this
tier
as a as a experience writer
teacher is it is going to help
them however for a.
A reward for doing what they're
doing because they are giving up
their work in a year trying to
train someone and show
everything they can about
teaching.
The state.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
and and my understanding is the
the use of words type and then
it it doesn't affect the the R.
B. contributions are there high
three is that right.
Mr speaker pandemic if it is
paid as a stab in it does not
affect their ERP.
Mr speaker gentle lady is there
I guess I I wonder sort about
the role of the level two and
three is this is there going to
be maybe there is a that a plan
from Public Education Department
of about how this is implemented
for this depending upon the plan
that the district adopt some
just one mechanics of how this
works from a day to day
operations.
Mr speaker condemning ideally
the institutional work with the
district in the teachers so that
everyone is successful.
Mr speaker generated so there's
no there's no.
Approve had planned then in
other words.
Mr speaker kind of that's kind
of the beauty every
institutional be different
because of what they need.
Thank you Mr speaker generated I
would submit that's one of the
things that the American system
got right when we have fifty
states especially when you talk
about education instead of
having one system that is
applied across all fifty states
to allow for some
experimentation within those
individual states would look
around see what we're doing
right what others are are doing
better and I think the same
concept applies to the local
school districts as well
certainly can learn from each
other the next paragraph Mr
speaker program J..
talks about this the other
statement of two thousand
dollars can explain what that
is.
Mr speaker kind of that's for
the principal or the ministry
They will be in and out of the
classroom they will be taking on
a teacher and they get a state
that they're getting the second
for that.
Mr speaker gentle lady so is
that to cover additional
reporting or they actually you
working with the student teacher
as well.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
will be supporting the teacher
and hoping that resident.
Mr speaker generating the the
next paragraph I noticed there's
a new.
Is this a new position within
Public Education Department
where is this house.
Mr speaker kind of many of the
the coordinators are at each of
the institutions Mr speaker
generally so you mean the higher
ed institutions Mr speaker
pandemic correct.
Mr speaker generated you know
For these new FTEs for the
institutions.
Madam it's possible they could
be used but it's also possible
they could be using our faculty
to fill the position.
Mr speaker gentle lady so as in
terms of the actual funding.
We're going to appropriation
section so is the are these
funds.
The.
Does this please go to higher ed
and the the rest of the funding
goes the path or how how is the
distribution of the
appropriation.
Mr speaker and gentleman the
entire appropriation goes to PED
to the teacher residency Fund.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle lady
and so this the fifty thousand
per for hire it is that just
assumed with any Trier and
budget does as described in
House Bill to.
Mr speaker can determine
potentially the law doesn't
require that the the the
coordinator is funded through
the university.
Mr speaker condemning the
universe the state or the the.
The institution could pay for.
Mr speaker generally can you
just speak to a little more
about what these coordinators
actually do what their job will
be what the role is.
Mr speaker and gentleman they
have a of a really big role
depending on screen and how many
kids service since there are
they're gonna be tracking them
working with them supporting
districts but supporting the
school where they're at
supporting the resident and
making sure they're covered in
the in getting their classes at
university also.
Mr speaker gentle lady question
of the program itself of let's
say a third year college
student.
Going into my fourth year and
I'm in the.
the teacher certificate track
is this a program that I have to
apply for.
Mr speaker and gentleman right
now because it's new there may
be some kind of selection
process
but when we were discussing the
bill early when we were doing
the bill all of us together at
PED in the unions there some who
could do it like some of our
athletes but there will be some
kind of selection process.
Mr speaker generated so in other
words this is not an automatic
enrollment it's not a new
requirement to achieve my my
diploma.
Mr speaker and gentleman that is
correct.
Mr speaker gentle lady.
How does of this program impact
students that are in the
alternative licensure program.
Mr speaker kind adamant so each
each institution can decide if
they want this residency program
if they have an alternative
program and just want to do that
they can do that they want to do
this both of the they can still
do that.
Mr speaker generated and a part
of my question I guess stems
from just thinking through if
you're the way I understood only
us in this way to make sure I'm
correct so if if I'm gonna
alternative licensure program
student I have an existing
bachelor's degree or higher.
And then
By applying to the program to
get accepted I get hired by the
local school district and I
actually do teaching while also
taking classes that right.
Mr speaker pandemic in the
alternative program that is
correct Mr speaker gentle lady
and so I'd.
As I understand and then I'd I'd
get hired on as let's say I'm a
I about severe so you hire on as
as a level one teacher.
And so I I received a that level
one salary for essentially
teaching full time is that
right.
Speaker kind gentleman yes that
is correct.
And Mr speaker generated so I so
that I guess kind of friends
might my question which was if
if I'm one of these alter
licensure student yeah students
and I'm making a salary of state
you know fifty thousand as a as
a tier one is this going to do
anything to you know.
Essentially punishment
financially we're now I'm I have
to go through this program and I
drop down to the thirty five
thousand dollar level.
Mr speaker can demonstrate
alternative licensure.
person running going to the turn
of licensure can either choose
to teach or they can choose to
be in the residency program
accountable.
Mr speaker generated so if I if
I decide to the teacher route
than I thought I can do they'll
P. program.
Permanent the fifty thousand
dollars starting salary not
happy bond on thirty five is
that correct.
Mr speaker kind of that is
correct but you would not get
that year of training and all
the things that come with it you
I have I mentored and I've had
teachers that have gone to this
program Mr speaker and gentleman
and
This program is going to have to
make they will be ready when
they leave this they will have
the confidence to be in that
question next year all by
themselves this is a program
where they will see how kids
think how kids act in classroom
they will know the curriculum
because they will have taught it
they will no the school and all
the other teachers because
they've been there for a whole
year that's a huge difference.
Mr speaker generally appreciate
the enthusiasm and.
And the you know that's a good
the good sales pitch I think
it's it's a.
It's effective and I I
appreciate really the the hard
to try to address our our
teacher shortages do know
currently how many shortages we
have in the state.
Speaker and gentleman I think it
was close to over thousand.
With a thousand questions about
a teacher in the classroom.
Mr speaker gentle lady and so I
I know part of this bill is to
to make sure that the teachers
that are actually in the
classroom are the most prepare
that we could possibly get them
but can you also speak about how
the language in this bill.
can actually help address
teacher shortages as well.
Mr speaker can determine the
recruitment the group
recruitment the the second could
help with recruitment and the
other bill that Senator has as
far as tiered
there's a whole bunch of things
to do this but recruitment and
retains said we really we need
to fill those positions we want
to fill in with T. people
teachers who are prepared ready
to the classroom and will stay.
Mr speaker gentle lady and so
right now under our current law
if this bill doesn't get passed
to fund a if I'm in my last
semester I go and do student
teaching is that paid.
Mr speaker kind dominos.
Mr speaker gentle as I think
that's I think that's vital for
us to understand because that in
my mind is real how this is how
we can really help tackle some
of the recruitment issues
because the sad part is you may
have a student who's interested
in going to the classroom
but I have bills that I have to
pay or have a family member that
has a need and I have to get a
job and then maybe I'm like well
all work for a short amount of
time and then I'll go back into
my student teaching a year two
three down the road on my
circumstances change and so I
think a bill like this that
says.
We're gonna take it from one
semester to and we're going to
pay you for your work in the
classroom because you are doing
work you're not just on the
sidelines I think that's helpful
for recruitment.
and then the other side though
besides the financial care Mr
speaker generally can you speak
to how this kind of model helps
with retention.
Mr speaker kind gentleman being
in the classroom when you first
go in the classroom after
student teaching it's it's still
new you could go to different
schools here you're going either
to the same school for the same
district so you have that
advantage
When you feel comfortable and
they will because they've been
the whole year with everyone
then you tend to stay where you
feel comfortable for you feel
here your counterparts invite to
and help you mentor you and help
you would be successful in
classroom.
Thank you Mr speaker generated
there's certainly something to
watch an experienced teacher day
in and day out and the to be in
the trenches so to speak
alongside her.
Mr speaker generally I so I I
got a bachelor's degree in maths
but one of the optional classes
they offered as part of that
**** tractors if you had any
interest in in teaching
you took this class and
essentially there was about six
of us.
And we each took
about four weeks and top college
out and called John for class
with the professor
and our member of a couple
things I remember being
terrified and I remember that
having to stand up that first
day because it they're kind of
like your peers you know as
twenty one time and a lot of
those college other students for
eighteen or nineteen.
but beyond that I remember
having sessions with the
professor after classes and you
know getting critique and
watching him teaches well so I
I'm not a teacher but I do have
that that memory of of that
experience of being a learning
through the process of doing
about have someone there with
you that is there to help you
through that process and I think
it's helpful for teachers.
But I also think it's very
important for students as well
because then we're guaranteeing
that no they've got an
experienced teacher in the
classroom with them that's
experience.
Teachers job.
And the experience teachers is
getting paid additionally for
that so I think there's a lot of
good pieces in this bill and one
of things I appreciate about
we're doing in the session is
you know we're not just throwing
all our eggs in one basket in
terms of how do we tackle you
know say the the the ship the
teacher shortages are feel like
there's a number of these ideas
that are coming to fruition that
are important for New Mexico.
I think we all recognize that
our educational system is that a
crisis and so we're it's all
hands on deck about how do we
how do we lifted you know and I
think we all have a hard for for
our children and and want to see
them do nothing but succeed so I
appreciate the the brainstorming
that went into creating this
bill and look forward forward to
moving on Senate thank you Mr
speaker thank you.
German report ordered I'm
curious show someone your co
sponsor of this bill isn't right
Mr speaker Mr speaker yes.
The gentleman from Dona Ana
grant is here.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
kind of a joke gentlelady please
yield.
Mr speaker I yield to the kind
of thank you very much I just so
we have how many
Mexico
the National Guard or actually
filling these positions.
Mr speaker and gentleman I don't
know but I don't we're not
that's not part of the bill I'm
sorry I'm sorry Madam speaker
gentle lady I it was more just
to understand how many how this
bill will help fill in that
crisis is what was going with
that.
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
don't have an answer for you I'm
sorry I'm sorry madam speaker I
was just trying to see get an
idea that so real quick my
understanding madam speaker
excuse Mr speaker gentle lady is
that we have three paths of
reading traditional residency
and alternative licenses Senator
so.
And you're you're specifically
doing the one for residency but
I want to understand so the
alternative one is if you have a
can you explain that a little
bit better because of that I was
there trying to explain it to me
I was like in the quite get it
I'm sorry speaker and gentleman
we currently have a residency
program passes bill two years
ago and it's alternative
licensure program where if you
have a degree in another if you
have a degree you can come in
and be a teacher if you have the
specialty within the certain
area but you can be a teacher
with an alternative licensure
with another degree that's what
we're currently doing now it's
very successful and I miss you
when you NM
What we're adding with this bill
is the fourth year the last year
senior year of a
a program.
A teacher preparation program.
That's why we're doing this
we're giving up more stipends
thirty five thousand dollars so
that that president does not
have to take on a second job
father doing this so they can
really focus on being a teacher.
Mr speaker and gentle lady so I
have a bachelor's degree in
accounting four so how could so
I could get a job as a in in
this manner.
Mr speaker and gentleman if you
qualify to go through the
program yes that's pretty to
cancel or that I'm really really
thankful
Mr speaker the only that you
have this bill I really like the
bill I've been listening to
stuff and it is those are just
some holes and I was getting and
I just was trying to figure out
if we're gonna have funding how
do you believe that we're gonna
have funding to continue this
for how long do you have any
idea that.
Mr speaker kind gentleman I'm
hoping to have funding for the
entire time for to continue
because we need good teachers in
the classroom well prepared
teachers in the classroom and
that's what this does.
Thank you Mr speaker Julia yeah
and that's why I was asking
that's why I'm he to go circle
back around to the the National
Guard it was more to understand
our reserve twenty of is there
two hundred of them I just
didn't know how many positions
how how much in crisis we were
meant Mr speaker gently Mr
speaker kind dominos when we
don't have when we have
questions over thousand
questions without teachers we
are in a crisis and if it takes
at least getting even Nash the
you know the National Guard in
our classrooms to have someone
there for the kids you know.
The National Guard is has a
different job I was a reserves I
was a computer programmer but
so.
They are they could thank.
We could use some.
Is Mr figures only so just again
thank you very much I really
want to support your bill I
think it's a great thing I was
just trying to figure out the
the three paths it is this seem
like they were.
It's just as nice as you guys
are allowing that and thank you
for bringing this legislation
anything that we can protect our
educators and I'm a big
supporter of education so thank
you so much figuratively no
further debate generated close
Mr speaker I move
house bill house bill thirteen
as twice amended do now pass
final passage of house bill
thirteen is twice amended the
vote is now open.
Just portion of it is about
close.
The clerk of the members without
a recorded vote.
Representative Alcon.
Representative all con is yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash is yes
Representative bone cough.
Representative will guide yes
Representative Cook.
Yes Representative Cook is yes
Representative Dow.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
is yes Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Yes Representative Miguel Garcia
is yes Representative and on
this.
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
Representative Hochman Vigil is
a yes.
Representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente yes.
Representative Dow is a yes
Representative Dow is a yes
Representative Lewis.
Yes Representative Lewis is a
yes Representative Roger
Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
is a yes Representative
Pettigrew.
Yes Representative Pettigrew is
yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero is yes Representative
Thomson yes Representative
Thomson is yes Representative
Townsend.
Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo is
yes.
What is closed by vote of fifty
four in the affirmative zero
negative house bill thirteen
minutes passed house.
Deliberately.
Thank you Mr speaker I move we
go to the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business objections so ordered
are there any nonsense.
Gentlelady from Dona Ana.
Chairwoman Ferrari thank you Mr
speaker your kids
Consumer public affairs
committee will meet fifteen
minutes after we recess.
Members take note.
Are there other announcements
gentle lady from McKinley in San
Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker our house
appropriations and finance
committee will meet at four
o'clock and we will have a hard
stop at five so for the middle
of the bill we're just gonna
turn off the computer screen
thank you Mr speaker.
Don't tell Representative Eli.
Are there further not since the
gentle lady from zealous
Representative Chandler thank
you Mr speaker house taxation
and revenue will be meeting
tomorrow morning at eight thirty
and Mr speaker I would ask that
members keep their Saturday
morning health open just in case
we have the bond package to look
at a and or if the tax package
Mr speaker.
Members take note.
This kind of taxing use early on
Saturday.
The gentleman from civil and
McKinley chairman Alcon.
Mr speaker
labor military Veterans Affairs
will meet at four o'clock and
just as you can see I wanted to
to see what an empty bag of
chili chips looks like.
Thank
you for being with us your video
that I'm not sure what happened.
The staff is.
Taunting
There you go you can see it.
Riveted Mr chairman.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson.
Thank you Mr speaker and I want
to object to the former speaker
about showing that empty bag of
potato chips that's totally
unfair when he's not there to
share I'm I we will have house
health and Human Services
meeting tomorrow at eight
thirty.
I agree in general is a point
those the those very delicious
snacks are actually made in
chairman I'll cones home
community I think we we have a
hoarding situation going on
let's those single vote all
those in favor of chairman al
cone setting each of us a bag of
those chips before the end of
the session signify by saying
aye
all day.
Motion carries terminal going to
have any duty to the members of
the house of representatives in
the staff.
We'll make sure we get your
FedEx account number the
gentleman from Bernalillo C.
will make in the Socorro San
Juan in Valencia Representative
Harry Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker on the Jews
chip issue Representative of
course we this is willing to
have it I will pay for the other
half of federal judge.
This is the kind of team spirit
the the house of representatives
is known for
that's what we have trophies.
Thank you Mr speaker chairman
miss a representative Garcia
here your reputation for always
delivering is well earned Sir.
Okay we will come back this
evening and we will pick up on
third reading we're going to
visit with the the floor leader
and with.
we'll come back.
We will come back.
This evening to consider
legislation on third reading.
to work with the leadership to
come up with a list of bills
that we're going to consider
time.
That as quickly as we can.
In the meantime hopefully you'll
enjoy watching the work of the
consumer public affairs
committee in the labor
committee.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker.
I move that the house in recess
until eight PM.
Until seven fifty five.
The HSD seven forty five.
The house uses until seven forty
five this evening fantastic
enjoy your committees afternoon
enjoy the rest of the the time
before you reconvene house in
recess until seven forty five.
P. M..
