Representative Eli your.
Representative night.
Representative Zamora.
Representative stables.
By Kirk Johnson.
Thank you madam chair and
members the committee for fall
thank you all it's nice to see
you all in the committee room
it's been a while so couple
years so it's nice to see you
all as I understand it madam
chair we are going to in
addition to what you've
announced we're gonna be meeting
tomorrow at nine o'clock madam
chair so I understand we're
gonna be meeting tomorrow nine
o'clock for questions from the
committee and for technical
presentation I have told
branch and revenues people were
literally right next door that
they will not be called until
tomorrow we will also have the
lawyers present for whatever
legal questions may be asked so
as I began I'm gonna start with
a bill that is not in front of
you just to give you a
perspective on this so this was
Senate bill three oh four from
the sixty day session that we
had a year ago and that passed
with bipartisan approval.
To establish a citizens
redistricting committee the
first of its kind in New Mexico.
The intention of that committee
was to set up a process where
partition chip would be taken
out of at least the initial
drawing of the maps.
The idea being that each one of
us has a conflict as we're kind
of drawing our own districts and
that it should be left up to a
bipartisan group that was not
running for office.
One of the ironies is in that is
that I think the reason I'm
being tasked to sponsor this is
because I'm not running and so I
I I don't find myself in that
conflict except for the fact
that I'm a Democrat.
And so there would still be that
kind of partisan approach so the
whole idea was.
A group of people together in a
bipartisan way.
Have them hold hearings public
testimony.
And see what kind of maps can be
drawn that would reach a
consensus without person ship.
I have to tell you that I was
while I was a co sponsor of that
and a supporter of it I have
some skepticism about.
Having watched the process and
what would happen I no longer
have that skepticism.
The fact is the citizens
redistricting committee under
the leadership of justice Chavez
and his other six commission
members I guess I should say
committee members.
Did extraordinary work.
Twenty three public hearings
around the state.
Over eight hundred people
testified in front of the
committee thousands literally
thousands of people either
attended in person or by zoom.
To hear and find participate in
and provide COVID to and
questions of this committee.
The result of which which we'll
talk about in a minute.
Was three maps the Senate three
maps will Congress three maps
for PC and three maps for the
house all of which have been
reviewed by it independent body
actually an independent expert
from the Princeton
gerrymandering project
professor contrail and that
appendix is part of the report
the look at it to see well okay
they didn't consider
partisanship let's see does it
meet the partisanship
requirements is it is it a
partition map on a scale of a
building no it's not and F.
being a failing grade where they
at and as we heard on the floor
all of the maps.
That's all that free maps for
each of the four subject matters
we talked about received NA it's
remarkable.
When you compare it to a state
like Texas where they don't have
a US citizens redistricting
committee or anything like it
and most those maps are
receiving apps dis and some
extraordinary situations cease.
So it is an incredible success
on the part of this project now
when it came to the house maps
which is what we're going to
talk about today.
I want to focus you and ensure I
know we're going to hear from
tribal interests so I won't I'm
not going to be long today.
But I do want to give just a
quick overview of this on the
house maps you have in front of
you for maps okay exactly where
we're going we're going to be
going to the house bill eight
that is the one I'm gonna want
to committee that is the one we
are eventually going to be
introducing the one I want the
committee tomorrow I will be
introducing a will not be
introducing the others for
purposes of passing through this
committee but I wanted the
committee to see all of the
bills three of the bills and I
always have to get my cheers on
so I can tell you what they are.
and you'll see why we did this.
three of the bills are from the
citizens redistricting
committee.
So if you look at the book at
one point I did and my
yeah stickies on virtually every
page
so was ridiculous I had to edit
the stickies but if you look at
your book if you refuted
alternative hi which was
referred to as the problem after
is now house bill three.
The house the alternative J..
Was the Navajo proposal that is
now House Bill five.
The one which is sometimes
referred to as the people's map
was hi is house bill four.
We could not.
Use them all get to this in a
minute we could not use either
the Pueblo map for the Navajo
map House Bill three or five as
a starting point because what
the citizens redistricting
committee did was to say okay we
really can't reach a decision on
this because there is not been a
consensus among the tribal
interests as we're meeting and
that's important for everybody
to understand so that so by the
time the committee's work was
done the tribal interests had
still not reached any kind of
consensus so it didn't make
sense for us to start with
either the Pueblo map for the
Navajo map.
So we started with the one and
then since the committee is
Matt.
of the tribal interests that
would include the Navajos the
all probably all public council
governments Correa's Mescaleros
I hope I haven't missed anybody
reached what I would describe as
a historic consensus.
And believe it or not because my
kids refer to me as a total nerd
I did listen to some of the
audio testimony which is
available online from the
committee's website.
And it is some of the most
remarkable testimony when it
comes to tribal interests.
And so I want for the public
information this committee.
That I'm going to shamelessly
steal from Casey do not who is
here and I've asked for his
permission to do this just
quickly to give the history of
this committee and to the public
the shameful past that we have
with respect to the
enfranchisement and
disenfranchisement of native
American interests I mean I knew
some of this but honestly I
didn't know Act more than about
twenty percent but what this is
so I just want to walk you
through it.
The Indian removal act.
Eighteen twenty eight to
eighteen eighty seven.
The allotment reservation Iraq
from eighteen eighty seven to
nineteen thirty four the
assimilation era from eighteen
eighty seven to nineteen thirty
four the Indian re organization
Europe from nineteen thirty four
to nineteen forty five the
termination here are from
nineteen forty five to nineteen
sixty eight.
Native Americans were not
granted citizenship until
nineteen twenty four.
Under the Indian citizenship
act.
And yet even then they were not.
Given the right to vote.
In New Mexico the rate for
native Americans devoted not
occur until nineteen forty eight
and only due to a lawsuit by the
way so the courts had to weigh
in the legislature did not and
the right to vote for the native
American population which
interestingly enough I did not
know wasn't until nineteen sixty
two.
It is just horrible.
What happened I just yes.
And so what's so cool about
this.
Is that the tribal interests of
all come together.
And they've worked a consensus
the speaker was helpful very
helpful in terms of mediating
making sure that the interest
came together and he should get
full credit for.
But the consensus was reached
among the members themselves and
that's what's critical for
everybody to understand we are
not going to interrupt that
process so what your heck which
we have in front of you as this
map.
Is really two six.
You have a map that has been
approved and has received an
eighth grade.
An independent body that's the
one House Bill for.
Along with the consensus that
was reached by the tribal
interests.
That then changed you want and
became house bill eight.
It is such a wonderful thing
that I get to say you we're
gonna fight about the
congressional maps I get that
but when it comes to the house
maps this is something that we
as a body shop all the press
Democrats and Republicans
citizens of New Mexico that we
were able number one they have a
body that was bipartisan they
came to a conclusion on most of
the maps except for the tribal
interests and then they have the
tribes themselves instead of us
telling them what we expected to
have them come to us and tell us
what they expected and that's
what's remarkable about this in
order to this point with that
overlay and then tomorrow we can
talk about kind of the technical
maps and I know madam chair like
for example representatives more
was asked me questions that the
technical people will be here
tomorrow to be answering
questions the lawyers will be
heard us but I thought in
keeping with what we've done I
want to quickly turn it over to
the public so we can talk about
the public's comments but
particularly to the
representatives of all the
tribal interests to talk to us
about the consensus that they've
reached and with that madam
chair I'll turn it back over to
you thank you very much.
Thank you for that.
and I know that the tribes have
worked.
That thank you
What.
You better.
Good afternoon madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Brian value and the governor
of the Pueblo of Hockomock and
I'm here to express the public
support for house bill eight it
does contain the tribal
consensus map for the house.
The map submitted under this
bill captures the wishes and
preferences of the sovereign
tribes Pueblo the nation's of
our great state and we stand
unified behind the.
It has not been an easy process
trying to reach a consensus
among sovereign governments but
I believe that we did just that.
The map underscores our greatest
desire and concern and that is
to protect the voting rights of
our tribal systems.
We also make sure the mat
protects several existing major
native American legislative
districts namely the six of the
house.
These districts are with the
deviation and maintain a major
native voting age population.
We appreciate the fact that the
C. R. C. listen to the
preferences of tribal leaders
and their wishes to remain in
certain districts or to have
them placed in multi legislative
districts for better
representation.
We were also extremely cognizant
of the need to protect
communities of interest areas
considered important
significant and in some cases
sacred to a group of Pablo's
including Chaco canyon Taylor
and other sites.
Tribal leaders also wanted to
make sure that the kind
candidates we chose our
responsive to our needs and
concerns which credit cut across
a broad array of issues from
education to jobs health care
economic development and
infrastructure.
But more than anything we want
them to recognize the unique
standing of our cultures our
language our homelands and our
governments.
Lastly madam chairman.
The maps not only capture the
guiding principles that the opal
the council of governors adhoc
committee relied upon.
But also reflect the highly
valued concept of self
determination.
A concept that is deeply
embedded in the heart of tribal
sovereignty.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee.
Before I go on welcome to the
homeland syncytial homeland so
to keep public.
My name is mark Mitchell I am
the governor for the public to
should get.
In this arena I wanted to be on
record saying that the Pueblo
the support HB eight house bill
eight.
Since April or July of this year
leadership has engaged in re
just in the redistricting
process.
And we have worked hard to
achieve the tribal consensus map
from on the pueblos hickory and
the Navajo Nation.
We appreciated in the
redistricting process by the
guiding.
Guiding redistricting principles
to establish native American
redistricting workgroup.
This guy guiding risk
redistricting principles focus
on our redistricting decisions
the voting rights the state
voting rights act the state law
and traditional Riteish.
During the twenty eleven New
Mexico redistricting processes
tribal leadership successfully
met its efforts to secure the
native American majority
districts and influences
districts guide.
By the spurs same principles as
a result ten years ago the
legislative districts about the
New Mexico legislature in New
Mexico District Court says New
Mexico Supreme Court reflected
on the tribal consensus map
advocated by the pueblos tribes
and they.
For twenty twenty one the
redistricting process.
Our tribal nations approach to
redistricting with the same
intentions to the voting rights
act the traditional
redistricting principles and the
principles of self
determination.
Courts have recognized the
tribal input in redistricting is
a vital to maintain essential
communities of interest.
That's tribal nations.
We are in the best position to
inform this body on our
communities interest the
decisions we have made in
creating the tribal consensus
map result and careful
deliberation intense
negotiations among tribal
nations.
We have done.
The hard work for this body to
security redistricting maps.
And that the approval of our
respective tribal nations.
The best way to proceed in.
Proceed which assures the body
will top the maps that meet the
voting rights act and the state
law requirements is to adopt
their tribal consensus Matt of
the northwest quadrant.
I want to thank you all for
giving us the opportunity and
the time to come before this
committee.
And.
And say what we need to say on
behalf of our tribal nations and
again we do support house bill
eight.
Good afternoon chairman and
members of the committee.
My name is Candace Taylor and
I'm the first to to.
Today's the public group
testifies in support of the
tribal consensus maps just
reflected in house bill number
eight that reflects the support
of the Pueblo nations hickory
Apache nation.
Approval would do the work
diligently alongside our sister
pueblo tribes and nations to
create redistricting maps that
provide native Americans with
the opportunity to elect
candidates for our choice.
The trouble consensus maps as
reflected House Bill number
eight.
Contain the blessings of our
respective tribal nations and
risks Representative months of
deliberation by our councils.
The tribal consensus maps as
reflected House Bill number
eight under the voting rights
act tribal self determination
and the because constitutional
mandates that each person to
vote counts equally.
The trouble consensus Matt.
Of house with the representative
House Bill number eight no doubt
about where our tribal nations
want to be.
Each district in the northwest
quadrant of the state has been
wait discussed and vetted by our
leadership to protect our
people's right to vote and have
the meaningful impact of the
political process.
The pueblo would do in the
actively engaged in the citizens
redistricting committee process.
To in to inform the committee on
a commitment.
Of interest our of our
communities of interest
including ties to other tribal
nations our neighboring
communities.
And importantly for the land
that makes up our important
cultural landscape and shakes
our identity as with the people
maintaining.
Connection it to a place is just
as important as maintaining
connection to people communities
of interest include our sacred
landscapes that often fall
outside of our reservation
boundaries as a group of people
we remain connected to our
ancestral lands not within our
reservation boundaries places
like mount Taylor usually Salt
Lake Chattfield can you make
severity resume mountains the
real San Jose river the real
purple river are among many
important landscapes that
continue to shape the identity
of our people we have not
forgotten of course secret
connection to these places
despite the areas not being
within our boundaries.
Our consensus maps as reflected
House Bill number eight reflect
our respective tribal nations
intense process to make
important decisions especially
those that will affect us for
the next ten years.
Other groups and organizations
wells will be submitting maps to
choose assume with what is best
for our communities.
that have not taken time to
reach out to the pueblos and
leadership we ask you to taken
certain with the approach as
this approach runs the risk of
separating our communities of
interest and diluting our voting
power.
The kinds of consequences of
redistricting are two vital for
our tribes input to be ignored.
Turning to the tech turning our
attention to the statehouse maps
the pueblo una seeks to remain
in district sixty nine reflected
in the tribal consensus maps
house district sixty nine is
currently a protected native
American majority district and
we seek to maintain the status
of house district sixty nine as
a native American major.
The trouble consensus met
reflects the Pueblo of lagoon
this desire to remain in the
district connected to Bob Taylor
our sacred mountains that we
have a great connection to and
continue to protect just two
words with our sister Pueblo and
tribes the tribal consensus maps
maintain our communities of
interest with apple pueblo this
little pueblo and the Navajo
Nation for which we share common
interests history and receive
reversal are for power left in
reserve for our lands.
The our house maps also include
traffic canyon within house
district sixty nine which we
view as the central for keeping
us connected to one of our most
important community self
interest our vision for house
district number sixty nine is to
come capitalized on the
opportunity to elect a candidate
of our choice that reflects my
people's collective values and
shared experiences.
In conclusion the pueblo for
Grudinin for sizes the
importance of self determination
in this redistricting process.
Our engagement in this process
which brings forward tribal
consensus maps as reflected
house bill's a number eight.
The.
that a already long history of a
native American border
discrimination we urge you to
adopt the tribal consensus masks
of the northwest quadrant it
reflects our sovereign decisions
and proud provides native
Americans with the opportunity
to elect candidates are for
choice and access the political
process it is my hope that the
voice of my people are carry
throughout.
This entire redistricting
process this is a duty I in turn
didn't trust upon the New Mexico
state legislature thank you
posture and members of the
committee.
The governor.
Could have to the approval
members Representative I am a
customer of the pool got these
little Peublo I'm here on behalf
of governor bill passed the city
air and attentive intercultural
Pueblo at the and the rest of
the council of to speak up we
have for the but will soon the
the pueblo of Zuni is highly
invested in the New Mexico
redistricting in twenty eleven
so the pueblo less one of the
six tribal plaintiffs known as
the multi tribal plaintiffs and
at that time leadership
recognized the value of the
engaging in the redistricting
process but we were thankful
when the court successfully
adopted our maps.
With the intensive collaboration
with the system pueblos Victoria
patch addition and Navajo Nation
this redistricting cycle The up
levels in the decider maps that
place to the pueblo in New
Mexico Senate district four and
thirty house districts six and
live in congressional districts
two and three.
The public decision to place in
the precincts in multiple
districts The New Mexico Senate
and congressional district is
based on connections to our
ancestral lands is to ensure we
had access to representation to
our communities up interest.
Our goal today is the same as
ten years ago we aim to create
voting districts that allowed
native Americans to elect the
candidate of choice.
To understand the pueblo of Zuni
communities of interest one must
look beyond our current
reservation boundaries and see
through the less of or soon the
world view.
So the Pueblo maintains the
connection to ancestral lands
that span across New Mexico
Arizona Colorado and Utah.
Well these lands are not within
their current reservation
boundaries a connection to these
lands that justice today as the
worried that they support
ancestors.
We maintains to our connections
to our system pueblos and the
Navajo Nation is shared
connection to sixty places like
this the Salt Lake.
Well Taylor tackle candy and
then the of posterior.
anxious alliances continue to
this day as we participate in
the all pueblo council of
governors advocating for issues
that benefit the lives of all
public people.
Together we have pushed for
respect for sacred sites
educational reform natural
resources water ways and healthy
lifestyles.
Collectively we took a unified
position to oppose mining
activity that the the health of
our people and the land.
The pueblo along with other
pueblos heavily opposed it was
along the Salt River project
that threatened a lot of table
this applied to sue the state
could Salt Lake we understand
that our pueblo and tribal
people share connections to the
sacred places SO we work
together to protect these
special places all of these
factors weighed heavily into the
redistricting decision of that
is really Pueblo.
decisions are driven by our
obligations to protect the
voting power four people as
well.
We assert the findings of judge
calls redistricting decision ten
years ago that tribal
communities are in the best
position to determine what is
best for their own communities.
The pueblo of Zuni knows what is
best for its people including
voting boundaries that the
impact of people.
I redistricting decisions are
not made lightly but with the
thoughtful deliberations that by
building consensus with the
system pueblos and tribes and
built on a foundation that
reflects the voting rights act
institutional redistricting
principles.
We asked the New Mexico state
legislature to respect the
rights to self determination in
under our ability to decide what
is best for our people thank you
very much.
Madam chair representatives
thank you for having us here
today
present are then the leadership
during meetings right now so
they could not make it that's
basically extender apologies but
they didn't want me to speak on
behalf of them just to let you
know that he could be a budget
leadership has been working with
the of the public governors and
with Navajo Nation since the use
of early summer I think is about
to had a number of conversations
will work with our with our
Representative is with our
dealership and try to work to
get a consensus so the president
did want me to read just a quick
pull from to the.
Committee that's representative
of our that he says that he
could be a pagination has been
working side by side with the
public governors a Navajo Nation
leadership we are excited that
we could come together to submit
a consent so some of twenty
census maps that will reshape
redistricting for the state of
New Mexico for the next ten
years so they are leadership
has approved this consensus maps
in our favor possibility thank
you madam chair and committee
members.
Good afternoon madam chair.
And madam vice chair and members
of the.
Respectful committee thank you
for.
Giving the Navajo Nation the
opportunity.
To say a couple words.
Regarding
The bills that are introduced by
Representative Eli.
And.
House Bill five.
Is a very wonderful.
It encapsulated the desires.
Of the Navajo Nation.
Without.
The form of influence.
Request for just minutes.
And what it believed to be.
In the best interests of.
Native American voting age
population.
And districts four five six.
Nine sixty five.
And sixty nine.
Those are the six districts.
There are primarily the
major native American districts
in the state of New Mexico.
For the house of
representatives.
Well that was the iteration the
Navajo Nation submitted.
A couple of weeks ago.
And since then the Navajo
Nation.
Has compromised.
Extensively.
And and I mean extensively.
To accommodate.
Concerns asks.
Recommendations.
From our brothers and sisters up
the Rio Grande Valley.
down in the south.
To the brothers and sisters.
And the Navajo Nation made the
effort to accommodate these
concerns.
And
We would love to have.
House Bill I.
The the primary bills.
But as Representative Eli said
that.
there has to be some level of.
making it easy to go through the
process.
Ensuring that.
At least two principles.
Among the very of principles
that the Navajo Nation along
with the work that entail.
With our brothers and sisters
from the all public council.
the various lists of principles.
One this is very important is
the voting rights act.
It's a federal law.
We have to respect that.
And native Americans are among
those list of minorities as
protected societies.
In every opportunity that we
make from redistricting to
redistricting.
It's like climbing the step.
The staircase.
Every step we make.
Has to be forward and upward
that change of ability to.
Elect a candidate of our choice.
Taking a step backward.
Is referred to as retrogression.
It's also an element of
diluting.
The native American voting
power.
That is not the place that we
should be going with this with
this plan.
And to ensure.
That we don't requests we do not
dilute.
One of the principles the second
principle is that the native
American voting age population
in these.
Six districts must comprise of
that the minimum.
Sixty two percent native
American voting age population
at the Mendham.
Navajo Nation would love to see.
Well beyond the sixty two
percent for all the six
districts.
And that's that that's an
important facet.
So at the end of the press upon
the committee here and also the
legislature as a whole.
That there's going to be many
more testaments to be made.
Before the plans are adopted.
In these areas for districts for
five six nine sixty five and
sixty nine.
Should there be any adjustments.
It ripples back on to the Navajo
Nation.
Keep that in mind.
Let me repeat it ripples back on
to the Navajo Nation.
The last consensus that's
referred to in house bill eight.
Was only one precinct.
There was of kind of a concern.
That precinct.
Ripple back.
To.
The center of McKinley County.
That's Navajo land.
And it's important to remember
that as you go about your
business.
If you decide not to adopt.
What's referred to as here in
the house bill eight.
It the consensus map it will
ripple back.
For the Navajo Nation and Navajo
Nation needs to be at the table.
To consider does ripple impacts
should does be these standards
be part of your principles.
And your consideration of
working with indigenous
communities indigenous nations
in the northwest quadrant of the
state thank you very much.
That's what I figured and I I.
Thank you good afternoon madam
chair committee members thank
you for the opportunity my name
is Keegan king I have the honor
of serving as the co chair for
the all public council
governor's re.
Along with my co chair Mister
Casey do my and our committee
members we have work to support
leadership of the all public
council of governors and been
charged with working with our
brothers and sisters of the
Apache and Navajo Nation.
Our goal is to build consensus
and present maps that truly
represent our sovereign tribal
nations to safeguard their right
to elect a candidate of their
choice and to create maps that
comport to traditional
redistricting principles.
A coalition of tribes nations
and publish has achieved
consensus we have brought
together the best thinking of
the Apache Navajo and
publications to create house and
Senate maps that are compact
contiguous achieve reasonable
deviations and maintain native
American majority populations
and protected.
For the past eight months tribal
leaders have worked with their
administrations there councils
their communities to understand
what community.
What are tribal leaders have
shared with us is that
communities of interest are much
bigger than the part of the
state that you live in.
It includes our traditions our
languages our long history in
the state.
The way we make a living and the
shared lived experience of all
of our communities.
Through articulating these
communities of interest
leadership guided this process
and drawing maps that protect
and preserve the right to vote
for their respective
communities.
Now the hickory Apache nation
the Navajo Nation and the
pueblos are United in their
support for one map.
House Bill a supports the self
determination of New Mexicos
tribal nations and it pulls the
principles of the voting rights
act the deviation statewide is
within a ten percent range and
the native American voting age
population maintains native
American majority populations
and R. six house districts.
These maps had been crafted
their true tribal consultation
and collaboration.
And they have the support and
blessing of our sovereign tribal
nations.
We ask for your support for
house bill eight thank you.
Thank you.
I believe it's already yes I
chair non just kidding.
Thank you madam chair vice chair
members of the committee my name
is Casey dumont I am from the
poor little go to also an
attorney from the public with
Luna as well as the co chair of
the all public cancel dollars
it's a pleasure to be here with
you.
Isn't it for four budget into
the the citizens redistricting
committee I know that's a lot of
content to to filter through.
And history is very important in
this process of redistricting.
History one of remedying past
voter discrimination that's
occurred within native American
communities also history
focusing on ten years ago as we
engage in the redistricting
process
I had the fortunate or
unfortunate experience depending
on your perspective of of being
engaged in the redistricting
litigation that took place ten
years ago as co counsel to the
multi trouble plaintiffs in the
two thousand one redistricting
process.
And lessons learned from that
process informed the approach
taken by public leadership in
this year cycle of redistricting
lessons learned that were
important to guide our process
as we filtered through what
worked for us ten years ago what
what did the court look at.
As far as defining what is valid
under the voting rights act as
well as traditional
redistricting principles so
using those as a basis for how
we approached the maps that were
created and recommended by
public leadership they were
grounded in the loft there are
grounded in the voting rights
act as well as those traditional
redistricting principles one of
the things that's very important
to to really appreciate of
obtaining a travel consensus is
the amount of work leadership
done
can you if you can imagine this
body having to work with
individual problems and hickory
Apache nation Navajo Nation to
get an agreement on a single map
starting today.
That would be a huge
undertaking.
As a as representatives from the
various bubbles presented they
provided that heavy lifting for
this body.
And identifying and crafting the
maps that.
Representative the best
possible
outcome of electing candidates a
choice of which the voting
rights act supports and so I
want to emphasize that today and
bring that forth that this
coalition of tribal leadership
oftentimes you hear critiques
and we heard this during the
redistricting process is that
native American majority
districts are racial
gerrymandering.
The voting rights act provides.
This very opportunity to create
these types of districts if
certain factors are met.
What's there called the jingles
factors and I understand you'll
be getting a legal analysis
tomorrow and in that the jingles
factors of which we presented to
the citizens redistricting
committee as meeting those
factors for the northwest
quadrant find this opportunity
to see the maps the way that
reflected in the H. B. eight.
Just so the importance of the
law is what guided our process
that was very fundamental to how
we approach this because there
would be many brainstorming
sessions with leadership but we
would act as a sounding board
for many different concepts many
different ideas much of which
many this is similar to your
process there will be folks that
say well that might not meet the
the confines within the law that
might not meet the standards set
established by the voting rights
act and so the probably your
ship proceed in that manner so
their maps have gone through
much analysis
within the law but also to
achieve the best opportunity to
elect candidates of their choice
and so with HB eight reflecting
that consensus is very important
because as as it was mentioned
before this is the map that is
supported by our public
leadership you know as we came
out of the citizens
redistricting committee process
there was both the Navajo map as
well as a problem that put forth
and the ongoing expectation was
that there would be consensus
achieved prior to the special
session.
And leadership has worked hard
during that time from the when
the citizens registered in the
committee concluded their
process to achieve that
consensus SO if that work was
ongoing even after the CRC
concluded as so what you have
before you is the culmination of
all that work months and months
of deliberations
the eight the all public also
governors Committee the culture
king king and myself with math
with just about every public
multiple times with leadership
there governor's convey
a lot of information on
redistricting what you see here
representatives from the various
problems being able to speak
because they've been engaged in
this process for a very long
time so would like to thank you
for for hearing shaped up
present today in their support
for house bill eight.
We feel this is the strongest
map to protect our voting rights
of native American people to
remedy past voting
discrimination as well as to
provide our communities access
to the political process so with
that madam chair vice chair
committee members thank.
Madam chair co chair members of
this committee I'm Regis because
of the former governor of put to
the Pueblo the member of the ad
hoc committee relegated with the
responsibility of the half of
the ninety pueblo governors I
don't want to be labor of what
has already been shared the dead
to underscore how both historic
this effort is and what a
response to a monumental
challenge to get twenty three
sovereign nations
moving in the same direction
built upon a collective
knowledge of their history the
manner in which policies and
laws were deliberately one
conceived in the act it an
inmate law that covers the
entire spectrum of the areas of
that Mr Casey do more
articulated before the C. R. C.
that underscores fundamentally
the long history of deliberate
nest on the part of the United
States of both Congress the
executive and the courts and to
overcome the kind of monumental
challenge with regard to that
dressing that long history of
delivering
And admissible policy and law is
a major part and at the heart of
this collective effort on the
part of the all pueblo council
of governors representing the
nineteen pueblos the Jicarilla
Apache the Mescalero Apache
nation and of course the largest
Representative of nations of in
our state with Navajo Nation and
so it's been a very exhaustive
deliberative process but I think
the the heart of the of oil and
the spirit well is clearly
demonstrated with the kind of
consensus brought forth to you
and it is our utmost desire
working in partnership with all
of you as a member of this body
that house bill eight be the
preferred of bill moving forward
and that with that madam chair
and unable culture members of
this committee and the
representative of Daymon thank
you for the opportunity to come
before you and share and reflect
upon this long exhaustive
process and we appreciate of the
work of the C. R. C. as the
first and historic effort in the
state of New Mexico for which we
are grateful to have been part
of so with that thank you.
that could.
And now.
That are in person I would like
to speak if you raise.
Madam chair members the
committee made a mistake Mason I
am the project leader foot that
districts New Mexico which is a
coalition of thirty
organization.
I'm here today to speak to you
as a member of the twenty five
person New Mexico first
redistricting task force
whose many of the ideas
what it cooperated into the
system to into the redistricting
act.
And I want to thank this but
this committee in particular
far the our boat on H. B. two
eleven because that boat was
what.
We created the impetus for the
creation of the redistricting
that so we are action to stop of
the day everything that led to
the creation of the reducing tax
the redistricting steps
redistricting.
But I want to talk about one
specific thing and you have a
hand out here which is a poll
that was done it presented to
the
New Mexico for three dispatching
Task Force and how this
reinforces both the citizens
redistricting committee and four
pieces of legislation and before
you and to provide that says
that the
that you know the public one of
more competitive political
competitive this
What is one what what
transparency in the process
eight and a robust eighty nine
percent of the respondents
indicate that that is important.
New Mexico I want to say voters
are highly supportive of using
public hearings allowing
specific
billowing Pueblo to provide
comments on Matt and
of.
That's created by a combination
of experts and community members
and with high support regardless
of whether the media Mr been
conducted by person are online
the public is also hungry for
education on how the process
works and how people can be
involved.
And this one in particular is
its support of
HB eight there is strong support
to engage young people and
tribal nations in the process in
the case of tribes the public
would like to ensure that the
sovereign nations are not only
limited to.
Yeah I I know I'm not only
invited to give input but that
their input to receive through
true consideration.
And the last point that was the
part of this
A poll that was done by the U.
N. M. center of Pacific policy.
Public wants new laws and this
was before the citizens
redistricting committee was
created and that education was
that if the legislature fails to
meet that criteria but for what
is probably that they should be
given the creation of an
independent redistricting can
Committee so the polling shows
support for the citizens
redistricting committee it shows
support for the for bills that
were presented to you today and
because HB eight is a consensus
I think it should show support
for that that consensus bill to
so thank.
Thank you Mr Mason thank.
Good afternoon madam chair
members of the committee I'm
Hannah Burling and I'm president
of the league of women voters of
New Mexico.
You've been provided with our
advocacy statement on
redistricting so I won't go into
detail on that.
But we have long been involved
in redistricting reform both
nationally and here in New
Mexico.
And in twenty nineteen The New
Mexico league was funded by the
third bird foundation to conduct
a fair districts for New Mexico
project.
The goal of fair districts was
to engage other organizations
and policy makers to see how we
could make the redistricting
cycle following the twenty
twenty census bear more
transparent.
And trusted.
We are very grateful to the
twenty twenty one legislature
for passing the redistricting
act that created the citizen
redistricting committee.
Members of the league attended
the fourteen meetings conducted
by the CRC and we've been very
impressed with the transparency
of those meetings.
We review the maps put forward
by the C. R. C. we believe they
reflect the standards in the
redistricting act.
And incorporate the public input
from these meetings and online.
We urge you to adopt one of the
districts maps presented by the
C. Garcia.
And should you change any of the
maps we ask that you provide the
public with a thorough run
Channell for the reasons for
those changes.
And lastly we wouldn't be the
league if we did not ask that
all deliberations on
redistricting follow the spirit
and the letter of the open
meetings act thank you for
allowing me to speak.
Thank you.
Thank you madam chair members
the committee my name is Austin
we often here today on behalf of
N. M. native up
and I just wanted to voice my
support for H. B. eight this is
my first redistricting process
and I just want to voice like
how incredibly proud and
grateful I am for my ability and
like the the
of responsibility and the
opportunity to work with tribal
leadership it has been
absolutely incredible to hear
the input come back our way as
opposed to the way which it's
always been in the way that we
had to be re directed at the
start because this is an
entirely new process one which
actually uplift the voices of
tribal leadership which we don't
have to go to a lawsuit to yet
which really prioritizes the
people having an opportunity to
choose who their leadership as
and it has just been a and
incredible process to that is
not prescriptive that we can
really create the lines where
they should be based on the
communities of interest that
tribes are nonpartisan that they
will work for what's best for
their people for their resources
for their economy for their
education
and that it has really been a
really enlightening
I think very special process
this time around specifically
because of the CRC and because
of the legislation that was
passed in in twenty twenty one
that really promoted people's
power and and especially tribal
power and I just want to thank
the members of the committee and
and again voice my support for
H. P. eight I just want to point
out that ensure that it's both
of our first time since.
Thank you.
Hello madam chair vice chair I'm
Eisaku Sato sign the new chair
of the native American
democratic caucus and it is our
honor to to be here to be able
to talk about not only the
history of where we are but the
history up to date nineteen
forty eight native Americans
were not seen as relevant to
this discussion we did not have
voting rights and it took a
World War two veteran to come
back and fight for those rights
and for the Supreme Court to
determine that we as native
Americans should be given that
right to vote seventy years
later here we are considering a
bill that would potentially now
take into consideration what are
our ancestors that have come
before us had only hoped for we
are here to provide support for
the recommendations put forth by
our tribal leadership by the
president of the Navajo Nation
and are patching Asians so that
there is now equity we always
talk about the idea of the
quality versus equity and today
we now have the opportunity to
be able to provide equity to our
tribal regions in our tribal
communities and our peoples that
we've been waiting for for over
seventy years so with that thank
you so much for your diligent
work and we stand in support of
HB place.
Great thank you thank you for
anyone else on the side that
would like to see.
I apologize if that doesn't
have.
Let me try so we have president
Sanchez.
We are.
Ready and we can take her.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Preston
Sanchez I'm not sure right now I
an attorney for the state of New
Mexico and as you may know the
ACLU currently works to defend
protect in advance of the
collective rights.
In this people.
Including the right sovereign
right to determine what is best
for their tribal communities the
ability to access the democratic
process and their ability to
elect candidates of their
choice.
You for support redistricting
preferences.
No machinations of New Mexico we
support and stand behind the
many tribal leaders and
representatives currently in the
room as they exercise their
right to self determination we
support sensors obtained by the
tribal nations in making plans
possible and finally we
supported house bill eight and
ask this committee to support as
well thank you.
Madam chair are having a
difficult time hearing.
Great thank you so I think
everyone heard that loud in
there a little bit more loud or
louder than we would have liked
to but we just only have one
more to go Kathleen Burke.
Welcome.
Thank you.
Here again go ahead.
Right now.
Right.
Members I'm having a project
coordinator with that districts
for New Mexico.
The company of thousands of
people were saying about
professor Max for New Mexico the
rest those who unified and
accommodated not here today.
Twenty twenty one you the New
Mexico legislature to December
the Monocacy.
Mexico by passing the
redistricting at high speeds for
which created the system
redistricting committee we have
a compelling findings today.
What was the New Mexico
redistricting task force the
task force made by members
statewide minister I am on drugs
and not for profit New Mexico
fires.
Which was made up of
professional data analysts
business leaders legislators
judges and a whole slew of
products from various walks of
money.
House course made
recommendations to the
legislature's.
As well as recommendations to
the school actually how.
The task force however with the
citizens hi with movie put them
out.
Wirth twenty nineteen and we are
now roughly fifteen thousand
Mexicans comprised of.
Ations.
Mexico organizations and I
highly esteemed national
organizations including women
voters US president German
project center for justice.
Republicans and Democrats.
The groups Hispanic white groups
educators women's groups whether
it's.
Sessions and more.
Representative comments on
disenfranchisement I.
He's forty groups asking the
Legislature cleans not
disenfranchised and fifty
thousand New Mexicans asking for
a fair process.
For modified C. R. C. McQueen
please provide the public with
explanation as to any changes
might may.
Will ask for compliance with the
voting rights act.
Freedom from constant
gerrymandering protection of
communities of interests.
Right here it's just about
groups including tribal
boundaries.
No comments have fun Karia.
On legislative meetings follow
the letter and spirit of the
open meetings act.
Should be conducted and for
public view the actions of the
public bodies should.
And operations then open to the
public.
For New Mexico and voting on
partner organizations for us to
take the next steps to ensure
that the twenty twenty one
redistricting but spare.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you so and we have one
more in person Madam welcome.
This took a fine you could just
leave it on and then speaking
yes.
Good afternoon
We chair madam chair all that
committee members I mean look on
that the people's I where
people's maps camping
coordinator we host over a
hundred forty five interactions
grant really direction across
hold the state supporting the
CSC process for the past
the past months two hundred
eighty three the state for more
on these across the state really
supporting our house Matt E. and
also the changes that brings
would be we best take yes the
challenge though communities off
the interest on the community
self of that have seen is that I
adopting the plastic yes changes
will be back.
The Hispanic majority the
spending ability makes major in
house district sixty three house
district sixty three has a
history will be nestled for
major spending again we want to
keep it like that I sat
protecting also the minority
minority rights in that area in
the southeast we know by new
scene that percentage of
Hispanic voting age population
in house district sixty three
will also also the opportunity
for a lot of our communities
which one has been growing
exponentially in that area major
Mexican Americans email requests
and Latinos will be left out in
the conversation for their
representatives so we ask you to
really amend and they changes
happen at the last minute in the
CSC process after all the
meetings that we hold a you what
have helped the light that will
never be able to produce yes
community this really.
Talk about how that.
Even that change will have a
ripple effect in the rest of the
state in this case for us we
want to keep
they major all the data
percentage of the spending body
image population the house
district sixty sixty three how
Edie's meaning that will won
them and they just a kitchen to.
So madam chair what we'll do is
I want to everybody here that
because we will end up having a
substitute just so that
everybody can look at both of
them because I didn't understand
this year she had approved this
but it didn't hit the final map
but I obviously wanted the
native American community here
that as well as the committee so
that nobody surprised tomorrow
so I didn't want to kind of
spring it on everybody so that's
why I was kind of scrambling to
make sure that somebody was
talking about this because I
knew this issue was coming up
and they were in on in this.
They that this it gives us.
The building this we're
struggling to get.
Thank you and and
Representative.
That is my understanding senator
members the committee so that's
why I am going to make sure that
I've confirmed that
you know the tribal communities
have been lied to far too often
historically I don't want to be
part of that process so I'll
make sure we have a quorum
definitely hold you accountable
Representative yes committees.
Fifty money so was watching for
any thank you I I don't want to
go back and Mr because you've
already.
We have that okay great.
can I give one minute face so
the way that we have planned for
today to go well as for
Representative.
Overview of what's happened
especially after we heard today
from this year C. and research
I'm pulling but then the lawyers
that have also been working on
this are in the Senate is my
understanding and they're not
available until tomorrow morning
so we were going to hold the
question.
Tomorrow because normally the
process goes we introduced a
bill we hear the committee
From the committee exited from
the public and then go to the
committee members were holding
off and tell.
No right right now we're talking
about is just so that the
committee has it so that I know
decisions are being made.
I'm going to bring you tomorrow
an additional house bill eight
will be a substitute for house
bill eight it is only going to
change as I understand I just
have.
house bill house district sixty
three
in a minute it has some impact I
think on a house district
seventy but I'm gonna find out
we will know because you will
have not just the lawyers you
will have the technical people
here who can talk about it you
are not bound by this substitute
but I just didn't want to spring
it on the committee tomorrow
without some explanation as to
what we were doing but that's
the only two house districts
that I know of that will have
any impact on in the experts
should be confirmed tomorrow the
one thing I'll say madam chair
members the committee is what I
tell people is the knowledge on
these redistricting is about
this deep and I have about this
much knowledge so it's it's
helpful to have the technical
people the lawyers here when
those kind of.
Seventy.
Correct seven seven zero seven
zero.
And.
My hope is is.
Tomorrow more nine o'clock right
part of the.
The.
Find out make sure.
I I am chair and.
We can certainly get
representatives more involved in
that you bet right after.
Course that makes sense thank
you so again we just have it.
Still have getting together to
get consensus on items but I do
want to so I in my case to of
being late and trying to get
started I did forget to.
So I want to go back to that but
before I do.
I just want to thank all the
tribal leaders everyone here
today for for to.
Far away from your homelands and
I think it just shows how
important it is that
Tribes.
Elected members of their
choosing and that way we can
ensure that tribal sovereignty
tribal self determination.
Honored and that.
Again I know you have.
And
I'm sorry to my committee
members but Representative Rehm
if you.
I'm up Representative state
representative bill Rehm a
district thirty one which is the
farger.
Good afternoon my name is Gail
Chasey my to.
I I really want to face.
So far.
And I I just I want to take a
moment to say I I grew up in
Arizona.
I went to the university of
Arizona I did in history and
What I.
I think it's kind of a travesty
that I didn't actually realize
that the native people did not
have.
I don't.
Arizona I mean.
But it is.
I learned here that it was
nineteen forty eight.
I am so shocked.
My father flew B. twenty.
And thank talk about travesties
that in that is a travesty the.
Hi.
On this right.
Afternoon thank you madam chair
members of the committee thanks
all of you for being here and
Christine are yes Representative
houses or forty two which is
most of task County for now I'm
so grateful for the states for
the input received today thank
you so.
Really important history
lessons.
Madam chair I'm Daymon Ely on
the representative house
district twenty three which is
the north west of the northwest
secretary of Albuquerque
southern Krause and a little bit
of Rio Rancho
I was trying to look at in
response to
the the church AC's inquiry we
both grew up in Arizona I also
don't know the answer to that
question as to when the
American.
And it's shocking that we don't
know that and so is has been
really an interesting process
and it's been a privilege to be
sitting here with the the tribal
interests.
Sure for allowing that to happen
thank you Representative Eli
that can be here piece of
homework for that.
I will come back and report we'd
like to know that okay thank
you.
Good
lesson.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you colleagues and thank you
that's funny tribal leaders and
everyone I am.
That house district I.
San Juan county's hi.
And about nineteen chapters and
it's an honor.
I do want to say I always.
Thank you.
And I'm hurting blue.
Representative house district
twenty six.
And I'm sorry.
And with that we also have a
great staff.
Good afternoon my name is.
Right.
Down.
So that.
I think everyone.
In person on Thursday.
Appreciate your taking the.
We will be back tomorrow.
I believe in room three zero
seven.
At nine AM.
So.
Thank you everyone thank you
madam chair.
