The clerk to call the members
without a recorded response.
Representative Alcon.
Representative Anderson.
Representative Barreras.
Representative bash second
president.
Representative bash is present.
Representative black.
Here Representative black is
here.
Representative Bonga.
Representative will guide here
Representative Brown.
Representative David M..
Representative Castellano.
Representative Castellano is
here.
Representative Chasey.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield is here
Representative Cook.
In the spring.
I was late getting on the road
what let me in and then they let
me and all of a sudden.
Is that Representative Alcon.
Yes I'm sorry are you here here
thank you all right
Representative Alcon is here.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Ferrary.
Here Representative Ferrary is
here.
Representative.
Gregoras Representative Gallegos
is here Representative Harry
Garcia that is in the
Representative Harry Garcia is
here Representative Miguel
Garcia.
Representative Harper.
Representative Lente.
Representative Lente is present
Representative Lente is here
Representative Lord.
Representative Lord is here
Representative Lewis.
Here Representative Lewis is
here.
Representative Lundstrom.
Here Representative Lundstrom is
here Representative Maestas.
Representative Ortez.
Here Representative Ortez is
here Representative Andrea
Romero.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Representative Roybal
Caballero is here Representative
Scott.
Representative Scott is here
Representative set up though.
Representative Strickler.
Representative Strickler is here
Representative Thomson
Representative Thomson is here.
The representative Cadena.
The members recalls close we
have a quorum.
Please rise for today's
education offered to us by the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative late.
What's great.
All right thank you for the gift
of life yet again this morning
another opportunity to come and
do the people's work.
Former grateful that we live in
a nation in the state we have an
opportunity governor selves.
There were also grateful that
you tell us that those of those
who ask for wisdom or you give
it abundantly.
And what I know that we as those
who cast votes on behalf of our
people that we need an abundance
of your was and so would prefer
that this morning for all of our
decisions we led by you and
wasn't that you offer Lori thank
you again for those times and
pricing we pray amen.
Thank you general with the
gentle lady from.
with the gentle lady for you
Representative Rubio please
leave this in the pledge
allegiance.
And with the service to access
C. and.
have a generally from Chavis
Representative Ezzell yes in the
salute to New Mexico's flag.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker with a go
to the next order of business
third is getting see the roll
away.
Announcements and miscellaneous
business area junction sorted.
Morning members.
we get to a memorial city today
one needs to be introduced so
we'll go quick briefly to.
Introduction of legislation.
Domingo that we go to the next
order of business introduction
of legislation.
Texas ordered.
The clerk to read.
House memorial twenty seven
introduced by Representative Dow
and tracks the memorial honoring
Diane Miller Hamilton and
recognizing her outstanding
service to New Mexico House
memorial twenty seven introduced
Representative Dow and process.
House memorial twenty seven
having been read twice by title.
These are not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr Gramm of the go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business no objection it is so
ordered and for curious minds
the long delay in between
meeting that never the memorial
and putting on the speakers
table had nothing to do with
that memorial we were dealing
with some other procedural
questions related to the
memorial the gentle lady from
granted this year I do you wish
to make a motion.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
house memorial twenty seven the
removed from the speakers table
and make it the next order of
business please no objection it
is so ordered let the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House
memorial twenty seven on final
passage has been taken.
Gentlelady to explain the
memorial.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
of the committee of the body
today we're introducing a
memorial to honor Representative
Dianne Miller Hamilton she
served as a representative in
district thirty eight for
eighteen years and passed away
November ninth twenty twenty one
and so today we have members of
her family in the gallery and I
would like to have the memorial
read and give each of us the
opportunity to honor her in her
work.
Thank you gentle lady before
just occurred to read I would
like to recognize merit Hamilton
Allen in Gerry Hamilton of the
gallery would you please stand
up let us welcome you to the
house.
The clerk to read the memorial.
House memorial twenty seven
introduced Representative Dow
and process a memorial honoring
Diane Miller Hamilton and
recognizing her outstanding
service to New Mexico whereas
Stan Miller Hamilton who served
as a Republican state
representative for district
thirty eight died eight batter
home into various on November
ninth twenty twenty one and
where as Representative Hamilton
served nine terms from nineteen
ninety eight to twenty sixteen
representing district thirty
eight which includes grant
Sierra and Hidalgo counties and
whereas Representative Hamilton
was born in Kansas city Missouri
on January thirty first nineteen
thirty four.
And where as Representative
Hamilton attended grade school
and high school in Kansas city
and graduated from the
university of Kansas in nineteen
fifty five with a degree in
speech communication and whereas
Representative Hamilton talking
Kansas city public schools and
pursued a broadcasting career
until she married her husband of
sixty years United States Marine
Corps officer John a Hamilton in
December nineteen fifty six.
And whereas for the next twenty
years Representative Stapleton
and their four children drew
Jared when and merit followed
her husband's career in the
military until John retired from
the United States Marine Corps
in nineteen seventy four when
the family moved to Silvercity.
And whereas Representative
Stapleton was a well known radio
hosts and silvercity
broadcasting to daily programs
on K. ISIL from nineteen seventy
six to nineteen ninety nine and
whereas during her legislative
career Representative Hamilton
served on the following standing
committees.
Consumer and public affairs
education government elections
in Indian affairs and
transportation and public works
and we're as Representative
Hamilton also served on the
following interim committee
committees economic in rural
development and
telecommunications economic in
rural development legislative
affects legislative education
study and Military and Veterans
Affairs.
And whereas Representative
Hamilton was a key figure in
relief efforts to establish
statewide voter identification
and was known as an advocate for
veterans and ranchers.
And whereas people fondly recall
the record that representative
Hamilton appreciated the
legislative staff.
And members who support the
legislative legislature and the
public and whereas
Representative Hamilton was a
popular legislator who is known
to have her way through the
capital and.
Where's Representative
Representative Hamilton has also
been added.
As a suits women who paved the
way for other female legislators
and whereas Representative
Hamilton was an active volunteer
and leader in Silver City where
she helped found the first
shelter for victims of domestic
violence.
And whereas Representative
Stapleton served on the board of
regents at western New Mexico
university from nineteen ninety
to nineteen ninety eight serving
as president of the board for
the last four years of her time.
And whereas Representative
Hamilton led leadership roles in
many community organizations
including the Grant County arts
council thank you it regional
Medical Center foundation the
board of Hidalgo medical
services and Silver City library
board and whereas Representative
Hamilton received the governor's
award for outstanding New Mexico
women and nineteen ninety four
and was aimed Silvercity Grant
County citizen of the year in
nineteen ninety five.
And whereas in two thousand
Representative Hamilton receive
the New Mexico district
attorney's award for outstanding
representative of the year and
was rewarded an honorary
doctorate for humanities from
western New Mexico university in
two thousand six.
And whereas in November two
thousand nine the dynamic Diane
Miller Hamilton military museum
celebrated the grand opening.
It's grand opening into the
consequences and whereas where
Representative Hamilton is
survived by her children John
Andrew drew Hamilton and Tricia
Jared Miller Hamilton and
Michael Wayne Hamilton of
Connell's and I am more at
Hamilton Allen her
granddaughter's life Hamilton
and Joan Marie o'connell and
three generations of Armstrong's
led by Bobby and rates
Armstrong.
And whereas the C. honor
Representative Hamilton on
November twenty second twenty
twenty one.
When she late in the state
capitol rotunda and now
therefore be it resolved by the
house of representatives of the
state of New Mexico that Diane
Miller Hamilton be honored and
recognized for her public
service and dedication to the
residents of New Mexico.
And her strong advocacy for
those whose voices are often not
heard and be it further resolved
that copies of this memorial be
transmitted to John Andrew
Hamilton.
Jared Miller Hamilton when
Hamilton o'connell and merit him
of ten out signed and sealed at
the at the capitol in the City
of Santa Fe.
Thank you the gentle lady thank
thank you Mr speaker and you
know that was believe it or not
an abbreviated version we're
trying to keep it to two pages
this is a very accomplished
woman and if there is mentioned
in the memorial that should pave
the way for other female
legislators you know I remember
her telling me when the women's
lounge was installed so that
that we didn't have to go to a
different floor to use the
restroom and now women make up
the majority of the body and so
it is quite an honor to follow
in her footsteps
She was my representative for
many years before I ran in her
position when she vacated her
position and she has a very very
larger than life personality and
Justin during compelling person
with a wonderful sense of humor
and of all of her
accomplishments I know that her
family is the greatest
accomplishment of all and so
it's really nice to have a few
of them here today I wish drew
inland would be here as well but
it's a quite a distance to
travel but I just I want to
thank the speaker for making
time for this she did pass in
early November and early in
state was was a beautiful
ceremony and Representative
Terrazas was part of making that
happen so many of the the
employees and folks who are here
for committee members paid their
respects and it was just an
honor to her to see so many
folks the come and and recognize
her in her work in this house
and without I stand for
questions.
Thank you generating it is there
debate on the moral the the
gentleman from grant
Representative SS thank you Mr
speaker I just want to make some
comments about this one
wonderful person from our
community.
Mr speaker will the gentle lady
please yield thank you Mr
speaker I yield to the gentleman
from Dona Ana grand Sierra my
apologies I got ahead of myself
so I just want to make some
really nice
You know statements about the
and she was a beautiful
beautiful person I remember is
as a kid seen here and if she's
probably as tall as I am for she
was as tall as I am you're a
little kid and you saw her you
could recognize her voice she
had been in the right on the
radio for so many years little
kids so you can Mr as an altar
boy there at St Francis Newman
center and so that was for
parish and it was a beautiful
thing she was always kind
friendly per and Marie Ryan for
their the same at that same
parish
and any time that I came up here
You know as a as a but what I as
as I was growing up and things
that were needed in the
community only came a few times
she always treated me and
greeted me and I think.
The hospitality of a
representative or senator
legislator to take the time to
to what their constituents
around and I make sure they feel
comfortable up here in the in
the in the people's house is a
beautiful thing so may god bless
her again choose you know I
think like we could all sit here
and talk for an hour but all the
different things she's done you
know she she did and what shape
what you stood for but always
remember she does so we.
Up to two of the include my
current and and and running what
you always call me Darling that
was her word so with that thank
you Mr speaker gentle lady.
Thank you John the gentle lady
from grant Hidalgo and Luna
Representative Sweetser thank
you Mr speaker will the gentle
lady from grant Hidalgo in
Sierra yield thank you Mr
speaker I said I yield to the
gentle lady from Luna Hidalgo
and grant thank you when we
first bought the dimming radio
stations in nineteen ninety of
course you check out what's in
the surrounding communities and
Diane Hamilton was legendary she
was such a well respected and
well thought of radio host and
she was just one of those people
there was no way you could
duplicate so we didn't even try
she was so connected to her
community.
Fast forward to when I'm elected
appear and I start introducing
myself and people say all our
Diane Hamilton and I said that
could never be another Diane
Hamilton I learned that early in
my radio career so the other.
The connection I guess that I
have is that my predecessor
Diane Irwin came in with
Representative in Hamilton and
retired with Representative
health and so they were really
well connected and we and Diane
passed away I called Donna and
she was she was really upset she
said that that she loves serving
with their that they were across
the aisle very good friends and
that she was the kind of person
you could connect with no matter
where you were on any issue or
any ideology she listened she
cared she respected other
people's positions and she was
just so well thought of so just
wanted thank you for bringing
this memorial thank you for
succeeding her so well in that
position mostly I just thank her
family for being here and
sharing her with us thank you Mr
speaker thank you generating.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
leader Martinez thank you Mr the
gentle lady please yield thank
you Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you to lady I got to serve Mr
speaker and a lady with percent
Hamilton for for a little bit
and I agree with all of you she
was a larger than life
personality when I came into the
legislature I used to sit on
that other side she would sit on
that far corner up there and I
would encounter her every once
in a while in the lounge and you
know should be cheating on me
from you know John but she
always took the time to
exchange of you know words of
courage and and and west of with
me and so when I learned over
passing the speaker gentle lady
it was a reminder to me that in
fact.
you know life is precious and
granted she lived a very full
life but it was some of the
minder of of how quickly things
can turn for all of us and I was
able to be part of the service
back in November and I got to
meet some of the family
at the time and.
You know the sacrifices that
were made by Representative
Hamilton to serve
the sacrifices of the family
made for her to be able to serve
it not only serve but to blaze a
trail as you said gently before
for other women to serve in is
in this legislature I think it's
something to be commended so she
will be missed she does have a a
spot in our leadership office
along with some of the other
elders that have passed in in my
time here and you know every
time I walk in and out I sent
him up there in another watching
us pretty close attention to the
work that we're doing thank you
Mr thank you generated for doing
this.
Thank you gentlemen next year
the gentleman from Chavis Lee
and Roosevelt leader Anderson.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady yield.
Thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the gentleman the minority
leader of the independent
caucus.
Thank you the.
Hi to rise and take a moment to
remember
eight nine term.
State representative.
for hard eighteen years did not
X..
Is not remembered in my mind.
For her longevity.
She is remembered for her
dedicated honest service to the
state of New Mexico and her
constituents.
And I believe she and her
service.
Sets a high bar for all of those
who participate in this service
in the legislature and seventy
members thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen.
The general fund Chavis Eddie
Arcaro leader Townsend.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady of thank you Mr
speaker I yield to the to the
leader.
Thank you
It highlights of leader Martinez
I remember well
exactly.
Where she set back in that
corner.
Because my first year I was just
below or.
And
She was
Extremely candid the.
offered
Positive.
Fox.
David was awfully funny when she
did it.
She was a grand lady she had
the.
She.
In my experience with their she
always tried to exactly what was
right and she stood for what she
believed in and he did it well
and at that we all should follow
thank you very much.
Thank you gentleman that act the
gentle lady from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Thank you we'll delay deals
thank you Mr speaker I yield to
the gentle lady from Chavis.
Mr speaker gentle lady this lady
you've just had a regal quality
about her the way she cured
herself the way that she.
Was able to talk to people the
way that she was she was just an
icon up here and I want her
family to know that she will be
greatly missed by many Mr
speaker gentle lady thank you
very much.
The gentle lady.
Is there further debate the
gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey thank you
Mr speaker will the lady yield
thank you Mr speaker I yield
thank you Mr speaker and lady
from ground I appreciate very
much an opportunity to say a few
words about diet Hamilton when I
entered the house consumer and
public affairs committee she
served on that committee for
many years I am on not only is
she extremely entertaining and
articulate and and so kind to
people in their presentations
even if she was going to vote
another way but I I have viewed
her as a renaissance woman and
didn't even realize the extent
to which she was until I read
her obituary because she didn't
talk about I done this and this
and this and this instead she
was just always a an intelligent
delightful person and I would I
want to just relay one little
anecdote and did not campaigning
for anything here but when I was
working on the repeal of the
death penalty for ten years I
had at that bill on the house
floor three times and on the
third time and the reason it was
on the floor three times not one
session but three consecutive
sixty day sessions
we had.
Three house votes on it this was
a bill that was supported we had
bipartisan support for that bill
on that last time.
In two thousand and nine
Representative Hamilton voted
for the bill she hadn't done
that before and that was the
year that the bill was actually
signed into law because it made
it through the Senate but I did
visit with her and I said if you
don't mind my asking no we don't
question people's votes but I
just asked her what had changed
her mind and she said that she
had had on that exchange gassed
from Russia who spent time at
her home that summer and that
person said to her don't let the
state take a life in the name
and that changed it for her and
she just very calmly voted for
the bill and never.
Mention it to anyone and other I
was I was really amazed at her
courage in as I but as I said
there were a number of
Republicans who voted for that
bill and of hi I just felt a
special kinship with her from
her service and her her
entertaining quality I want to
tell her family that story when
we had her when she lay in state
here at the right time to and I
didn't have that opportunity so
I want to bring it up today
thank you so much Mr speaker
thank you lady.
Thank you Jerry is there further
debate.
Before I go back to the the
gentle lady I too enjoyed
serving with her I was here for
several terms of her and she did
have an incredibly good sense if
you were there is a another
former state representative Lori
von and glory of on would have
these.
She kind of four costumes on the
floor and and do all sorts of
funny stuff.
And she was over having those
wax lips you know that I can
vampire teeth and I don't they
still have them anymore but when
I was a kid it was a Halloween
thing.
have you cheated you look very
funny thank Lori von where them
on the floor like all the time
as a joke and one day I would
send the back row and the glory
of on came up with
Representative Hamilton in terms
of health is our header hand
like this kind of covering her
face and and one of our came up
and did a whole thing with the
wax lips they were all sort of
the again taking it back and
then Representative Hamilton
here to verify hands waiver face
and she was tag teaming with the
wax lip in New Mexico this is or
terrorize if you've just on the
floor it is very funny and I
certainly miss serving with her
and thank you also to her
daughters for being here so
gentle lady to close thank you
Mr speaker and I just want to
thank the body for sharing these
stories with merit and which
aired today and I now move that
house memorial twenty seven now
to pass Mr speaker if I could
ask for you unanimous consent
showing all members present and
voting in the affirmative no
objection it is so ordered.
Okay so we are on final passage
of house memorial twenty seven
there's a request that the
record show all members present
and voting in the affirmative
hearing no objection it is so
ordered the vote is open.
Hello folks were.
The vote is a close rival to
seventeen the firmness zero
negative house memorial twenty
seven has passed the house.
The gentle lady from Los Alamos
do you wish to make a motion
thank you Mr speaker yes I do Mr
speaker I ask unanimous
unanimous consent that house
memorial twenty three the
removed from the speakers table
and be made the next order of
business.
No objection it is so ordered.
For the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House memorial twenty three our
final passage is been taken the
gentlelady to explain the
memorial.
Mr speaker it's a privilege and
an honor to present this
memorial congratulating el
Rancho de las Colin Drinan's on
its fiftieth anniversary and
proclaiming January twenty fifth
twenty twenty two el Rancho the
goal goal and dream the state in
the house of representatives and
I asked Mr speaker that them
memorial the red.
The clerk to read.
House memorial twenty three
introduced by Representative
Chandler memorial congratulating
el Rancho does go under you as
on it's fifty fiftieth
anniversary in proclaiming
January twenty fifth twenty
twenty two ranted just going to
just stay in the house of
representatives whereas over
into does go under in us New
Mexico is from more living
living history museum is
celebrating its fiftieth
anniversary on January twenty
fifth twenty twenty two.
And where as the mission of
Eloranta dealers going green as
it is to preserve the legacy of
the land.
And his spaniel traditions and
whereas we Sam was established
in nineteen seventy two by
landowners Lenore Ecker ten and
why a follow him on.
Who had the vision to donate the
land and establish an open air
museum and whose family remains
involved in its operations today
and whereas over into the US
going green is located south of
Santa Fe in the Los younger
valley welcomes more than fifty
thousand visitors each year from
all fifty states and around the
world and whereas over into does
going green as encompasses five
hundred acres part of which was
in.
With an important period or
stopping place along the El
Camino of.
Ralph.
The royal road extended from
Mexico City city to Santa Fe and
whereas over into those going
during this is dedicated to the
history heritage and culture of
the eighteenth and nineteenth
century New Mexico and features
original his historic buildings.
A local acequia system and an
irreplaceable cultural landscape
and were as of right to do is go
hundred as encourages guests to
get hands on with history by
teaching visitors.
How to spin yarn and make a corn
husk dolls for Chile restricts.
Stomp grapes and stuff stamps
ten work and we're as a rented
us going Drina strives to
protect preserve and showcase
the culture traditional life
ways and historic agriculture of
New Mexico.
And whereas over into this
country as welcomes and serves
more than twenty thousand Mexico
school children through its
programs each year instilling
pride in children's history and
heritage and an understanding of
their place in the the American
story and whereas the museum
brings education and
understanding of New Mexico's
history to participants through
numerous festival weekends award
winning lectures live broadcast
programming and field trips and
were as of right to do is going
green as has.
More than five hundred low
volunteers who worked thousands
of hours in many capacities at
the museum throughout the
season.
And whereas Aventis going rate
as is a year round working ranch
that donates four than seven
thousand five hundred pounds of
fresh produce grown in its feels
the Santa fe's food depot to
feed the hungry each year and
we're as a rancher does going to
go into and just is an iconic
setting for New Mexico's film
industry with such films and
television shows as better call
Saul young guns and then news of
the world have having been
filmed on its ground.
And whereas over into those go
in free agency is a faithful
steward of the land protecting
and preserving several
significant archaeological sites
and whereas over into those
going Trina's is holding fifty
infants and twenty two in
observance of its fiftieth
anniversary.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the New Mexico house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico that the.
Granted it was going drainage be
congratulated on its fiftieth
anniversary and the January
twenty fifth twenty twenty to
become proclaimed of Rancho to
us going to to stay in the house
of representatives and be it
further resolved that a copy of
this memorial be transmitted to
the museum director of el Rancho
de las going to just.
Thank you and before I go back
to the gentle lady I'd like to
recognize guests in the gallery
we have
The museum director
Daniel Goodman.
The state that was welcome you.
We have to go on a very familiar
face member of the board of the
museum.
And we have Henry Rivera who is
chair of the board.
Welcome.
And to the gentle lady thank
thank you very much Mr speaker
if.
Is the museum is a does a
delightful place located in the
loss and I go valley and if it
exhibit so much of New Mexico's
history.
One of the most engaging ways to
learn about visiting around so
that is about our history is
visiting around so the goal and
three assists living history
museum south of Santa Fe it
transports you back in time to
the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries.
Around the state law school and
during this was a major rest
stop on the Camino Ryo.
It features original buildings
on the site that dates back to
the early seventeen hundreds and
other historic buildings brought
in from other parts of New
Mexico.
Volunteers dressed in period
costumes and show visitors how
people lived in colonial New
Mexico whether it's baking bread
and all for now shearing sheep
blacksmithing or running a mail.
Most fourth grade students in
northern New Mexico have taken a
field trip to el Rancho de las
School Andreas stirring New
Mexico heritage days to learn
about New Mexico history that is
one of the many educational
programs offered to school age
students.
El Rancho de las Colin dream
this was opened as a living
history museum in nineteen
seventy two and is now
celebrating its fiftieth
anniversary.
As part of the celebration and
museum will host fifty events to
celebrate.
Its anniversary the events will
include the museum's regular
festivals.
The spring and harvest festivals
lavender and wine festivals the
fiesta de Los Ninos and the
spirits of New Mexico leave a
Mexico and the Santa Fe
renaissance faire plus a half
marathon run and a walk on the
Camino Rohit Ryo.
The mission of L. round so data
school injuring us is to
preserve the legacy and lands of
Espanyol's traditions.
The museum is in self is the
southwest premier living history
museum and one of New Mexicos
most precious gems.
Thank you generate we have the
gentle lady from Santa Fe
Representative Romero thank you
Mr speaker thank you gentlelady
for bringing this forward
And runs of the law school in
the nurse's by childhood
sort of Mecca say growing up
there my grandparents used to
spend their summers dancing for
tourists for locals for
everybody and I would get to
learn a lot about the history of
New Mexico through that process
how my dad went to school on our
in house and of course what it
was like then thankfully the
school reform has been
substantial since then my dad's
listening for the single school
house stays we're you know
teachers did things that don't
they don't do today but that
said we were able to have horses
cultivate cord be among the
subsistence sort of farming
community that my grandparents
grew up in and so it's just a
gem of history of culture and of
course bringing together all of
New Mexico history in a living
museum and I think that's the
best part about it so I'm just
so grateful to have that today
is as L. runs of the law school
funding us day and to be able to
celebrate the existence of this
and of course it's persistence
and being part of part of our
future thank you
Gentleman from Los Alamos and
Santa Fe thank you Jerry next we
have the gentle lady from Santa
Fe Representative Lujan.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you gentle lady for bringing
forward this
Memorial and I say.
Are they happy fifty years to
to the LESC and the answer
Placer swelled swallows are you
can see can go there I don't
know if anybody hears is visited
I don't do COVID there's been
certain restrictions but it's
been a.
A place where I've I've grown up
the going to and I've seen it
change over the years and that
is a place where I've taken my
children as well and celebrating
the fifth at the listening test
that you mentioned is one of the
one of the days that we we my
friends and family and I always
get our kids out there to to get
in touch with and understand
their heritage of New Mexico and
where we.
Where we came from in order to
know where we're going and I
think that this is this living
Sam has been just a stable for
for me my family but for New
Mexico and bringing a children
and people from all over to
visits and really understand.
Where we what we have done and
where we are today and some of
the same traditions that still
exist culturally and their
artwork and through
And there are culture so I want
to say Happy Birthday thank you
for being there and thank you
for bringing this for this is a
really like you said is a staple
to New Mexico and it really is
so thank you and I look to have
more memories to build their
thank you.
Generating that extra the
gentleman from Chavis Lee and
Roosevelt thank you Mr speaker
Mr speaker I.
Rise with great endorsement of
the of memorial.
Rajo day lows go Andreas is one
of New Mexico's top cultural
educational sites and I remember
with fond memories my wife and
I.
Being there many years ago and I
think to myself there may be
some members in this room who
haven't had the chance in the
first fifty years and my only
advice to you and your loved
ones in your family and friends
is don't wait for another fifty
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen is there
further debate.
So before I go back to the
gentle lady I want to echo the
congratulations.
I.
Like many who Representative fe
of incidents within the genus is
a very common destination for
school trips and it's going the
only ways you can learn how how
active media medieval culture
was in New Mexico the twelve and
thirteen hundreds.
Thank you Mr okay well that was
a joke about the renaissance
fair that they have there that
every year
obviously we do not have an evil
culture in New Mexico
So for someone with the
intention to what I was saying
but thank you very much for a
bring this memorial thank you to
the members of the board for
being here today thank you for
all you do to enrich the lives
of the people of our state with
your wonderful museum and branch
gentle lady to close always the
jokester Mister speaker Mr
speaker I now move that house
memorial twenty three do now
pass and I ask unanimous consent
of the house that the record so
that the rule has been called
and all members present voted in
the affirmative.
We are on final passage of house
memorial twenty three with
requested the records show all
members present and voting in
the affirmative hearing
objection it is so ordered.
The vote is now open.
The vote is now closed five of
seventeen from if zero negative
house memorial twenty three has
passed the house.
Are there other announcements
before we go to bill
introduction the gentle lady
from grant Hidalgo and Luna
Representative Sweetser thank
you Mr speaker Mr speaker are
you involved in agriculture.
Glad you asked because yes I am.
We've got that down Pat.
Tonight would have been access
to add things that we all
enjoyed it mainly with our
farmers and ranchers and and the
affiliated organizations from
around the state but due to an
abundance of caution no advance
tonight so instead The New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
sponsored these wonderful bags
that are at our places filled
with all kinds of goodies Pinto
beans jerky but constant red
chilli infused olive oil and
lots more and so we want to
thank The New Mexico farm and
livestock bureau for
coordinating the bag we want to
thank all of the groups that
sponsored things and put in put
items in the bag and of course
we want to thank our farmers and
ranchers feeding close the
hungry naked nation thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you gentle lady.
The delay from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker thank you very much
and along those same lines also
in the bag.
First off I do want to stress to
the body that ever product in
here is New Mexico ground and to
me that's very important.
Mr speaker.
This little bottle of Bill cries
here.
Is now national this was
developed by a dairyman that had
a dairy farm right next to my
parents.
And they have in all the grocery
stores now.
Right Representative Lara talked
him into buying a half gallon of
it at the grocery store last
week and you will agree with me
is some of the best mode again
ever drank they have regular
mentalities that way so
Representative a lot of bench
pressing a Prius in the garage.
Mr speaker I'm not gonna.
And knowledge that Mr speaker
this milk.
Has been sold coca Cola bottling
now owns it because they
believed in this product.
My.
Enforce blue is the daughter who
is a diabetic can drink this
milk it has been approved by the
US department of health as being
one of the top.
Once is that they have for their
patients and Mr speaker I do
have to stand up and applaud
every person that is out there
trying to make a living on any
farm or ranch.
Because right now farmers and
ranchers throughout the United
States.
Total less than ten percent of
our population Mr speaker I
would like to give a big round
of applause to all of those that
are involved in agriculture
thank you.
Thank you.
The gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan Representative
Lundstrom.
Good afternoon Mr speaker I
would just like to announce that
we'd like to start.
Rations and finance committee at
one thirty today if that's
possible for off the floor thank
you members techno and the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business introduction of
legislation no objection it is
so ordered.
Click to read.
One thirty six introduced by
Representative Sariñana and act
relating to criminal records
providing an exclusion for
school districts from the
criminal offender employment act
house bill one thirty six
introduce Representative Sonya.
One thirty six having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules committee.
One thirty seven introduced by
Representative Dow and Miguel
Garcia.
And act relating to public
contracts requiring the public
contract provided for increased
contractor and subcontractor
reimbursement and worker wage
increases in accordance with and
concurrent with the state
minimum wage increases house
bill one thirty seven introduced
Representative doubt
Representative Miguel Garcia
house bill one thirty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
One thirty eight introduced by
representatives Strickler
Allison Rod Montoya and Lane an
act relating to the environment
amending the air quality control
and changing the date on which
standards of performance that
women carbon dioxide emissions
from the certain electric
generating facility sources well
I from January first twenty
twenty three to January first
twenty twenty six has a one
thirty eight introduce their
presented Strickler thousand Rod
Montoya and money one thirty
eight having been read twice by
title is ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
One thirty nine introduced by
Representative Rehm act relating
to elections creating the voter
education in elections Tax force
task force directing the voter
education elections task force
to study provide recommendations
and proposed legislation to
implement best practices to
educate voters and ensure the
accuracy and integrity of
elections process in New Mexico
declaring an emergency house
bill one thirty nine introduced
by Representative bring us for
one thirty nine having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules committee.
One forty introduced by
Representative Rehm an act
relating to criminal law
providing for and no time
limitation for prosecuting
second degree murder house bill
one forty introduced by
Representative Rehm.
House bill one forty having been
read twice by title.
About is germane pursuant to
house executive message number
two.
This is what we discussed
yesterday the rules committee
for those following home.
under printed and referred to
consumer public affairs
committee this Judiciary dense
appropriations and finance.
One forty one introduced by
representatives Dixon guy goes
in rural and act relating to law
enforcement enhancing death
benefits for peace peace
officers for New Mexico mounted
patrol members and reserve
police officers changing
distributions from the law
enforcement protection fund
house bill one forty four one
introduced by Representative
Dixon guy goes in rural.
One forty one having been read
twice by title is ordered not
printed and referred to the
rules committee.
One forty two introduced
Representative Serrato.
And act making appropriation of
public education department to
provide personal protective
equipment to all public school
students and rolled through the
end of the twenty twenty one
twenty two twenty two school
year declaring an emergency
house bill one forty two
introduced by Representative
Serrato.
One forty two having been read
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the Education
Committee then to appropriations
and finance.
So one forty three introduced by
Representative Serrato and
actually need higher education
creating a fiveyear innovation
accelerator pilot program to
assist start up businesses to
accelerate into viable
businesses that are attractive
to investors and to study the
economic development and
diversification potential of
accelerators providing for
innovation accelerator centers
at certain community colleges is
creating a fund making
appropriation house bill one
forty three and respect
Representative Serrato house
bill one forty three having been
read twice by title is with.
I determine to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the commerce and economic
development department the
change committee this
appropriations and finance.
House bill one forty four
introduced by representatives
Rubio and Martinez.
And act relating to commercial
driver's license aligning the
new aligning New Mexico
commercial driver's license
requirements with federal law
amending repealing and enacting
sections of the N. M. S.
eighteen nineteen seventy eight
house bill one forty four
introduced by Representative
Rubio and Martinez.
House bill one forty four have
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the rules committee.
One forty five introduced by
Representative for heart of an
actuating to families and act in
the child welfare.
Obce Fund Act.
Providing for the chief child
welfare odds and.
Rating the child welfare this.
but then office and establishing
the powers and duties of that
office providing for the
establishment of chief child
welfare funds men's selection
committee amending the and
enacting sections of the NMSA
nineteen seventy eight making
appropriation house bill one
forty five introduced by
Representative Fajardo house
bill one forty five having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuant to
article four section five B. one
of the constitution order it
printed and referred to the.
The Judiciary Committee then to
appropriations and finance.
House bill one forty six
introduced by Representative
process and senator crystal
diamond act relating to taxation
providing a temporary
distribution of the taxes
imposed pursuant to the
resources exercise.
Excise tax act on copper two
counties where the coppery
served house bill one forty six
introduced Representative
process and Senator Diamond one
forty six having been read twice
by title I determined to be
germane pursuant to article.
For section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee and taxation
and revenue.
Also one forty seven introduced
by representatives Castellano
and mass.
An act relating to trade
practices prohibiting the
circumvention of control
measures used by electronic
ticket sellers to ensure
equitable consumer access to
event tickets house bill one
forty seven introduced by
representatives Castellano and I
just does the one forty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
referred to the rules committee.
One forty eight introduced by
Representative Dow and Martinez
an act relating to business
extending the date applications
for loans pursuant to the small
business recovery and stimulus
act must be received extending
their reversion date of
unencumbered money in the small
business recovery loan fund
house bill one forty eight
introduced Representative Dow
and Martinez.
Yes one forty eight having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order it printed
and referred to the.
Commerce and economic
development committee thence
taxation and revenue.
House joint resolution twelve
entries by representatives Lord
Pettigrew Scott in towns and the
joint resolution proposing an
amendment to article twenty of
the constitution of New Mexico
to allow the recall of public
officers elected to a
constitutionally created
elective office in the executive
or legislative branch of
government.
House joint resolution twelve
introduced Representative Lord
Pettigrew Scott and Townsend.
First.
The joint resolution twelve as
authorized by article nineteen
section one of the constitution
hundred printed and referred to
the government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee thence
judiciary.
Twenty eight introduced by
Representative Fajardo Dow and
receive a memorial recognizing
victims of violent crimes and
their families and honoring
their loss and suffering House
memorial twenty eight introduced
by representatives Fajardo Dow
and right.
House memorial twenty eight
having been read twice by title
is ordered not printed and
placed on the speakers table.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker move that
would make sort of business
messages no objections ordered
clear to read.
House executive message number
twenty one there speaker you
often members of the House
pursuant to article four section
five B. two of the New Mexico on
New Mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
initiatives of house bill one
thirty five a bill enacting the
Indian family protection act
consolidating provisions
specific to child custody
proceedings involving Indian
children into the Indian family
protection act providing
additional requirements
governing child custody
proceedings involving Indian
children requiring a cultural
competence component in case
plans and abuse neglect
proceedings creating the office
of tribal affairs within the
children youth and families
families department amending
various related sections of the
children's code the views and
the gloves Act the adoption act
and the kinship guarding Act and
repealing NMSA nineteen seventy
a section thirty two a dash one
dash fourteen and NMSA nineteen
seventy eight section thirty two
a dash three the dash six point
one respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor Mr chair.
House executive message number
twenty two.
Dear speaker you often members
of the House pursuant to article
four section five B. two of the
New Mexico constitution I am
authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of a bill bearing
Legislative Council Service
drafting number point two two
two zero five five a bill
aligning New Mexico commercial
driver's license requirements of
federal law by amending and
repealing sections of the New
Mexico commercial driver's
license act amending the
motivate motor vehicle code to
include definitions for non
domiciled non resident resident
and non resident non resident
commercial driver's license
commercial driver's instruction
permit non domiciled commercial
driver's instruction permanent
and non domiciled commercial
driver's license and acting news
section of the New Mexico
commercial driver's license act
regarding non domiciles of
commercial driver's licenses or
non done domiciled commercial
driver's instruction permits
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor.
Mr will be entered.
Also let the record reflect that
a duplicate.
copy or duplicate of house
executive message twenty one was
received it will be entered in
the journal but not read.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business.
Objection is so ordered we have
house bill one thirty five.
Representative Lewis house bill
one thirty five.
Is germane pursuant to house
executive message twenty one.
Press one thirty five germane
pursuant to house executive
message twenty one are to remove
the rules committee printed and
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee sense
government elections and Indian
Affairs house bill one thirty
five so ordered removed the
rules committee printed and
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee that's
government elections and Indian
Affairs.
House bill one forty four of the
sponsor on one thirty five is
Representative Lewis.
House bill one forty four.
Representative Rubio.
Is germane pursuant to house
executive message twenty two.
Yes one forty four
Representative Rubio is germane
pursuit has executive message
twenty two ordered removed from
the rules committee printed and
referred to.
E. commerce and economic
development committee thence
transportation public works and
capital improvements house bill
one forty four removed from
rules committee printed and
referred to the commerce and
economic development committee
thence transportation public
works and capital improvements.
Are there other announcements.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker it not
being eleven to nine AM I move
we adjourn until one PM House
come order this is because in it
consent that the rules are
suspended in the the journal
show that all those present in
the morning session are present
in the afternoon session no
objection it is so ordered
speaker as in Adams consent that
the rules be suspended and that
the record show that the journal
has been reading fully approved
subject to revision and approval
of the rules in order of
business committee.
Karen objection is ordered.
Welcome to the third day of the
session everybody.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thompson thank
you Mr speaker the health and
Human Services Committee will
meet at eight thirty tomorrow
with the full agenda so please
be please zoom in on time thank
you never say no.
Are there for the general from
Bernalillo Representative Romero
thank you Mr speaker your house
Education Committee will meet
tomorrow eight o'clock the is
assumed the agenda should be in
the golden rod in the link
should be good and you'll get an
update in the morning should
members forget thank you Mr.
Members say no the generated
from was almost Rio Arriba
Sandoval and Santa Fe thank you
speaker house taxation and
revenue is scheduled to meet
tomorrow morning at nine AM.
Members techno.
We heard about the
Appropriations Committee
announcement are there other
announcements the gentle lady
Diana Representative Ferrary
thank you Mr speaker your house
and consumer public affairs
committee will meet today at one
thirty or well we should be
reason.
Assessing so one thirty.
Members take note did I hear
the.
Mr speaker yes Representative
out at your local.
Thank you Mr speaker a house
labor Military and Veterans
Affairs Committee will be the
minutes after we get off the
floor thank you Mr speaker
members take note we just got a
packet of committee reports so
we should take care of those
before we adjourn the gentleman
from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr chairman that we go
to the next order of business
committee reports no objections
so ordered thirty three.
Mr speaker Education Committee
tomb is referred house bill
thirteen has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that I do pass as
amended an answer for the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andrés Romero chair speaker
move adoption of the committee
report.
Unanimous consent for the
committee reports to be read
together acted upon a single
vote reflect in the journal so
they rectified individually
hearing objections sort the
clerk to read.
House bill fifty nine to pass
and thence to the appropriations
and finance committee.
House bill seventy three do
passed as amended and thence to
the labor veterans and military
affairs committee respectfully
submitted G. Andrés Romero chair
speaker move adoption of the
committee reports we're on
adduction favorable committee
report on house bill thirteen is
amended fifty nine and seventy
three as amended all those in
favor please signify by saying
hi.
All this was may three point
after.
Mr speaker your Judiciary
Committee too has been referred
house bill ninety two has had it
under consideration report same
as recommendation that it to
pass an answer for to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Gail Chasey chair.
Mr speaker move adoption of the
committee report we are adoption
of a favorable committee report
on house bill ninety two all
those in favor please signify by
saying hi.
All the suppose name reports
adapted.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee tomb is been
referred house bill sixteen has
had it under consideration
report same with recommendation
that it to pass an answer for
the provisions of finance
committee respectfully submitted
Representative Elizabeth
Townsend Here.
Mr speaker move adoption
the unanimous consent of the
committee point right to get
their act on a single vote and
reflects in the journals of
their act on individually
hearing objections ordered clerk
to read.
House bill seventeen to pass and
thence to the taxation and
revenue committee.
House bill twenty three do you
pass an answer for to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill thirty to do pass and
then for the taxation and
revenue committee.
House bill thirty eight do you
pass an answer for to the
taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair.
Move adoption we are option of
favorable committee reports and
house bill sixteen seventeen
twenty three thirty two and
thirty eight all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
This was a.
Committee point Dr.
Mr speaker Energy Environment
and natural resources committee
to miss from for house bill one
zero one has had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it do not
pass but that House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill one zero one do
pass an answer for to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted vacuum
between chair Senator.
The option of an unfavorable
committee report on house bill
one oh one bit of favorable
committee report on Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill one oh one all
those in favor please signify by
saying hi.
All this was make reports up to.
Mr speaker your rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee to is
been referred house bill eight
has had it under consideration
point seems recommendation that
it to pass an answer for the
taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted Susan and
a chair unanimous consent of the
committee pursuant to gather act
on a single vote reflects in the
journals of erected upon
individually hearing objections
order click to read.
House memorial I do pass.
Respectfully submitted Susan K.
at a chair.
This is a bigger move adoption
we are adoption a favorable
committee report on house bill
eight and a favorable committee
report on house memorial I all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
All this was a three point
reduction.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
We'll go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business sections
order that we've heard for
committee chairs present
housekeeping today's or anything
else.
The gentle lady from million.
The gentle lady from Valencia.
Mr speaker what do you call it
when you somebody's sorry just
try this one again what do you
call it when you still
somebody's coffee.
Gentility what I'm making.
Very nice gentle lady
the gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr chairman of the
house said in recess until
eleven thirty tomorrow morning.
Thank you for a good day's work
ever in the gallery thank you
for being with us we appreciate
you being here please be sure to
follow the work of our
committees this afternoon enjoy
the rest of your day and an
even.
We'll be back tomorrow house in
recess until eleven thirty AM
tomorrow.
