Representative small.
Thanks chairwoman Herrerra here
chairman.
Yeah of course.
Thank you very much Taylor good
morning members thank you all
very much for letting us for for
one bill this morning
if you recall house bill one
seventy seven was tabled earlier
in the session to it's a a Bill
by Representative Cook titled
the homely food act and there
was a request by one of our
members who actually joined
Representative Cook on this bill
to see if she can revive it and
and put some life back into it I
know we have a little bit of
time left in the session so
without further ado hospital
once in.
I'm looking for Representative
Cook in the end these list I do
not see him.
I'm wondering if Representative
Matthews who has talked with him
and has has has teamed up with
and now we would like to take
the lead on this house bill one
seventy seven but first if I
could have a motion to deport
off the table.
Some of Mr chairman.
Second thank you very much so
we'll pull house bill what's and
isn't off the table homely food
at separate cook Representative
Matthews
Representative Matthews you
would think you have thank you
Mr chairman thank you members of
the committee headed to get
everybody out early for one bill
but I think this is kind of an
important bill of homemade food
yet so this came before us
several weeks ago.
Does.
I'm sorry.
Representative Ezzell is Colin
cook we come up.
All right
and and it it was table there
was concerns about
there's concerns about whether
they were not safety features
and some various other things
that cause problems but let me
kind of explain the background
of this of this act so in New
Mexico generally our food cooked
at home can be so and it's it's
a
The regulated regulatory
agencies New Mexico environment
department they have certain
rules and of course this is
where you know people come out
may sell their cookies and
whatever wonderful things they
make it home I'm.
Nobody I I I have to say I've
actually no personal interest in
this in the sense that nobody
would ever buy what I cook so
I'm not doing this for myself
other than maybe to be able to
buy some goodies from other
people but the problem is that
in.
Albuquerque the City of
Albuquerque third of the
population of the state they
have a total ban on the sale
were you of food that is made it
home.
And so it affects not only those
of us in the city from being
able to make things and sell
things but it affects people
from surrounding areas being
able to come in during the times
of the balloon fiestas and
things or whatever or the
weekends and sell things it
prevents
It prevents intrastate internet
sales and so forth and so this
bill we went back to the to the
workshop on it and
Worst with the with the
department of environment the
environmental Department to
basically.
Some require that workers do do
the same thing as the rest of
the state in terms of providing
this as an outlet for people who
make homemade food and want to
sell it these are.
As a cottage industry but there
are a lot of people who do this
and want to do it and they use
it to supplement their income
they may you do that
particularly when they have
young children at home and they
can't work outside the home
I have several constituents you
came to me and said could you
please thank you please sponsor
this could you do something with
this and so it's as the as the
and analysis indicate it's
basically just setting up the
same system that's available
through the state and has a
provision that says and if your
home rule classe County.
Only being one I think in the
entire state
then these are the rules for
this instead of these ridiculous
rules to totally prohibit this
activity on and
And squash
entrepreneurship and getting
giving us all some choices to
eat something besides Cheetos
filled with chemicals and.
All the general numbers will now
send me emails but.
Right so so with that and I have
an expert Erika
Smith who should be on a maybe
we could add her and she can
she's more knowledgeable but
some of the details of this and
I am.
Certainly Representative
Matthews but before we do go go
to Erica I because you're
reviving this and now it's full
of the table you do have a
committee substitute yes sorry
yes we have a committee
substitute and I the number for
us please the number is this.
Yet to many bills on my.
A tier one give me one second
please sorry.
The number of the committee
substitute is.
To to all one seven one point
four.
Very well thank you very
chairman I made the committee
substitute for discussion motion
made thank you very much
Representative Ezzell.
And Representative Matthews is
so so you know we're on the
substitute bill.
You know just go and so it is
that changed up any from the
original bill and if so you and
I know you just give
introduction on your thoughts in
the original bill on the
impacts.
For you but the substitute bill
does what differently.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee it's a.
Let me again just one second
I was working on two bills I
didn't sort my papers last night
before after that access debate.
Here we go sorry.
Okay.
So
It changes the quality and
safety standard for homemade
food for the homemade food
exemption from non potentially
hazardous to quote not time and
temperature control which is the
same standard gets used in
restaurants to determine all the
rules regarding keeping stuff
heated and cold and all of those
kinds of things.
It includes local government
food sanitation inspection
programs in the definition of
department.
it limits the definition of
seller to the person producing
the fight the food item.
It limits sales direct from
seller at farmers markets
festivals roadside stands the
sellers on and on the internet.
it requires that the seller
complete a food handler class.
It provides that the seller
maintained a sanitary kitchen
practices good hygiene protects
the kitchen from rodents and
pests and keep children and pets
out of the kitchen while
producing food.
It.
Requires that this should be
transported safely
It
At the end it it just it of New
Mexico Environment Department my
operator voluntary permit system
for homemade food which is what
they have.
it provides for the
investigation of any food borne
illnesses traced a homemade food
provides for written warnings in
the case of food bank born
illnesses
legislative failure to comply
with the enemy PED written
warning is a misdemeanor and
result in a fine
just got a lot more safety
provisions in terms of the food
and how the food is cap and
produced it has all kinds
requirements about labeling
and those those kinds of
issues.
Let's see.
This section is
I think I consider the key
section to be.
section three.
Which.
Goes through basically three
things it talks about how it's
regulated.
and it talks about.
how the labeling what will be
done.
Of course requires accurate
labeling and so forth and then
the.
Sect subsection C. provides that
the
the information that is provided
to the consumer which includes
not only the labeling of the
ingredients and so forth but
that name and home address
telephone number email address
of the of the of the the
producer the food.
And
There's voluntary permit
systems.
And then it's also in the where
the class state county and home
rule municipality has to.
Can't impose greater
restrictions than this.
and as I say it as a part need
it as a
of a penalty in the event of a
of a violation.
And I think those are the key I
mean really beefed up the yes no
pun intended
it really increase the.
There are requirements to be
sure what you can trace with
this we comes from it has to be
produced and clean area
and it's this is all limited to.
New Mexico only this is not out
of state sales or anything like
that.
So.
Thank Representative Matthews on
the committee substitute there's
been a motion to move the
substitute their second.
And is it chair thank you very
much Representative Hochman
Vigil as any opposition to the
committee substitute at this
point.
Okay you have a committee
substitute for house bill one
seventy seven at does that
you're you're expert wish to add
any quick comments before we go
to the audience.
hi I don't know.
There she is okay I'm so sorry I
didn't see here.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Matthews and
members of the committee my name
is Erica Smith I'm a senior
attorney at the institute for
justice I'm also an expert on
homemade group laws and I I
legislative chairs on these laws
nationwide
I as I testified last time New
Mexico has one of the most
restrictive homemade food laws
in the country this is not just
because Albuquerque has a
complete and as Representative
Matthews mentioned but it's also
because you are only allowed to
sell at farmers markets and
roadside stands you cannot even
sell out of your home you cannot
even deliver bread to your
neighbor down the street so this
bill would fix that and allow
people to sell directly to
consumers and online this is
what almost every other state
already does the other big thing
this bill does is it gets rid of
the burden some permit
requirements and and the need
and instead makes that permit
voluntary which NMED's that they
are totally fine with.
So the last time we brought this
bill there were some safety
concerns that that the
department had and the
department is also concerned
that this bill could possibly
violate federal law and
jeopardize their FDA grants
since then worked very closely
with the department I've worked
with Sandra Ely is one of the
directors there I have also
worked with Jennifer how're is
there she she Council and NMED
has they're concerned their
concerns have now been addressed
they're still getting
authorization to attend
committee hearings on this bill
but they have authorized need to
give this statement that quote
we have discussed the amendments
with the NMED and they have told
us that they addressed many of
their concerns and do not
believe this will jeopardize
their requests and if the bill
is passed out of committee NMED
will do a complete analysis on
the bill prior to going to the
house Judiciary Committee so
this substitute our address is
on the safety concerns and it's
a very good bill it's an
important bill it's going to
help a lot of people support
themselves their families and
their arms especially now during
the pandemic and so many people
are struggling I'm I'm happy to
answer any questions we have a
lot of people who want to test
provide support thank you.
Thank you very much miss Smith
Representative Matthews anything
else to add before we go to the
audience.
you're you're you're muted
Representative Matthews.
Sorry I'm Mr chairman and
members of the committee
the only thing I would add is
just a short my interest in this
can't comes about in part
because I was the I taught
entrepreneurship at C. N. M. for
number of years and as she NMAA
Connor program and I would
constantly have people in my
classes you wanted to start
restaurants bakeries.
Home businesses and so forth and
as part of the class of people
who had products that they
wanted to share of they would
bring them and so we had a
constant flow of wonderful food
coming into the class and we
would have a public at the end
and.
It is.
It would when I really when I
learned in Albuquerque had this
provision I was thinking what a
terrible tragedy that these
people don't have an outlet
trying to get started maybe
they'll Sunday do a restaurant
maybe some day they'll become a
bigger package you're bent but
even if they just do this on the
side is something to help find a
little income and cause a so
much love it and enjoy it what a
shame that we don't allow this
basic level entrepreneurship and
let other people she because
cooking.
Looking by folks like this is
sharing is a gift to give to
share and and which if we don't
keep people from singing we
don't keep people from dancing
and doing other things and so I
I'm sorry it's it's kind of you
may seems sort of strange to get
so worked up about it but it
really is a shame not to allow
people to share their gifts with
other people so.
That with that I will.
Stop talking.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative let's
go then out to the audience
attendees all those.
That are in support of the now
the case of stew for House the
one seventy seven please raise
your hand.
We will work down the list and I
will begin with Amy.
Amy good morning.
Thank you for hearing me again
this morning.
Yeah and I geo my husband and I
just bought an orchard that's
been in his family for about
thirty years.
I was working in the code.
And you know when I when I was
working in the field and I was
laid off.
You know jobs the so.
Just going income I was able to
just start making sourdough.
When farmers market so long as I
the world so they were really
simple to navigate so I did that
and it was a wonderful blessing.
We also in Wyoming and the same
thing when we got home I was
able to do farmers markets
because there are laws are very
similar.
And when we don't hear I was
researching the regulations and
now my background is I I.
I was a paralegal and in the oil
field added regulatory
compliance sorry I read
regulations for a living.
The really hard to understand
and so when I was able to
determine what is that there's
really no way that I can all of
them just right in my home
kitchen the wages for instance I
think I would have to have extra
reserves that extra
refrigerators I believe that I
would have to store in separate
you know in separate
refrigeration places
separate pantry.
A lot of those are very
And cumbersome for the whole
Baker.
And requirements were kind of
complicated I'm not sure but
things are not you know it was
just very confusing and where I
came from a very easy to
understand and the rules are
very easy to follow and incomes
and speaking to New Mexico in
the lack of a comma orchard.
The locals have really reached
out to me and said are you going
to start making her mother lost
count hi is we're waiting for
these things to come back it
really want to support my
started making business
and I'm a college student right
now and I'm taking out student
loans I believe that I could
think for Michael kitchen I
would probably not have to do
that
you know so it's it would be
wonderful blessing if we could
get through I believe that the
the compromises made in this new
bill are fair and reasonable
you know before college I worked
in commercial kitchens so I
understand safety and I
understand the concerns about it
I think that the the additions
to this bill address that I'd
been sort of state certified
many many times another
wonderful class to be able to
take I definitely learned a lot
when I when I was certified and
each time I take it something's
changed and it always makes good
sense so
I would encourage you to and.
Support this bill and send it
Senate.
I think right it would be a
wonderful stimulations the
economy especially after such a
long pandemic and.
Really want to
I've had such great support
this.
I ask you to wrap your comments
please.
This so this community is
supported and I really am
enjoying Mexico and I would just
like to be able to fill the
communities.
And also make a living and that
was it thank you thank you Amy
every day that's going to.
What happened.
Okay
so we good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is that
we think and I'm a registered
lobbyist for the national young
farmers coalition my husband
Carlos and I also grow diversify
vegetables and raise small
livestock here and readily
elements to quite a counties and
we think the bill sponsor for
bringing this bill forward we
fully support it with the
amendments made regarding the
safety concerns that were
brought up previously.
Informers believes that having
consistency across the state
around the ability for producers
to sell their home made products
is really vital for the health
of our local food system
and this bill will help farmers
like myself who want to expand
our agricultural businesses by
adding value added production
when there's abundance in the
season with excess produce
and we we again thank
Representative Matthews for
bringing this bill forward with
the amendments made and we urge
the committee to support.
Thank you very much so we list
now go to Pamela Roy Pam really
good morning.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members thank you very
much for the opportunity to be
with you today and I'm here
representing the New Mexico food
and agriculture policy council
rocky mountain farmers union and
farm to table and we all stand
in support of house bill one
seventy seven Warren thank the
sponsors Representative Matthews
Representative crook for
we working this bill and
addressing the concerns that we
brought forward before and for
for it miss miss at the
institute of justice in the work
that they do and to the point of
Representative Matthews and and
miss teen who just address this
as well we appreciate that this
brings more continuity across
actually municipalities and
jurisdictions
it's and and then secondly that
now includes the sellers that
sellers need to complete food
handler certification course
approved by the department I
think that's really important
and dresses are concerns about
food safety in public safety
when somebody selling things and
and also learn about one of the
things that are that are
important to did you like this
gets mentioned.
I just want to share really
quickly the about a decade ago
we worked on this issue here in
New Mexico so this is a great
step forward from that New
Mexico didn't even allow for
state.
In two actually make and create
and nonvolatile kinds of jams
and jellies in their home
kitchen until we worked on a
rural ten years ago and this is
a really great step forward on
that rule in in brings forward
more money modernization to it
and to represent Matthews point
we appreciate the also really
looks at constant we've crosses
jurisdictions like Albuquerque
and rest the state so thank you
very much for bring this forward
working on it whole heartedly
and we look forward to the
spread of the committee.
Thank you miss Roy this now go
to Katie Katie good morning
you're with us.
Good morning thank you to the
chairman and committee members
for letting me speak in support
and again thank you to
Representative Cook and Matthews
and those have been open to
discussing and supporting and
working with us I'm Kathleen's
Act men and I spoke last time
I'm in Albuquerque Baker and
have been shut out of this
opportunity that's find across
the state and like I said before
I looked into starting my
business about three years ago I
was excited that New Mexico
already had laws in place for
that to happen but was really
disappointed when I found out
that didn't apply to me and when
I reached out to the city
council and the department of
health department everyone
trying to make that happen
legally and the right way I was
just told they're not interested
which was really disappointing
and so that's three years that
I've missed out growing a
business that could be
completely different than just
starting it now if this is
passed like I said last time
I've got a three year old and so
it's understandable that it's
not possible at this point to
rent a commercial kitchen and
launch a full fledged bakery
with her but this bill would
allow people like me to slowly
scale of businesses in a way
that fits our families in the
state were and
an actor coming out for a
licensure community and reduce
that initial cost and financial
risk
and so like we've heard it from
Representative Matthews and
everyone the state has already
established that these things
are safe and beneficial for our
state and it's just like people
said it seems like myself my
fellow bakers should be shut out
just because we decided to live
in Albuquerque which has a large
portion of the state's
population and I'll just close
with one last spot for you guys
shortly after I spoke last time
my daughter I was sitting with
her and she just looked up at me
one day and said she wants to be
a Baker when she grows up which
you know three year olds want to
to what their parents want to do
but I know from my own
experience that that can be
really difficult Karen Mexico
and so I just hope that by the
end of the session that with the
help.
Of you all we can make that
dream a bit easier for her and
myself and others here in our
state and I just ask you to
support this bill and allow
those of us in Albuquerque to
join others in our state who can
sell their home processed food
so thank you all.
Thank you very much Katie have a
great morning the stock go
finally to Tricia Tricia good
morning.
Tricia you may be muted.
Can you hear me.
We can you know yes ma'am okay
good morning chairman let the
Representative Matthews and
committee members thank you for
your time and given me this
opportunity to speak to your
favor of house bill one seventy
seven.
My name is Tricia ray and I am
from staff of the Pueblo
residing on tribal land.
I currently work full time but
will be eligible for retirement
in approximately three years at
that point in time I would like
to make a seamless transition to
a home based bakery business
specifically sugar cookies.
Eagerly and ambitiously I got
started on this process three
years ago as I began going
through the steps to establish a
business I quickly learnt that
customers look for a flu permit
license I contact a contacted
Environment Department to get
the process started but I was
told that they could not issue
me a license since today do not
have jurisdiction over tribal
lands the environment department
could grant me a temporary
permit but it would only be
valid to events today half
approved distant not line up
with.
With me wanting to sell to the
public I also reached out to our
tribes healthcare director and
also is Sandoval County to check
if there are any food licensing
programs in place but there are
not.
Sh I have also been taken
entrepreneur workshops with the
Indian public cultural center
and although they have tried
their best to help guide me it
seems that no one is aware of
how to get license when residing
on tribal land this bill can
change that my passion for
creating cookie are just not
going away anytime soon and I am
seeking out all avenues to
create a rewarding business and
that is legal currently my
credentials could include a food
handler's certificate and
liability insurance.
Without this bill I would like
to know how someone who creating
who resides on tribal land can
successfully start a home based
bakery business this is the land
of enchantment and we should all
have equal opportunity to be
able to start our own business
and I thank you for giving me
the time to hear my voice.
Thank you very much Tricia have
a great day.
Let's go out to the audience all
those in opposition of house
bill one seventy seven.
A couple seconds.
Seeing no one in opposition we
wanna come back to the committee
good morning committee again
let's go then to first on the
list I have Representative
Hochman Vigil Representative
Hochman Vigil the floor is yours
then.
You are muted out
Representative.
Okay still can't hear you blink
twice if you want to come back
to you.
Okay what will come back to
Representative let them go to
and then two of Representative
Herrerra Representative good
morning.
Mr chair good morning committee
I am so grateful to to the to
Representative Matthews
Representative Cook for bringing
this bill back before the
committee I just hated voting
against it last time that I was
really concerned about some of
these issues and I I'm really so
grateful just to give you a
little background I grew up in a
family of ten very active in
this age Catholic Church my
mother was at an amazing chef I
won't even call her can every
for like three years when I was
in high school as she would
cater weddings every single week
for about five hundred people
doing the wedding cakes doing
everything so I grew up in an
environment like this and I know
how valuable it is and and
that's certainly that problem in
a lot of extra income to our
family with you know at the time
a teenagers they certainly
needed that so I'm so happy to
vote for this and I'm so
thankful that you brought it
back to the committee thank you
Mr chair.
Sorry about that.
Thank you.
Okay.
What was was there a question I
am sorry I was distracted from
it.
No okay.
Question just a comment Mr I
apologize thank you very much
vice chairwoman let them go now
to Representative brown
Representative brown good
morning.
Good morning Mr chairman so.
Just a couple questions about
the bill
Mr chair and and Representative
Matthews so it says here that a.
Food handler
would be I guess required to
take a food handler
certification course approved by
NMED so my questions there or
how often are these courses
offered are they on the line or
the easily accessible then how
much do they cost.
Mr chair representative.
Representative Matthews you are
muted.
So too many late nights these
days I'm sorry.
Mr chairman at sorry about that
and Representative those are
great questions I'm going to ask
It Eric that if she has any
specific information about that.
Of before I talk a little bit
about I went seeing it was
offering thank you Erica.
Mr chair representative back in
Representative Brown of these
classes are very accessible
offered online you can take them
at any time they're usually
about eight hours and there for
a small fee maybe about twenty
or thirty dollars so very
accessible.
It's.
Mr chair and representative and
so that's that's really good
news.
Mr chair representative do you
have a sense of we've heard
about Albuquerque and the
experience there to some extent
this morning what are you
hearing from other parts of the
state if anything about about
this bill.
I'm.
Mr Chairman representative
It it it I'm it hasn't got a lot
of publicity that we were trying
to resurrect it recently but
I've been sort of surprised that
even without very much publicity
or much notice that this was
happening that of I started
getting emails from people
And I think quite frankly I
wasn't focusing so much on where
they were coming from just some
of the art felt feelings about
thank god you people are doing
this force
So I can't it it's you know
there are built where our
inboxes are in
I just filled with thousands of
emails this this is not one of
them
but there is a steady stream of
emails that seem to be coming
from various parts of the state.
Thank you so Mr Chairman
representative I'm I'm I'm I'm
really intrigued by this bill I
I like the fact that people
would have the liberty to use
their creative talents and you
know use is that too see the
other people I think that's
great I.
I know we have a lady in
Carlsbad who.
is married to a gentleman who
couldn't tolerate any and so she
created a homemade salsa that
doesn't have any incentive and
every time somebody else try to
this if you've got a bottle this
and she ended up
Really moving forward not just a
little cottage thing anymore for
her but she's she's national now
and she's even Hearst also is
featured in advertisements for
New Mexico drugs in those at ads
are running in in other states
so it was really an incubator
for her and and she never would
have gotten to that point
except for the fact that she had
to do commercial kitchen and do
all those things so I think that
the main concern I think any of
us would have is this really
going to be safe enough and the
fact that they have to take a
food handler course and I guess
it was my next question that's
regarding the it says that in
the bill that the solar
maintains a sanitary kitchen
practices good hygiene and so my
question is Mr chair
representative is there
is there going to be a spot
inspection to ensure that that
those are the case how do we
know they're practicing good
hygiene.
Mr Chairman Representative Brown
again a very good question I'm
going to let Erica talk about it
because she's talked with the
environment department she
handled all those negotiations
and I think she's going to be in
a better position to answer that
and I am.
Erika please.
You Mr chair representative
Representative Matthews we have
worked closely with and I mean
do on this and they have said
that this addresses their safety
concerns of this also addresses
their concerns about possibly
jeopardizing and requests they
don't think that's the case
anymore the bill does required
food handler our it also
requires that people keep their
kitchen State and it gives the
department of enforcement RT we
also reached out to Albuquerque
about this bill a couple weeks
ago and they have not responded
with any concerns or questions.
And then I think to have a
question it's on page three of
the bill it's section three at
one nineteen and it's
Talking about.
and these are provisions that
have to be met that the solar
sells directly to consumers with
in the state.
and then it gives examples
farmers markets festivals
roadside stands and so forth.
Analyst for mail order so
The part of that solar cells
directly to consumers within the
state and wondering if that is.
Why that restricted languages
there why does it have to be
within the stated talks about
some mail delivery which could
part I guess be outside the
state so just curious if this
subpart two once nineteen
through twenty two creates
potentially some problems.
Representative.
Representative at Mr Chairman
representative brand again I'll
defer to that dismissed.
Mr chair representative Matthews
and Representative Brown we
thought very carefully about
this line of we wanted the sales
to be allowed across state lines
but NMAG was concerned on that
that would then bring in federal
law so to keep it simple we
allowed sales with just put in
the state all the cells that are
direct to consumers are allowed
and the list just provide some
examples
and this is what most states
have in their law right now so
there's about forty five other
states that allow all direct to
consumer sales there's thirty
states that allow all online
sales so this is bringing New
Mexico's law adopted best
practices in other states as
your question about mail order
mail order would have to be
within the state.
Okay so me just Mr chair give me
just a second to.
Okay I I I think I think the
languages is going to be okay
there and then on that and then
finally and I'm sorry kind of
using up so much time Mr chair
representative can you give us
kind of a kind of a grocery list
of the kinds of foods that are
not time or temperature
sensitive I'm thinking we've
heard baked goods jams and
jellies.
what other kinds of things are
we talking about I mean like
beef jerky I mean there are a
lot of things that I I suppose
fall in that category but would
you say it's
jarred or canned or dried or
help.
Give me give me yes I'm looking
for a sense like you can't do
burritos this way correct.
Mr Chairman.
Mr Chairman representative Brad
at last very good to answer that
please Mr chair and
representative brown so this
will allow all shelf stable
foods also known as not actually
hazard is also known as not
requiring time and temperature
control also these kids are
typically things like because
popcorn roasted coffee beans
jams jellies pickles anything
that you can kind of put on your
counter and leave it out and
you're not gonna have to worry
about something bad happening to
it team mixes mixes there's just
a whole long list dried pasta
but it's not going to allow is
any type of meat product even if
it is the hydrated any sort of
perishable food anything that
needs to be kept in the
refrigerator like mac and cheese
right now.
Okay thank you very much for
indulging me with all those
questions Mr chair thank you
thank you Representative Brown
this and go back to
Representative Hochman Vigil who
has are you figured out.
Mr chair can you hear me now
your use of their thank you so
much Mr chair I just wanna take
a moment to thank the sponsors
of this bill and recognize the
process that this bill went
through I think it's pretty cool
that we had first iteration of
the bill was tabled although
good in concept there were
clearly some of some large
issues without was drafted on
the first time around when
commend Representative Matthews
is taking great interest in this
working with at the primary
sponsor who is from across the
aisle to come up with a much
better product Mr chair I also
want to mention I was unable to
get into the share file this
morning so I and and just just
giving to the committee
substitute I know that I had a
number of issues that were
brought up in committee for me
the last time but most
importantly Mr chair that the
biggest question I have is if
the tamale problem has been
solved it sounds like it has a
not we're not we're limiting
this lot to good sex that do not
require refrigeration or have a
a shorter sporulation date so I
just wanted to confirm that with
the sponsor Mr chair if that was
correct.
Representative Matthews you're
you're muted.
Mr Chairman at Representative
the hot Papen Vito sorry
I will let Erica talk about that
does kind of specifics.
R. O. thank you Mr chair
Representative Hochman of last
time tamales was included to
just include a very narrow group
the families that were district
tamales that worships shell
stable there was concerns about
that so we took it out the only
things allowed under this law
are foods that are actually
still shelf stable and if
someone is selling something
that the department disagrees
that shelf stable that it can
stop that sale so nothing that's
partial.
Thank you very much Mr chair
thank you Representative
Matthews and miss Smith so I was
actually adamantly opposed to
this bill the first time I
thought that it had some major
issues that drafting and and
unintended consequences but I'm
very pleased to report back now
that I think you've done a great
job on this committee
substituting I cannot support
the bill thank you very much Mr
chair thank you Representative
this not go to Representative
Ezzell good morning.
Mr chair members of the
committee vote Representative
Cook was gonna be on this
meeting because I not called
the.
In he had forgotten about it he
has something else going on.
But I was gonna ask him
questions about what do you know
about pathogenic microorganisms
or toxin formation or Listeria
but since he's not I'm not going
to bring those issues up.
Representative Matthews.
Whenever we're talking about
shelf stable foods.
Are there.
Is this through out this bill or
are certain items that farmers
market going to be exempt.
And the reason I'm asking that
is lots of people that in my
area raise goats for live in.
They do create she says they
want to be able to sell their
cheese and if I'm hearing you
guys ride.
They would not be able to do
that I also have lots of
producers down there of hands
and will chickens actually they
would not be able to sell their
home grown mix it sounds like is
that correct Mr chairman and
representative.
At.
Mr Chairman representative of is
outside I do not believe that's
correct this is for a specific
type of product and but again
I'll defer to Erica.
Thank you Mr Mr chair
Representative Ezzell members of
the committee on this bill is
meant to reform the existing
laws that apply to all made.
So these are foods that are
already allowed to be sold in
some parts of the state but just
under the current regulations so
this is just performs those
regulations it does not change
the law or other types of it
does not affect the law for
angst it does not affect the law
for selling meat for selling she
is those types of foods are
governed under completely
different Los.
Mr chairman miss Smith thank you
very much and that the sale.
Yes my question is.
Those people that do producing
cheese and that's becoming a big
cottage industry right now is
you will know.
Thank you in my particular at
the EDD has come out said now
you cannot sell those and I'm
I'm really bothered by that yes
we do have people that do
advertise in the newspapers for
homemade X. to be so.
Mr chairman and.
Miss Matthews and miss Smith I'm
going to hi everybody in here
together.
Whenever we are talking about
the EDD's involvement and
everything.
Do these people.
That are making the shelf stable
food.
Are there kitchens physically
inspected by the environment
department.
Mr chair members of the
committee right now there
kitchens are inspected under
this bill they would no longer
have to be inspected and ET as
they are fine with that they
think the inspection is
unnecessary in fact only other
states right now spectrum.
Thank you very much for that
response that makes me feel a
lot better because in the past
people admire you were concerned
because they were only allowed
to make these certain products
that were being so safe farmers
markets or whatever place case
may be that they can only use a
commercial grade kitchen now how
many people have access to a
commercial grade kitchen so one
to one more time it just proves
that we have agencies that don't
have a lick of common sense and
I hope the environment
department is on there and the
reason I'm bringing that up I
got a call from one of my high
school's couple years ago in
their home make home EC class.
They were being taught how to
bank.
They had made brownies they had
make cookies and they did a
taste test on the various
products that they had bait.
The teacher was explained to him
that you know yes for.
The appropriateness of all the
stuff that goes along with bank
staff.
They had all these left over.
They had.
During the noon time recess or
not races actually but the
break.
The young people took them out
to give them away Hey the
environment department's and
no you cannot do that.
So they came back and said okay
we can sell Environment
Department said oh no you can't
do that the teacher then ask
what can we do with this and
they said throw it away so what
a waste okay.
Whenever you're talking about
Representative Matthews whenever
you are talking about.
The concerns and I think Miss
Smith brought this up yeah a
day.
Whether you're talking about the
concerns that were addressed by
the EDD can you tell me what
some of those concerns were
other than.
Shelf stable foods were the only
things that we're going to be a
layout I understand that the
Turkey processing.
There is a concern there because
of Listeria so they do have
inspectors that these.
Plants.
Tell me what other concerns that
were addressed that is going to
be beneficial not just to
Albuquerque but to the entire
state my my goal well I'm up
here in the legislative body is
to do what's right for all of
the state not just one segment
of the state so make that
explanation for me.
Yes I'm happy to do so all right
so the bill as a whole largely
does affect the entire state
Albuquerque is just one piece of
it the two big things that the
bill does for the entire state
is one it now allows sales at
the home including pick up and
delivery as well as sales online
that is and across the state
right now that would be a huge
improvement the other big thing
it does is it removes the permit
requirement
NMED currently has that's the
permit that requires you to
to thousands of dollars of
upgrades to your home kitchen
get inspection pay fees it's
very very burdens NMED is of the
position that this is no longer
necessary and that's fine to
just have a volunteer our system
so if people want to get a
permit to be able to other
customers they have a permit
they can do that but they no
longer need a permit to sell so
that's how this bill would have
help rural state.
Thank you very much for that
explained explanation there I
just want anything that we do
it's got to be applicable to
everybody that is wanting to do
this in my opinion.
So Mr Chairman representative
and miss more.
We were talking about the
certification prone process.
What is the time frame on a
person having the certification
before they do have to have it
renewed.
Representative Ezzell that's a
good question I actually don't
know the answer I think it's
five years I think it's a five
year period but I could be wrong
about that but I do know that
it's not a process to go through
I know lots of people who added
just it's an eight hour course
you can do it online.
Well I'm really surprised if
it's a five year process that
that that you might want to
check on that but that that just
doesn't sound right to me Mr
chairman.
Of.
Let me see what my other.
I had the left because whenever
I was reading the FIR.
The center for disease control
said that there were.
Forty eight million for the
board illnesses and sixty
percent of those came from home
prepared rate so Mister chairman
Representative the miss Smith is
sounds like we are in desperate
need to get our restaurants back
open it sounds like the people
will quit cooking at home.
No I think this is a good bill I
fully supported I just wish that
there was more.
Shelf stable foods you know
we're.
That's one aspect of our food
chain here that we need to
probably expand I think that we
need to look at she's processing
part of it and
And you know what if
Representative small was in the
lineup you would have to be and
is hit down because that's all I
can see most the time good
morning Representative small.
That Mr speaker Mr Chairman
Representative Matthews and miss
Smith thank you for answering my
questions
but I'm still gonna by Kamal
itself the street thank you very
much.
Thank you Representative Ezzell
is not go to representative
Allison at that been
very good morning Mr chair of my
is just a comment in addition to
all the discussion that's been
taking place of the area forum
from we pretty much follow
everything that's outlined and
and this bill and I'm glad to
see that the because it opens
the doors for me to want to go
back into retirement I can hit
the streets and so my Navajo
tacos.
So with that.
Before we sell any Navajo tacos
in my part of the country what
we go through is a food
handler's permit and that's
conducted by the Indian health
service they hospital personnel
so we learn all about what
temperatures to keep our food at
the shelf lives on certain
pieces of food and stuff like
that and these certifications
are.
Required to be renewed once a
year so Mrs L. here welcome to
come to the Navajo Nation and
have in dollars in Navajo tacos
and you know that they're going
to be safe well one thing that I
didn't read in the bill was
When a person gets their food
handler's permit.
They're required to post it at
their station so that they know
that whoever the customers are
know that that of the people
that are vending are in
compliance with all the
requirements and the.
I think this is good I mean I
know this is good because of a
lot of people rely on homemade
foods like Navajo tacos among
other things they make a good
living at it and it also allows
for our our neighbors our Pueblo
brothers and sisters to come and
bring their delicious open right
and the red chili parcels to our
area because I think they make a
lucrative living because like
every year they always come up
with brand new vehicles not just
plain vehicles but four by fours
extended cabs and crew cab so
business is booming on the
Navajo Nation with homemade
foods so with that I appreciate
this so bill and will support it
thank you Mr chair thank you.
Representative Matthews thank
you thank you representative
Allison any other further
questions from the committee
questions comments if not what's
the pleasure of the committee.
Mr chairman I move to do pass on
second house agriculture and
water.
Any substitute for house bill
one seventy seven.
This made by Representative
Ezzell I hear second from
representative Allison madam
secretary would you please call
the roll Mr Chairman
Representative Brown Mr chair do
we need to do now pass the seven
and then what you're right well
said thank you all for keeping a
straight we need to team will
give it a fair so Representative
Ezzell if you would please.
Mr chairman I move a do not pass
on house bill one seventy seven
but to do pass on committee sept
house agriculture water
resources committee substitute
for house bill one seventy
seven.
Very well also give the second
representative Allison again
madam secretary hello.
Allison yes Representative brown
yes.
In the south yes.
Representative Hochman Vigil yes
Representative Matthews yes
Representative small yes.
Yes.
Thanks chairwoman.
Yes and chairman ninety yes
nine.
Unanimous vote land is zero
Representative Matthews have a
due pass on the committee
substitute for house bill one
seventy seven thank you very
much thank you for joining us
this morning thank you all the
committee members for in
building us with one bill of for
the day this is it again we
don't have any health referred
to us and so until we do for our
perhaps the Senate side we will
be in recess until we have some
more bills to talk about until
then everyone stay safe and
we'll see you all on the floor
thank you thank you thank you.
