Members of the house.
Roll call this close.
Please rise for today's vacation
offered to us by the gentle lady
from Katrin Sikora and violence
yeah Representative Gail
Armstrong.
Thank you Mr speaker please bow
your heads.
Dear lord thank you for the
state.
Thank you for always watching
out for us being in our hearts
in our minds.
Wrapping your arms around New
Mexico lifting us up.
Helping us to make good
decisions for the state of New
Mexico in our constituents.
Dear lord please watch over our
families as we do the work of
the state.
And make sure they know how much
we love them and miss them.
Thank you to our military for
protecting.
The United States and New
Mexico.
Dear lord be with us in the long
stretch.
That we have left.
And guide our hearts and our
minds in Jesus name I pray amen.
Thank Johnny resent that address
would you please leave us in the
pledge of allegiance.
I pledge allegiance to the flag
of the United States of America
and to the Republic for which it
stands one nation under god
indivisible with liberty and
justice for all.
Representative Ortez would you
please leave this in saluting
New Mexico's flag.
I salute the flag of the state
of New Mexico this is the a
symbol of perfect friendship
among United cultures.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker good afternoon Mister
speaker members of the house I
move that we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business no
objections so ordered.
Good afternoon everyone.
You're obligating.
In the number of representatives
of the chambers is multiplied.
It's nice to see everybody.
Are there any nonsense.
The gentle lady from McKinley
and San Juan Representative
Johnson.
Thank you Mr speaker I would
like to make a special
announcement it is my Big
Brother.
Chennai Representative Allison's
birthday today.
So I have a vested leader
Stapleton to share some of this
thank you.
The gentle lady sing.
Involves.
Happy.
You
have
to.
Have.
Thank you thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
messages no objections order.
Clear to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house that the Senate has
passed Senate bill thirty two as
amended Senate bill thirty four
Senate bill one twenty three
with emergency clause Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill two to Senate
bill two ten as amended Senate
bill two nineteen.
Senate joint resolution thirteen
in requests the concurrence of
the house respectfully submitted
Lenore and Lara host Senate
chief clerk message we entered.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
committee reports.
no objections so we're clear to
read.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee.
To whom has been referred Senate
bill one twenty one has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that a due
process and answer for to the
taxation and revenue committee
respectfully submitted unethical
Rubio chair.
Mr speaker move adoption.
We are on adoption of the
favorable committee report on
Senate bill one twenty one.
All those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
I'm.
This was me three point out
that.
Mr speaker your Education
Committee too is been referred
house memorial twenty four has
had it under consideration
coursing with recommendation of
do pass respectfully submitted
G. Andrés Romero chair the
speaker move adoption of the
committee report we're adoption
a favorable committee report on
house memorial twenty for all
those in favor please signify by
saying hi I'm.
All this was nay reports about
Mr speaker your Education
Committee too is been referred
Senate bill seventy seven has
had it under consideration
reports in with recommendation
that it to pass respectfully
submitted G. Andrés Romero chair
speaker move adoption of the
committee report run adoption a
favorable committee report is
Senate bill seventy seven on the
second please signify by saying
aye aye Hey Hey reports about.
Mr speaker your taxation and
revenue committee to him is been
referred house bill two ninety
six has had it under
consideration point same with
recommendation that it do not
pass that house taxation revenue
committee substitute for House
Bill to ninety six do pass
respectfully submitted this
Martinez chair.
Mr speaker move adoption of the
committee report on induction
unfavorable committee report on
house bill two ninety six and a
favorable committee reported
taxation and revenue committee
substitute for hospitals to
ninety six also favor please
signify by saying aye I.
This was nay reports that.
Mr speaker taxation and revenue
committee to is been referred
Senate bill one thirty one has
had it under consideration
forcing with recommendation that
do pass respectfully submitted
have yet Martinez chair.
Mr speaker move adoption of the
committee report we are Joshua
Senator committee report on
Senate bill one thirty one all
those in favor please signify by
saying hi I'm.
May the force not to.
Mr speaker your state government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee to miss been referred
house memorial twenty three has
had it under consideration
reports same with recommendation
that it do pass respectfully
submitted Georgene Louis chair
unanimous consent of the
committee Forster together act
fund civil reflecting the
generals of the erected upon
individually hearing a junction
supporter click to read Senate
bill twenty one as amended to
pass.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
seventy five as amended to pass.
Senate bill ninety six as
amended to pass.
Senate bill one forty five as
amended to pass.
Senate bill three oh four as
amended to pass respectfully
submitted Georgene Louis chair.
You learn.
Mr speaker move adoption we are
adoption of state premier force
in house memorial twenty three
central twenty one is amended
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill
seventy five as amended Senate
bill ninety six as amended
Senate bill one forty five is
amended Senate bill through
before submitted.
Also favor please signify by
saying I don't have.
Right this was nay reports are
adopted.
Mr speaker your appropriations
and finance committee to is been
referred Senate bill fifty nine
has had it under consideration
forcing with recommendations
that I do pass respectfully
submitted Patricia A. Lundstrom
chair then this consent decree
pursuant to gather acted upon
the single vote reflects in the
journal so they reckon upon
individual you're not section
sort of clergy Senate bill
seventy do you have.
Senate Bill.
Senate bill one thirty seven do
passed Representative petition a
luncheon chair Mr speaker move
adoption we are adoption of the
favorable committee reports a
Senate bill fifty nine Senate
bill seventy eighty eight is
amended and one thirty seven all
those in favor please signify by
saying hi I'm.
Well this was may reports are
that.
Mr speaker your health and Human
Services Committee tomb is been
referred house agriculture water
resources committee substitute
for house bill one seventy seven
has had it under consideration
point seems recommendation that
do pass as amended respectfully
submitted Deborah Armstrong
chair unanimous consent of the
committee endorsed right to
gather act upon the scene of a
reflection of the journal so
they're acted upon individually
hearing objects disorder clerk
to read.
Senate bill one fifty two do
path.
Senate bill two twenty two do
passed respectfully submitted
Deborah Armstrong chair move
adoption rounded option of
favorable committee reports and
agricultural water resource K.
us to France one seventy seven
as amended in Senate bills one
fifty two and two twenty two all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye aye all those first
name.
Can be productive.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
introduction of legislation no
objections so ordered.
Surgery.
Senate bill thirty two.
As amended.
Introduced by senators Gonzales
and McKenna an act relating to
wildlife and acting the wildlife
conservation public safety act
providing for restrictions on
the use of traps snares poisons
and poisons providing penalties
Senate bill thirty two as
amended Senate bill thirty two
is amended having been read
twice by title is referred to
the Energy Environment and
natural resources committee.
Senate bill thirty four
introduced by Senator Kernan and
after eight procurement enabling
use of a design and build
project delivery system for
certain department of
transportation projects Senate
bill thirty four Senator thirty
four having been read twice by
title is referred to the
transportation public works and
capital improvements committee.
Senate bill one twenty three
introduced by Senator Stefanics
and after relating to health
care including physician
assistants and pharmacists in
the definition of health care
practitioner for the purpose of
making certain provisions in the
health care practitioner
agreement void unenforceable and
against public policy declaring
an emergency Senate bill one
twenty three.
Senator one twenty three having
been read twice by title is
referred to the health and Human
Services Committee.
Senate Judiciary Committee
substitute for Senate bill to to
an act relating to business
entities providing for the
registration of alternative
business entity names Senate
Judiciary Committee substitute
for Senate bill to to.
Senate Judiciary Committee
subsidy percent to to have been
read twice by title is referred
to the commerce and economic
development committee.
Senate Bill to ten as amended
introduced by Senator Lopez for
the legislative education study
committee in act relating to
public education defining ethics
ethnic studies requiring ethnic
studies that meet Public
Education Department contents
and performance providing for an
ethnic studies counsel to assist
the department with curriculum
development Senate Bill to ten
as amended.
Senate bill two tennis amended
having been read twice by title
is referred to the Education
Committee.
Senate bill two nineteen
introduced by Senator Ortiz each
Pino an act relating to
occupations removing proof
residences citizenship or legal
residency requirements for
certain professionals allowing
for submission of an individual
taxpayer identification number
for certain occupational license
or permit applications Senate
bill two nineteen.
Senate Bill to nineteen having
been read twice by title.
Senator T. nineteen having been
read twice by title is referred
to the Judiciary Committee.
Senate joint resolution thirteen
introduced by Senator Campos a
joint resolution ratifying and
approving the transfer from the
general services department and
the department of public safety
to the department of
transportation of all tracks of
real property and improvements
there on on which are located
New Mexico ports of entry Senate
joint resolution thirteen.
Senate joint resolution
thirteen.
Senate joint resolution thirteen
having been read twice by title
is referred to the state
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business objections order
membership two items on the
calendar that we are going to
move to the consent calendar.
Items twenty and twenty one
house memorial eight and house
joint memorial I.
House memorial Mr house memorial
eighteen your house memorial
eighteen item twenty and asked
Joint Memorial I am twenty one
we're gonna remove from thank.
Okay so first and and we have
conferred with the Republican
floor leader.
I believe K. items twenty and
twenty one on the third reading
calendar are placed on the
consent calendar House memorial
eighteen house joint memorial I
with that objection.
And then we have from the
speakers table.
Item number one which is house
memorial twenty to
Representative Dow.
House memorial twenty two item
one of the speakers table is
removed.
From there and placed on the.
Consent calendar.
Mr speaker point of order.
State your point.
Mr speaker I would request that
you consider
Moving the Senate bill thirty
two through the act committee as
well as that controls the state
a lot of state land and has the
impact on the farmers ranchers
in the state land users.
Thank you John and we will look
into that thank.
Mr speaker are there other
announcements gentlelady from
Chavis Representative Ezzell Mr
speaker I too feel that house
and Senate bill thirty two needs
to go to house Ag it does have
to do with the care that the
farmers and ranchers take and
it's a necessary part of them
being able to make a live and I
think that we need to review it
and how sec thank you very much
the gentle lady.
The gentleman from.
Curry tobacco water Lupe
Roosevelt in San Miguel.
Mr speaker I also rise in the
with the same issue this has
everything to do with
agriculture and ranchers and
cattle and.
And I believe it ought to go to
house ag if you will please take
a look at that thank you.
Thank you John gentlelady from
Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business third
reading of legislation.
no objection it is so ordered.
We're gonna start with.
Item twelve.
Jennifer Bernalillo
Representative my Estes are you
ready on that item yes Mr
speaker.
The record reflect all action
necessary for placing House
Judiciary Committee substitute.
For us consumer Public Affairs
committee substitute for house
bill two eighty six level
passages from taken down to
explain the bill thank you Mr
speaker honourable members house
bill two hundred eighty six is
regarding law enforcement what
it does is a couple of things it
moves the authority to spend to
revoke a law enforcement
officers license from the
current the law enforcement
academy board to a new created
independent law enforcement
certification board which will
be administratively attached to
the department of corrections
it also clarifies that the
director of Law Enforcement
Academy shall be under the
supervision of the DS secretary
of DPS and it also increases the
amount of the peace officer
survivor fund from three hundred
fifty thousand to four hundred
thousand dollars with that I
stand for questions.
Others may with the gentleman
from Bernalillo Representative
read.
Thank you Mr speaker will my
General ram from Bernalillo
county you Mr speaker yes.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo county we will
discuss quite a and actually you
and I were working on this up
for it so I think if we have a
little more time probably could
come to some compromise but
let's let's begin with what is
the current problem and so why
is this change needed.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
formerly health so the law
enforcement academy is housed in
Santa Fe and on the flow chart
of state government is just kind
of floating it's not under
department of public safety so
it hasn't director it has a
board and it receives
information from the various
chiefs and sheriffs with regards
to allegations of police
misconduct then they're supposed
to investigate and you know
decide what to do with regards
to these allegations that entire
process that I just described is
completely dysfunctional it was
described by the Attorney
General as quote a train wreck
on quote so others about a
hundred thirty cases backlogged
of these officers are not
getting.
Resolutions there's tremendous
anxiety with these allegations
hang over you.
And and there was a national
outcry this summer and fall for
police reform in terms of
streamlining the way officers
are held accountable when
there's allegations of
misconduct.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo thank you and I
believe that the with the issue
is is that there's about a
hundred thirty officers pending
hearings before the academy
board and
currently it is the cattery
board that
you know if you will hold so
many trial on it and then issues
to support is that correct.
That's correct Mr speaker don't
commercial.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo so who is the head of
the academy board currently.
Thank you Mr John from
Bernalillo the law enforcement
academy board
Is the chair is the sitting
Attorney General.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo and I
I see that as.
You know his criticism that it's
a train wreck and he is the
individual who can call the
board in a session and deal with
these.
A little disingenuous I mean he
should be calling the board and
get needs moving.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo I noticed that you're
removing the administrative
hearing for state police
officers to could be disciplined
why are you doing now.
Thank you Mr speaker John from
Bernalillo I don't believe I am
doing that however to answer
your question for the body state
police
I have their own statutory
scheme you know so section two.
chapter twenty nine so they're
kind of on their own and they
have their own process for for
these for disciplining if
they're currently under current
law if they're disciplined for
thirty or more days they can
appeal that to to what is called
the public public safety
advisory commission.
This bill does away with the
public Senator public safety
advisory commission and they can
merely yield to the new board
which is the law enforcement
certification board so they
still have the exact same rate
is just to a different body.
Mr speaker and gentleman on that
point I don't think we need to
reinvent the wheel what's a Mr
speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo let's move on to.
R. on that same issue I also see
that it's going to be a cost
increase of of the because
they're being removed.
Let's see.
Mr speaker and gentleman so
Will now issue the diploma to an
officer who graduates from law
enforcement academy.
Thank you Mr speaker Johnson
rail under the bill is written
the the director the director
alone law enforcement academy
and just for the folks listening
and
Lot of the major police
departments have their own
academies.
The law enforcement academy sits
the culture and tone of policing
in the state and trains officers
from smaller towns or or
officers that come in from out
of state so I would imagine if
you pass the Albuquerque police
department.
Training that that that APD
captain or whoever gives you the
certification but what's your
question Mr speaker John Mario
the art director Law Enforcement
Academy.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo that's that is
correct the
There are many satellite
academies around including
universities here in the state
the officer that offer the
training at the end of the
training there to take in what's
called the post yes the police
officer proficiency test and it
is the academy that issues are
certification and then Academy
holds or certification.
And you know everyone has a file
I have a file up there right now
and you know if there's any
disciplinary actions or anything
there noted in that file as
well.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo I see that you
included in your bill the tele
communicator trained and then
also the the
of discipline for them and would
you explain to the body who
they are and whether sworn
officers from the.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle from
Bernalillo I was brought to me
by
Committee analysis I don't
recall if there was the DPS
analysis of our three generals
analysis after the bill
initially was introduced.
And they suggested I carry that
language with regards to the
nine one one operators in the
tele communicators into this
bill which is consistent with
what we're trying to do but up
they are not sworn officers like
we consider.
With the full powers of of a
regular police officers.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo I see on your new
board that you propose to the
positions are for defense
attorneys to sit on that board
and I kind of wonder what the
rationale is I I feel that you
know they might be if you will
posed to law enforcement.
Thank you Mr speaker John from
Bernalillo no great catch one of
the defense lawyers is a.
Civil defense lawyer the defense
cities and counties when
officers get sued in civil
rights cases so their civil
rights defense lawyers arguing
that knows violation of civil
rights occurred and then also
there is one one prosecutor.
One of the reasons.
So there's a lawyer who
practices in the area of civil
rights from the plaintiff's side
a lawyer the practice of arise
from the defense side and then
attorney on page ten line twenty
and internet was both prosecuted
and representative will defend
and so those are the three
lawyers on the new board.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo so you
also have a couple civilians on
their and I don't see that we
have language to ensure that
they're not if you will be part
of the anti law enforcement
organization or expressed anti
law enforcement
you know positions no thank you
Mr speaker John from Bernalillo
thank you for that the question
you asked in that I answered.
With the rest of the lawyers was
read the law enforcement
certification for the board that
decides whether to suspend or
revoke an officer's license what
you're referring to now is the
board it currently exists the
speaker don't really help the
law enforcement academy board
and that's on page five that
language was cut and pasted from
Senate Bill it's three seventy
five which is supported by buy
the book of law enforcement in
the state and it does say the
speaker is offering help to
members.
and then and to citizen at large
members so yeah the language
that was suggested by you and
others is to ensure that they're
not.
I'm talking about patently
ideologically anti cop they're
appointed by the governor and I
would imagine that reasonable
people will be on the board but
but I'll take a second look at
that language of the bill
continues
To address the point you're
making.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo another person on
that board or is a psychologist
or psychiatrist and.
When I was in the the
administration what we had was a
problem finding a psychologist
that is
understanding of police and
police procedures and tactics so
I think we need to have
something in there that you know
they need to have expertise in
this field.
Mr speaker really that's an
excellent point I
I mean we should everyone should
know.
Basically the the fundamentals
of of policing because.
Eighty five percent of all the.
All the.
Grievances would be resolved if
you knew kind of where the cop
was coming from where the
officer was coming from terms
of.
Of personal safety and things of
that nature so I I my first
couple months at the DA's office
Mr speaker jumper I learn more
and it all and it all made sense
on where officers are coming
from the majority of the time.
Yeah we can do that Mr speaker
John Martin.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo I
think so probably the last year
yeah I kind of want to go to is
the end of the bill where you're
a limiting what is been referred
to as the officers bills of
rights but it is the peace
officers employer employee
relations and
are wildly disagree with removal
of that one of the things that I
see in there is.
a question of where are.
Arson investigators do they have
their own separate employer
employee relationship and why
are they included.
Mr speaker job real based on
what you told me the last
committee they they do have a in
employee protection statute but
but I I'm not I have not read it
so we're not so I don't even
know that was there the bill
doctor didn't know that was
there
but this is the statute dept Rio
relating to misconduct
investigations and.
So that's why it's in in the
bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo when we look at this
is employer employee
relationship it's based on to
Maine US Supreme Court I the
decisions lateral and Garrity so
of a I know I've got a another
colleague here that will speak
to that the moment but I want to
go over some of what's in there
during my career I was an
internal affair so a lot of this
was there and we had to go
through it so Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo when
we look at this and our officers
employer employee relationship
one of the things that scan that
is contained in this section is
it compels an officer to give a
statement to administration and
I think that's important and we
want to know why you want to
remove that.
Thank you Mr speaker the
Currently it's in state statute
and that you know of those the
my new show of HR rules should
be in state statute for a
particular class of state
employees that that's kind of
the logic behind it so what you
described.
Can still happen and will happen
but it.
It's just thank you your that a
certain class of government
employees have their own statute
dealing with.
Dealing with miss misconduct
investigate.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo well like I think
it's codified in law what is a
Supreme Court decision but let's
go to another section and there.
Does a section in this log come
panel an officer to take a
polygraph test if ordered by the
agency.
Thank you Mr speaker job early
on I have it now so
So section twenty nine dash
fourteen dash five polygraph
examinations and they up.
And it says the the chief
administrator of the officers
employer make order the officer
to submit to a polygraph
examination.
So yeah so that that's kind of
New Mexico is the only state in
the country that the polygraph
can be said submitted as
evidence in a court case so.
So yeah it does it does say that
but it doesn't need to say that
in a state statute as my point
this stuff this stuff is in
collective bargaining agreements
it's it's you know the you know
we did we passed an incredible
people the public employee
bargaining Act last year.
this stuff is.
doesn't belong in state statute
Frank.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo I think you're right
that a lot of it is codified in
labor agreements around the
state and in fact around the
country I think there's
seventeen states that have this
on their books but the reason
why it's codified in in the
labor agreements is I go back to
a lot of knowing guarantee so or
a lot of mental and Garrity.
R. I think that there are other
provisions in here that are
important like of what political
activity that officer can be
engaged in or not engage them
well as you know we have many
sure state agencies and their of
course of the elected head is
political but Mr speaker and
gentleman I hope that we can
work on a compromise that we can
turn to.
But as it sits currently I can't
support it I think that
you know its kind of a knee jerk
reaction to what we're
currently doing and tries to
correct a problem that really
the Attorney General can call
hearing tomorrow well I mean you
know practically it probably
have to be weak way and start
hearing some of these cases that
are pending up there.
Anyway thank you Mr speaker
thank you gentlemen from
Bernalillo and I friends by.
Next year the gentleman from San
Juan Representative Eli.
Thank you Mr speaker religion
from Bernalillo kindly yield
Mister speaker yes I will.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentleman from Bernalillo and I
was listening to the to the
debate with.
The gentleman from Bernalillo on
the other gentleman from
Bernalillo and I appreciate the
comments and Mr speaker I found
the the dialogue to be helpful
one of the things.
that I recall is I think it's
not the only purpose but one of
the purposes I think for this.
Particular bill H. B. H. B. two
eighty six is to our further the
concept of police reforms that
correct.
Mr speaker John from San Juan
yes and and and in particular
solve the problem of the
dysfunction of the the way it's
done or not done being done now.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo thank you for that
and it just sort of a I guess of
a policy question
as you were drafting this bill
one as it was going to committee
were there any discussions about
maybe adding in funding to help
train officers across the state
because I.
Pretty much every police chief
or or
Supervisory officers that I've
talked to they I think they all
recognize and welcome police
reform
I haven't really found anybody
that's fighting against that but
one of the common things I hear
from them though is is one of
the things they would appreciate
is the opportunity for for
additional and specialized
training.
Especially when you go on on a
call.
With with a high conflict type
situation so is there been any
discussion along those lines Mr
speaker gentleman from
Bernalillo thank you Mr speaker
John from someone the up I
haven't had any conversations
with regards to funding but but
we all know cities and counties
are hurting.
Because of that because of the
G. R. T. Kerr also with done
here up in Santa Fe so hopefully
we can.
Change policy so this isn't
counties have a lot more no more
money to to pay their workers
particularly officers with
regards to the training Senate
bill three seventy five does
have a sections with regards to
training.
so I need to talk to to the
sponsor and and some of the
officers of and getting feedback
from on this bill to see if
that's what they want to do but
definitely training is an aspect
of police reform
but it's but it's the legal
structure that we have created
that that is because this
This profession to be very
difficult to to deal with.
Allegations of misconduct it's
very difficult very difficult
legally and and practically so.
but anyway I haven't up but
training could be in this in
this final version but I tend to
focus on training.
Mr speaker gentleman from
Bernalillo
I I know you don't need help
from a lowly Republican but I am
interested in in that particular
issue so anything I can do to
help in terms of of getting our
officers there on the streets of
more training and and funding
for that kind of specialized
intervention training I'd be
happy to do that.
Mr speaker gentleman from
Bernalillo can I direct your
attention to the last page of
the bill section fifteen.
And Mr speaker gentle let me
know when you're there thank you
Mr jump someone I see it now
Mr speaker gentleman from
Bernalillo and and you and I
visited very briefly about this
prior to this debate and so what
I'd like us to spend a few
minutes discussing is is this
subparagraph B. as in Bravo.
And what this section does it
repeals state statutes twenty
nine dash fourteen dash one.
All the way through twenty nine
dash fourteen dash eleven is
that correct.
Mr speaker job of someone yes in
Mr speaker John from Bernalillo
would you just enlighten me in
the body about what what do the
statutory provisions twenty
minutes fourteen this one
through eleven.
what are the statutory
provisions are being repealed.
Thank you Mr speaker John from
San Juan will they hinder police
investigations.
Based.
Of misconduct allegations from
being fully vetted and and fully
investigated.
officers you know in in in
investigating allegations of
crime need to get to the bottom
of the need to find out the
truth.
And
These this provision was put
into law in the early seventies.
to you know the rise of
political power of of police and
and our love for police we are
one of the last is to do it
thirty states do not have this.
But they simply codify existing.
Case law and so.
We can't on change case law
so yeah I just want to procure
the summer when I stumbled
across it and and it was in
statute but it it it talks about
how the do's and don'ts of
investigating announcer who may
have done something.
You know incorrectly.
Mr speaker and gentleman date I
just wanna make sure that we're
kind of the same thing here so.
My understanding of of statute
twenty nine to fourteen just one
through eleven those are only in
the context of administrative.
Proceedings within a department
so for example if I'm a police
officer and I violate a
particular department policy or
it could even be you know I I
I commit misconduct or even a
crime but you were talking about
possible it employee discipline
is that correct.
Thank you Mr leader gentleman
from the outside one yes yes
it's how up.
It's a it's help the culture of
policing as involved and it
deals with the do's and don'ts
of investigating peace officers
in their duty in their in their
role as a worker it in you know
how does the boss deal with you
when when you may have made a
mistake that type of thing.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo just to give some
context of the number so you
know this would be just a normal
job situation like
the process that allows someone
to say give you a letter
disciplining your file or maybe
suspend you for a couple days or
even terminate you so that's
that's the context of the
statutes is that correct correct
Mr speaker John from someone
yeah it deals with that type of
stuff.
And Mr speaker John from
Bernalillo it's my understanding
that the statutory provisions
are commonly referred to as the.
The peace officer the or the
police officer bill rights is
that correct.
Thank you Mr speaker John from
San Juan by the law enforcement
community yes they're known as
the peace officer bill writes as
if a government worker is
entitled to rights that citizens
have protecting themselves from
that very same government.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo
and it's my understanding that
that the stature provisions they
they apply to like the the local
shares for example in the
municipal police officers are
correct.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
apart from San Juan
You see if there's a.
The definition section there is
a peace officer means a an
employee of a police or
sheriff's department.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo thank you for that
and.
While you're in statute there.
The the section right above that
it's so you read twenty nine of
fourteen dash three which is the
definition section.
We as a legislative body
actually put together a purpose
statement as well and twenty
nine dash fourteen dash to are
you aware what the what the
purpose of the statutory
provisions are.
Thank you Mr speaker is our
homes on one
I mean it's we always will have
more time to talk about this
addition general but.
What officers officers.
Courts and society have a
mystery what this law review
article says as both the social
science literature and the
courts have acknowledged that
the police role is unique in
American society the the police
are the only agents in society
legally granted unique capacity
to use force as part of their
job and so
So these are these up and police
you know back in the there was a
heavy duty police chief any
controlled everything and and
workers were disrespected work
historically police were not
unionized.
and collective bargaining units
they were on the other side of
the.
Of the of the fence on that deal
on on many occasions you know
century decades ago and so it's
just interesting the way
developed and so police got a
lot of criticism justly or
unjustly as a result of the
rights primarily from nineteen
sixty four to nineteen sixty
eight and those rights.
Made allegations not only of
police brutality but a systemic
racism and things like that and
it it it it created a backlash
in the law enforcement community
and law enforcement is absurd
it's political power and got
statues like this past.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo the way I read twenty
nine dash fourteen dash to what
it is saying is that the
legislature's purpose in passing
this bill was to try to ensure
that there are good and working
relationships between the police
officers were actually on the
street doing the law enforcement
work and their supervisors.
Which which doesn't just include
chief of police and and
municipal contracts that also
includes a city manager and
mayor and so we want to make
sure that there is harmony
between those persons and one of
the ways that this legislature
believe that we can accomplish
that purpose was to enact these
statutes that give certain due
process rights to these
officers and I I I understand
that maybe Mr speaker the
gentleman from Bernalillo has a
different perspective but is
that consistent with what the
legislature stated it's the
legislature stated purpose
wasn't twenty nine dash fourteen
dash to.
Mr speaker job from someone yes.
And the Mr speaker gentleman
from Bernalillo we've we've
we've been kind of.
Dancing around these these
statutory rights.
I I'd like to just let's let's
dig into just a few of them so
we as a as the body understand.
What are these rights and if we
vote in the firm today what what
rights will be voting to remove
from statute and removed from
our police officers
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo do you do you have a
few that come to mind that you
wouldn't mind sharing.
Thank you Mr speaker from San
Juan because not everything in
the to order certain player play
relations act prohibits proper
investigation
but what does but there are some
things that are very troubling
and make it more difficult to
investigate these these
allegations one is.
The officer is entitled to a
knoll who the complainant is is
entitled to know the name of the
rank of the person in charge of
the investigation out all other
persons will be presenting
during that interrogation you
know you're dealing with that
with a code of silence amongst
police officers a blue line you
know in a department everybody
knows everybody and so you're
also
You're also
You know the the interrogation
sessions shall not exceed two
hours
that there's not more than two
interrogation sessions within a
twenty four hour period.
That there shall be no more than
two interrogators at any given
time.
There's some good stuff in there
as well like combined duration
of the officers work shift in an
interrogation session shall not
exceed fourteen hours within a
twenty four hour period in my
opinion if you're being
interrogated on on an issue like
this you should have the day off
we don't want officers you know
with that anxiety out on the
street so there's some things we
could do to make it better but
this shields citizens ability to
hold officers accountable
for alleges allegations of
misconduct.
Mr speaker gentleman from
Bernalillo
thank you for delineating some
of those those rights that are
protected by statutes that are
our police officers.
Working the streets have but
none of those things yeah and
I'm just trying to understand
your perspective Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Knowing who your accuser is
limiting interrogation to to two
hours
Not being interrogated more than
a combined fourteen hours after
work shift.
I don't I don't I guess I
understand how those things if
there's real misconduct on
behalf of the police officer.
Would preclude the discipline
from being impose these seem
like.
more like basic due process
protections for police officers
from and an overzealous maybe
mayor city manager I don't even
honestly think we need to worry
about the police chiefs I I'm
worried more about the elected
officials at the local level and
so I I look at these more as due
process protections can you can
you help me explain what I'm
missing Mr speaker gentleman
from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker John from
someone no they are due process
protections and they're in
collective bargaining agreements
some of the stuff is actually in
constitutional law some of them
are in the in the city and
county codes
But these for this particular
of government what employee it's
in state statute.
So these
So there's provisions that don't
necessarily hinder a proper
investigation there's provisions
that actually do in particular
it says that you have to
interrogate the officer
during normal waking hours and
at the employer's facility you
know you have to go but why
can't you just talk to them
there at the scene.
You know
they're up.
There's I can't find it but
there's a provision there's a
timeline where an officer gets a
certain amount of time.
Before he even has to give a
statement I mean if I'm messing
up my bosses like.
I talked to and and the boss and
the workers you know have that
conversation now granted it's a
profession there needs to be due
process rights for those who set
process rights.
Are included in.
Current protocols and current
collective bargaining
agreements.
Should be a state statute.
Mr speaker gentleman from
Bernalillo I I do understand
that perception that Russian on
but.
Even if we look within the the
text of HB two eighty six itself
for example.
If you look at section two of of
this bill.
It is it a man's twenty nine
dash two dash eleven which is a
state statute.
But twenty nine dash two dash
eleven has similar due process
type protections.
And yet that that statute or
statutory provision is not being
removed.
So I I do understand sort of the
reasoning that these type of
employee due process protections
ought not be in statute
they ought to be an employee
handbook for example that's
where you see a lot of these at
the municipal and county levels.
that's where you find a due
process protections of
government employees and and not
in statute but here we have
twenty Mr just eleven has.
Due process protections built in
and yet this bill doesn't remove
those protections is that
correct well thank you Mr
speaker John from San Juan no
great great conversation so
chapter twenty nine section two
it deals with the state police
the state police have a unique
relationship with in law with
with state government and the
state police have their own
section their own section
they're not
they're not in a formal you
there at will employees
and so they have statutory
protections dealing with their
employee reality but since state
government can tell cities and
counties how.
You know what to bargain and
what to do the state can't I
suppose we can directly make
all.
Cops at will employees with the
same similar protection so no I
would want to take out the
protections for the state police
because they're not they don't
have a collective bargaining
agreement.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo I I certainly don't
take those out either I
appreciate that you're not doing
that and that's not what I'm
suggesting
and I don't think that's what
you're suggesting I'm suggesting
either but I that I guess one
thing is is here's a here's an
example also in statute also
reference in this very bill that
has due process protections in
statute.
but we're not removing those
protections that we are moving
the peace officer bill rights
statutes as.
They're coming for two and so I
do have concerns and there are
additional
Protections for police officers
in the statutes that are being.
Removed here today that we
haven't discussed you know some
basic protections like.
There's also but it allows an
officer to to basically bring
his own evidence to employee
appeal hearing he can confront
and cross examine witnesses some
very basic due process rights
it actually also protects their
right to engage in political in
the political process off duty
there's also a section dealing
with those type of political
participation rights.
and I think also important
section is it it prohibits.
The employer from retaliating
against the officer if the
officer raises any of these
issues
And you know the other thing I
would like to just make sure we
all understand is.
Not every police agency in our
state house are you.
many of them do but most
patients are most needed and do
but some of them do not.
And so if this body repeals all
of these.
Peace officer bill right
statutes.
Then we are completely relying
for those agencies that don't
have a you were completely
relying on the employee handbook
at the local level and those can
be amended at any time by
a majority of that that city
council or that city commission
or that Johnny Commission.
Whereas if we leave these peace
officer bill writes in here we
don't have to worry about you
know a rogue city council or
road County commission because
our police officers
are protected by statute in
terms of their basic due process
rights in these employee appeal
hearing contexts and so Mr
speaker John from Bernalillo it
sounds like from our dialogue.
There's at least some of these
rights.
Mr speaker and gentleman from
Bernalillo that that you're okay
with but it sounds like maybe
there's a there's a handful of
that you think.
Our helpful is that correct Mr
speaker John for someone that's
correct that's correct there's
some of these things that do not
hinder.
swift and and streamlining
investigations but there's
things in in the act that that
certainly do.
Mr speaker gentleman and I
appreciate that and so you know
all this discussion and and.
In leading up to and I let the
gentleman from Bernalillo knows
well said I want to catch me off
guard I am I am proposing and I
do move Mr speaker house floor
amendment number one to house
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House consumer of public
Affairs Committee subs to profit
to eighty six and I'm happy to
read the to to run ready Mr
speaker.
Don't forget the to to number.
Mr speaker it is point two two
zero seven five point one okay
the Jones with the amendment
with the two two number general
to explain thank you Mr speaker
and and so not surprising this
what this amendment does is it
basically does away with the
repealing of twenty nine of
fourteen US one through twenty
nine US fourteen eleven and
again the the point is and the
purpose is to make sure that
these of these police officer
bill rights remain in statute
and these protections are
afforded to our law enforcement
thank you Mr speaker.
You go to the gentleman from
Bernalillo
gentleman is this a friendly
amendment thank you Mr speaker
John from San Juan just a quick
comment of where I'm going at
some.
Let me just read from the law
review it says you know rather
than encouraging a culture of
professionalism and
accountability among police this
formulation these statutes would
create a legal barrier to the
self policing of police
misconduct that that the New
Mexico statute in particular
explicitly limit the application
of the law to formal
investigations by the officer's
Department.
What is going to say I truly
believe this of.
The best way to create a police
culture that respects citizens
rights is to give ample room for
so cultural dynamics to help
their corrective affect like the
friendly advice of appear or
sergeant to an errant officers
officers don't criticize each
other on the spot they don't
criticize each other at the end
of the day they don't review.
Of you know each each
interaction like a football
coach would review it with its
players there is just a science
there's no question there's no
answers and they just keep on
doing what they're doing and it
has evolved into something that
created a national outrage that
unprecedented in my lifetime
might.
My hometown police force of many
of the guys I I know personally
and I love they up there under a
it was determined by the
department correct department of
justice that they had a pattern
and practice of abuse of
unconstitutional
you know behavior.
But anyway having said this is
the first time the legislature's
looked at the statute in thirty
years and I think we should take
some time to digest it and
review it
and so so in short Mr speaker
jump someone I I think it's a
good idea at this time and I
considered it from the
amendment.
I urge adoption.
These are for the debate on the
amendment.
Is injection to it.
John you want debated we're
about to accept it.
Mr speaker since he said except
that I don't have anything to
say thank you a hearing on
Jackson house floor amendment
number one to house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
consumer public affairs
committee substitute for Bill
two eighty sixes adopted
generous and wants to have the
four Mr speaker thank you and
Mr good for bank of the June
from Bernalillo
Risk of restoring my faith in
the process of debating and
working on Legislature of pieces
of legislation
I did not expect that I think
you I think it generally makes
this bill better
So I I just wanted you thank you
without a very active full ten
point of order wasn't your faith
restored the last time you
talked to one of your equipment.
For the time before that.
For the time before that Mr
speaker I guess before that then
a little test for that.
I'm I'm just I'm trying to get a
timely generated when the faces
lost.
And what is reserve was restored
was lost again and then restored
again or was it just a one time
loss and one tie restoration Mr
speaker I I feel like I need
some legal of defense to ask
answer that question because
it's a very good line of
questioning.
I said the compliment there's
further debate the gentleman
from Lee Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker absolutely.
This.
With respect to disciplinary
actions.
Involves a public safety
advisory commission.
Could you describe for me and
the body what those existing
procedures are thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman from Lee
so the public safety advisory
commission is up volunteer board
against per diem and it's under
the department of public safety
that's to responsibilities one
is to advise the secretary of
public safety issues and to to.
To investigate and adjudicate of
it's essentially up on appeal
process first state police.
And so so the state police kind
of you know.
And these are so the state
police the chief can suspend
somebody for a week or a month
or or whatever and then they can
appeal that to the public safety
advisory commission this bill
of.
suggests region repeating that
body because it's unnecessary
now this bill creates a law
enforcement certification board
which can deal with with all
those things state police and
nonstate.
So.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Of all issues the commission and
create so bored.
Mr speaker generally yes.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
What's the difference one thank
you Mr speaker the general fund
levy.
We're dealing with with
certifications so each
individual police department can
deal with HR stuff.
Eight you know the day off with
pay suspended for a week or
whatever you're dealing with
your job you get fired from your
job your buyer it's very
difficult and that'll be another
to our debate but but this this
board that we need to set up
deals with the certification of
the license essentially so a law
firm could fire me I'm still a
lawyer the school the principal
could fire the teacher that
teacher still a teacher that you
the officer still has a ticket
and go to the next town is
certified and and be employed as
a peace officer so currently the
law enforcement academy is
charged with dealing with with
certifications and is not
dealing with it so that's why we
create this board that deals
with the certifications of
officers
it's made up of former officers
the the the commission that you
mentioned dissension the is like
H. R. appeal commission within
the state police we're
essentially taking the survey
the suspending and Revenue
revoking powers from Law
Enforcement Academy and creating
this new board
that's independent and not and
and and much more efficient and
streamlined in dealing with
these allegations.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Hi in return for training.
The plain language of the bill.
Wall.
Commission.
If this legislation becomes law.
Will have the authority to
discipline an officer.
Thank you Mr speaker General
gentlelady up each individual
police.
Agency is is about disciplining
the officer this is about
whether they keep their license
or not.
So each individual agency can
discipline officer it's it's
very difficult to discipline
officer or to hold officers
accountable because because of
the because of this legal
structure we've set up
So.
So the other day that we're
dealing with certification not
discipline but if we create the
correct legal structure and we
streamline it and make it fair
and and transparent and
accessible I believe that that
that discipline will we'll
follow.
On.
If this legislation becomes law
all.
What
will be responsible for
disciplining state police
officers thank you Mr speaker
generally the state police need.
And Mr speaker and gentleman
what would be the next step.
For for sure in the event that
he is disciplined.
Thank you Mr speaker generally
if that state police officer is
disciplined by the chief.
Currently they can appeal to the
to the commission that we talked
about this would allow them to
yield
To the US certification board.
Every other officer up in the
state.
They're only appeals to District
Court I suppose.
Mr speaker and gentleman
because.
All.
These officers will all have
only one option and that is to
District Court is inaccurate Mr
speaker and gentleman that's.
Current law.
That's current law the state
police however currently can
appeal to the commission and we
don't want to take that appeal
away and so that's why on page
four lines nine and ten we say
the officer may appeal the
secretary's actions to the law
enforcement certification board.
So that New Mexico state police
make it's it's status quo for
the New Mexico state police in
terms of their ability to appeal
the secretary's actions and of
course as you know Mister John
from the that secretaries is
over the chief and in in the
department of public safety.
So Mr speaker and gentleman
there remains an intermediate
step.
In the.
Of discipline that would then
all be giudicato by this new
board rather than the public
safety advisory commission Mr
speaker definitely correct for
state police yes.
My questions were with respect
to the.
Of.
What was referred to as the bill
of rights in a way we solve that
issue I shipped in the movie so
Mr speaker and gentleman with
the are you.
The other is for the debate the
gentleman from civil and
McKinley Representative Alcon.
Thank you Mr speaker of the.
The only old Mr speaker yes.
I am just curious specially as
fast moving as that amendment
when I I lost one and then there
is an amendment Erin got
approved and I still wasn't able
to catch up with what happened
and I imagine the.
About sixty eight of us in the
house are in the same state let
me ask you this.
With or without the met with the
amendment is now the number
of the police officers and
member of labor donations be
represented by labor it K. Mr
speaker.
Absolutely.
Thank you just one.
One more question Mr speaker and
gentleman you only save the
state police are not the members
of the union.
But yeah the Mr speaker it was
also one of the.
The state police they have a
representative dean that'll
that'll speak for what it is he
is he.
I see them president of their
non you know what is this case
thank you Mr speaker is out from
Cibola McKinley yes they they're
not a collective bargaining
unit.
Of but the state police are all
workers are organized they have
an association and they have a
present association of four
former APD officer that I knew
back in the day
I'm also going to school.
Mr speaker and gentlemen so the
this officer New Mexico is the
president of the union that is
not a you.
Mr speaker gentle development
Kelly he's the president of
their group he's the president
of their association however
they're not a collective
bargaining unit that you and I
would think of as a you thank
you thank you Mr speaker.
This for the debate the gentle
lady from Bernalillo Santa Santa
Fe Representative Lord.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Bernalillo county
please yield.
Mr speaker absolutely there you
are thank you Mr speaker so the
so.
Yes I'm very ten point laser on
my questions but what I have is
a lot of committee because the
whole time this bill it's been
going on my phone's been blowing
up from law enforcement law
enforcement that are a lot in my
district.
Twenty two I have a lot of law
enforcement live there and so
they're always in contact with
me so the first thing I want to
do so you thank you for
accepting that amendment and I'm
hoping that one day
Representative from San Juan his
luck rubs off and then maybe one
day this call is yes to get in
and then met for over I doubt it
but it's okay it's wishful
thinking.
So Mister speaker and what is
the main thing I want to get
across to you and then it's
going to be a little bit more.
On the emotional side than on.
The laser perspective I usually
have on this.
So when we look at this I see
the DPS in the New Mexico state
police officers association
disagreed with this I also
talked to the shares they want a
bald and here's what they want
more than anything else in life
let me tell you what law
enforcement want they will tell
you what is broken they tell me
all the time Stephanie this is
what's broken and this is what
we want fixed but they never get
a seat at the table and they're
all frustrated
that they're being brushed is
that all bad and they're all of
this co to someone they don't
trust me they do not as you know
you probably know some very good
law law enforcement officers in
your district.
Want more than anything else in
life.
They want to be included and I'm
really big on inclusion even
with us on Republican and
Democrat side there's things we
can agree on those things we
just can't agree on but I think
at some points we need to really
come together specially with
this law enforcement thing
especially with so many of the
anti law enforcement bills that
I've seen coming through I think
they deserve our respect and
understanding that they will
tell you the truth they will
tell you what's spoken and I
will bet you that if Democrats
Republicans sat around with them
preferably over beers they would
tell us what is wrong and what
is going on and how we can fix
it I think they're the best
people to know how to fix their
own issues.
So when I speak for them and I
speak from my constituents with
tech I said I have a whole bunch
of law enforcement in my
community what I would like to
see is shares.
State police city police all get
a place the table so that they
can tell you honestly this is
what's wrong and this is how we
can fix it because I trust all
law enforcement officers enough
to do that so that's what I have
on that thank you very much I
yield my time thank you Mr
speaker.
As for the debate the gentle
lady from Sandoval
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Thanks with the gentleman from
Bernalillo yield Mister speaker
yes.
On
I.
It talks about the board.
And
adopting the basic training and
then service.
Standards.
And my my question involves.
If you go also to page.
twelve again is about which is
most of it already in statute
the law enforcement training and
and the forty hours required.
for certifications and what
about.
Is.
For.
The.
Will they be designing the
training model that could
that's.
Will be utilize when they come
into law enforcement at the
academy.
Thank you thank you so much
Mister speaker July from Santa
Fe yes yes and I I.
The law enforcement academy
under the currently and under
this bill doesn't change in
terms of its training of
officers of the training and the
initial deployment if you will
of that officer that completes
the of the law enforcement
academy and so what we do is we
just put good Ole fashion
language the board not us not
politicians but police officers
the board shall develop and
adopt basic training and in
service training standards for
police officers and
telecommunications
telecommunication our in New
Mexico short and sweet they have
full authority to develop that
training for their own
profession.
And I'm glad you up.
For those keeping score at home
Mr speaker at twenty nine dash
seven dash seven point one that
made it in the bill because we
had insert the magic words law
enforcement certification board
but those are the only statutory
requirements for police officers
in terms of the training because
you know police trained their
own profession but yeah the law
enforcement academy is in charge
of training setting the
curriculum setting the standard
determining who's an officer and
was not and that that will not
change and I believe it will be
enhanced and there's no conflict
of interest the law enforcement
academy trains the officers.
And then the certification board
deals with whether or not that
officer keeps keeps his or her
license under certain
circumstances.
And back up to the recruiting I
know that they're in the process
it used to be when they were
recruiting officers that there
was a series of yes.
That the officers and the
physical training that that
could that applicants have to go
through to get to the training
module and I also know that they
used to give a psychological
evaluation to.
Of the I was one of them.
And it is one of the more read
here psychological tests that
you live throughout the nation.
And so what my question is in
regards to that.
And and the recruiting.
And the offices that make it
make it through the oral to
whatever they're given that yes.
And.
Officer makes it through the
police academy.
Officer.
And then three four five years
down the road.
That also gets in trouble and
has to go through
an investigation that yes arises
again the results of that test
come into play.
And the internal affairs area so
I'm wondering will the board
have access to all the talk of
the information when it comes to
address the.
The disciplinary problem with
this officer.
Thank you Mr speaker delay from
a Santa up they may have that
information but it would be
relevant it would be relevant
the way this is set up that the
law enforcement academy board
Tracy officers.
Us you know give them their
initial certification but
anything after that come like
anything after that in terms of
do they keep their license or
not do they suspend their
license or not would be
determined by this independent
board the law enforcement
certification board so it's
kinda like for the lawyers in
the room amount of Mr speaker
jollity from Santa it's like the
law school trained you teachers
you give your diploma and after
that the state bar under the the
Supreme Court decides if you get
to have a licensing people
license so would be similar to
that that that's a structure
that this bill creates.
So is.
The first question on that MMPI.
Collided with that there's two
hundred questions on there and
if the collided with that very
last question because they have
a bearing on one another.
And there was a flag that maybe
the recruiters chose to ignore
but now it's rearing its ugly
head this officers not before
this board the son of being.
Look that as to whether or not
they retain they sort of there's
certification.
Thank you would not come into
play and that's what I'm trying
to get to because I know that
many times and even with the
psychologist.
I'm not one period there was a
time where the five colleges
couldn't manipulate.
And they were manipulating that
yes.
And some of the officers down
the road had a problem when they
went back and looked at the test
have usually taken the entire
yes that is something would have
come up.
Earlier because it would shown
itself throughout the the entire
two hundred questions and so I'm
just wondering you know what
this board having access to that
to make sure that the officer.
You should not have been a
police officer matter of fact or
law enforcement officers.
And so so that's what I'm trying
to go to because I believe that.
That would be something very on
the outcome.
Of that individual maintaining
their certification.
Thank you Mr speaker don't up
gently from side about no that's
great that's a excellent point
and that's what this bill hopes
to do is is is separate that
potential conflict of interest
so using the Law School example
you you know you graduate from
also you get a diploma you're
still not a lawyer you got to
pass the bar even if you pass
the test the bar has to accept
you so you're right that's the
way it's set up here you do the
training you graduate from the
law enforcement academy and then
the board determines if you get
your license and then then down
the road if you you know to keep
your license if you maintain
your certification so the law
enforcement up certification
board determines if you have
that that golden ticket to be at
peace officer up and the law
enforcement academies strictly
training and teaching.
I disagree with you on that but
I don't think your understanding
my question okay I'm not
advocating it you know properly.
You're running out of us Mr
speaker gently from total
theoretically yes in the past
the academy and the
certification board find
something in your past and does
not give you a license I I if
that answers your question.
Thank you Mr chairman no it
doesn't but thank you.
The through the debate the
gentleman curry Representative
Crowder.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Bernalillo please
have.
Mr speaker yes.
Thank you gentleman heard my
colleague from Lee County
mention a little bit ago the the
orchard bill does is actually
standing down the public safety
commission.
And then standing up a
certification board.
And I see that the certification
board gentleman Mr speaker is a
nine member board.
But I don't have a knowledge of
the public safety commission.
Is in a sense of similar size or
manpower.
As the new board.
Thank you Mr speaker John from
curry let me look and see if I
have a roster here the up it's
not just a straight replacement
keep in mind Mr speaker gentle
Kerr that the board is merely
within the state police very
within the state police this
creates a certification board
for every single piece officer
in the state.
But it also allows a state
police officer who's passionate
to appeal to that board so that
the state police officer is is
in the exact same boat if this
bill passes in my opinion the
commission is obsolete it's it's
not necessary.
Because you know we create this.
Yes
this credible board us with
statewide a authority.
Thank you John thank you Mr
speaker what what was going on
is a little bit different what
what I'm struggling with is is
you're probably well aware
always try to look at the
financial impact of anything
that we do what bills come
through a look at the financial.
Is this bill showing a million.
One hundred twenty four thousand
recurring.
Impact year over year.
And we're always struggling to
understand the financial impact
was because we're replacing one
board with another board we're
standing down.
One commission standing up
another one and I thought well
how in the world that create
that kind of financial impact
and so the only other item I
could find within your bill is
there's a.
Fifty thousand dollar fifty I
think fifty thousand dollar bond
to the
funded us from three hundred
fifty up to four hundred
thousand for windows I believe
it is
And I thought well that's a
little bit but that's not the
million self.
I I don't understand how the
analyst came up with that kind
of financial impact can you help
me understand the gentleman
thank you Mr speaker gentle
Carino I think up.
Let me just back up real quick
that this bill does not replace
the commission with the board
what this bill does is take the
certification and disciplined
responsibilities from the law
enforcement academy and gives it
to this new board says this new
board is created in my opinion
the commission is obsolete but
having said that the commission
is a voluntary commission that
gets per diem that's it.
I just volunteers that meet from
time to time this would be this
would have been executive
director and staff.
That would do the investigations
that would have the hearings and
that would determine so it's
like a mini state agency an
independent state agency
are not beholden to the police
academy not beholden to.
Two police you an ISIS
independent made up of experts
to determine whether an officer
should should have his license
suspended or revoked so yeah so
it's so yeah that's the
difference in the FIR.
Thank you Mr speaker John I
appreciate that very much I was
struggling to to grasp what was
taking place you've done a very
good job of of clarifying that
for me and I appreciate very
much thank you John thank you Mr
speaker thank you Jim this
further debate the gentleman
from Colfax more Rio Arriba and
San Miguel Representative Roger
Montoya.
Mr speaker will the gentleman
from Bernalillo please yield
Mister speaker yes.
Mr speaker and gentleman I just
want to share a few words I'll
try to be brief.
I'm not coming today with
through the lens of a lawyer but
more as a community builder for
four decades in the north.
I believe the H. B..
Two eighty six is solid and I
rise and support but I want to
just explain some of my
thoughts.
There are a couple of
experiences that I have had
watching law enforcement.
First I want to say that law
enforcement across our state by
and large I would say the vast
majority are there for the right
reasons.
They lay their lives on the on
the line they are as well
trained as we have provided them
to be and I respect them deeply
so this is not a statement
against policing by any stretch.
But in the northern have seen
instances where a lack of
accountability has generated
serious hostility mistrust and a
broken system that hurts it
hurts as an educator it hurts as
someone who has advocated for
young people to see that this
divide is so detrimental to
society on a personal note about
three years ago my family was
part of a very very tragic.
The crime and there was I
haven't heard it referred to
before this way a blue line but
I witnessed it up close and
personal there was an
impenetrable barrier to
communication.
To resolve and it is this day
that crime is not still not been
resolved.
I just want to say is well that.
I know that this provision is
not talking directly about
police training but it's implied
that we are only going to have a
better society we can modernize
be honest be accountable and and
drive to the place where we can
have a stronger law enforcement
system.
Where there is trust again.
I will stop there for now but
before I do I want to say that
the gentleman from San Juan is
had a string of amendments that
have been successful in been
noticing and I applied it is
this homework is thinking
broadly and I think that's part
and parcel of his good recipe
there so I will close on that
and I yield back.
These further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Matthews.
Thank you Mr speaker me start by
video.
Mr speaker and does the
gentleman from Bernalillo county
you.
Mr speaker I do.
Thank you
General
We hear a lot about bad apples
being a problem in various
professions and I'm one of the
sponsors of best of H. B. one
twenty eight which involves
teachers sent moving on and
being able to reset it right in
certain as who have certain bad
behaviors
and we hear a lot sometimes in
these cases involving police
brutality or inappropriate
behavior about bad apples and I
will preface this by saying that
I when I was at the attorney
general's office I was in charge
of supervising a license law
enforcement officers in
Albuquerque so I've worked with
of police and law enforcement
officers a good deal in the
past.
One of the things we hear about
Mr speaker gentleman is that
there are provisions in
contracts that prevent.
The disclosure of prior.
That bad actions disciplinary
problems whatever we want to
call on of from being made
either public or being available
to use and subsequent
Of disciplinary actions or
whatever so my question is and I
have read your bill but my
question is Mr speaker gentleman
does this bill do anything.
About does it relate in any way
to the disclosure of prior of
disciplinary action against law
enforcement officers and and if
so what what does it do.
Thank you Mr speaker gentle
lady.
It does not.
Our goal is to try to but it it
currently has written it does
not address that at all.
Mr speaker and gentleman at are
you suggesting that the
amendment change that.
Mr speaker generate up
potentially potentially because.
In current statute what we what
we decided not to mess with.
Hi talks of all personnel files
it talks about up what happens
if the also refused to sign.
And also of.
You know talks about
That they don't actually I think
it's a collective bargaining
agreements more so than the
statue but they
Those are determined in the.
In the way police police
themselves they don't have.
If you got a letter in your file
it does not remain there ten
years down the road I think
they're removed after a year and
it's very hard to even get one
in the file thank.
I'm Mr speaker and gentleman
with this bill.
In your opinion be better with
something that addresses that
issue.
Mr Mister speaker gently maybe
maybe but I'm I'm concerned with
the legal structure the legal
structure of solving the problem
of the dysfunction of the law
enforcement academy you know
creating a sound legal structure
to streamline these
investigations
I believe Senate bill three
seventy five has a great section
Mr speaker gentle lady on what
you're what you're talking about
and I believe that
these two bills will merge at
some point hopefully
hopefully they were both won't
die but there's some good
language and I did put that
language in here because I
wasn't the the thrust of my
agenda but I'm there's some
pretty good language dealing
with the sharing of information
and the
And the non up and the
disclosure of information things
like that.
Mr speaker John thank you for
that that information and I
wasn't being critical I was just
of your bill I was I was just
trying to kind of figure out
where we are on an issue that if
we're really serious it seems to
me about.
And I'm sure the word I want to
use but being sure that we don't
have.
At apples if you will in police
are in schools or other places
Matt prior disciplinary action
seems to me to be have to be a
piece of the of the.
Information that's available
when there's when there are
complaints made so.
With with that I appreciate your
answers thank you thank you very
much.
Regionally if I may apologies
that section nine of us Senate
bill three seventy five entitled
law enforcement officer
database.
Thank you very much Mr speaker
general.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo grants
is here Representative process.
Thank you madam speaker with the
gentleman from Bernalillo please
a yield.
Mr speaker.
I will.
Madam speaker my friend up.
I just was gonna ask you all.
I hope I didn't miss it.
Is there any any time limits of
when these investigations will
be sentenced.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman.
Jonathan Dona Ana grant and
Sierra counties not in the bill
not in the bill but that's but
yeah we need to think about that
it's
They should be done done within
ninety days but they need to be
thoroughly but I didn't mess
with that in the bill but I
think I'm not sure what the
current policy is but.
There's so many backlog cases I
don't think there's anything in
statute or rule that but that's
something that we we should
consider after consultation
with.
With law enforcement leaders but
there's there's not a deadline
in the books thank you madam
speaker gentleman so I think
that's one of the issues that I
think up some of the officers
had I think you address that in
the beginning of your of your
legislation.
Introduction.
I believe it's this should be a
reasonable time for both
parties it should be probably
around ninety days with the by
the I don't.
I think maybe I'm speaking out
of turn but I think up it should
be a reasonable times for both
the officer and the person that
was on they were unjustly.
Bob whatever I think that.
Madam speaker Mr to me
gentleman.
Is there gonna be some talk to
revise that or is it something
that you possibly would be
entertaining to maybe address
that issue.
Mr speaker Johnson don't address
here yes I think I think we
should figure out what's best
because you're right those those
officers have that anxiety the
entire time those allegations
are hanging over their head
that's not fair
I think ninety days is.
Ninety days is the number that
that A. P. uses Perth pursuant
to the settlement agreement but.
So yeah that's a good number to
start so but so maybe we can
amended this bill or do it down
the road but we regardless of
what deadline we put we we
gotta.
We got us all this backlog
problem.
Madam speaker John I think you
know I'm still need some
learning the the processes but I
think that would be nice to be
able to amend that to give that
relieve that anxiety for both
parties
I have another question madam
speaker government up from
Bernalillo.
So what on the on the board
that's gonna be created I have
two questions actually first of
all it and maybe I understand
structure but or maybe I'm
trying to find another way that
they could do the work to be all
developed is there any way that
since the border already well
once the Ellie eight that it'll
falling under rules and
regulations to make this
consider creating a new deal I
see you smile so I I I tripped
up on some because there maybe
not thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman from Diana requests
yet others two of us the two of
us yes my original bill had of
have the up the licensing and
certification going to a
regulation and licensing
department just like every other
profession but that was frowned
upon to say the least but yeah
my original idea was folded into
our L. D. because our of the
already has the structure and
there's and there's the legal
framework there
but then we up they also did not
like that at all even though
they would be able to control
the situation within our LD so
we went with the independent
boards thank you Sir.
Madam speaker a.
Gentleman from Bernalillo I just
so I guess that's the that it
was the offices of push back
from and I I just was trying to
brainstorm through this process
is why I bring that up.
Mr speaker made sense to me at
the time.
Madam speaker gentleman I think
we're all learning and we were
trying to stop find our way on
the last question I have is
anyone on the board Madam
speaker going
If they're on the board.
Or any process of the board will
they be kept from any litigation
against an officer.
Mr speaker gentleman from Diana
Grant instead I'm assuming
you're talking about the new
certification board.
And I don't.
Quite understand what you're
asking me rephrase that Madam
speaker of German so if if one
of the.
One of the board members happens
to be at an attorney
would they be exempt from their
firm or
being involved in in litigation
against the officer we did
something wrong thank you.
Thank you Mr Johnson Dona Ana
grants a yes the lawyer would be
it would be unethical for him to
serve on this board.
You know determining somebody's
license and then him or his any
of his legal colleagues suing
that same person yeah that that
would be a complex so that would
not happen.
Madam speaker gentleman so I I
just and I so even has his law
firm any of his associates would
be exempt from that also Mr
speaker gentleman from Dona Ana
grants data correct up when if
there's a hundred years in a law
firm all hundred lawyers would
have the same ethical
Duty not to be involved in that
contract Madam speaker gentleman
from Bernalillo my friend which
address just.
Are you.
Si no further debate the general
then to close.
Thank you madam speaker
honorable members.
Appreciate the debate I now move
that house Judiciary Committee
substitute for House consumer
and public affairs committees of
two or house bill two hundred
eighty six.
Do now pass.
We are on final passage of House
Judiciary Committee substitute
for House consumer Public
Affairs Committee substitute for
House Bill to eighty six as
amended the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds remaining.
The electronic portion is now
closed with the clerk.
All members without a recorded
vote.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Ferrary
Representative Chandler both
yes.
Representative Ferrary.
Representative Harry Garcia yes
Representative Harry Garcia both
yes Representative at a.
Asks I'll come back.
Representative Madrid.
Representative ended up.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of forty four in the affirmative
and twenty two in the negatives.
House Judiciary Committee
substitute for House consumer
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill to
eighty six as amended has duly
passed the house.
Gentleman from Bernalillo burn a
Leo Representative meadow are
you ready for items forty.
Madam speaker I am let the
record reflect that all actions
necessary for placing House
Education Committee substitute
for House Bill three thirty one
on final passage has been taken.
Madam explained the bill thank
you madam speaker so house that
the committee substitute for
House Bill three thirty one
would allow for the
transportation program units to
be
Utilized from the past school
year prior to the pandemic
essentially allowing for a hold
harmless on school
transportation for the next
school year so this is been this
was part of house bill two
language this is passed out of
the Education Committee
unanimously twice so this bill
has been vetted
The levels state needs to
provide assurity to students
into school districts
transporting students in the
upcoming school year that
they'll have enough money and
buses to run things efficiently
for the next school year so with
that madam speaker I'll stand
for questions.
Cena for next debate that
gentleman to close thank you
madam speaker I move that how's
Education Committee substrate
for House Bill three thirty one
do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
Education Committee substitute
for House Bill thirty three
thirty one the vote is now open.
Thirty seconds remaining.
The vote is about to close.
The electronic portion of the
eighties is now closed with the
clerk of the numbers without a
recorded vote Representative
Anderson yes Representative
Anderson both yes Representative
Ezzell Representative Dow both
yes Representative Ferrary.
Representative Maestas.
Representative Serrato.
Representative Trujillo.
Representative Zamora.
Representative Zamora both yes.
Madam chair I I vote yes.
Representative Roybal yes
Representative Trujillo yes
Representative Ferrary is yes
and Representative Ferrary both
yes.
Is now closed backed by a vote
of sixty six in the affirmative.
And zero in the negative.
How's Education Committee
substitute for House Bill three
thank.
Passed the house.
Three thirty one excuse me House
Bill three thirty one has duly
passed the house.
On items.
Is the gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Garcia yes the
speaker can you get me to that
power point.
Representative the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing house bill
one eighty nine on final passage
has been taken that is now
subject to debate amendment for
substitution.
Thank you estimates speaker as
the madam speaker house bill one
eighty nine pertains to the
community governance attorney
act enacted in two thousand and
nineteen.
Find a tuition waiver slash loan
forgiveness program at the
university of New Mexico school
of law for incoming third year
law students who upon graduation
work for a nonprofit entity
providing pro bono pro bono
services to land grants sick yes
in colonial for a period of two
years see more speaker.
Thank you madam speaker house
bill one eighty nine correct a
drafting error in the twenty
nineteen provided tion which now
calls for the community
governance attorney commission
to adjust the maximum allowable
starting salary upwards to keep
pace with the mailing salaries
as the last speaker with that I
stand for questions.
The no debate the gentle lady to
close with MSPs me the gentleman
close.
but good conversion.
As the last speaker I
appreciate at the site and
debate and as we know silence is
golden so with that I do now
move that house bill one eighty
nine two packs.
We are on final passage of H. B.
one eighty nine the vote is now
open.
Thirty seconds remaining.
The vote is about to close.
The electronic portion is now
closed with the clerk called the
members without a recorded vote
Representative Cook.
Representative EFL.
Representative Dow both yes.
Representative Garrett.
Representative Martina.
Yes Representative Martinez both
yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Scott both yes.
Is now closed by a vote of sixty
six in the affirmative and zero
in the negative house bill one
eighty nine has duly passed the
house.
On item five is the gentleman
from Dona Ana Representative
small already.
I am madam speaker would you
give me to that point please.
Representative record reflect
that all action necessary for
placing House Bill two ninety
nine as amended.
On final passage has been taken
and that it is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
gentleman to explain the bill.
Thank you very much madam
speaker Madam speaker and body
House Bill to ninety nine the
improvement special assessment
act creates a voluntary tool
that would be available to
commercial and multi family
property owners to finance the
important investments in
construction in resilience
energy efficiency and clean
energy improvements Madam
speaker and body I do have to
amendments which I'm very happy
to briefly discussed and bring
to the body if whenever you
would like that Madam speaker.
Gentleman would you read that to
our to number of your first
amendment yes madam speaker
thank you madam speaker body the
first two oh two number is going
to be point two to zero six zero
two point two.
And I would move that floor
amendment one.
That gentleman has moved the
amendment we're waiting to see
if that's posted online.
The gentleman to explain the
amendment.
Thank you very much madam
speaker and body Madam speaker
body floor amendment one came
from collaboration with the
county treasurers association
and I'm in a briefly explain a
couple of the the all of the
parts Madam speaker body first
this clarifies that counties
again who voluntarily choose to
adopt an ordinance creating a
program may contract with a
third party provider to
administer that program.
Second madam speaker body this
clarifies that if count counties
who voluntarily choose to be
part of this program wish to
jointly administer a program
such a program that they may do
so by either signing a
memorandum of understanding or
it is through a joint powers
agreement Madam speaker and body
or by signing a more common
memorandum of understanding in
order to jointly administer the
program finally madam speaker
and body this clarifies the
senior priority of ad valorem
property tax liens and other
lanes co equal to property taxes
that those will remain seeing
here
And madam speaker and body and
so they
This is the special assessment
would be junior to such property
tax liens but senior to other
liens Madam speaker and bought
it.
And that that summarizes madam
speaker body house floor
amendment number one.
Is there debate on the
amendment.
For.
Gentlelady from Otero
Representative black.
Thank you madam chair yes the
gentleman from Diana you.
madam speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from Otero.
Thank you a gentleman madam
speaker I don't I'm I'm gonna
give you some kudos here it
looks like you did actually do
part of what you said that you
work with the county treasurers
association in making the
changes that they wanted so I
appreciate that
yeah I still do have a few
issues with this bill
but I will say on on amendment
number one and it looks like you
you brought your words I just
want to throw that out there
thank you gentleman.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr speaker and a Madam
speaker and gentleman's
gentleman from Dona yield.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you madam speaker a
gentleman
on the that if you could go to
the bottom of your amendments.
And if you could.
justanswer I think just one
question here and that is
There's a memorandum of
understanding that is described
here that says any combination
of counties may also agreed to
jointly administer program
pursuant to the agreement and so
Mr speaker and gentleman as I
understand that this
bill the overall bill applies to
a single property.
a.
A large commercial building or
maybe a multi of the multi
family
housing building so I'm I'm not
sure why there would be a need
for a combination of counties
to.
Agree to jointly administer a
program what under what
circumstance could that happen
Madam speaker John.
Thank you very much madam
speaker madam speaker gentleman
from San Juan
I can think of a a couple of
instances Madam speaker
gentleman again this is
something requests from the
treasurers and madam speaker
gentleman if the counties west
to contract with a third party
administrator therefore
ensuring that this program is
administered
in it from that third County
third party administrator David
even though this would be a
different properties that same
third party administrator could
be part of madam speaker and
gentleman one of the reasons for
counties to ensure into that
memorandum of understanding to
administer.
Thank you.
Madam speaker and gentleman okay
so it's it's on the front on the
front and.
With that a person who could be
managed this so so counties.
Can all choose the same person
the contract with per se to to
to manage this program was in
all county so assessors would
not necessarily.
have to to do this work in the
in house is that correct madam
speaker John madam speaker
gentleman that definitely one
example there may be others but
I think that's perhaps one of
the most common examples Madam
speaker gentle thank you madam
speaker and gentleman just one
more question is there is there
another one that may come to
mind besides what was.
What will be size example you
gave.
I'm Madam speaker and gentleman
That's the first one madam
speaker gentleman another one
that may come to mind in seeking
to
Yeah Madam speaker gentleman I I
think you stumped me I think
that's that's the main example
that is contemplated in the bill
and that does come to mind.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you John.
There is further debate the
gentleman from curry county
Representative Crowder thank you
madam speaker gentleman from
going out to please you madam
speaker I gladly yield to the
gentleman from curry.
Thanks John.
Jonatan item to your amendment
it talks about superior to all
eight claims and titles and I'm
when I read that my tenant kind
of went up a little bit I
thought what about the builder
that built the property is he a
no longer in a in a strong
position is in line behind solar
or or whatever can you just tell
me about.
What happened to the builder
that had applied only to get
paid.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen I imagine
significant amount of this would
potentially be covered in debate
Madam speaker gentleman this was
this does place the mortgage
behind the lane but madam
speaker gentleman when we go
into the discussion of the bill
none of these can be entered
into without the consent both of
the owner the builder and the
holder of of those mortgages and
so madam speaker gentleman this
clarifies
This is standard for all of
these programs madam speaker
gentleman and I'm consulting
with an expert who's texting me
the expert is Genevieve sermon
from green works who is a one of
the capital providers for these
sorts of programs in other
states so madam speaker
gentleman this would be common
across all states but madam
speaker gentleman I look forward
to our debate because I think we
will very clearly show that the
property owners as well as the
lien holders are very much
active participants in this and
that these programs can only
move forward if there's consent
from all parties.
John thank you I just I know
we're gonna vote on the
amendment before we vote on that
bill and and when I read the
language that it's superior to
all eight like I say that that
causes my intended to go out so
could you ask your expert.
On on a new construction
project.
And the contractors fatherly.
And and it's near the end of the
process or something like that.
The does this language because
someone to leapfrog that
builders position only a
gentleman and madam speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker I thank the
gentleman let me consult my
experts to get a clear
You madam speaker gentleman.
Yes this is consistent with
all special assessment and
improvement district lanes
that are so that that would be
the case madam speaker gentleman
consistent with all special
assessment and improvement
district lanes that are
currently
in existence okay well I
appreciate that I I I don't like
that but I appreciate you let me
know words that I know that the
builders just got pushed to the
back of the bus and that that
doesn't feel good song but I
appreciate you being
straightforward now appreciate
your expert.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentleman.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative Nibert.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentleman from done Ana County
yield Madam speaker I yield to
the gentleman from Chavis.
Madam speaker and gentleman
I wasn't going to say anything
about this and to use of the
that the mortgage holder would
have to give their consent you
know the the issue immediately
popped in my head.
Madam speaker and gentleman as
to whether or not the mortgage
holder would be subject to zoom
and therefore liability should
they declined to give their
consent.
Madam speaker gentleman now.
Madam speaker and gentlemen is
there anything in this bill that
would reflect that.
Madam speaker and gentleman
there's nothing specifically in
this bill that prohibits that
but madam speaker gentleman the
if no consent is given and then
this will that property under
that mortgage holder would not
be eligible for this program.
What.
gentleman I'm just concerned
that if I.
What he J. without their consent
that the mortgage or with them
our claim that they're
interfering with their ability
to
have this benefit that's being
provided in this legislation and
would maybe
branded some action to two four
seconds sep
I wish the bill had some some
protections in that regard Madam
speaker and gentleman thank you
for answering the question.
There is further debate the
gentleman from the county
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair
The gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln asked my question thank
you.
Is there for the debate on the
amendment.
Seeing that the motion is to
adopt House floor amendment
number one.
Is there a connection.
Yes.
We will have a roll call is now
open.
Thirty seconds remaining.
That's a close.
The electronic portion is now
closed with the clerk called the
numbers of data recorder that.
Representative follow.
Representative Brown.
Representative Cook.
Representative Dow.
Representative Dow votes yet.
Speaker evolved.
Representative either L..
Representative downloads no.
Representative Harper.
Representative Lord.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Ted Office.
Representative off of both no.
Representative Trujillo.
Yes Representative Trujillo both
yes.
Is now closed by a very forty
nine in the affirmative and
eight in the negative house
floor amendment number one to
house bill two at two ninety
nine as amended is adopted.
Gentleman from doing and I would
like to present your second
amendment yes madam speaker body
Madam speaker about eight at the
next amendment is point two two
zero six four eight.
One.
Madam speaker embody as I
explained House Bill to ninety
nine is now twice amended only
applies to commercial and multi
family properties
we had included the repealing of
the solar energy improvements
special assessment act which
applies to residential
properties but since we
in house bill two ninety nine it
does not apply to residential
properties we're striking that
at this time we're we're
repealing the repeal.
Then that explains the amendment
madam speaker by the.
Madam the amendment this speaker
I move house floor amendment to
to house bill two ninety nine as
twice amended.
Is there debate on the
amendment.
Gentlelady from Otero.
Thank you madam speaker does the
gentleman from Diana you
madam speaker I yield to the
gentle lady from Ontario.
Thank you gentlemen madam
speaker I'm sorry gentleman now
I'm a little confused on this
what I'm being told and my
understanding
this actually puts the
residential back.
In the game.
Would that be currents thank you
madam speaker thank you gentle
lady madam speaker gentle lady
for house bill two ninety nine
it does not the residential has
never been Madam speaker gentle
lady and house bill two ninety
nine this does not put it back
in Madam speaker and gentle lady
we had contemplated repealing
this other legislation that does
include residential that would
be operated under a separate
program separate from house bill
two ninety nine but has since
decided that since none of these
programs are happening in the
state and because residential
was never part of two ninety
nine that was actually simply
cleaner to not addressed
residential at all in our bill
so madam speaker gentle lady
under house bill two ninety nine
residential property
improvements are not eligible
for the financing in house bill
two ninety nine.
Thank you gentlemen
I yes I'm I'm gonna have to read
that's going to actually have to
read the solar Energy
improvement the special
assessment action I understand
what you're saying is that that
residential is not included in
bill two ninety nine
however I mean told that this
actually puts it so that the
residential could potentially be
considered into ninety nine at
this point I'm so at if.
Yes I guess we believe I I
really really doubt I'm and
that's the information that I'm
getting from the treasurer's
ability as well I was contacted
by them and and they are not for
this at all I'm if that is the
case.
Madam speaker gentle lady if I
might I I shared the both
amendments with
the the of the approach of both
amendments Spanish speaker
gentle lady this does leave a
prior statute in place since two
thousand and nine on the books
but madam speaker gentle lady to
be very clear madam speaker for
the entire body under house bill
two ninety nine and it's
financing approaches
residential properties are not
eligible under those financing
under house bill two ninety
nine.
Thank you John Madam speaker I'm
one other question on this and
this is coming from the
treasures of billion I'm so
since Santa Fe and Bernalillo
county currently have programs
on the books I'm yes since this
amendment is repealing.
Is that because a legal issue
with Santa Fe county Bernalillo
county.
Thank you thank you madam
speaker thank you gentle lady
for the question we avoid a
legal conflict by leaving the
statute on the books under which
they have already voluntarily
entered into Madam speaker
gentle lady if successful we
will create a separate statute
the improvements special
assessment act we're in only
commercial and multi family
residence Moti family
properties will be eligible for
financing and the two will not
mix so we avoid we avoid taking
something off the books that is
currently involuntarily entered
into by two counties
and create would create a
another
Social improvement
Act that will
be again to read the sorry madam
speaker and gentle lady where in
only resident only commercial
and multi family properties will
be eligible.
Okay thank you gentlemen
and madam speaker I will yield
the floor and and.
Continue on chart thank you.
Gentleman from San Juan
Representative would you wish to
debate unit.
You haven't for.
Is there for the make debate on
the amendment.
The motion is to adopt House
floor amendment number two to
House Bill to ninety nine as
twice amended.
This is now open.
Twenty seconds to vote.
The electronic questions that is
now closed for the clerk called
members without a recorded vote.
Representative Baldonado.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative no.
Representative Harper.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Representative.
Yes I'm sorry.
Body's Representative hurdles
now Representative Harper votes
no.
Representative Rubio.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of thirty eight in the
affirmative and twenty four in
the negative house floor
amendment number two to house
bill two ninety nine as twice
amended is now adopted.
Now back to debate on the bill.
The gentle the gentleman from
the Lee County Representative
Scott.
Thank you madam speaker was our
term loan from Donna Anya.
You
madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from the.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
This.
It's.
March.
One might be associated with
reason pro western.
Hey are.
Just just wonder.
That insured for property taxes
this senior.
To.
Right other lands that could be
placed on the property is that
correct.
Madam speaker and gentleman
general a yes.
Madam speaker and chairman.
Can you describe to the body.
Teachers are.
To develop a single structure
project.
Yes passions.
And.
Your participants in the
program.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen just to be very
clear Madam speaker and
gentleman as we noted this is
what the junior to the property
tax
In co equal to other lanes Madam
speaker and gentleman the
advantage to the commercial or
the multi family property owner
or owners are very simple this
has
the ability to create a longer
term a lower payment and
therefore to finance.
Far more construction more
improvements Madam speaker and
gentleman more construction more
jobs more development.
In in those are the key
advantages madam speaker and
gentleman for this approach.
So madam speaker and gentleman
for the SLO which.
Generally well financed
developers which tend to
encourage and lower the upfront
capital required to call should
the project is that accurate.
Madam speaker and gentleman
generally I think yes there
would be less of that equity
required madam speaker gentleman
more ability to finance at this
lower rate and longer term to
Madam speaker and gentleman to
again to the Biltmore to create
more jobs to
To build more yes madam speaker
and gentleman.
Madam speaker and gentleman can
you describe for me other
instances straight well this.
Sharples for natural range work
is applied.
I'm thank you madam speaker
thank you gentleman there are
other assessment districts Madam
speaker and gentlemen that are
applied in different parts of
our state madam speaker
gentleman as is the case here
two in part to provide public
benefit Madam speaker gentleman
in our case what we're helping
to do is to
lower energy costs to secure
renewable energy improvements
to build in resilience so that
could be
slide protections drought water
conservation protections
protections against forest fires
Madam speaker gentleman in other
cases assessment districts are
used for other public goods
including other infrastructure
things like streets and and
things like that.
Mr
speaker rather.
And gentleman.
Adequately made the point that I
was going to try to make in that
instance in the state.
What is financing arrangements
be applied to anything that was
not of.
Mr for the public that is what
made us worse or it would be
water lines or it would be some
sort of restaurants and clubs
that would have been a strict
to.
And one entity is concerned
with.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen they public
benefit is quite important Madam
speaker gentleman the public
event of benefit of using less
energy using energy efficiently
building buildings that use less
water use water more efficiently
those sorts of things that are
included in house bill two
ninety nine madam speaker and
gentleman those do have public
benefits
And and yeah we're facing quite
a scarce water situation we face
challenges in these other areas
so that's why these improvements
as are eligible in other states
meet that test here.
Representative.
This legislation passes we would
be.
The cistern or mitigating our
farmers could you explain sure
helped me.
Sure panel right on top of the
commercial building would.
Consul for sparklers.
Madam and I I can't see is that
Mr speaker madam speaker.
Madam.
Okay perfect sorry I wasn't on
the right page there Madam
speaker gentleman thank you for
the question Madam speaker
gentlemen one of the
The improvements here is within
this category of resiliency so
madam speaker gentleman that
doesn't have to be a solar
Peavey panel on top of of a
building Madam speaker and
gentleman that can absolutely be
hardening of infrastructure
dealing if one is in an area
where forest fires are an issue
of mitigating against that risk
to these structures and we can
think of a number of places most
in the mountains where that that
is the case
Madam speaker and gentleman so
this is not simply limited to
solar energy Madam speaker
gentlemen it includes
It includes water conservation
energy efficiency as well as
Improvements that promote
resilience.
Question with respect to energy
efficiency.
And how this.
Which were.
impact.
For example.
was climate change for.
Madam speaker gentleman
the improvement on energy
efficiency making buildings
whether it's commercial or multi
family which can be very very
large buildings Madam speaker
gentleman making those buildings
more fan efficient energy
efficient requires less energy
it will keep prices lower by
requiring last peak energy Madam
speaker and gentleman
So while it has a direct impact
on those energy costs and the
benefit to
That not only the property owner
but to the the public benefit by
requiring less energy and Madam
speaker gentleman
I think that covers it.
Madam speaker resurrection.
We have to disagree this is
unquestionably.
Going to do is going to
Developers with our financing
arrangements all large projects
in the event that they do not
want to install this call solar
panels or or an adjacent one
male or.
Shown energy efficiency
measures.
however.
A strong argument can be made to
there is little public benefit
beyond
helping developers kept our
projects more.
Adequately and timely financed
for for less money.
And for that reason I'm going to
stand in opposition reduced
lunch thank you madam speaker
thank you John for your.
There is further debate the
gentleman from San Juan
Representative Strickler.
Thank you madam speaker and or
the gentleman from done out of
yield.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from San Juan my
erstwhile basketball partner yes
Sir yeah I miss that General
a quick question on the.
you got you and your bill you
allow third party you know
Electors you know it can either
be the treasurer for party
thanks for those states the.
The property owner are you know
the developer or the treasurer.
If the county treasurer's size
to garnish out to our party.
Thank you came up by one of my
treasurer somebody that need to
just that.
First.
Madam speaker John thank you for
the question the
The capital provider madam
speaker and gentleman would pay
for those the county and or the
administer may charge fees to
cover the administration of the
of those costs of the
assessment.
Okay so could be either or
depends on what kind of deal we
make it would be the the the the
treasurer or the third party
you know collector for lack of a
better sorry madam speaker and
gentleman that the capital
provider would pay that costs
for the assessment
so madam speaker gentleman and
the the treasurer or the third
party administrator could
administer that C. upon the
capital provider to cover those
costs so they would pass it on I
guess really to the to the owner
right I mean our our to the
developer at Madam speaker and
gentleman that would be subject
to the financial agreements that
they make but the lower cost
longer term financing would
Madam speaker gentleman
steam to provide sufficient
space for those costs to be
borne by the capital provider
perhaps by that project
developer while still proving
and very good deal to build more
employ more people and provide
the public benefits that we've
talked about an energy
conservation water conservation.
Thank you thank you gentlemen
thank you of.
What I am a little confused by
that ensure but but it sounds
like those costs would be passed
on
to the of capital provider in
our to the developer and that
the treasurer of the capitol
they would you know they would
be stuck with the bill and
that served their T. four party
you know call the ministry would
pass those costs on us so that
is that which is okay.
Jim what one last question
gentleman and and madam speaker
with with these assessment
districts listed in our state
Bernalillo in Santa Fe County
opt in on this like they did on
on the on the rooftop solar.
How the special districts are
going to be worked out in the
it'll be
isolated special districts why I
mean Senator on the project so
we'll have to keep track of
these many districts requires I
districts have you seen that
working now.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentleman see it working the
way that current County
improvement these at different
improvement districts are
administered it could be small
in size
they could be a relatively large
Madam speaker gentleman this
wouldn't be a parcel by parcel
district it would be a district
where the properties would be
eligible within that district
and so madam speaker gentleman.
We know that this won't cause an
increased cost to the treasurers
and it'll be up to those
individual counties
municipalities to set the
geographic bounds of the
districts.
Miss madam speaker and gentleman
no words it'll be a county wide
you know program any and and
you're you're gonna have to.
To
Dedicate this took by partial on
me you gotta you gotta project
let's say it's you know it's
it's five acres and and and it
has a song you know or the that
that that five acre tract is
part of the Development in a
song by you know the owner's
developers so you would have a
five acre project
you know in the county and you
I have half a dozen of the so it
seems like to me it would be
targeted to to that partial
because H. tractors care part
you know H. property values
therefore.
So to me it would have to be
kind of on a partial block
Marshall.
you know of valuation or.
Do you have any thoughts on that
are just thank you madam speaker
thank you gentleman they they
need it it would be a county
wide part program madam speaker
gentleman buddy parcel by parcel
they would each.
Individually have to be approved
and then administered unique to
those parcels yes that that
makes sense okay I think that
that finishes my questions and
thank you madam speaker thank
you gentleman thank you Jim.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative Nibert.
Thank you madam speaker what
would gentleman from Dona ana
county yield madam speaker I
yield to the gentleman from
Chavis and Lincoln my other
basketball partner.
Well madam speaker and gentleman
that but that's quite a
compliment listen because I'm
not sure I can hold a candle to
your skills on the basketball
court too bad that were unable
to engages that percent this
year but we look forward to
defending our trophies maybe
next year around this time
Madam speaker and gentleman
just one question and I believe
if you'll turn over to page
nine.
Yes.
And I'm looking specifically at
one nineteen AM this is the
issue that I raised with you
during the amendment.
And this is a paragraph
paragraph B..
Well Karia paragraphs I.
Talk about securing written
consent of the the land holder.
And Mr Madam speaker and
gentleman I was wondering if you
might be available.
To a remember if this moves
forward that would basically
address the concerns raised I do
have some language of this this
state what that language might
be and the.
If you're amenable to
Representative region try to
handle the future maybe five to
run upstairs I could do that but
basically at the end of the
period of online nineteen put
the words when holders who do
not give written consent shall
not be liable to the property
owner for withholding consent.
because.
I've seen a number of
Mortgage is.
Subject to students for for
withholding our consent and
various venues
with the person claiming that
they are reasonably withheld
consent or whatever and so it's
an issue that I've I've seen
actual
evidence of over the years and
that language I think we're
basically state of absolved
awaiting holders of programming
Sir four
maybe with holding back to the
center I don't know if you be
available to that or not but you
can certainly address issues
that are that are raised earlier
and if you want to just think
about it for awhile that's fine
with me but the I would like
that issue addressed impossible
madam speaker gentleman's our.
I guess if you have a do you
have a comment fine if not I'll
be happy to relinquish the
floor.
Madam speaker gentleman briefly
thank you for this as speaker
gentleman I expert has not seen
this in the other states Madam
speaker gentleman regardless I'm
very happy to circle in with use
specifically and explore this if
we're fortunate to move forward
and if it's an issue with madam
speaker gentleman we
The this should only happen in
this case with the consent of
that mortgage holder if that
mortgage holder withholds
consent there should not be an
impact upon them from our
program and so I'm very willing
to I don't one like to do it
tonight but I'm excited to
continue a dialogue with you
explore this issue and I
appreciate your raised.
Thank you madam speaker and and
gentlemen thank you for your
willingness to maybe look at
that as the sun moves forward
and I will be happy to.
I do with that language in
written form if you to to name
drugs thank you madam speaker
thank you John.
There is further debate the
gentle lady from a federal
County Representative black.
Thank you madam chair and madam
speaker and will gentleman from
dynamic yield again.
Madam speaker I gladly to the
gentle lady from Otero.
Thank you madam speaker I'm so
on page two.
Nine six Department means
economic development department.
Can you give me an idea why this
is falling under that act Namik
Development Department.
Madam speaker gentle lady yes
thank you for the question Madam
speaker gentle lady they.
Have the again we work we've
talked about how this is to
promote construction the
creation of jobs building needed
infrastructure in the various
categories that the loss that's
forced and so madam speaker
gentle lady we thought that the
economic development department
which had that has in Senate
bill three seventy seven the so
called junior bill where funds
have been included for this
purpose that they're the
appropriate place to administer
that promotion of economic
development and job creation
in this program.
Thank you for that John and
madam speaker I guess what my
confusion on on the Economic
Development Bunge I'm I guess
we're so we're referring to the
state economic development
department is that correct
Mr dent sorry you madam speaker
gentle lady yes that's right
thank you for that sentiment and
madam speaker okay so I can then
it brings me to the next
question some page three it
talks about the program guide
but I'm means a comprehensive
document created by the
department.
With and it goes into all the
details of what is going to be
in this guide book will call me
crazy but if it's the Economic
Development Department.
How are they creating guidebook
when their job is to create job
or their mission I guess you
would say is to take care of.
Jobs I guess that's what I'm I'm
having a hard time putting that
together can you can you give me
some ideas on that.
Gentleman.
Madam speaker gentle lady yes
Madam speaker gentle lady
The
They're just this is that to
create a consistent documents
that can be utilized
by it in a voluntary matter
again if if counties choose to
ensure to to utilize this.
Tool to provide financing Madam
speaker gentle lady there's a
couple of reasons we know that
consistency transparency between
so that is not different in
different counties different
communities that the same
standards that that transparency
and consistency is beneficial
when it comes to economic
development
so madam speaker gentleman
that's just one of the reasons
why we chose to ensure that the
economic development department
would be the one to.
Create that guide book and then
really that is their role once
that is complete then it'll be
up to
the counties if they voluntarily
choose to participate to apply
those clear transparent and
consistent guidelines.
Thank you for that a gentleman
Madam speaker.
Okay so then moving on to page
six.
one fifteen.
Do you authorize and direct the
county officials to enter into
the special assessment
agreement.
With property owners and capital
providers and special assessment
assigned will strip gets so can
you tell me what.
Which officials is being
authorized and directed to enter
into this agreement.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady the the counties would
choose that official in their
ordinance Madam speaker gentle
lady in presumably in
consultation with that official.
Okay thank you for that that
gentleman.
And madam speaker.
I will have to find out from
Representative Nibert on I think
there's only certain county
officials that can actually
signed them so that that's where
I was going with that.
The gentleman I guess.
Sure I have this right so this
is a voluntary program.
That a person can.
Go out on their own.
Contact a solar company.
Make an agreement with the solar
company.
The that they're going to
finance that.
And then they would approach
their County and say okay I want
this on my tax bill the special
assessment and and I get that
right gentleman thank you madam
speaker thank you gentle lady
Madam speaker and gentle lady
the county would have to
voluntarily
enter into it create this
assessment district first Madam
speaker gentle lady the if
yes someone says I have a great
industrial building and I want
to do this if there county has
not
Created this special assessment
district that the property owner
will be ineligible for this
financing but madam speaker
gentle lady if the county
voluntarily creates a special
assessment district sets it up
then that property owner could
say I want to conserve water in
my industrial building I want to
guard against the risk of
catastrophic flood to my
building and other properties in
the area I want to use energy
more efficiently use less energy
than they would be eligible to
finance those approve mints
through this program but only
yes that County has already
entered into to agreed to ensure
that create this assessment
district.
Thank you gentlemen and madam
speaker I guess I just really
have a hard time thank.
In my head grasping the concept
of an individual business owner
going through the trouble of.
Contact the county if it's not
already in there and then
contacting the solar company and
and getting and setting up the
financing and doing all these
things.
It to me it just makes more
sense that if you're going to
get along.
Or have you know it's going to
be finance that you would deal
directly with the finance
company and not bring the county
but at that's really my my
thought I'd really have a hard
time grasping why anyone would
want to muddy the waters I'm as
far as finances concern so
I guess that's all the questions
I had gentleman thank you so
much and.
Thank you madam speaker.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Lee County
Representative paper.
Thank you madam chair this
gentleman from million in cap
cana yield.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from the.
Thank you very much
Sure one of the questions I have
this is.
Is there with respect to the
funding source.
Because this is going to be
managed by administered by
economic development Sir chance
that some of these funds can.
Because so this could be
considered infrastructure madam
chair.
Could be could be used.
This opens up lead and love our
funds to to this process.
Madam speaker gentleman thank
you for the quest question Madam
speaker and gentleman now Madam
speaker gentleman the role for
the economic development
department is to simply set out
those guidelines and that guide
book to create a clear
transparent consistent guidebook
Madam speaker gentleman that
would then be sensually the
playbook adopted by counties but
Madam speaker gentleman the
Economic Development Department
would not have any role in the
financing of these projects.
Thank you madam speaker and and
gentleman so
me ask the question let me just
make sure is there anything in
your in this legislation madam
chair that could open the door
to that at some point in time in
the future.
Madam speaker gentleman now this
is Madam speaker gentleman they
would not be a capital provider
under this program.
Thank you very much for your
answers sure I yield back once
I.
Thank you for the debate the
gentleman to close.
Thank you very much Madam
speaker body I move that house
bill two to ninety nine as three
times amended do passed in order
to bring this
economic development and
environmental improvement to our
commercial and industrial
property on this.
We are on final passage of house
bill two ninety nine asked rice
amended.
The vote is now open.
Thirty seconds remaining.
Is about to close.
The elector tronic portion of
the road is now closed will be
where called members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Brown.
Representative Miguel Garcia
yes.
Representative Miguel Garcia
both yes.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Brown votes no.
Representative Brown boats now.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of forty two in the affirmative
and twenty six negative house
bill two ninety nine as thrice
amended has duly passed the
house.
Right here eight three.
We are moving on to item
thirteen gentlelady from
Bernalillo Representative
Stansbury are you ready on item.
Yes madam speaker can you please
get me to that point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House state government elections
Indian Affairs Committee
substitute for House Bill three
hundred.
Is on final passage has been
taken and that is now subject to
debate amendment or substitution
gentlelady to explain to them.
Thank you madam speaker and and
good evening body so the purpose
of house bill three hundred is
to help foster greater
leadership innovation and
streamlining and performance of
our state programs I know that
all of us have seen how are
agencies are struggling to
recruit and retain staff to
innovate within their programs
and to improve the delivery and
performance of services so what
this bill does is it directs the
state person program to work
with agencies to create a pilot
leadership management and
pipeline program to advance the
training and recruitment
retention performance and equity
across our state agencies and it
lays out the guidance on how to
do so and directs our state
personnel office to come back to
the legislature this next year
in October with recommendations
on how we can advance leadership
in innovation across state
government this bill was
developed in partnership with
the state personnel office other
agencies research conducted by
our Legislative Council Service
and CSL and modeled after
federal programs such as the FCS
program and other programs it
will can and the civil service
Reform Act and with that I stand
for questions.
There is debate on the bill the
gentleman from Lee County
Representative Scott.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentleman yield up salute Lee I
yield to the gentleman.
Speaker gentle lady are supposed
to support.
This legislation would depend.
On the political
issue of the parameters.
And.
Program organizations.
Yes.
I'm
to applaud all of the goals.
Senator.
Four separate somehow about.
Would be providing the training.
Thank you gentlemen and this
bill is completely non political
it's not intended in any way to
advance any kind of political
agenda it's intended solely for
the purpose of advancing
leadership in state government
M. in my conversations with the
state personnel office they are
beginning to initiate some of
these trainings already and
through you know well
established leadership and
training programs.
Madam speaker gentle lady reduce
tried our state our for example
associated with so much try or
would it be.
Toward.
Providing government services.
General Mister speaker gentleman
I would assume the second but I
would like to confer for just a
moment with my expert who is
acting director Ricky Santana
from the state personnel office
if you can give me just a moment
here well he's just told me
state at personal trainers.
State employee parameters.
Gentleman I believe she answered
you.
Madam speaker gentle lady was
conferring with cemex for.
Yes thank you and madam speaker
and and gentlemen I received an
answer from Mr Cernat that the
trainers will be state employee
parameters.
Strong.
You the state should be wrong.
Which.
Yes.
Thank you Mr I can what is your
answers.
Thank you gentlemen there is
further debate the gentleman
from the council representative
pedigree.
Thank you madam chair does the
gentle lady yelled.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you gentlemen I most
certainly yield.
Thank you very much
I just I guess I I'm I'm kind of
the standard madam speaker that
that we're actually looking us
in and speaker and private
industry that's how we stay
afloat is ensuring that we are
we have leadership management
and development programs to keep
Madam speaker and gentle lady
are please I stood in and have a
desire to stay with the
companies that that we were only
running manage and
Find it disappointing madam
speaker gentle lady that we
actually have to suggest.
The state agency leadership that
they should be doing this and
that Madam speaker and gentle
lady that we actually have to
put somebody in charge of it to
make sure that we actually have
a program that does just.
It.
The whole concept astounds me
and so madam speaker and gentle
lady I don't have a question I'm
just.
In all that we actually have to
do so this are you back thank
you madam speaker thank you Mr.
There is further debate the
gentleman from curry county
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam speaker
gentlelady from Bernalillo
please you.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlemen of course thank
you Mr I was curious I see
there's a seventy five thousand
dollar recurring impact for new
person to run this program and I
wondered when you put this
together did slower great to
just absorb that cost it didn't
go through appropriations and
did requested Appropration cell
they agreed to go ahead and just
absorb that cost and within our
agency.
Thank you gentlemen M. and thank
you madam speaker so originally
as the bill was drafted.
Act with a different.
While for review and send the
fiscal impact report and had
come back with that original
assessment and upon and
conversations with various
entities and council service we
did strike the appropriation
it's my understanding that the
agency based on both vacancies
as well as existing training
programs that are are planned
will hopefully be able to carry
out this program with their
existing resources.
M. madam speaker I I hear you
hopefully they will be able to
do that so that would imply to
me that they haven't said yes we
will absorb but I I would agree
with the I think they probably
could I looked in their on their
financials the last two years
they have reverted and then
twenty nineteen five hundred
nineteen thousand dollars back
to the general fund and in the
year twenty they reverted six
hundred fifty four thousand so I
think they have adequate
adequate capacity to do this I
liked what you're trying to do
trainings a good thing I agree
with that saw but I was just
curious if they have verbally
said we will just absorb.
Thank you all righty thank you
madam speaker.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close.
Thank you madam speaker I think
the body for the wonderful
questions and with that I'd to
ask now that the body do now
pass house state government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill three hundred.
We are on final passage of how
state government.
Elections in Indian Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill three hundred.
The vote is now open.
Thirty seconds remaining.
The vote is about to close.
The electronic portion of the
road is closed with the clerk
called the members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Hochman Vigil.
Representative Lente.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of forty nine in the affirmative
and eighteen in the negative.
House state government elections
Indian Affairs Committee sept
for House Bill three hundred has
duly passed the house.
We are moving on to the
temporary calendar on item
number one.
Excuse me supplemental calendar
number one.
Item number one is the gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson.
Right.
Madam speaker I am ready can you
please get me to that point.
Let the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill to thirty two twenty
three on final passage the
taking and that it is now
subject to debate amendment or
substitution.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker this
this is a really important bill
to me it's it's fairly simple it
allows a person a driver I'm a
person who owns a car when they
register their car to check the
box that says that the driver or
a passed a regular passenger in
the car may have a disability
I'm and and then when the when
the law enforcement officer who
was stopping the car runs the
license plate it will pop up
let's say that the the driver is
death and the reason I'm doing
this bill madam speaker and body
it as you most of you probably
know I've been working with
people with disabilities for
over thirty six years and I have
my son with significant autism I
also have some friends and I
asked them when you get stopped
what is the first thing you do
when they say I reach into my
pocket to pull out the card that
says that our debt.
And we see all the time what law
enforcement is yelling hands up
hands that don't move don't move
and I just see something really
bad happening it's one hundred
percent voluntary and I believe
madam speaker that this can
change this can save lives I
have talked with law enforcement
from several different
Bodies and they all say we are
essentially the same thing the
more information we have on a
traffic stop the better off it
is for the person that we stop
and for ourselves and with that
madam chair I will stand for
questions.
No debate the gentle lady to
close.
Thank you madam speaker I move
that house bill two twenty three
do now pass.
We are on final passage of house
bill two twenty three the vote
is now open.
Friends thirty seconds
remaining.
The vote is about to close.
The electronic questions now
closed with the clerk called the
members without a recorded vote
Representative Lente.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative get off of.
The vote is now closed by a vote
of sixty four in the affirmative
and twelve and the negative
house bill two twenty three has
duly passed that house.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
Madam speaker.
I love the employees.
Right thank you thank you very
much.
Madam speaker I move that we go
to the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous.
What
madam speaker I move that we go
to the consent calendar.
Members the consent calendar has
now been passed out duties
please take a look.
Members the motion before the
body is eight do you pass on
house joint memorial I House
memorial eighteen and house
memorial twenty two the vote is
now open.
The electronic portion of the
vote is now closed with the
clerk.
Call the members without a
recorded vote.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Chatfield both
yes Representative lane.
Representative Lewis.
Representative Zamora.
Yes.
Representative with both yes.
The vote is now closed.
By a vote of sixty seven the
affirmative and zero in the
negative house memorial science
house memorial eighteen and
house memorial twenty two has
duly passed the house.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo.
I move that we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
I see some announcements the
representatives from the excuse
me the gentleman from Dona ana
and Otero Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Thomson.
Thank you madam speaker in your
natural up there.
The speaker better look out so
madam speaker I am announcing
that consumer of public affairs
committee did not receive any
renewable so we will not be
meeting tomorrow thank you.
Members take note the gentleman
from Bernalillo Santa Fe
Torrance and eight
Representative McQueen.
Thank you madam speaker.
Thank you madam speaker.
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee will
meet tomorrow but we're pushing
the start time back to nine
o'clock instead either clocks so
we'll see everyone at nine
o'clock thank you.
Members take note and be
grateful the gentle lady from
the Jana Representative Rubio.
Thank you madam speaker yeah you
you're you're really also on
that and then share
The house transportation will be
on tomorrow morning at eight
thirty we have a three bills on
the agenda and we will see you
all then thank you.
Members take note the gentleman
from Cibola and McKinley County
Representative Alcon.
Thank you madam chair house
labor Veterans Affairs committee
will meet tomorrow at eleven
thirty I got it right this time
eleven thirty everybody two
hundred.
Eleven thirty two more members
take note the gentleman from
Bernalillo easy representative
Garcia.
The man the speaker as the madam
speaker the tall dark and
handsome and lovely and
Local government land grants and
cultural affairs committee will
be meeting promptly tomorrow at
nine eight AM not one minute
before not one minute after so
members and presenters be there
or be sponge Bob square pants.
Members take note the gentleman
from Rio three of us on the
violence and one Representative
Lente thank you madam speaker
your house agriculture water
resources committee has no
referral bills so we will not be
meeting tomorrow thank you and
have been that.
Thank you gentlelady members
take note gentlelady from
Bernalillo.
Madam speaker.
