The clerk to call members
without a recorded response.
Representative alkaline you
Representative Alcon is here
Representative Anderson.
Representative Anderson is here
Representative bash.
Here Representative bash is here
Representative bone Kauffman.
Here Representative bone because
here Representative okay then a.
Here Representative Cadena is
here Representative Chatfield.
There Representative Chatfield
is here Representative Cook.
Representative Dow.
Representative Gallegos
Representative Gallegos is here
Representative Harper.
Representative Lente.
Representative Lewis
Representative Lewis is here
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Present day.
Representative Roger Montoya is
here Representative Nibert.
Representative Nibert is here.
Representative Pettigrew.
Here Representative Pettigrew is
here Representative Powdrell
Culbert.
Representative Powdrell Culbert
is here Representative Roybal
Caballero.
For example Representative
Roybal Caballero is here
Representative Serrato.
Representative Serrato is here
Representative off us.
Here Representative Terrazas is
here Representative Trujillo.
Representative Trujillo is here.
Close we have a quorum.
Please rise for two days
indication.
Offered to us by the member
whose prayers are so nice she's
doing it twice.
The gentle lady from McKinley
San Juan Representative Johnson.
Thank you.
Karoshi city into Tasha Yar
sting when loanee too much HM on
us on the and on the Feeney
courtesy of the gonna this is on
the so that the DNC.
We thank you creator for your
love grace and the blessing of
another day we asked the to
extend your mercy to all those
in need of comfort.
And all those who are going
through difficult times
especially our children elders
and veterans.
Let us remember our families our
homes our communities as we
produce prepared to serve our
people.
Less McKinley County day and all
are counties in New Mexico thank
you creator through you we can
be reminded to represent their
character.
And that we can honor you and
everything that we do.
That we can walk in beauty with
beauty before us and beauty all
around us.
We ask that you guide us
throughout the state and all of
our deliberations.
Help us to be mindful of our
words actions and that through
your blessings we can hear see
say and know your wisdom excuse
me.
Creator your shield.
Yes this guidance and everything
that we do.
Creator you already know us you
know us by our heart beat.
All we have to do is ask in your
name heavenly father our
creator.
In beauty it is finished in
beauty it is finished in beauty
it is finished in beauty it is
finished a man.
Thank you generally would the
gentle lady present Fe
Representative Serrato please
listen the pledge of allegiance.
And the gentleman is the result
Representative Anderson to the
distance looting New Mexico's
flag.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
good afternoon Mister speaker
and members Mr speaker I move
that we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business.
No objection it is so ordered.
Good afternoon everyone.
Are there any nonsense before we
go to Gallup McKinley county
day.
The generator Chavis given us
to.
Mr speaker just point of
personal privilege please.
Story sitting.
Would you please repeat that
generally.
Personal privilege please state
your point.
Mr speaker.
We do have quite a few members
that are here.
That are taking their committee
assignments in their offices Mr
speaker I'm old school if you
want to call it that way I'm not
going to tell my age I'm a lot
older than.
Most everybody here that Mr
speaker I do like to be able to
read for where you're being
presented with an committee.
We do receive all are far
document documents in the House
Appropriations Committee which
is very very helpful it's needed
in the committee.
Mr speaker.
This morning I was needing the
handouts while we were in house
ag Mr chairman chairman Lynn
today was kind enough to have
his assistance direct them to
our staff that works on the
Republican side they ran copies
and got him to each one of the
Republican members Mr speaker I
like to be able to make notes on
my hand outs to be able to go
back and reference them
especially if any of our other
members here on the house floor
have questions about those
certain bills about what the.
Of agency directors have said Mr
speaker I don't think it's out
of line for me to ask in the
future.
Twenty four hours in advance if
those that are presenting can
get the handouts to the
committee secretaries so they
can be distributed either
through the house minority
office and the house majority
office to its members I would
greatly appreciate it Mr speaker
thank you very much.
Thank you gentle lady will ask
the leader Martinez and leader
Townsend to
I guess I think we should
probably not printed everything
right but I think it's
reasonable for member to us then
we can have prince you pronounce
maybe
just for the sake of saving
paper and and the costs but
we're happy to.
Have things printed and
delivered to you and I'll
mention to the chairs that we
should.
Ask members of the public to
have any handouts the day before
so they can be distributed.
And Mister speaker would it be.
Helpful to those to our
leadership if the members that
do want copies of the handouts
that they'd and notify.
There floor leaders it speeded
would be a lot easier I think
just to talk to the committee
secretaries.
Because they're the ones that
have the documents and so.
Yeah we.
Making the request to the
committee secretary for the
agriculture committee would be
the best and easiest way to
accomplish that.
Okay Mister speaker I know that
there's other members that do
like the hard copies to them
very said the committee so of
your your words I think will
resonate with them as well thank
you very much thank you
generally.
Generated million of
representative Gallegos.
Thank you Mr speaker today like
everybody to take note of the
teddy bears that are on there at
tests today the teddy bears are
from the New Mexico primary care
association around the state
their primary care clinics serve
about forty seven percent of New
Mexicos uninsured and almost
sixty percent of all New
Mexicans with incomes under a
hundred percent of federal
federal poverty they provide
over a hundred million a year in
high quality care and over a
hundred and sixty five medical
dental and behavioral health
sites in ninety communities in
New Mexico.
Of the New Mexico the the
primary care clinics have played
a crucial role in providing
COVID testing vaccinations and
care for all of us in our
communities today I ask you to
join me in recognizing the
clinics for over fifty years of
service in New Mexico's most
vulnerable citizens.
Thank you generating.
The gentle lady.
The.
Gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you Mr chairman of the go to the
next order of business third
reading of legislation.
Action it is so ordered.
Gentlelady from McKinley in San
Juan on house memorial fourteen
that the record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House memorial fourteen on final
passage is been taken gentlelady
to explain the memorial.
Thank you Mr speaker house
memorial fourteen is a memorial
that is proclaiming January
twenty seventh twenty twenty to
Gallup McKinley county day in
the house of representatives Mr
speaker may we have the clerk
read house memorial fourteen
absolutely click to read.
Fourteen introduced by
Representative Lundstrom
a memorial for claiming January
twenty seven twenty twenty two
gallantly Kenley county day in
the house of representatives
whereas the City of galloping
McKinley County.
Are the north western gateway to
New Mexico and whereas the city
of Gallup in McKinley county
reflect the rich cultural
recreational and economic
diversity of New Mexico.
And whereas McKinley County has
the greatest number of native
American residents of any New
Mexico county is the home of
members of the Navajo Nation the
pueblo of Zuni.
And is the site of one of the
largest annual gatherings of
native Americans and intertribal
Indian ceremonial.
And whereas this year Gallup
will host one the one hundred
annual intertribal Indian
ceremonial.
And whereas County incorporates
McKinley County incorporates the
continental divide which
separates the watersheds of the
Pacific and Atlantic oceans and
whereas the city of Gallup has a
historical downtown and is
recognized as both a New Mexico
mainstreet and an arts and
cultural district.
And whereas in twenty eleven the
legislature declared the city of
Gallup to be.
The adventure capital of New
Mexico and whereas McKinley
County boasts world renowned
adventure venues and trails
including the Zuni mountain
trail system the jewel of the
southwest and whereas the city
of Gallup is recognized as the
most.
I tried small town in America
and is home to a state national
veterans Sir Senator.
And whereas the city of Gallup
is a center of commerce and
since the nineteenth century has
been recognized by the B. and S.
Afro wave as a heritage
community for its importance
along the transcontinental rail
line and whereas McKinley County
is home to the Gallup energy
logistics park.
One of only a handful of BNSF
certified sites for economic
development located in an
Internal Revenue Service
designated opportunities now
therefore be it resolved by the
house of representatives of the
state of New Mexico the January
twenty seven twenty twenty to be
designated Gallup McKinley
county day in the house.
Representatives honor and
showcase the many facets of the
city of Gallup and McKinley
County.
And be it further resolved the
copies of this memorial be
transmitted to the mayor and
city council of the city of
Gallup and the board of county
commissioners of McKinley
County.
Thank you
Gentlelady from McKinley in San
Juan you have before thank you
Mr speaker and members of the
body I would like to add that
it's an honor for me and a
privilege to represent McKinley
County and I live in these
Gallup which affords me the
opportunity to be a community
member of both the city of
Gallup and to be near my folks
who live on the eastern Navajo
agency reservation.
I would like to acknowledge our
McKinley County day committee to
get together and meet all year
long to work and plan
McKinley County today I
appreciate their enthusiasm and
I attended a couple of meetings
and they show the importance of
the celebrating and sharing the
day with our legislative body.
I would like to also acknowledge
and thank McKinley County I
thank my colleagues from the
city to the county managers to
our Gallup McKinley county
school district to our hospitals
are Indian Health Care Services
arm C. H. R. veterans that are
like clinic to Mexico cancer
center or sheriff's office.
Our of fire and rescue EMTs and
so much more all these entities
and organizations who help
provide services to our
constituents Mr speaker and
members of the body we are a
tight knit community who is
fired to foster an economically
vibrant and safe County that
embraces and respects cultural
diversity and our veterans thank
you Representative Lundstrom for
introducing house memorial
fourteen and thank you McKinley
County for all that you do for a
community members Mr speaker and
the members of the body I move
house memorial fourteen for a to
passed with unanimous consent
showing all members present in
the affirmative.
Thank you gentle lady are is
there debate or comment about
Gallup in McKinley county.
Well I will add before we go to
a vote on it I will say that I
the number goes up and down year
to year but we are in the mid
double digit double digit
percentage of members of the
house to run each year solely
because of the commemorative pin
that is delivered each day and
can the candidate for all
looking forward to that
that we do have a debate
generally from Bernalillo
Representative Thompson thank
you Mr speaker will the gentle
lady from McKinley yield Mister
speaker I yield to my good
friend and sister thank you Matt
Mr speaker and gentle lady I'm I
stand in support of this I'm I'm
a McKinley County product to I
grew up in Crown Point Gallup
was the big city where we would
go for any restaurant or movie
back Representative Johnson and
I were our crown point eagles
for ever and ever so thank you
galloping can the county thank
you Representative.
Thank you gentle lady Mr
speaker.
The pins are in the house.
Gentlelady from grant Hidalgo
and Luna Representative Sweetser
thank you Mr speaker will the
gentle lady from McKinley and
San Juan you Mr speaker I yield
to the kind gentle lady.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to comment that we had
multiple interim committees go
to Gallup this interim and I
mean a lot of them I I was there
twice and had schedule to go for
the third one and didn't make it
but I was just so impressed at
the incredible hospitality and
and warm feeling that all of
your community leaders expressed
for interim committees and I
know they can kind of be a pain
when you're asked to meet here
and and maybe House something
here in buffalo but all I got
was just a wonderful warm
feeling including the committee
that I co chair the rural
economic opportunity task force
I just so thank the all of years
city fathers and your businesses
a year hospitality locations for
welcoming us with open arms the
representative wonderful
community thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you Mr speaker kind gentle
lady.
Social media is now all about
is.
Then this year is especially
nice.
Mr speaker may I explain the pan
please thank you Mr speaker
members of the body the Gallup
McKinley county day lapel pin
this year is at a pattern and a
turtle and the patter and
represents long life and
fertility so be careful.
We are on.
final passage.
Of house memorial fourteen with
the request for the records show
all members present and voting
in the affirmative.
Hearing objections so ordered
the vote is now open.
The voters are closed over
seventy the Fuhrman is here the
negative.
House memorial fourteen is
passed the house.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business section sort of gentle
lady from McKinley and San Juan
with a.
Certificate.
Thank you Mr speaker.
In addition to celebrating
McKinley County day we'd like to
celebrate one of our community
members Dr Jenny way who is an
awesome community member good
friend sister and provides
health care services and much
more in our community Mr speaker
I would like to request the
clerk to read the certificate
that recognizes Dr Jenny way the
to the to read.
The house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico
recognizes Jenny way and do
whereas the Corona virus disease
nineteen pandemic has decimated
New Mexico communities and none
more so than Gallup which is
what the state with infectious
infections and hospitalizations
and where as anyway and do an
internal medicine physician at
the Gallup Indian Medical Center
and chief clinical consultant
for the internal medicine with
the federal Indian Health
Service has was instrumental in
addressing the challenges the
pandemic has presented and
whereas gallops high poverty
rate and multi generational
families living together
compounded the urgency to
address the corona viruses these
twenty nineteen pandemic and
whereas drive way initiated a
community wide shelter meetings
with the goal of helping protect
Gallup's most vulnerable and
unsheltered population
population.
And where I'd through the
community meetings and drive
ways leadership Gallup was able
to collaborate with the state to
vote I Corona virus disease not
twenty nineteen isolation hotels
to temporarily house more than
one hundred individuals
individuals and whereas.
And others who work with the
county and state community
organizations and even family
and friends to book rooms at
local hotels so homeless
patients with corona viruses
he's twenty nineteen could
quarantine and whereas as the
pandemic progress into the
winter months drive way
advocated for a wellness hotel
in Gallup for the many
unsheltered individuals at
higher risk for illness and
whereas the wellness hotel
became a valuable resource to
the community and when the
funding for the hotel ended in
January twenty twenty one drive
way advocated for a long term
housing option for gaps on
sheltered popular population
and.
Whereas drive ways advocacy led
to the city of Gallup purchasing
the Lexington hotel which now
provides those experiencing
homeless this with emergency
transitional and permanent
support supportive housing and
provides housing for homeless
families in McKinley county area
and were as Dr way arrange for
medical services to clients to
help.
With help from the New Mexico
medical reserve corps and
whereas drive way advocated for
a medical detoxification service
which culminated in the Santa Fe
recovery center opening the four
corners detox recovery center in
Gallup.
And whereas drive way was at the
forefront of coordinating
outreach when Corona virus
twenty nineteen vaccines became
available with McKinley County
at one time leading the state in
vaccines administered.
And we're allies after attending
Harvard Medical School Dr way
spent a summer in kente
Arizona's Wally resident of the
university of California San
Francisco Medical Center and
whereas Dr ways experience on
the Navajo Nation is
demonstrated how she could help
rural.
And under under served
communities such as Gallup and
whereas drive way is respected
and honored by those who she
search for saving lives and
providing a voice to a
population in Gallup that often
lacks one now therefore be it
resolved by the house of
representatives of the state of
New Mexico that recognition be
expanded to to anyway and do for
her deep and abiding commitment
to the health and well being of
McKinley County residents signed
and sealed at the capitol in the
City of Santa Fe.
Thank you
The general shape is the result
with a comment on the
certificate.
Yes Mr speaker of the if I could
I would ask the Representative
issue would yield from McKinley
San Juan.
Mr speaker I yield.
The speaker I.
Wholeheartedly embraces
Memorial.
Drive way and the work.
she's done I think that in many
ways we stand today to recognize
all of New Mexico's health care
providers physicians nurses.
Who are on the frontlines of
dealing with this pandemic under
the most difficult
circumstances.
Of.
The ones we're all painfully
aware of and hopefully there's
light at the end of the tunnel
so yes I stand to support your
memorial and the good work this
doctors doing thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker and
representative thank you
gentlemen.
the other other comments about
Dr way.
Thank you generally.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Are there other announcements.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business introduction of
legislation.
No objections so ordered Cllr to
read.
House bill one fifty seven
introduced by representatives
Castellano Strickler I hearted
Trujillo and guide us an act
relating to children allowing
persons to leave infants and
safety devices for the surrender
of infants under certain
conditions without critical
criminal prosecution for
abandonment or abuse of a child
allowing the installation and
operation of safety devices for
the surrender of infants
providing limited immunities for
operators of those devices
requiring the public education
department to promulgate rules
making appropriate making
appropriations acquiring an
emergency house bill one fifty
seven introduce representatives
Castellano Strickler I heart of
Trujillo and guide us one fifty
seven having been read twice by
title I determined to be germane
pursuant to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the health and Human Services
Committee thence appropriations
and finance.
House bill one fifty eight
introduced by Representative
Serrato an act relating to
taxation and acting the real
estate transfer tax act
exempting social security income
from income tax for certain
individuals house bill one fifty
eight introduced by
Representative Serrato.
One fifty eight having been read
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuant to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order it printed
and referred to the consumer and
public affairs committee then to
taxation and revenue.
House bill one fifty nine
introduced by Representative
Serrato and Lujan and act making
appropriation for college and
career readiness programs around
the state house bill one fifty
nine introduced by
Representative Serrato and move
on.
House bill one fifty nine having
been read twice by title I
determined to be germane pursuit
to article four section five B.
one of the constitution order it
printed and referred to the
Education Committee then to
appropriations and finance.
Also one sixty introduced by
Representative Serrato and act
relating to public purchasing
and acting the historically
underutilized business
opportunity after providing
additional duties for state
agencies encouraging state
agencies to use historically
underutilized businesses making
appropriation house bill one
sixty introduced Representative
Serrato for one sixty having
been read twice by title is
germane pursuant to article four
section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the conversation
Namik Development Committee then
to appropriations and finance.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
committee reports hearing
objections so ordered.
Clear to read.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too is been referred
house memorial eleven has had it
under consideration report same
as recommendation that do pass
as amended respectfully
submitted Georgene Louis chair.
Move adoption there are option
of a favorable committee for
House memorial eleven all those
in favor please signify by
saying hi.
All this was may.
Could point out to.
Mr speaker you health and Human
Services Committee too is been
referred house bill forty seven
has had it under consideration
for some of the recommendation
that I do pass as amended in
answer for to the taxation and
revenue committee respectfully
submitted Elizabeth Liz Thomson
chair Senators consent of the
committee point Regina they're
acted upon a single vote
reflection of the journals of
erected upon individually no
objections were clear to me.
House bill fifty two.
Do pass and thence to the
Judiciary Committee.
House bill eighty two.
Do pass and then so the tax and
Rev revenue committee.
House bill ninety seven to pass
and then it's to the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
Elizabeth Thompson chair.
Move adoption we are adoption a
favorable committee reports on
house bill's forty seven fifty
to eighty two and ninety seven
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
All this was may committee
reports are adopted.
Mr speaker your commerce and
economic development committee
to is the referred house bill
sixty seven has had it under
consideration reports say with
recommendation that do pass
sentence referred to the
taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted a Tania
Maestas chair.
Move adoption there are option a
favorable committee report on
house bill sixty seven all those
in favor please signify by
saying aye.
All this was named Canadian
point up to.
Mr speaker your rural
development land grants and
cultural affairs committee to is
been referred house bill one
seventeen has had it under
consideration reports it was
recommendation that it to pass
and that's referred to the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted Susan K.
and a chair.
Move adoption we are hundred
option of a favorable committee
report on house bill one
seventeen all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
This was nay reports that.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Remove that we go to the next
order of business announcements
and miscellaneous business.
Hearing no objections so
ordered.
That is it for the day so we can
get the gentle lady from Los
Alamos thank you Mr speaker
house taxation and revenue will
be meeting tomorrow at nine AM
if we do have a few bills on our
agenda and I request that you
take a look at the share file
there are some amendments
included in there we will
taxation revenue will also be
meeting on Saturday at two PM
when we have a few bills
schedule for that thank you very
much those members say no the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Romero thank you
Mr speaker house Education
Committee will meet tomorrow at
eight thirty so no for to
members and you time eight
thirty in the house chambers
we're gonna have a joint session
with Senate education to go over
the various budget proposals
from the legislative education
study committee the public
education department will have
DFA as well as legislative
finance council then will return
to the zoom room about nine
thirty ten o'clock depending on
questions and we'll hear the
three bills listed on the golden
rod thank you Mr speaker.
Members say no the in the
chambers tomorrow not on zoom
for the beginning
the gentle lady for you
Representative thought IT thank
you Mr chair Mr speaker we are
going to be meeting the Consumer
Pueblo of.
Shares Committee at one thirty
today and then we also are going
to be meeting Saturday at ten AM
the rooms might be shuffled but
we think it might be three
seventeen that we're going to
check thank you every state Jen
Leasure said Fe Representative
Romero thank you Mr speaker
there is an a correction for the
house rules committee will be
meeting next Tuesday at eleven
AM to be able to make
accommodation for the some of
the other committees there is a
court request so it's adds
Tuesday at eleven on zoom we'll
have three bills so far and will
be sending those out to folks if
you still have a bill that you
would like to be germane please
senator committee thank you more
say no the general from Cibola
and McKinley.
Thank you Mr speaker your house
veterans and military affairs
committee will meet at one
thirty one thirty two here two
bills that we have heard at
least ten times reply career the
legislature thank you Mr
speaker.
Are you gonna have a new meeting
just gonna replay webcast from
the prior session.
I think we can do at least two
or three of.
Did the the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative Chasey
thank you Mr speaker I wanted to
let everyone know that although
my name was on today's lunch the
only claim to this lunch I have
is that it is in it is from a
place in my district this
learning center of New Mexico so
I hope you enjoy your lunch and
remember the folks from the
Islamic center of New Mexico as
you do so thank you.
For utility did other gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Lewis thank you
Mr speaker the house government
elections an Indian Affairs
Committee will meet tomorrow at
eight thirty AM and our agenda
is posted online they were
single the other other gentle
lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thompson thank
you Mr speaker of the house
health and Human Services
Committee will meet the assumed
at eight thirty tomorrow please
be on time thank you never say
no the gentle lady from Rio
Arriba Santa Fe inTaos no.
And the other announcements
Representative Zamora instant.
Going once.
Going twice the gentle lady from
Valencia folks are generally
from.
Chavis Representative Ezzell.
Mr speaker I don't know
Representative Sweetser is going
to announce that we will be
having appropriations today.
Gentlelady would get right with
the generally from Chavis please
like to make an announcement
about.
The proposed the Mr speaker on
behalf of representative of
chairman Lundstrom it looks like
the House Appropriations
Committee will be meeting today
starting at one of the one third
members say no.
It is important to us and I will
repeat this several times.
Financial disclosure forms.
Financial disclosure forms are
due to the secretary of state's
office I Monday January thirty
first every member must file one
even if you filed one with your
decoration candidacy or if those
if the future for those you may
turn those in already this must
be done directly to the
secretary of state's office and
it must be done electronically.
So this the old paper forms and
don't work any longer so if you
don't already have so
Representative Baca you probably
don't have a login and username
so
if you need assistance you could
talk to the clerk's office or my
office and we can work you to
help you work through the system
to get a log in if you need help
I don't Representative Buka also
if you do if you're a new member
since last session so if you
need help please let us know
these are required by law they
must be filed another thing of
the issue for those of us from
Santa Fe sis's Representative
Serrato Romero Lujan those of us
who live within fifty miles of
the capital must now report our
legislative per diem as income
if you receive more than five
thousand dollars of per diem
last year that is in the
regulations the secretary of
state's office so please
remember to list per diem as
income on the secretary of
state's financial disclosure
form if you have the pleasure of
living in Santa Fe.
Any other announcements.
The gentle lady from Valencia.
Mr speaker do you know why I
carry I pinions in one pocket
and three pinions and the other
pocket.
I might have an opinion about it
so we can have a difference of
opinion.
I was so close so close.
The Mr speaker that was from our
one of our senator of arms very
good.
The the gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that the house
stand in recess until eleven
thirty tomorrow morning.
Thank you thank you members for
a good in brief session.
Please make sure of all the work
for committee this afternoon Joe
your afternoon and evening we'll
see you back here tomorrow the
house is in recess until eleven
thirty AM tomorrow.
