To article four section five B.
to the New Mexico constitution
arm authorizing for your
consideration during the fifty
fifth legislature second session
submission of house bill one
thirty two a bill changing the
permitted percentages percentage
rates for loans pursuant to the
New Mexico bank installment loan
act of nineteen fifty nine and
the New Mexico small loan act of
nineteen fifty five requiring a
license for certain lenders
changing certain reporting
requirements requiring the
director of the financial
institutions division of the
regulation licensing licensing
department to post related
notices respectfully yours
Michelle Lujan Grisham governor
Mr chair gentleman from
Bernalillo.
Things were going to the next
order of business committee
point judges ordered surgery.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is referred house bill forty
three has had it under
consideration report same with
recommendation that a do pass as
amended.
And the answer for the
appropriations and finance
committee respectfully submitted
G. Andrés Romero chair.
The speaker move adoption of the
printer we're adoption a
favorable could you for house
bill forty three all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye this was in a three point
that.
Mr speaker your taxation and
revenue committee team has been
referred house bill ninety five
as amended has had it under
consideration for the same as
recommendation to do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair.
Move adoption we're adoption a
favorable committee report on
house bill ninety five as
amended all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
This was nay reports about that
misters Mr speaker taxation
revenue committee to is been
referred house bill one oh two
has had it under consideration
point I was recommendation that
a do pass as amended
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair move adoption
we're adoption of the federal
communication house bill one oh
to all those in favor please
signify by saying hi.
Well this was a.
Three percent.
Mr speaker your Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee to is the
referred house bill one twenty
five has had it under
consideration forcing with
recommendation to do pass
finance referred to the taxation
revenue committee respectfully
submitted Matthew McQueen chair
unanimous consent of the reports
are together after the financing
of of reflection the journals of
the wrecked upon individually
here in objections were quick to
read house bill one sixty four
do not pass the House Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill one sixty four to
pass and then to the provisions
of finance committee.
How strong resolution to do not
pass.
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for House track
resolution to do pass and then
to the to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Matthew McQueen chair that's a
we are adoption of a favorable
committee report on house bill
one twenty five an unfavorable
committee report on house bill
one sixty four but a favorable
committee report.
On energy environment natural
resources committee substitute
for house bill one sixty four
and favorable committee report
house joint resolution to the
favorable committee report on
Energy Environment and natural
resources committee substitute
for House joint resolution to
all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
This was a committee point
reductive Mr speaker your
Judiciary Committee was been
referred house bill nine has had
it under consideration point in
with recommendation that it do
not pass but the house Judiciary
Committee substitute for House
Bill line to pass and it's for
to the appropriations and
finance committee respectfully
submitted Gail Chasey chair
unanimous consent of the
committee for together acted
upon a single vote reflecting
the journal so they rectified
individually hearing objections
were quick to read.
Also consists of health consumer
Public Affairs Committee
substitute for house bill forty
six do pass.
House bill eighty four.
Do you have.
House bill ninety nine as
amended to pass.
House joint resolution one as
amended to pass respectfully
submitted Gail Chasey chair Mr
speaker move adoption we are
adoption of an unfavorable clear
for house bill nine but a
favorable committee report on
Judiciary Committee since across
the line.
And favorable committee reports
on consumer Public Affairs
Committee substitute for House
Bill forty six and House Bills
eighty four and ninety nine as
amended and house joint
resolution one as amended all
those in favor please signify by
saying hi.
All this was need reports or
drive.
Mr speaker commerce and economic
development committee was been
referred house bill one forty
three has had it under
consideration for some of the
recommendation that I do pass an
answer for the provisions of
finance committee respectfully
submitted until you master it in
was consent of the reports for
the other act upon receipt of
over function the journal so
they're acted upon individually
hearing objections ordered for
to read house bill one seventy
six to pass and then to
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one ninety one do not
pass the house commerce and
economic development committee
substitute for house bill one
ninety one to pass and then set
to government elections and
Indian Affairs Committee of
respectfully submitted on twenty
Mr.
Rogers rigor we're on a really
move on has over three.
favorable committee for house
bill one seventy six favorable
committee report has one anyone
but a favorable committee for
commerce and economic
development the substitute for
House Bill one ninety one all
those in favor please signify by
saying hi.
This was a reporter drive.
Mr speaker your preparations
finance committee to has been
referred house bill thirteen as
amended has had it under
consideration for them with
recommendation that it to pass
as amended respectfully
submitted Patricia A. Lundstrom
chair unanimous consent of the
reports for the other act on a
single voter fudging the
journals of their act on
individually hearing objections
were required to read.
House bill twenty two two passed
as amended.
House bill forty two to pass as
amended.
House bill sixty two to pass as
amended.
House bill eighty six to pass as
amended respectfully submitted
Patricia A. Lundstrom chair.
Move adoption Mr speaker we're
on an option a favorable
committee reports house bill
thirteen is amended twenty to
forty to sixty two and eighty
six of us a favor please signify
by saying aye.
Was was named to reports about
the.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee was been
referred house bill one seventy
five has had it under
consideration point in his
recommendation that it do not
pass for the health healthiness
Services Committee substitute
for House the one seventy five
to pass an answer for the
provisions of finance committee
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair.
Mr speaker move adoption where
induction of an unfavorable
committee report on house bill
one seventy five but a favorable
committee reported Health Human
Services the sub to frost one
seventy five of us a favor
please signify by saying hi.
Also today.
The point adopted.
Mr speaker Education Committee
too is been referred house bill
one twenty two has had it under
consideration point seven
recommendation that it do not
pass the house Education
Committee substitute for house
bill one twenty two do Path and
answer for to the provisions of
finance committee respectfully
submitted G. Andrés Melcher
unanimous consent of the
committee for sure to get their
act on a single voter function
the journal so directive on
individually during the
projections order click to read
house bill one sixty five do
pass as amended thanks to the
appropriations and finance
committee.
House bill one sixty six do pass
and then see provisions of
finance committee respectfully
submitted gender similar chart
reduction of the committee
reports there are option of an
unfavorable committee report on
house bill one twenty two but a
favorable committee report on
education a substitute for house
bill one twenty two and
favorable committee reports on
house was one sixty five one
sixty six all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
This was may twenty point
reductive.
Mr speaker taxation revenue
committee to Mr referred house
bill one sixty seven has had it
under consideration point it was
recommendation that a do pass
respectfully submitted Christine
Chandler chair.
Move adoption there are option
of a favorable committee for
house bill one sixty seven all
those in favor please signify by
saying aye.
All this was a three point up
to.
Gentleman from Bernalillo thank
you Mr though to the next order
of business announcements and
miscellaneous business
objections order members house
bill two two seven is in the
Appropriations Committee
hi.
Wanted to remove that from
committee in place you know the
speakers table this rejection no
that is ordered.
Jennifer Aniston speaker this is
bigger really is Allison reasons
until it caught this evening.
Mr speaker is not available do
not recognize the house in
recess until eight PM.
Mr speaker did not have my
microphone in my hand we will be
protesting this.
