Allison I am here.
Representative Matthews.
Mr Chairman.
I'm here well for the sake of of
a attendance purposes of
Representative Matthews was just
here and I don't know if we just
have a tough connection with her
but and I would like to
recognize it as being part of
the of the of the weapon are in
a cedar again on the panel and
attendees list so we'll just
continue to try to work with her
to be heard over but let's let's
make sure that his account is
present.
Thank you very and with that it
looks like we have a whole warm
this morning good morning
members thank you all for
joining us this morning for the
public for joining us as well we
have a your bill's this morning
and we have a few more on
Thursday that we will take up an
overview that list before we
conclude today's meeting
let's see so without further so
without further ado.
I'm sorry yes so without further
ado we will go to the house bill
eighty three qualifications for
the head of the office of the
state engineer and that will be
presented by Representative
Romero Representative Romero
good morning.
Thank you for joining us the
floor is yours then.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
committee this is house bill
eighty three it's a very chill
bill I know there was an idea
that would be.
Name on the floor early at
eleven thirty this bill is
essentially looking it's two
pages it's looking at updating
our credentials for our state
water resources department which
is our water engineer currently
we have the title as water
engineer but as many of us know
that the the skills and and
requirements for position and
managing water today this is are
very different that it was in
nineteen oh five in this
position was created so what
we're doing here is updating
these credentials to broaden the
possible pool of candidates to
fill this position and so will
here from some of the audience
about what this means and brings
to and we can talk about some of
the diversity of interests that
we've seen in western states
around the country or western
states modernizing this type of
skill set to to help manage
water it in the drop that we
have but sectors so with that Mr
chair will stand for questions
thank you Representative Romero
and remind me you do have a
committee substitute for this
bill correct.
It's not a committee substitute
there is a there's a an
amendment that clarifies the
qualifications and experience
required for this position just
I believe that we see if I have
the.
Two oh two I don't know if you
needed to to number or if you
have been available if you could
please me dust off the two of
number four the committee's
referenced.
Okay.
Second open my files.
I have a and I read it off to
you.
It is very thank you to to to to
thirty eight point two.
Two two two two three eight
point two.
Thank you very and and
appreciate that so
Representative Romero I will
move the amendment for for a
discussion and if you can go
through with the amendment
that's the bill that will they
will start with the with the
audience as well.
Thank you Mr chair so the
amendment as I was saying
merrily clarifies the type of
qualifications that we like to
have but our first iteration of
this we didn't clarify that we
wanted someone that had a
master's degree or higher in
geology hydrology our water
resources management and at
least five years of experience
in that field so we just wanted
to clarify that the head of this
office should have had that
experience are qualified and
qualification Mr chair.
Thank you very much in requests
on the amendment before move for
we we can come back in and do
questions on the bill as far as
the amendment itself is just
very very briefly but we will
come back with with the with
questions on the entire bill.
Hello I see a state
representative this element of
the Representative Matthews
after that okay thank you.
Representative Ezzell.
Mr chairman thank you very much
good morning members of the
committee I do have a question
for the sponsor of this bill
why did she meant attorneys in
your.
Amendment budget you may the
earnings to the first.
And then you change that you
added our managers can you tell
me one.
Thank you Mr chair
Representative Ezzell there
basically this was the choice of
the at the drafters to clarify
what we were doing it was just
further clarifying in the title
what we were seeking to do when
we decided to change the
qualification that was one of
the decisions Affairs to added
to the title it was already in
the bill is Mr chair
representative.
Mr Chairman representative.
The.
Work at the on your number three
amendment to this particular
bill on page one line twenty two
after qualified you're striking
the remainder of the line and
then you striking look at our.
All of twenty three.
And so now you are stating that
they just need to have.
State master's degree or higher.
Five years work experience in
their areas of hydrology water
resource managers Water Rights
litigation.
Is that what I'm right right
here Mister chairman.
Representative.
madam chair Mr chair
Representative Ezzell that's I
believe correct.
Okay.
Any further questions before we
get into the substance that we
go to the audience that's all I
have thank you Representative
Ezzell Representative Matthews.
All right thank you for moving
me over.
So I'm.
Well I'm I was reading these
that those doing today.
Yesterday and I didn't.
I don't believe I the amendment
was.
Available at that time I don't
seem to have it and I'm
wondering.
Thank John a little lost in
states actually what we're
talking about we're.
Isshin I'm sorry C. addition of
the master's degree requirement
for the people who are who have
careers in the water.
A hydrologist and so forth is
that.
That is that with the amendment.
Is doing.
Mr chair representative Matthews
we just basically clarify the
word qualified by adding in
language that helps described
the credentials and an
experience that we were looking
for for this position which
indeed discusses the master's
level in in that a at degree
category and then also adds five
years of work experience in at
minimum in that in those fields
that we about it Mr chair
representative okay okay I I had
missed to hearing the five years
thank you.
Thank you representative
Representative and then be able.
Much Mr chair thank you
Representative Romero for being
this bill I just I have several
questions because I'm trying to
understand that the universe
that kind of precipitated this
problem in the first place and
why we need to have these
changes so Mr chair
representative are we making
these changes because we're
having trouble finding a
qualified engineer to fill the
spot.
In in before you answer that
Representative Romero I I would
hate to do for us to begin the
the the deliberations on the
entire bill and and the reasons
for all at this point I just
wanted to do is and I'm sorry if
I missed that that the committee
but I want to just move the
amendment and top have you
talked about the amendment
itself might sell and what it
does to the bill and then we can
come back after we go to the
audience and do our our normal
deliberations and debate on the
bill itself and the entire
substance thank you Mr chair I
don't know how I Mr do sorry
about that all my questions
until and appreciate you thank
you record Representative a
Representative more for the same
reasons if you have a question
regarding the amendment itself
if not we can come back to you
when we discuss and debate the
entire bill the floors.
Mr chair I do believe mines on
the amendment and the you can
you can correct me if I'm wrong
and the.
So so on I'm on the.
The amendment where you moved it
turns to the front.
Of the list almost I guess I
would say does that mean.
That you'd rather have an
attorney then an engineer.
Mr chair representative Zamora
what I know what we're doing is
just making it available to
attorneys to apply for the job
and that they would be
potentially qualified should
they meet all of the criteria
that we have in the list and of
course the experience necessary
to to fill that position of
water resources manager
you would have to have all the
credentials they're just merely
on the potential list of
candidates that could be vetted
for that position.
And and thank you for that
answer and then Mr chairman and
representative so why is
engineer not in the list of
people to qualify.
Mr chair representative
can you help me with where
you're looking so I can follow
up.
Online's eleven through thirteen
we did not see it says relating
to water amending the
eligibility requirements for the
position of state engineer that
includes.
So but then you don't have
engineering.
As of right Mr chair
representative state engineers
the only qualification right now
that's required of that position
so you have to be an engineer in
order to be the state engineer
today and so this recently just
helps understand that we want to
include other credentials in
that category of potential
candidates.
Okay and I'll.
I'll wait and see how it goes in
in debating the bill but seems
to me like this engineer would
be on this list.
Your
the.
I'm sorry but there's a more
please universal yourself so so
be that the engineer is
qualified now why why would the
engineer not be on the amendment
just to include engineers.
Mr chair representative because
that current law so current law
and just already clarifies that
you a state engineer is an
engineer so we didn't feel like
we had to clean any of that
language that we agree that they
would be qualified already so
we're just adding to the list.
Okay that that just.
Doesn't seem right to me it
seems like engineer ought to be
on the list if if the engineers
also qualified and engineer
would be qualified to.
And and seems to me like we
might have made a mistake on the
amendment now.
Mr chair representative tomorrow
so if you look at the the bill
rather than the amendment the
bill itself does discuss about a
technically qualified been
registered professional engineer
in in current law that's that is
credentialed and and already
attention a qualified for this
position so we felt like we
don't have to change current law
the way that it stated and and
therefore would be added to the
list for this act specifically
we just we're we're adding to
that in in what we're presenting
today Mr chair Representative
Zamora.
Representative Zamora the floor
so your search okay thank you
and thank you for the answers
and thank you Mr thank you
Representative Brown on the
amendment that.
Yes Mr chair thank you and
Representative Romero so I'm
going to agree with my
colleagues about I think the
appropriateness of mentioning
the word engineer a professional
engineer and I'm I'm I'm very
madam chair so I know a little
bit about it but a professional
engineer Mr chairman has to go
through additional schooling and
testing and it's it's a really
high bar to get to become a
professional engineer and be
registered that way but there
could be someone who's not a PED
who is an engineer who has the
kinds of qualifications you list
in the amendment someone who's
got at least five years of work
experience in in some area of
engineering having to do with
you know water resources that so
I think it really should be in
there just stating an engineer
and again it could piggy back on
to that language you're
proposing in the amendment so
there is a distinction and
I just think it would be a and
and improvement to your
amendment is that were included.
Thank you Mr chair.
Representative Brown
Representative Ezzell for a
second time on the amendment.
Mr chairman thank you very much
my thoughts for a long exactly
the same lines as captain brown
for as need to be specific in
the title and I'm really
disappointed to sponsor the bill
didn't think enough that
position included thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
Mr chair Representative Romero
On the amendment Mr chair
Representative Romero.
Are you changing are you
removing the possibility for
engineers to serve in this
position.
Mr chair representative now.
Okay thank you Mr chair thank
you Representative Romero and
are you
A kind of.
Subordinating engineers to other
qualifications in this
ammendment absolutely not Mr
chair representative.
Okay thank you Mr chair thank
you Representative so are you
just.
During in addition all
adding an additional
qualifications that would
essentially meet the standard is
there I guess to the quest to
again that's and I you just
answered and I apologize but.
Mr chair representative Romero
is there any privileging one
pathway over another in your
amendment.
Mr chair representative that is
absolutely not the intent nor
does do I believe that this
would credential anyone above
anyone else other than clarify
the credentials if you're not an
engineer what the requirements
would be okay thank you very
much Mr chairman I appreciate
going through that I appreciate
very much the questions
Mr chair I'm I'm happy to
support the amendment and and
then go to discussion on the
bill because
there's a lot of important
things that I'm excited to to
discuss in this legislation
thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative small at this
point I would take that the
motion to table this amendment
that we we can move on to the
the attendees and then come back
to the committee for debate
thank you Mr chairman I would
move adoption of the amendment
thank you their second.
The second half of the committee
and is there anyone in
opposition to to the amendment.
With no do we have one to.
In three four in opposition to
the amendment.
And okay let's let's take a
local American can Reese
committed to local all those.
In in favor of the amendment.
Representative Brown.
No.
Representative Ezzell.
Representative Hochman being
yes.
Representative Matthews.
It no.
Representative small.
Yes.
Representative the motor.
So.
Representative Allison yes.
Mr Chairman.
Yes.
So madam.
Sure Representative Romero it
looks like we have a hi.
A vote from my account for for
on an amended bill so at this
point if if we don't want an
amended bill then we would go
back to the original bill as was
originally presented.
Since the committee does not
want to accept your equipment.
Representative Romero.
Mr chair representative it
committee I think you know that
what we're trying to do with
this amendment is just clarify
what qualified means it just
expands the interest of us to be
able to discuss what we think
new our potential qualifications
for someone who could apply for
this job would be it leaving it
vaguely what qualified is in the
bill currently would just mean
that
It's a subject to anyone's
interpretation rather than
clearly state and the type of
experience the type of education
that we would be asking for for
this position to fill it so if
if we don't clarify what
qualified is it's it's left to
anyone this idea of what that
means.
Thank you representative
Representative Papen Vigil.
Thanks Mr chair I'm wondering if
the issue with the amendment
maybe we can pull the other
members of the committee but
perhaps the issue with the
amendment is the the express
inclusion of the word engineer
is that the problem that
everybody's having I I know that
Representative Romero has
explained Mr chair that
engineers are codified in
statute but that does not
prevent the committee from
perhaps inserting the word
engineer and to the amendment if
that's what would make everybody
feel a little bit better about
doing this just just a question
Mr chair.
Great question great suggestion
Representative Hochman Vigil and
I'm looking at the committee
members and I will go to all of
you that have your hand up but
it seems like if we can just
explicitly include.
Professional engineering to your
amendment with that satisfied
the sponsor and with that
satisfied the members of the
committee so at least we have
that amended bill so that we can
go into the process of being
able to hear this bill of fully
as I think of the sponsor would
like it to be and I think as in
terms of our committee we have
always made sure that we want to
provide a fair hearing to anyone
that brings a bill to this
committee so that being said we
will will will put a pin in that
one represent Hochman Vigil
Before I go to Representative
Romero on whether or not that
inclusion would be satisfactory
to you are not but I want to
hear the sentiments
Representative Zamora is L.
brown Matthew so Representative
Zamora.
Thank you Mr chair and that that
would help me.
That would help me feel better
about the amendment is if we
have state water engineer not
like to see the state water
engineer at the front of the
list on that amendment because
this this that's existing law
and that's really.
What we're used to and has been
the history of the state is to
have the state a what an
engineer just.
In the in the lead of that and
in the print in that position
and I would like to see engineer
at the front of the list instead
of a the others that are that
are mentioned there with with
all due respect everybody else
but I would like to see this
engineer at the top of the list
thank you.
Thank you Representative Zamora
there is L..
Mr chairman thank you very much
kind of ended we're we're
looking at a bill that is going
to change the requirements for
the position of state engineer
and
include everybody else which I
mean I.
I don't understand why we're
changing event.
We have a non management
management I need to because of
the time that.
So I'm not really sure why we're
trying to convince everybody to
go back in and change their
budget so we can have it on this
bill.
To change what is state engineer
is.
So that's just my Mr Chairman.
Thank you Representative Ezzell
representative Representative.
Yes thank you Mr chairman so I
want to reiterate Mr chair that
a professional engineer who's
registered it is a totally
different category of right but
just a you know an engineer and
whether that person has a lot of
experience or not
a professional engineer has a
stamp and
really has his or her license on
the line if that person stamps
something and it's it's it's not
appropriate or call for it's a
very very high level position
and so I'm not prepared to just
tossing the word engineer
although I think that needs to
be that we are talking is
Representative Ezzell said about
the state engineer and that's
the term we give it in statute
as far as I know this bill does
not modify that so to say some
of the state engineer.
Is not really an engine maybe as
a hydrologist I think we have a
problem there but I really would
like to see us if we're going
to.
Deal with this ammendment and
get it right I think we need to
go back to council service and
get it drafted so that it's it's
very accurate because this
language right now I believe is
subject to differing
interpretations and I I just I'm
not comfortable this is very key
language and I think we need to
have Council Service work with
the Sanchez perhaps anybody else
who wants to weigh in to make
sure we get this just right so
that would be my preference Mr
chair thank you thank you
Representative Brown
Representative Matthews.
Thank you Mr thank you Mr chair
I'm concerned because there
there's also a lot of confusion
about of what this ammendment is
saying and whether engineer got
left out or whether it's in the
original statute and I just
think that that that this is an
important decision we're going
to be making today this
committee and this this bill as
is this position in the state
engineers this is a really
important one in the state and
I'm concerned that there's so
much.
Uncertainty about what this
amendment is doing that it seems
to me that it's inappropriate to
approve it at this point in time
that that's my concern.
Thank you Representative Matthew
Representative vice chairman
Allison.
Thank you Mr chair.
I agree with the statement
that's made by Representative
Brown you know in the
introduction into the field.
It mentions the attorney's
geologists hydrologists and
water managers but yet it says
nothing about engineers and the
official title.
Is still office of the state
engineer and yet it doesn't
mention any amendment to change
that title.
Thank you Mr chair thank you Mr
chairman Allison so at this
point in time Representative
Romero it does seem like like
there is is not be appetite even
if it went to the bill we can
take a vote again but we already
table at this point of time hold
your amendment but it seems that
even they would be inclusion of
a professional engineer enough
title there seems to be some
speculation on whether or not it
would be clear enough for that
everyone would still go
comfortable moving for with on
the fly amendments in the
committee verses you going back
to Council services working with
them to try to figure out what's
the best and most effective way
that takes place it in your
amendment then and therefore in
the bill on how this may or may
not for.
So at this point in time
Representative Romero I am in in
in all due fairness with
everyone here I want to make
sure that we we find that that
that clarity that transparency
and and the and the protocol to
make sure that we can bet these
as effective as possible about
the same time the the the
committee has spoke in regards
to your amendment I I will allow
you some comments
Representative.
Thank you Mr chair thank you for
the comments so I I would so I'm
just for the pleasure of the
committee if I added the word
engineered to the credentials
that's insufficient for of this
group despite some of the
committee saying that that would
clarify that if you were an
engineer which is current law
adding that to this list of
qualifications again to be able
to clarify that if you are an
engineer need to have that
experience in this list it's
it's the same thing is current
law happy to do that here I hear
that also you'd like Legislative
Council is here that I wonder if
the committee substitute would
be more clear for this committee
to be able to add the language
and so it reads consistently so
you don't have to worry about
where the where we go
Mr chair representative
our representatives I would just
be you know curious as to what
we could do today because I
would still like to talk about
the bill.
Representative Romero I
appreciate you you bring up the
notion of wanting to find a
committee substitute because I
think at this point in time with
all of the uncertainties that
the the the committee has
brought out in just trying to
get this right to a point where
the committee that is
responsible for for agriculture
and water resources in this case
to be fine with the state
engineer what what that office
director will be from now into
the future we wanna make sure
that this is crystal clear so
that there's no interpretation
for a Mr interpretation on what
these but this person's
qualifications should be so I
think and and it it's going to
be my my my my ultimate role at
the in this committee is that I
would rather see a committee
substitute to ensure that.
It's in the title it's it's in
the language so that there is no
uncertainty you in regards to
how folks I think in this
committee field regards to their
sentiments that were shared with
you just minutes ago so I I just
you know I I just want to be
fair with with everyone on the
committee I want to respect
everyone's opinions and
questions on this committee
you know I I would welcome you
to come back to this committee
with with with the clean up.
The substitute because I think
if we move for now we're still
gonna have that that uncertainty
about what exactly are we
talking about without really
seeing the language whether in
hand or online in regards to how
you want to move forward with
that with with your with your
suggestions of of changing the
qualifications so with that
being said committee members I
hope I'm not agency representing
anyone of you I hope that I'm
trying to be fair as possible
with every single one of you and
and and I will open it up if you
guys need to talk more but at
this point time but I would
suggest is that Representative
Romero we're Council Service
create a committee substitute
and then we can bring this back
for for hearing on the committee
says do as has been reflected of
with the sentiments of the
entire group.
Mr chair whatever the will in
the committee is this is will
will will be fine if I can have
this drafted by today it would
be possible to be able to hear
this again on Thursday.
Let's see it's it's nine o'clock
now
that that that's going to be a a
tight squeeze
Just just looking at our our
thing and I'm just a committee I
mean I I've I've been I've
abided by that the twenty four
hour rule.
I know that by the time the
Service draft this and is ready
for for after proving it comes
to us it'll likely be afternoon
which gives our analysts not as
much time to review the bill and
then it gives committee members
not as much time to review the
bill as well I think we still
meet that that twenty for our
rural but just FY I to our
committee members this is the
approach that I would like to
take to try to help all our
members regardless of of the
affiliation on party just to
have their bill her and so if we
have this hearing today on a
Tuesday and it's pretty it's
provided to us by Tuesday
afternoon we still have
Wednesday and then Thursday
morning we can hear this and and
I do have another one of your
bills first on the agenda and
and that's house bill twenty
four I do believe that is first
on our agenda for for for
Thursday so again that's a bill
that we've already vetted out we
already had a hearing on that
one but we bring it out just to
up has it I think everyone
supports that for the most part
it's important for my
recollection then we would have
the hearing on this on Thursday
morning if that sounds
appropriate to to committee
members I I know people are
different no I'm trying to to
make up your mind to put
something down and will anyone
so I'm just saying I want to be
able to have a fair hearing for
everyone that's involved within
the house of representatives
that brings a bill to this
committee so Mister
Representative vice chairman
Allison your hand of Sir.
Thank you Mr chair I move that
we wait for a committee
substitute.
Okay okay I I I appreciate the
motion I don't think we we miss
a need a motion other than what
we would just we would just by
by virtue of this of this
committee's tabling of the
amendment we will ask you to to
work in that a committee
substitute.
As soon as possible get that too
merry as soon as possible so
that she can provided to our and
our analyst and to the committee
members for further review.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Committee you'll see you on
Thursday I hope and and my
apologies to members of the
public who didn't get to comment
today I hope you'll stick with
us on Thursday thank you.
Thank you zero and and exactly
correct us members of the public
that joined us this morning in
hopes to speak on this bill that
doesn't mean that this is an end
all be all for today we respect
and we we here at cherished your
comments either for or against
so this is not not not the and
please do join us again on
Thursday morning when we do have
a committee substitute on the
substance of house bill eighty
three thank you so much so let's
move on that too house bill one
sixty nine which is dairy
facility funding that is being
presented by Representative
Zamora and Representative
Townsend Representative Zamora.
The floor is yours Sir.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee
house bill one sixty nine makes
an appropriation to the New
Mexico department of agriculture
to assist very process in
manufacturing facilities comply
with executive orders.
The lesson their carbon imprint.
Address water savings and
rescue.
Reduce energy use.
So these are executive orders a
brought down by the governor in
the state of New Mexico and what
our intentions are is to.
Bring this fourth to the public
and let them understand help
them understand.
As to what it cost to make these
changes.
And.
And how it affects the dairy
industry and.
The the manufacturing of the
processing of milk in the state
and the with that Mr chair I
would I would like to bring on
my expert witness who is a
Walter Bradley.
And and see if he has some.
The words to say on this on this
bill.
Now are we there Mr chairman.
Okay.
Mr chairman members of the
committee once again before this
Committee I was here last year
and we had a nice successful
meeting of.
As a follow up to to explain
what this bill is all about the
governor issued an executive
order of number twenty twenty
one dash zero five two signed on
August twenty fifth twenty
twenty one that the instructed
actually instructed the several
agencies Blevins six agencies
including the the state engineer
Environment Department
of
energy and minerals all of these
a.
Agencies to work together to
attain the goals of thirty
thirty and that zero and the
it's quite extensive the
executive order it directs all
state agencies to use existing
programs across all the land
types leverage state and federal
funding to the fullest extent
engage with federal land
management agencies in planning
and coordinating with
stakeholders so the executive
order is the.
As a
document that is asking
businesses in the US are
agencies in the state of New
Mexico to implement to the best
of their ability and to a former
Canadian and me that quarterly
on progress.
As you know this issue is one
that was initiated by the
federal government and is still
being conducted by the federal
government.
Where she engaged in a lot of
they go she Asians right now
okay and by the way I'm sorry Mr
chairman I forgot to identify
much so Water Bradley and I
represent very farmers of
America.
The farmers of America is a
partner with the southwest
cheese here in a Clovis which is
by the way the world still the
world's largest cheese
manufacturer.
And not Glanbia Corporation is
the fifty percent partner they
are an international company
from Ireland and the.
Thank you I have taken upon
themselves to find out okay what
can we do to meet these goals.
And they heard their engineers
broader ma'am.
The plant was built a little
over twenty years ago with the
highest technology that was
available there is now some new
technology that has been put
together and and the.
There is for.
Projects did did think can do
and I just want them to you
right quick Mr chairman of.
The first one is a water of
recovery project and the cost is
two point zero eight eight
million dollars that particular
project for the what recovering
re use a total of a hundred and
fifteen thousand gallons of
water a day.
And that would be in direct
production to the usage of
process water from October first
in this gonna that is currently
averaging about six hundred to a
thousand gallons of water a day
so this particular two million
dollar project would reduce the.
By nineteen percent of the
influent water that they're
having to use process the cheese
and bear in mind I'm only
talking about this one plant
southwest cheese at this time.
The next project is a C. O.
water recovery project and it
would recover and reuse a total
of thirty thousand gallons of
water against the the six
hundred and that's another five
percent reduction of of that the
inflow water that we need.
The project will result in a
reduction also of four hundred
ninety point nine kilowatts a
day of energy to process to
roll.
So we're going to.
Re use water and reduce the use
of water but we're also reducing
the the cost of the Energy.
That would be required.
The third project is a border
and indigent Energy project it's
up four hundred seventy seven
thousand dollars and eighty
percent of all of our natural
gas itself was cheese is burned
in those borders us so this
particular project would be to
improve some water efficiency
and then utilize those borders
best suited to handle listing
demand.
In other words would put us at a
whole new monitoring system.
Two two and reduce the the uses
of those of course and that one
would that reduce our carbon the
reduction of the thirteen
thousand two hundred sixty of
the two you are another one
point five percent reduction in
total gas use.
Our projects.
Water recovery project image
projected to recover and re use
a total of eighty five thousand
gallons of water a day it'll be
a direct production to the usage
of the process for and it would
be another fourteen percent
reduction in cost of that
particular project is one point
four seven two thousand R. one
point four seven million.
The total estimated cost for
these four projects is four
point seven nine two million
dollars.
The discussions have been made
the throughout the of the
federal government and also
obviously by.
The state of New Mexico is we
want to read make things
reduction for move our reduce
our carbon footprint of the
executive order also wants to
reduce energy usage and also the
the water.
The with this new of things new
projects there would be
approximately
eighty thousand gallons a day
that could be sent to and we
already have a pipeline of bills
that could be sent to the city
for re use in the and they're
program which I haven't quite
finished of the muezzin ruf
returnable Water.
The funding that will be looking
for you know we we hope that you
will agree with us and passed
through so bill on to the
Appropriations Committee
in appropriations we we know
there's talks with secretary
Winnie and.
He has identified some federal
funds to that could
infrastructure funds that could
be used and we hope to what's
the we're your help and
Representative Zamora sale would
like to move this over to them.
And see where we can go.
This is the four point seven or
courses for one facility in the
state of New Mexico you can go
up from Clovis sentenced and
this project yourself what's
changed to Russell or look for
you know for a factory is it's a
little bit older facility may
cost a little bit more to
upgrade director fit and then
you go in the Los crucis and
you've got some so.
Cheese factory down there and
then Albuquerque has the of
fluid milk plant and then we
have a.
Kerry cheese plant a small plant
over into comparing and then
there's various other smaller
facilities so that's the reason
with the with those projects are
those of facilities in the state
of New Mexico.
We're trying to get enough money
to to meet these these projects
and secretary Winnie would be in
charge of making sure that the
projects would be funded would
come from a.
There are with the target to
thirty thirty process is that
we're in so with the.
This project right now
it it it it's a very expensive
project.
And we don't know exactly you
know our world is going with
inflation and everything but the
the dairy industry in your state
is two point six billion dollar
industry it's the second
largest producer of income for
our state.
So we hope that you'll support
this project and and we can move
forward and with that Mr
chairman members the committee
all stand for questions.
Thank you Mr Bradley for your
report on house bill one sixty
nine anything else
representative mark before you
go to the audience yes Sir Mr
chair I'll follow through with
the short statement on that
We is just laters I believe on a
pay attention to the costs and.
How it affects the.
These different businesses
throughout the state.
Whether it's an executive order
or whether it's laws that we
pass is legislators there's
there's a cost handed down.
The.
Businesses so many times and
then we don't help.
In the in the funding of of
these costs and I believe as a
as legislators we ought to be
looking at that all the time I
see it so much and in my
district and and some process
state we're we instead of
working.
with these businesses we we do
the mandates and then we wonder
about the funding later
we know there's some federal
funding the that we could profit
that could probably help us on
these issues.
and I believe the state on a.
I always look forward to helping
these business and promote
business in the state of New
Mexico we we we're already in a
tough position when you look
across the you and and and you
look at New Mexico and I think
we could do a better job and in
this this bill leans that way or
there or we can these businesses
make these changes and and we
all want to a smaller footprint
left the carbon footprint and I
think this is a some for us to
look at and and I hope the
committee supports the bill
thank you Mr thank you
Representative Zamora so with
that being said all those in the
attendees list those from the
public which new joiner meeting
all those in favor of house bill
one sixty nine please raise your
hand we'll go any one by one.
Begin with Jennifer Trujillo
Jennifer good morning.
Good morning chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Jennifer Trujillo registered
lobbyists for strategies three
sixty I'd like to express
support for this bill on behalf
of our client Jerry producers of
New Mexico the dairy industry is
cognizant of their cop carbon
footprint and support any effort
at new technology to reduce
water usage and carbon
emissions.
Funding the university is
greatly appreciated in the dairy
industry support ways to upgrade
and improve.
Thank you Mr chair and members
of the committee thank you Mr
here let's go to Caitlin's
Bradley Caitlyn good morning you
with us.
Morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee my name is Kate
once probably a register of this
lobbyist with New Mexico farm
and livestock bureau we support
house bill one sixty nine to
provide funding to dairy
processing facilities across New
Mexico as they adapt their
plants to comply with state
governments environmental goals
we have numerous dairy
processing facilities across the
state the contribute to two
point six billion dollar
industry and provide hundreds of
jobs is businesses will incur
millions of dollars of expense
to retrofit their facilities to
comply with goals for lessening
the state's collective carbon
imprint address water savings
and reduce energy use we support
providing financial assistance
to these businesses to comply
while ensuring these businesses
that contribute to our economy
and provide jobs to rural
communities can continue we ask
that you vote to pass on house
bill one sixty nine thank you
for your time thank you again
that's correct and McCartney and
good morning.
When you're on mute.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and committee members I am
speaking on behalf of three
fifty New Mexico real advocacy
committee and we support this
bill because it will make a
difference in terms of water use
and carbon footprint for dairies
you think that's an important
step for New Mexico so we
strongly support this bill.
Thank you thank you and it's
going to need to this but most
Jason good morning.
Good morning chairman members of
the committee Jason Espinoza
state director with the national
federation of independent
business and we stand in support
of the legislation and thank let
Sanchez for bring it forward
really just want to underscore
and I think this bill does you
know regulations and compliance
come with a cost to businesses
across New Mexico and across the
country I really appreciate that
this bill recognizes that it
comes with a cost and really
seeks to create sort of a
partnership public private
partnership between the state
and those companies to shoulder
the burden of of that cost
really help with the state point
we stand and support thank you
thank you Jason anyone in the
audience in opposition house
bill one sixty nine please raise
your hand.
You see new weeds Carrero weeks.
We see with this yes hi good
morning Mister chair members of
the committee my name is please
get on with the Sierra Club Rio
Grande chapter and we are in
opposition of this bill this
bill asked legislators to
appropriate twenty six million
to give you very processing
companies to comply with basic
air and water protections for
communities this is more than
the entire general appropriation
of H. B. two for the state
environment department which is
eighteen point six million and
just one many of less than the
general fund appropriation for
the entire energy and mineral
Department please opposes
appropriation these funds are
probably better directed to
fully funding our resides Energy
who are steeply under funded so
forth laws and provide basic
care and drinking water
protections New Mexico thank you
very much for your time thank
you Reese Stapleton opposition
for house bill one sixty nine.
Seeing none let's come back to
the panelists for some analysts
I have Representative small
Representative small for your
Sir.
I thank you so much Mr chairman
and Representative Lara first Mr
chair representative I'm not a
Do you are your expert can you
speak to whether or not Derry's
either in our in state or other
places around the US are they
working on some of these carbon
management issues already or is
it only because of of the
dictates from the state.
Mr Mr chairman and
Representative small at the
Walter Bradley answer that
question.
Read.
Mr Mr Chairman representative
baby Representative small yes as
a matter of fact we're we bring
the we just broke ground on that
two dairies over on the C. side
of the state or a Dodd yester
Programs and we we've partnered
with the group out of the
northeast out of a I believe
it's the New Jersey area who has
successfully built by gestures
for dairies and those digest
trees are now was there there.
They take them and of which we
will be a huge.
Plus for us and I digested make
it into gas and that gas is
already so two other states so
what we've been working on this
for several years to provide the
adjusters that operate that
actually will will make it
happen now we found it so we
broke ground on the to the areas
and we're looking at probably a
right now we have a I believe
the number is up well in in the
New Mexico Texas panhandlers
thirty one there you said
correct and star Commission
contracts with the company so
yes Representative small we're
we're moving full that that's
awesome thank you so much Mr
chair thank you Mr Bradley and
you said that that you all of
sounds like this is been going
on for at least you know three
four five years especially with
some of the work to the east of
us is that fair to say yes Sir.
We've we've been moving forward
trying to find ways to make all
this work and and the technology
is is the hold back if you if
you will let that we found some
so there we go there you go yeah
no said super well Mr chairman
Mr Bradley thank you for that
and I you know I I just look and
briefly Mr chairman I saw that
there is a U. S. dairy net zero
initiative and that was this is
from last year the deal that I'm
looking at do you know Mr chair
Representative Zamora Mr Bradley
our our are there any
participants in that initiative
in New Mexico or do we now.
Well.
Mr Chairman representative small
are are.
Thirty farmers of America is the
largest very cooperative in the
nation probably in the world now
that they report being funded.
And yes we're we're we're part
of that the negotiation that and
that talks are going on right
now as well as a IDFA there's
several of us that we're all
interconnected and those are
ongoing talks and and funding is
one of the issues that and and
that's what this bill is all
about is to bring.
Welcome okay here's here's our
cost list start talking about
how to fund.
Okay thank thank you so much Mr
chairman thank you.
Mr Radley and
as I have when I wrap up of the
quick I promise I do want to
just take a.
The a couple of minutes because
we really have a remarkable
dairy industry both in New
Mexico and in the country and I
want to speak to that so
Representative Mr chair of
Sierra Madre it's seem like your
bill
You know it the language of your
bill sets out that this is all
in response to executive orders
issued.
You know I say over the last
three four years but Mr chair
Representative Zamora it seems
to me that the the court work
has been going on before the
executive orders were issued as
would you say that's fair.
Mr chair and representative
small I I'd say that's fair I
think dairy mentor or good
storage of the left hand and the
they also have a lot of rules.
Not only are they good stewards
of the land and they always try
to improve and and stay ahead of
the game but they also have a
rules applied by NMED and and
and stuff that they're always
complying with which would make
some.
I want to improve and work with
with all the regulations that
they have.
In the.
That's why why you always see
Derry man.
Improving
Everything is on on their water
works and and effluent water on
their men here Campos there then
here in trying to do a good job
with that.
Keeping drainage on the Aries
In good shape it all it helps.
With with pollution and and take
good care that water we had we
have water testing going on all
the time on these dairies so
we're always on the up and up in
trying to keep up with.
The demand and the instead of
instead of falling behind you I
worked I don't know if if all of
you know but most of you
probably know that I worked on a
dairy for twenty two and a half
years and I helped to a lot of
the environmental work on the
dairy and you talk about us
working on environmental stuff
we always kept that thing clean
it up to date and the.
Court for the inspections and
see where we can improve and all
that Walter Bradley make make
some statements to be wishes on
that.
Just simply follow up the Mr
Chairman representative small.
The dairy industry is the most
regulated industry agriculture
industry in the in the nation
and we we don't object to that
because for drinking that milk
to and the and and we wanted to
be state the fact is that to
your directly to your question
it where it appears we're
getting closer and closer to up
having legislation and and the.
The executive order was a prompt
to bring attention to this to to
our legislature and and let you
know what important this is and
and what it's going to cost us
to get there.
Okay I thank you very thank you
Representative I want to thank
you Mr Bradley.
so so looking through this
you.
At the I I really appreciate the
the us a few of the questions
thank I'm more clear now that
some of the key participants in
New Mexico which is ab Mr chair
representative on what are we
are we the fifth largest dairy
producer Mr Bradley where where
where do we follow again.
Seven in the nation okay thank
you I know it I know it was
there in the top ten Mister
chair Mister Bradley
Representative Zamora
So there's been a voluntary
there's there's been work on
carbon on water on efficiency
all the things that we're seeing
here.
Going back previous to the
executive orders Mr chair
representative in fact there is
a participation in the an
industry wide net zero
initiative which is super
exciting
at I don't necessarily
Representative Mr chair
representatives Lara.
Your adding.
We we didn't see that in the
legislation but I'm glad that we
got to kind of talk about it in
you all were able to answer a
few of the the brief questions
it might be nice nice to really
see that in the legislation
frankly Mr chair representative
armada to give credit where
credit is due and the work
that's already taking place in
the industry responding to
decarbonisation but you know
it's you all US bill not mine
but I really do appreciate the
chance to understand a little
bit more that through through
questions thanks so much.
Thank you Representative small
Representative Matthews.
The floor is yours then.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee and to
the presenters at.
It's just a few questions I'm
how many the dairy processing
manufacturing facilities do we
have in the state.
Mr chairman madam.
Madam.
Mr Chairman representative
Matthews.
Right now we have a.
The ones that I just can't offer
the Clovis Patel us Rahul.
Los crucis Albuquerque and to
carry so we have seven.
Certainly.
The smallest bang to compare it
but these others are fairly
large facilities and and I been
here for some time.
Mr Chairman at.
Mr Bradley.
I guess I should call you the
former lieutenant governor
Bradley.
In the is this twenty six
million in the budget currently.
That is there twenty six million
in the budget currently is that
the question for it for this
purpose as your it is that in
the budget we're looking at
right now Miss Mister chairman
and when Walter I'll take that
question if if and and
Representative Matthews Mr
Chairman representative Matthews
if you're asking if it's an H.
B. two it's not.
And and have it Mr chair and.
It is it is your goal to did
you.
I guess to the Senate at this.
And Mr Mr Chairman
Representative Matthews froze up
I don't know if you hear me
Representative Matthews.
It does look like like she froze
up mmhm.
And and I'd be glad to answer
the question
good
Mr chairman and Representative
Matthews if you can hear me
It is interesting to see if if
it can be put in on the Senate
side.
I I doubt that it can we up we
all know is legislators that
we're so our into the budget
already and and pretty much
finished most of it that the.
We we are hopeful that this
money could be funded but we we
know where we said as far as
timing and and in the budget so.
We just we just wait and see how
it plays out.
Okay it does look like it was
Representative Matthews on our
call we we will come back to her
will will kind of give a recap
of your of your answer
Representative Zamora but in the
meantime this is moved to
Representative brown
Representative brown.
Yes thank you Mr chairman so Mr
Chairman representative I'm
really in strong support of us
passing house bill one sixty
nine even though we know the
next step will be appropriations
and we just heard that there is
not money program yet into that
budget bill for FY twenty three
however I think that if
secretary witty has identified
some federal funds that could be
brought to bear that it makes
sense for us to please pass this
along to send the message that
we want to see some action on
that front and make sure we take
advantage of any federal funding
there is and Mr chair I you know
this dairy industry in New
Mexico is is huge and it's food
for New Mexicans and for export
as well
I'm always amazed when I go into
a grocery store here in Santa Fe
at the The New Mexico she's
products that are are really
showcased and so we can be very
very proud of this industry and
we know that they have you know
they've in some cases built
state of the art facilities are
some of those are aging
facilities at this point and so
the governor's mandate that you
know we not just look at the
general running of a business to
make it a safe and profitable so
that people can have jobs to
keep keep working providing food
this mandate involves carbon
implants were water savings and
and reduce energy use of these
are things that are in addition
to what the juries are already
doing and so I think assistance
to the industry is is very
important Mr chair it says here
in the bill that the
appropriation would go to the
board of regents of New Mexico
State University and that that
it would be expended by the
department of agriculture here
in the state so
I trusted Mexico State
University Mr chair to.
steward whatever money will come
in for this this purpose and to
make sure that it's spent wisely
and well and and fairly
Mr chair I I've had the
privilege of touring some
Kerry's here in New Mexico I
remember visiting the Plano in
Roswell I think it's the largest
mozzarella cheese factory in the
world is what I remember hearing
and I've toward southwest cheese
as well in Clovis and I was just
so impressed with the the way
this facilities are run and and
you know again we need to food
for for our P. and people in New
Mexico and elsewhere.
And I remember.
Being in the the room where they
store way W. H. E. Y. way that
you're for protein drinks and
things like that
southwest she's probably
provides as much or more way
than anywhere any other plant
for you know for these at what
energy drinks or whatever they
call them the Tristian drinks
and stuff so there's a lot going
on in New Mexico in the dairy
industry and I just think it
makes sense that with the that
more stringent
mandates that are coming that
that they do deserve some
support at least at
technological front so I I do
hope the committee will
unanimously passed this bill
although we do recognize Mr
chair that appropriations I will
say the money's not the budget
but it's possible that the
Senate will decide to
to put some money into this
maybe not the full twenty six
million but again again we need
to look for that federal money
to to match so Mister chair
thank you very much and thank
you for bringing the bill
forward Representative Zamora.
Thank you Representative Brown
Representative Ezzell.
Mr chairman thank you very much
Representative Zamora and in it
governor Bradley thank you for
your testimony today
The statements that were made by
Representative brown are spot on
we do need to support the Senate
in industry we are the during
capital of the southwest and
that does include all your all.
Jerry's throughout the state of
New Mexico it is amazing the
amount of jobs that they do
create and I also do have to
point out to the rest of the
members of the committee that
right now they are.
Using less counts to produce
more milk on a smaller area than
every book ever before in
history.
Mr Chairman whenever you're
talking about the plant that
there Clovis I do understand
that they are the largest
cheddar cheese the world the pre
no is the largest mozzarella
plant wells producing more
cheese.
The state facilities than any
others.
But I also have to brag on this
product right here.
It's their life.
I know about your life I will be
glad to discuss that with you
later it was a.
The dream of the very man that
was right next to my parents
farm.
And the he followed through with
that and Mr.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee.
I have a bonus granddaughter few
want to collar that she is.
Diabetic and whenever I pointed
out to her parents that they
might want to look into the.
The traditional facts on their
life.
This child can now drink milk
your life milk it is that good
Mr Chairman.
Right now our dairy industry
struggling Representative state
of New Mexico because of
mandates that have been set down
from Washington DC by.
Congressional people that really
don't know what the industry is
all about.
They're listening to.
How bad.
That mission from Jerry can be
in the past Mr chairman.
Many many years ago whenever I
was still on the Energy
committee is a.
My dairy producers in my part of
the world brought to me a bill
we got it passed and I don't
know whatever happened with that
it was.
Actually talking about the
digest here's the lieutenant
governor Bradley was talking
about earlier about where they
would be able to use the
barnyard as far as energy.
Mr Chairman.
They have raised the bar as far
as milk production goes hand in
our world.
Here in New Mexico they
understand the importance.
Being in compliance as far as
our clean air standards go the
whole nine yards.
Mr chairman members of the
committee.
They didn't want to listen their
carbon imprint they have been
addressing all the water issues
they're trying to figure out
ways to reduce their energy use.
Mr chairman.
Annually.
Having to.
The pip one of the.
I have.
Living out on a ranch living on
a farm I understand.
Some of the work that goes into
these facilities whenever we
went down to re for the ice
cream plant cell Ross will.
Anybody has ever seen stainless
steel welding Mr chairman and
members of the committee I have
never seen anything more precise
in my life it was amazing but
these people lie fortunately
there are agencies that are here
in New Mexico the disempowerment
Department.
I wanted to show that some of
these industries down.
New Mexico Environment
Department was instrumental in
closing down
every hot in our state.
You need to be a big
agricultural product because of
it.
Much water.
Right now Mr chairman members of
the committee thanks to the
environment department.
R. two cotton chance in our
entire state to.
I don't know about the rest bill
but I do like to we're
confident.
But right now these cotton
farmers are happened thank.
Their products across the state
lines to have it in.
And.
But the empowerment Department
doing is they're dragging eight.
imposing rules.
It is harmful to our business.
Mr chairman I agree like I said
earlier with everything that
Representative Brown had to say
I do feel that we need to get
set even though funding is not
available but if there is help
from the federal government.
On this I think we need to go
forward with that Mr chairman
thank you very much.
Thank you so much Representative
Ezzell for your comments let's
go then back to Representative
Matthews Representative Matthews
welcome back.
Thank you Mr chairman I'd frozen
somehow I maybe it is my sale
at.
So.
But to be serious
One of the
One of the in the analysis there
was some discussion that there
was a potential anti donation
the problem with this
issue with this request and.
Which made me think about the
fact that as we struggle with
the whole question of global
warming we're going to see a
continuation I think is a pretty
fair assumption of industry
after industry impacted by
requirements from Washington pop
possibly even from our own
environment department asking
for changes to be made in order
to reduce carbon and slow the
warming and
The it seems to me that we need
to be aware as consider this
request that is the way we may
be setting a precedent for other
industries that come to us at
some point and ask for and may
not be the act committee
committee but thanks come before
the legislature to ask for help
in meeting.
The the high cost of changing
how we do things in this country
in order to reduce carbon and
warming and I.
I have a little bit of a concern
that.
We're gonna get these one by one
we probably already have had
others and I would just.
I think that a better way than
doing this fight silos which
maybe isn't bad trace in the
nine nine approach it seems to
be an appropriate phrase
actually in the act committees
to talk about the Sacklers but
that we that we have the that we
develop a statewide policy
with some guidelines for how we
deal with these kinds of
requests going forward so that
we're not just looking at is it
said we have some consistency
this so that we treat different
parts of our industry in
different parts of our economic
base consistently and knowing
what the guidelines are going to
be so with that
I.
I I would think that perhaps
I would one at some point four
the department of agriculture
and if and when they get this
money to have some to address
the and I donation issue because
that is so on the state and be
sure that that's not going to be
violated in providing this help
but
I I will support to request but
I would like to see is start to
think more strategically and
broadly about how we deal with
these across our economy.
Instead of just one it's time so
with that I will.
You myself again.
Thank you Representative
Matthews it will.
We'll regret is were there any
other questions or comments from
committee members.
Representative Zamora to close.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee and and thank you
Representative Matthews for that
comment
and as legislators we are always
helping businesses and and and
across the state of New Mexico
and I believe this is a strong
issue that we ought to look at.
And
we're always allocated money to
businesses and and fiber optic
cable in transmission lines it
affects breaks a I mean we can
go on and on and on all day
long.
Up in the film industry and we
we do a lot of allocations of
monies and I believe that the
dairy industry is a good
industry to support in the state
of New Mexico when I left.
My department Rajan dairy.
I sat down and watched my
employer right out hundred
twenty seven checks directly to
employees that's not talking
about in direct business being
done with the dairy I know we
were milk and ten thousand cows
at the time millions and
millions of dollars worth of
equipment that support the
state.
A lot of taxes being paid by the
dairies.
this is a big money industry as
you heard in the testimonies
prior.
And.
It is a good business to keep in
the state of New Mexico the the
climate works for the dairies of
the dairies work for the state.
And in closing I hope that we
can find.
Strong support for this bill we
know and we think that it's a
little late in the session for
this bill to really.
Get some concrete support behind
it.
But we are looking for the
federal monies and what's due to
the dairies and and how the
money is being.
Handed down from Washington to
to the state of New Mexico and
hopefully it gets put in the
right places where the for the
initial intention was of these
monies that come down into the
state and with that Mr chair I
close.
Thank you Representative is a
more of a presentation what the
pledge of the committee for
house bill one sixty nine Mr
chairman I made the day pass
okay.
You press representatives L.
second by Representative brown
is there any opposition to house
bill one sixty nine.
I see no opposition you have to
pass on house bill one six and
my representatives thank you for
your presentation if I if I if
you with your indulgence I'd
like to make just one short
COVID.
Yes ma'am side yeah if if I were
to have if we had done a roll
call vote I would have asked to
explain my vote Mr chairman
members I really see this as a
technology transfer matter with
money going to New Mexico State
University and then use their
department back I I see this is
beneficial not just to the dairy
industry but other industries as
well that are having to meet at
the the mandates so technology
transfer is under utilized I
believe in New Mexico even with
our national labs and I think
this is a step in the right
direction of making new
technologies available for for
everyone thank you thank you
Representative Brown
representative of what I thank
you for your presentation the
kind of governor Bradley thank
you for being here with us this
morning appreciate you so at
this point time let's go to on
the continuation of the more up
the what a tour that's going to
house joint memorial number one
consideration of a drought
consideration in federal
agriculture policy
Representative Zamora thank you
thank you Mr chair and thank you
members of the committees.
House joint memorial one urges
New Mexico congressional
delegation to to to consider the
impact of drought when sending
agriculture policy in DC.
And what this is about Mr
chairman members of the
committee.
Is everybody here in the state
of New Mexico and our
congressional delegation in DC
also understand our water issues
it's a very important issue that
we face.
It's not gonna get any better in
the future.
As far as we can see hopefully
the good lord will we'll change
it and and we'll start receiving
a lot more rain and and address
a lot of our issues when it
comes to water.
What this this memorial does is
it's asking.
The congressional delegation.
When when farm policy comes up
in DC to look at us in a
different light.
Sometimes a lot of these a lot
of these federal policies.
Our our one policy across the
you it's it's a blanket policy
and it doesn't change.
From Florida or Georgia or
eastern Oklahoma it doesn't
change for the state of New
Mexico and we are different in
in the manner that we get a lot
less rain are aquifer's are
going dry and we're having a
hard time in agriculture so
therefore we look forward to may
be making changes for these
errant states like New Mexico or
the policy isn't a blanket
policy for us.
And we can use.
The.
Mechanics in the in the policy
made in DC to conserve water
here in the state and with that
we stand for questions.
Thank you Representative Zamora
at this point in time we will go
to the audience for any
those in support of house joint
memorial number what.
the support of hospital more
than one of these raise your
hand will go for expectations
branding especially good
morning.
Morning Mr chairman and members
of the committee my name again
us once probably and I'm a
registered lobbyist with New
Mexico from livestock bureau on
behalf of our twenty thousand
member families we support house
joint memorial one and thank the
sponsors for bringing this
legislation forward much in New
Mexico is in drought and has
been for many years this affects
not only our farmers and
ranchers all the citizens of our
state we feel they should be top
of mind for national delegation
when they make decisions that
affect all of us particularly
the farm bill is set to expire
in twenty twenty three and this
traditionally increase includes
provisions pertaining to
agricultural loans conservation
programs and risk mitigation
tools New Mexico has unique
needs particularly when it comes
to draw and we believe our
national decision makers should
take those unique needs into
account and advocate for them
when setting policy we ask that
you please support house Joint
Memorial Fund thank you for your
time thank you okay let's go to
Joe.
Joe good morning with this.
You know you.
Need to meet yourself Sir.
Right right now you hear me yes
okay my name is Joe Culbertson
and I'm vice president large for
the New Mexico cattle growers
association.
And we support this memorial
it's very simple and
straightforward we just hope
that are all our delegation pays
attention to Texas seriously
thank you thanks Joe let's go
into panel or.
And your with this.
Mr chairman and committee
members thank you so much and I
want to thank the sponsor rex's
wanted for bringing this bill
forward I'm here representing
both the rocky mountain farmers
union and farm to table we work
whole heartedly with our in New
Mexico delegation along with our
neighboring states delegations
and really believe that this is
an important
way of approaching uniqueness is
that we have in our very states
when it comes to water water
issues in drought
and so we really are whole
heartedly here we work with
other national organizations
like the national sustainable
agriculture coalition State Farm
pharmaceuticals and number we
work closely on these issues and
with our delegations thank you
very much for bringing this
memorial forward and we look for
your sport.
Thank you ma'am and Kearney and
good morning.
The morning.
Thank you Mr chair and committee
members again
I'm speaking on behalf of three
fifty New Mexico will advocacy
committee and we stand in
support of this bill for the
reasons stated thank you thank
you and anyone in opposition of
house memorial number one.
Any opposition.
So you know hands going up
committee members questions or
comments Representative Zamora.
No questions or comments from
anyone Committee.
If not what are the pleasure of
the committee I do I'm in the
past do passed by Representative
Ezzell I order them that by my
Sherman Allison is a second okay
got a second is there any
opposition the house general
number one.
Seeing none do have a due pass
on how strong the model number
one Representative Zamora thank
you for presenting this morning
and and thank you all for a very
good meeting this morning thank
you all those in the public that
joined us this morning reminders
that we do have a meeting
scheduled for this Thursday I am
thinking that because of the
workload on on this Thursday's
meeting that I would like to
start at eight o'clock as
opposed to eight thirty so we
can start again I make that
announcement tomorrow night at
the floor session but eight
o'clock start time for our next
meeting on Thursday we will then
bring up house bill twenty four
state engineer planning and
management and that's the bill
that we had already been through
the process and and it was going
to make a.
For the new our new state
engineer my cam and so I think
we we've already that that out
we will have of house bill
eighty three brought back to us
with the which will be second on
the on the agenda and that is
the one that we skipped over to
date so that they can find a
committee substitute then we
will have house bill one eighty
six
production of agricultural
products house bill one seventy
seven New Mexico wine production
in that house memorial forty
four federal and unbranded
cattle.
And so that being said we will
have all of those on the agenda
for Thursday I know it's getting
late in the session but I want
to make sure that we are able to
hear all these bills
Representative Ezzell.
I muted you I'm sorry.
Okay it's really hard to you Mr
chairman.
Mr Chairman.
Questions for you.
You said that we're gonna be
starting at eight o'clock most
everybody that's involved in
agriculture water issues and
this is and in water.
we're getting meetings at six AM
and everybody would be on board
but that's beside the point Mr
Chairman yesterday we did I do
want the committee to note thank
you for signing on to that
particular letter that we sent
to the United States for service
in regard to them doing an
aerial flyover to.
Shoot.
Cattle that are on the healer
right now I don't know what the
status of that is we send that
letter to everybody we could
think of in opposition to it
because Mr chairman whenever
that allotment was taken back by
the Forest Service there were
some cows missed.
This heard is ground the little
bit of.
In.
Problem evidently for the for
service and I think the only way
to leave this problem is by
shooting them.
Mr chairman members of the
committee I am appalled by that
you cannot read a brand from
helicopter.
We do have laws in place.
Regarding the thank livestock in
the procedures that take place
whenever it strays are found Mr
chairman I think whenever the
for service on its nose at the
state of New Mexico says is the
way we're gonna handle I have a
problem with that Mr Chairman
our congressional delegation has
been notified of this
particular.
Problem I don't know where we
stand today because they were
going to start this assault on
those the strays in the forest
today.
I don't know where we're
standing on that Mr Chairman if
you get any insight would you
please let the members of this
committee now.
Thank you Mr chairman absolutely
will thank you Representative
Ezzell for before that anyone
else questions comments.
If not we will see everyone on
the floor at eleven o'clock
thank you all for the great we
have a great day we'll see you
soon.
