Roll call is about to close.
The clerk to call the
representatives without a
recorded vote.
Representative Alcon
Representative Garcia
Representative Alcon is here
Representative Gail Armstrong.
Representative bash.
Here Representative bash is here
Representative Boca.
Yes Representative will guide
here Representative Cadena here
Representative Cadena is here.
Representative Castellano.
Representative Castellano is
here Representative Cook.
Representative dela Cruz.
Representative that this is here
Representative Eli.
Representative Harry Garcia
isn't there.
Representative Harry Garcia is
here Representative Harper.
Representative at a.
Representative added a is here
Representative Lord.
Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Roger Montoya.
This in the Representative Roger
Montoya is here Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Andrea Romero.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here Representative Rubio.
Here Representative Rubio is
here Representative Sweetser.
Representative Sweetser is here
Representative cut off us your
Representative Terrazas is here
Representative Townsend.
The role is now closed we have a
quorum.
Good morning everyone happy
Friday happy Indian day at the
state capitol we're gonna start
off with an invocation by
Representative Johnson.
Thank you madam speaker and
members of the house staff
guests in the gallery and
everyone watching online.
in honor of American Indian day
I'm going to honor our cultural
protocol and greet our
distinguished distinguished
tribal leaders who are on the
agenda today and I want to do
that by doing it in my Navajo
language.
And that greeting is always good
my leader yachts station on on
E. which is a one of the most
respectful ways one can address
a leader.
And it expresses high esteem and
gratitude so with that on this
very special occasion I want to
say good morning should not on
any president has.
And my sister First Lady and
then I want to say good morning
xin'an Spani governor Martinez.
And good morning Shintani.
President good day and good
morning Shinhan Spani speaker
Egolf and good morning all my
colleagues in the roundhouse.
And today I would like to do
something different I thought
about this when I was asked to
pray today because this is a
special day for me.
So I wanted to ask everyone to
join me in prayer in unison this
morning.
Back home this is how we pray in
our ceremonies from children to
elders everyone prays together
and I thought we could pray
however way you want to it might
be here thought it might just be
a word your own language.
however to your face is so with
that in honor of American day
please join me in prayer.
Creator on the state of American
Indian day.
We honor our parents or
grandparents we honor our
ancestors and on and all that is
reflected in our strong history
where we were top where we are
taught that every life is
precious.
All in life must be respected.
So on this day creator we give
thanks to this body for
acknowledging us in this
opportunity.
Creator we pray that the spirit
and beauty of our shared faith
is heard and felt as we remember
and honor those who invented the
values of life and us.
Our moment of prayer together
I'm thankful for the beauty of
the shared spirit of peace and
unity.
In beauty it is finished in
beauty it is finished in beauty
it is finished in beauty it is
finished a man.
And representative Lente the
leaders in the pledge of
allegiance.
I pledge allegiance.
And representative Allison will
you status with the salute to
the New Mexico flag.
Great thank you they'll add to
Representative Johnson for your
beautiful hair and for everyone
that joined us today we are
going to the gentleman from
Bernalillo thank you madam
speaker good morning and good
morning members and guests move
that we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business.
Seeing no objection it is so
much.
So thanks again everyone for
joining us today for our.
American Indian dance the
capital it's great that we can
have this and are statute and
honor the state every single
year and I thank my colleagues
for joining us today I know with
the protocols in place and with
the health concerns we had a lot
of tribal leaders that are able
to join us today but I want to
thank them for their continued
leadership throughout this
pandemic keeping our community
safe our family say.
And I want to continue partners
for their continued of wisdom
and strength throughout this
time so we look forward to being
able to join everyone in person
again and I hope that comes soon
because a I know it's something
that we all enjoy being together
and community building together
in prayer and I look forward to
when that's able to occur again.
So thank you everyone.
We have president Jonathan as
from the Navajo Nation.
President as if you would like
to make your way to the podium.
And we can start American Indian
day with your remarks.
Thank you good morning madam
speaker pro tem Georgene Louis.
honorable speaker egolf.
Leader Martinus leader Townson
and members of the house of
representatives Mr state.
I want to thank the tribal
caucus representatives Anthony
Allison.
Wonda Johnson there are plenty
and Georgene Louis for inviting
us to address this body today.
Also want to acknowledge members
of the twenty fourth Navajo
Nation council who are here with
us today.
Also want to thank all the
members that represent all areas
within the Navajo Nation.
To listen to the concerns of our
chapters and you fund our
projects that benefit our
communities.
She Oisin sleeve cut agency
unable she would be needed for
or touching and the center left.
I am Jonathan as the president
of the Navajo Nation.
Today I'm also joined by my wife
First Lady of the Navajo Nation.
In this.
A bundle of business in the US
seeing though not created native
but she died of the non.
Vice president Meyer Leyser is
unable to join us today.
but he and second lady Dottie
lasers send their greetings to
all of you.
It's wonderful to to be here
with you in person this pandemic
has created so many challenges
and restrictions that have
limited or face to face visits
with one another.
Two years ago this modern day
monster known as COVID nineteen
was beginning to enter our
communities in our homes and it
has led to many challenges
hardships and heartache for so
many people around the world
throughout this pandemic just as
our elders did long ago during
times of adversity our Navajo
people continue to step up and
demonstrate.
The strength.
And resilience of our ancestors.
We continue to use our way of
life teachings the teachings of
our elders to push back on COVID
nineteen.
Our frontline warriors continue
to protect and serve in the face
of this modern day monster.
I want to commend all the
trouble and state leaders here
with us today together we've
set.
A great example of how to push
back on COVID nineteen in our
communities the public health
orders and proactive measures
put in place have saved many
many lives and lessen the spread
of the virus in our communities
despite the heartache and losses
of loved ones are Navajo come
our Navajo people continued to
fight back.
Today.
We have nearly.
Seventy three percent of our
people twelve years and older
who are fully vaccinated of
COVID nineteen.
One of the highest.
One of the highest rates in the
entire world check this.
Of our elders who are sixty
five.
Years an older.
Eighty eight percent are fully
vaccinated eighty eight percent
this shows that our elders
continue to lead the way and so
a great example for people
throughout this pandemic we work
together with many of you.
On behalf of the Navajo Nation I
think you state leaders for
offering your support to the
Navajo people in our leaders as
we move forward with the
legislative session there are
several key items I want to
touch on.
And I'll try to keep it as.
Brief as possible on the when it
comes education we recognize
that removing the impact aid
credit in the state equalization
guarantee formula was a
monumental win for indigenous
students and the school
districts the intense I want to
thank representative body
Lundstrom chair of the house
appropriation of finance and the
co sponsor of last year's house
bill six for championing this
initiative.
But we can't stop there.
Since trying to be quick here's
the.
But thank you.
The the Yazzie Martinez lawsuit
is a landmark ruling for the
future of education in the state
of New Mexico we support the
efforts of this legislature and
working hard to ensure our
native American students receive
an adequate education that
prepares them to succeed in life
and we are here to support.
Those efforts we want to thank
Representative Derrick Lente.
Who continues to push the tribal
remedy framework.
Several bills he is sponsoring.
To adequately fund education
initiatives for native students
we appreciate your leadership
for all tribal nations
throughout the state.
The Yazzie Martinez lawsuit the
judge said the state failed our
students introduce sufficient
education is a right protected
by New Mexico by the New Mexico
constitution it also recognizes
the state is not provided in an
adequate sufficient education to
at risk students and
specifically native American
students this has to change.
Are you today are facing modern
the monsters that we never had
to deal with when we were young.
Depression suicide substance
abuse substance use and other
issues.
Now when it comes to the issue
of missing and murdered
indigenous persons we thank all
of our state leaders grassroots
organizations and many others
for raising awareness and making
it a priority in the state of
New Mexico thank you to Senator
Pinto or helping to lead the MMI
W. walk to the capitol this
morning as well.
A few years ago governor Lujan
Grisham appointed my lovely wife
evolution First Lady Filion as
to the missing and murdered
indigenous women's and relatives
task force created by this body
to work on this important issue.
We also have one of our
lawmakers amber can as but
Crotty who is a member of the
task force First Lady fifty
million is a second lady Dadi
Leiser has been active in the
Navajo nation's internal work
group known as to the next thank
case he lastly workgroup reunite
Arjuna relatives to address
issues and concerns impacting
Navajo families currently the
workgroup is strengthening the
Navajo Nation tribal community
response plan to improve
coordination and response to
terror violence against women
and children.
This led legislative session the
Navajo Nation is supporting
Senate bill twelve which creates
the position of indigenous
person specialist within the
office of the New Mexico
Attorney General the specialist
will be trained and cultural
competency.
Law enforcement reporting in
missing persons case work that
will ensure effective case
management.
The legislation also closes
jurisdictional loopholes between
federal tribal and state law
enforcement and prosecution of
M. M. I. W. R. K. is.
We also support house bill
eighty five and the companion.
Senate bill thirteen which
creates the missing in New
Mexico event that will providing
network for New Mexicans with
missing relatives to heal.
Access support services in axis
media outlets to distribute
information about missing
relatives to the general public
the event is designated to
provide an opportunity for
federal state local and tribal
governments to come together in
one location and assist families
to file a missing persons
reports update missing persons
reports submit DNA records for
me.
With an investigator these bills
are necessary because native
American women and men in New
Mexico have the highest rate of
homicide among all racial and
ethnic groups that are more than
twice as likely to be victim of
violent crime under the current
system.
I encourage you to support all
these bills as they navigate
their way through the process.
We have to do more to support
and protect our children since
two thousand and twenty the
Navajo Nation has been working
with Representative Georgene
Louis and our fellow tribes and
problems with the state of New
Mexico along with the children
youth and families department.
The Indian Affairs Department
and many others in the review
and drafting of house bill one
thirty five state of New Mexico
Indian family protection act
house bill one thirty five is
not only beneficial to the state
of New Mexico and Navajo Nation
but to New Mexico tribal
families and children I want to
thank Representative Lewis for
her great if.
Wells who.
Want to recognize and thank
state leaders for looking ahead
into the future when it comes to
energy development.
When our ministration took
office three years ago we signed
a proclamation call the higher
costs proclamation the sun rise
proclamation that prioritize
renewable energy development and
set us on the path of developing
more solar energy facilities two
weeks ago we signed a power
purchase agreement with us our
P. in the state of Arizona for a
two hundred megawatt solar
facility on the Navajo Nation.
We have other solar facilities
in development instead she read
Mason and other communities but
we need more support and
investments from the state of
New Mexico especially with the
uncertainty of several power
plants throughout the state we
want to partner with the state
and we want to engage in more
renewable energy projects.
Before I conclude.
I want to briefly speak about
the right to vote.
We know that voting rights is
also a major discussion of the
federal and state levels.
There's a lot of division.
And debate over the issue of
voting rights.
As our state legislators proceed
with the legislative session I
ask you to think of the elders
that live in rural areas of the
Navajo Nation who don't have
immediate access to a post
office for voting polls on
election day.
Many of our elders and those
living in remote communities
after Dr hundreds.
Of miles and several hours to
cast their ballots.
And when they get to the voting
polls they have to contend with
language barriers because many
are fluent in the Navajo
language.
They do but they do it because
the value of the value of their
right to vote.
And no one should stand in the
way.
We need voting laws that L.
hop pole and protect all
citizens right right to vote
including date of Americans.
In many states there are propose
laws that aim to disenfranchise
certain groups of voters
including Navajo voters.
We should be making laws that
expand access to voting for all
eligible voters no matter their
party affiliation and no matter
the color of their skin.
So please ask all state
legislators to carefully
consider.
The affects the proposed voting
laws and weigh them very
carefully and we look into your
hearts and do what is and do
what is right for all voters
including the first peoples of
this country.
Once again I want to thank all
of our brothers and sisters here
with us representing all tribal
nations in the state and all of
the state leaders together.
We can create positive change
the helper people for many
generations to come.
When tribal nations prosper.
The entire state of New Mexico
prospers.
Speaker egolf an honorable
members of the house of
representatives I thank you for
the time to dress you today and
I pray for continued good health
any successful and productive
legislative session for you.
Our leaders.
Yes.
Problems this is the less.
I would like to ask a speaker
Egolf to come out we would like
to present the speaker and the
legislature they give.
From.
The Navajo people for the hard
work that the speaker has done
on behalf of novel people tribal
nations and all peoples of the
state of New Mexico if I can
have Representative Wonda
Johnson come up and join me at
the Representative Anthony
Allison come and join me and
First Lady want to come and join
me as well.
Representative.
A.
Thank you.
To.
The speaker Brian Egolf for.
is hard work here as being the
speaker and it is engraved with
the Navajo Nation CEO.
And the Dennis says.
Representative Brian Egolf
speaker of the house in
appreciation for your service
the Navajo Nation.
We recommend.
We have all word of the day.
Thank you president as we
appreciate your presence here
today.
And next we have.
President Eddie Martinez with
the Mescalero Apache tribe and
he will be joining us virtually.
Right now.
Good morning.
On Christian and governor
moralis.
Griego.
Later.
You.
Other state representatives in
travel news of New Mexico.
My name is Danny Martinez I'm
president.
Learn about the drive.
To go this on January
fourteenth.
Three weeks ago.
My first term as president.
News my first speech to the New
Mexico legislature.
I want to thank speaker you of.
In those with the opportunity to
address you today.
It is an honor.
Also want to take a moment to
thank senator deferral.
Representative thank you.
There have.
Raleigh Fund in and their
support.
On many other issues.
Additions.
Wedded to the governor Lujan
Grisham secretary Trujillo.
And their staff for all of their
help during the pandemic.
Commitment to help us protect
are people is built and greatly
appreciated.
Forward to working with all of
you.
The remainder of my time before
you today.
Want to share a few things about
Mescalero for those of you who
might not be familiar with who
we are.
located.
In New Mexico.
The further south than any of
New Mexico and tried.
Thanks
three hours just to get a
percent pay.
They're not.
They will be present we would
like to be.
You may not be as familiar with
this.
If you are one of the tribes and
pueblos of New Mexico.
Clear about this comprise of
three bands of Apache.
Hello the fan Senator echo.
Our regional enrollment band
from Texas to Arizona and the
pin in New Mexico.
Late nineteenth and early
twentieth century the Mescalero
Apache people welcome the fan
and it's Jericho of.
Their reservation here in New
Mexico.
Your callers were prisoners of
war held in Oklahoma for twenty
three years.
The majority of the Jericho
decided to return to their
homelands and their descendants.
In two days.
There was well known provided
for tribal sovereignty.
Economic development.
No in our free then no the
reserves in.
One of the largest employer of
thousands of New Mexico.
The budget sheet which is best
with snow over the last couple
days.
We're proud of our history and
our accomplishments.
also proud to be New Mexicans.
People who live here hello
school here work here and
succeed here.
One anywhere we care about what
happens in our state.
Committed to happen state move
forward.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you president Martinez
next we will go to chairwoman
Laurie good day with the Fort
Sill Apache tribe.
So
Chairwoman good day is joining
us but she's not able to speak
so you want to just thank her
for joining us today.
We also asked to chair then mark
Mitchell from the all pueblo
council of governors
unfortunately he couldn't be
here today but he did send a
statement and representative
Lente do you have the statement
available if you could share
that with this place.
Yes madam chair woman.
Are you ready.
We are ready.
Thank you and it's quite the
honor to be able to present this
on behalf of chairman Mitchell
from the all public council of
governors as well as all of the
nineteen totals here in the
state of New Mexico and his
statement goes and it's titled
honoring and protecting
indigenous people through
policy.
Ownership with lawmakers.
As the New Mexico state
legislature convenes in the
second session of the fifty
fifty Legislature of two
thousand and twenty two the all
pueblo council of governors
shares its hope that the
critical matters of the state
and citizens are deliberated
upon and with the most open
hearts and sense of compassion
for all.
The all public on the governor's
honor to speak on the importance
of the Indian day at the state
legislature and recognizes the
years of dedication by the New
Mexico in affairs department to
ensure that this day celebrates
the numerous contributions of
the tribes nations and pueblos
to the state of New Mexico with
a special emphasis on the
political and cultural aspects
of our people in in the in at
the state of at the New Mexico
state legislature brings us
together connecting on the most
important issues of the day but
to always consider what will be
done to protect the unborn and
the next generations and our
responsibility to protect and
honor our sacred trust.
Through deliberations and debate
the sacred trust guides us and
presents us to an opportunity to
influence and Dick directs the
impact of decisions upon tribes
nations and pueblos our public
leaders have a solar position in
support of the Yazzie Martinez
bills known as a tribal remedy
framework additionally the
Indian family protection act has
been an issue the all public
council of governors has
contributed to and fully
supports.
The voters right act also known
as the voting rights act is of
paramount importance to our
people and follows the success
of our redistricting work in two
thousand and twenty one were in
self determination communities
of interest and the voting
rights act of nineteen sixty
five strengthen and guided our
rigorous strategy.
Well the stand out as priorities
we have other bills that align
with our desire and our actions
to protect our Mother Earth in
conclusion we honor and
celebrate Indian day at the New
Mexico state legislature for all
that it honors and we thank the
honorable mention he'll cabinet
secretary for the New Mexico
Indian Affairs Department and
the honorable Nadine Padilla W.
secretary of the New Mexico
Indian Affairs Department along
with the exemplary staff who
serve our native American
leaders think is disturbance
with compassion and dedication
congratulations on your success
is the trying times and many
blessings for all that you do in
service to our great state of
New Mexico sign mark Mitchell
chairman of the all public
counsel the governor's thank you
madam chairwoman.
Thank you everyone before we
conclude the program for the
Indian day today I just want to
thank everyone for your
attention to our tribal leaders
and for the support that you
providing and working hand in
hand with the native caucus and
ensuring that tribal issues are
heard and voted on in the New
Mexico house of representatives
I truly value your friendship
your partnerships and ensuring
that we pay respects to the
public tribes and nations and
again I I want to thank all the
tribal leaders out there who
weren't able to attend we know
you're trying to keep our people
safe and we wish you continued
strength and wisdom and we're
sending prayers to you so that
everyone is safe in our
communities we look forward to
gathering soon and I encourage
my colleagues once the tribes
are open again two please visit
especially during these days
you'll find a lot of great food
I think of we've had a lot of
representatives joined as an act
of a so I look forward to when I
can welcome you back to the
public of active again and with
that data and thank you to
everyone for joining us today
and we will conclude the Indian
day at the New Mexico house of
representatives for twenty
twenty two.
Great so Representative Dixon
has a gassed in the gallery UNM
student intern Jennifer
Patterson welcome to the house
of representatives.
Madam speaker wanted to point of
personal privilege please.
State your point.
I just want to today is also law
enforcement appreciation day I
wanted to say thank you to all
the law enforcement officers
every single one of them tribal
throughout the state our shares
are police and say thank you so
much for all that you do I also
want to honor fallen officer
danger was killed in the line of
duty one year ago today thank
you.
Thank you.
Are there any other
announcements the gentle lady
from Bernalillo thank you madam
speaker I just want to let you
know that the white bags with
the dental supplies are from the
New Mexico hygienists
Association thank you.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Hochman Vigil
thanks very much Mr speaker
speaker just want to take a
moment to recognize a fantastic
young lady who is one of my UNM
political science and turns
she's been helping us in my
office sitting as Mercedes at up
she's somewhere in the gallery
and I just wanted to take a
moment to thank her for all the
help she's given us this most
unusual snowy week and we hope
to see her again.
Jelly.
The gentleman Bernalillo
Representative Maestas thank you
Mr speaker honourable members to
some news to share the the house
Senate basketball game will not
take place this year
unfortunately kind of difficult
to organize a at the last minute
and cut a lot of bodies are
banged up so no official house
Senate basketball game this year
so the house would be street
will remain.
That any
News of a of a basketball game
an undisclosed location in which
the house winds up.
Is will be unsubstantiated thank
you Mr speaker and gentleman
it's my understanding that we
were ready to play but the
Senate cancels so technically
it's a default and we would
again is that correct.
I will defer to the the will of
this because I I was an
agreement with the Senate not to
trash talk about is the other
sixty nine of you can't.
Fairpointe so you are bound by
that commitment I am not so
let's all express our
condolences to the Senate for
losing for another year.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative ream thank you Mr
speaker and members of the
houses president now as
mentioned the missing and
murdered indigenous women.
Just two days ago there were the
thirteenth anniversary of the
thirteen women who were murdered
and buried on the west
maintenance of of Albuquerque.
Also you know for the other
missing and murdered
women I'd like for us to have a
moment of silence.
Thank you gentleman would
members please rise is it
entirely appropriate.
Thank you Mr speaker and members
the unfortunately the women on
the Wesley's or probably second
degree murders.
We are the only state in the
nation that has a statue
limitations on second degree
murder six years.
Which obviously is run.
And it would be difficult to
prosecute any person or
impossible to prosecute any
person for those murders.
Many of the other murders are in
that same boat.
And I hope that this session we
do pass a law I introduce Ms two
thousand and seven.
Making us in line with the
others the states where they
have no statute of limitation on
intentional killing of another
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you John.
I would like to ask the house to
join me in welcoming Nick mascot
and yes who is up in the gallery
of this she's interning with
chairman my Estes he is also
from the university of New
Mexico next please stand up and
let us walk me to the house.
Okay members we're gonna do
little housekeeping and then as
I said yesterday will go to
third reading for items one and
two on the calendar but before
that we need to do messages
committee reports etcetera.
Okay the gentleman from
Bernalillo thank you Mr speaker
I move that we go to the next
order of agency business
messages right of judges ordered
to read.
Message from the Senate Mr
speaker I'm directed to inform
the house of the Senate has
passed the Senate finance
committee substitute for Senate
bill six as amended with
emergency clause.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill fourteen as amended and
requests the concurrence of the
house respectfully submitted
Lenore and then off not host
Senate chief clerk miss entered.
Really thank you Mr chairman
that we go to the next order of
business committee reports your
interjections ordered surgery.
Mr speaker your consumer and
public affairs committee team
has been referred house bill
forty nine has had it under
consideration for the same with
recommendation that a do pass
and it's referred to the
taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrary chair and consent of the
committee portrait together
acted upon the single vote
reflection journals of erected
on individually hearing
objections were clear to read
house bill one forty do pass and
thence to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrary chair.
Moved to adopt the committee
report we are on adoption of
favorable committee reports
house bill's forty nine and one
forty all those in favor please
signify by saying hi.
Of those may prefer to drive.
Mr speaker health and Human
Services Committee too was the
referred house memorial thirty
six has had it under
consideration point of
recommendation that a do pass
respectfully submitted Elizabeth
Thompson chair.
We are adoption of a favorable
committee report on house
memorial thirty six all those in
favor please signify by saying
hi.
All this was me reports about
I'm sorry the economy
perspective.
Mr speaker your government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee too was the referred
house bill fifty six has had it
under consideration point in his
recommendation that a D. pass
respectfully submitted Georgene
Louis chair members consent of
the committee portrait together
act on the single vote.
And referred to the journals of
their act on individually no
objections order clerk to read.
House bill one ninety four do
pass and thence to the taxation
revenue committee.
Senate bill thirteen as amended
to pass respectfully submitted
Georgene Louis chair.
Move adoption.
We are on adoption fable
Committee force and house bill
fifty six and one ninety four
and Senate bill thirteen all
those in favor please signify by
saying hi.
Posters may reports are adopted.
Earlier.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business introduction of
legislation no objection it is
so ordered the clerk to read.
House joint resolution fourteen
introduced by Representative
Herndon a joint resolution
proposing amendments to article
I section two and article seven
section five of the constitution
of New Mexico to allow the
legislature to provide by law
for runoff elections for primary
and statewide elections house
joint resolution fourteen
introduce Representative current
and.
House joint resolution fourteen
having been read twice by title
is authorized by article
nineteen section one of the
constitution I order it printed
and referred to the government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee dense Judiciary.
House joint memorial three
introduced Representative
Townsend and Rod Montoya the
Joint Memorial requesting the
New Mexico Legislative Council
to implement a policy to adopt
and to require all interim
committees created or appointed
by the Legislative Council to
adopt the provisions of section
ten fifteen ten fifteen dash to
NMSA in nineteen seventy eight
of the open meetings act house
joint memorial three introduced
Representative Townsend and Rod
Montoya House memorial three
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the government elections and
the Indian Affairs Committee.
Forty to introduce more
presented Madrid a memorial
recognizing David Lee upping our
recipient of the twenty twenty
golden apple excellence in
teaching award House memorial
forty to introduce for
Representative Madrid.
House memorial forty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
House memorial forty three
introduced by Representative
Herndon Memorial requesting the
legislative education study
committee in collaboration with
the Public Education Department
to convene a task force
including committee members and
department personnel mental
health care providers public
secondary school teachers
counselors and administrators
school you representatives
community groups and other
interested persons to develop a
comprehensive plan for providing
mental wellness spaces and
public schools House memorial
forty three introduced by
Representative Herndon we're
forty three having been read
twice by title is ordered
printed and referred to the
Education Committee.
Forty four introduced
Representative todos a memorial
requesting the New Mexico
livestock board the New Mexico
department of agriculture and
the United States Forest Service
to study ways of resolving the
problem of feral and unbranded
cattle House memorial forty four
introduced Representative
Terrazas we're forty four having
been read twice by title is
ordered printed and referred to
the agriculture is a key is and
water resources committee.
One forty five introduced by
Representative Lewis memorial
supporting strengthening
relations between New Mexico the
United States and Taiwan in
trade the exchange of visits
fire officials and supporting
Taiwan's participation in
international organizations
House memorial forty five
introduced Representative Lewis
some room forty five we've been
read twice by title is or
printed and referred to the
commerce and economic
development committee.
House memorial forty six
introduced Representative
Ferrary Lara Fajardo Andrea
Romero and G. Andrés Romero a
memorial declaring February
eighth twenty twenty two New
Mexico Food and farm stay in the
house of representatives in
celebration of community food
and farm initiatives toward
ending hunger house where forty
six introduced by Representative
Ferrary Lara the heart of Andrea
Romero and G. Andrés Romero
house we're forty six having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
House memorial forty seven
introduce Representative Garrett
Morial urging the United States
Congress to pass H. R. three
three three nine the national
infrastructure bank act twenty
twenty one to create a national
infrastructure bank to finance
urgently needed infrastructure
projects house memorial forty
seven introduced by
Representative Garrett.
House memorial forty seven
having been read twice by title
is ordered printed and referred
to the transportation public
works and capital improvements
committee.
If they did.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate bill six
an act relating to elections
amending the election code
removing references to public
regulation commissioner as an
elected office throughout the
election code creating the vote
voter education and elections
Task Force specifying when
inspection of public records act
applies to disclosures pursuant
to the election code amending
and acting definitions creating
an election security programs
requiring the use of forms
approved by the secretary of
state for crying service of.
Process on the secretary of
state for election related
litigation addressing
qualifications of election board
members providing Alexion board
and messenger compensation for
crying training for challengers
watchers and election observers.
More info convenience centers
for providing for a program to
reconcile voter registration
lists allowing for an electronic
poll Bob book alternative
adjusting voter registration.
Processing procedures amending
requirements for registration
and voting locations prior to
voting legislative procedures
and requirements for mail
ballots absentee ballots and
military overseas ballots
amending the intimate partner
violence survivors suffragette
Act.
Adjusting time frames to fill
vacancies on the general
election ballot reinstating the
primary election law short title
act amending the primary
election laws revising
requirements for nominations in
candidates for eliminating pre
primary convention designations
amending voting system
requirements addressing ballot
preparation addressing
maintenance of ballot boxes and
monitored secured containers
correcting the print in
prescribing the order of offices
on balance.
For crying the sending of a
notice of election requiring
certification of voting machines
amending the election fund
directing the establishment of
county election funds addressing
provisional ballots addressing
the counting of the counting
indisposition of paper ballots
addressing post election duties
revising requirements for the
impoundment of dollars audits
and recounts amending the
presidential primary at revising
provisions related to filling a
vacancy in office of United
States representative revising.
Time frames for referendum
petitions amending the campaign
reporting act.
Recompiling section authorizing
legislative caucus committees
into the campaign reporting act
amending the legislative session
fundraising prohibition
conforming the meanings.
Of on lawful possession of keys
and unlawful possession of
absentee ballots amending the
crime of obstructing.
The polling place amending the
crime of unlawful possession of
alcoholic liquors amending the
local election apps amending the
lobbyist regulation Act.
Providing requirements for
people municipalities to hold
organizational meetings after
the new terms begin.
Directing deposits into it the
county election fund directing
the establishment of
requirements for Clark sort of
certificates and authorizing
additional compensation for
holding a certificate
authorizing taxpayer information
to be revealed to the secretary
of state for purposes of
maintaining voter registration
records amending the
confidential substitute address
Act conforming provisions
relating to certain special
districts to the local election
act providing for the election
of local public bodies at large
for from districts revising
Alexion procedures and board of
directors requirements for
artesian.
Conservancy districts
Conservancy districts and soil
water conservation districts
amending the current serving C.
activity Mexico amending the
Conservancy district reclamation
contract act amending the
watershed district act making
conforming and technical changes
amending repealing and acting.
And recompiling sections of the
NMSA nineteen seventy eight
repealing session laws declaring
an emergency.
The Senate finance committee
substitute for House for Senate
bill six
good morning everybody happy
Saturday.
before I refer the bill I want
to remind members that we need
to be wearing masks we're on the
floor if you are eating and if
taken of your mask you need to
be eating off the floor so if
folks would please comply with
rules was it seven dash nineteen
and think we talked yesterday we
need to be sure NMAA thank you.
Senate finance committee says
two percent of those six having
been read twice by title is
referred to the government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
Items I should break the record
for the shortest referral in the
longest short title.
Senate bill fourteen.
sorry Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill fourteen act relating to
the environment and acting the
clean fuel standard act.
Fighting for the establishment
of a clean fuel standard for
transportation fuels directing
the environmental improvement
board chair of promulgate rules
to implement the clean fuel
standard act implementing the
assessment of an annual
registration fee creating the
clean fuel standard fund making
appropriation Senate finance
committee finance committee
substitute for Senate tax
business and transportation
committee substitute for Senate
bill fourteen.
Program
Chris.
Senate finance committee
substitute for Senate tax
business and transportation
please sub two percent of
fourteen having been read twice
by title is ordered for is
referred to the government
elections in Indian Affairs
Committee.
I know.
Yeah.
The show this.
I.
Back and Senate finance
committee sub two percent of
those six which was referred to
the governor elections in eighty
Affairs Committee.
I want to thank whoever is a
sponsor for bringing seventy the
loudest to shopping bags in the
history of the world on the
floor of the house.
We get severe floods.
Okay Center press release of two
percent six was for the
government which is an in
universe Committee it will also
be referred to the Judiciary
Committee.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business no
objections ordered a house bill
fifty six was introduced by
former representative vetted us
of unanimous consent for the
sponsor of that legislation to
be Representative Martinez
interjections.
Three nine it is so ordered.
We have at the request of
representative Nibert to.
House Bill.
One eighty.
we are going to ask unanimous
consent to drop the referral to
the consumer public affairs
committee and have only be heard
in Judiciary.
No objection it is so ordered.
On house bill one eighty.
Dropsy pack.
What sorry review.
I think.
All right.
What.
All of the questions I thank you
That is the
number of years ago the ones
that look like.
I like.
The.
Capital outlay.
The house bill sixty nine.
Representative Dixon at the
request of the chair.
Women of the appropriation of
finance committee to remove the
referral to appropriations and
finance.
House bill sixty nine
projections.
Hearing none has to sixty nine
no one will go to the
Appropriations Committee.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business third reading of
legislation hearing objections
so ordered.
Members were going to do items
went into today.
And so that folks can plan for
expert witnesses before you item
number one folks want to take a
note on the counter today for
what will take a when we come to
for tomorrow.
we will tomorrow consider.
The items that today are items
three.
For.
I.
Six.
Seven and ten.
So tomorrow we will take of
house bill thirty seven is
amended.
House bill thirty nine.
And house bill's forty seven
fifty to sixty five and one
thirty five.
And for the.
They give these those are
representatives or TE's guy a
ghosts.
Chandler Lujan Romero and Luis
of anyone as expert witnesses
please have them near to the
capital or here at around two
o'clock tomorrow.
Gentleman from Bernalillo Santa
Fe Torrance and Valencia are you
ready on item number one.
I am Mr speaker will you give it
to the point where the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House Bill
eight as amended on final
passage has been taken the
gentleman to explain the.
Mr speaker house bill eight is
the Land Grant assistance fund.
Land grant research communities
our political subdivisions of
the state of New Mexico they do
not receive any income.
The tax revenue the property
taxes currently no to your teas.
So the income they have.
It's all earned income.
The sill some of them if they
have resources they might sell a
far would permit.
The grazing permit.
Some of them are reduced to
holding bake sales yard sales.
To raise funds for their
operations and to serve their
communities.
What this bill does is it takes.
A very small percentage point
zero five percent.
Of the G. R. T. this is the
statewide collected here T.
inputted into the Land Grant
assistance fund.
Then there is a process by which
land grants will become eligible
for distribution.
First first of the process is.
Are they all the compliance are
the certified by the state
auditor as being in compliance
with their audit requirements.
That list is sent to the land
grants council.
The lingering Council the
evaluates the list to make sure
the land grants are in
compliance with their other
governmental responsibilities to
the are they holding elections
in accordance law do they have a
board of trustees.
The total amount of funds is
then divided by the number of
land grants and they will each
receive an annual distribution.
Getting we actually push the
date back so the first
distribution probably with the
Kurds all twenty twenty.
Three or twenty four.
we.
There are currently about twenty
four act land grants that number
might increase the amount of the
distribution depending on the
gross receipts revenues would be
in order of fifty or sixty
thousand dollars a year so
that's fifty fifty or sixty
thousand dollars to.
Hire a bookkeeper.
Provide services to all the
things that the required to do
under the law as political
subdivisions of the state of New
Mexico.
I will know the version of this
bill
should sponsored by Senator
Representative Garcia has passed
this house previously.
It was the act on in the Senate.
And I would like to reduce by or
with this Mr are true or to let
the.
Who serves as program manager of
the land grant council.
With that Mr speaker I'd be
happy to answer any questions
well Mister speaker there is a
floor amendment.
Which has been passed out or
passed out okay gentleman to
move the amended.
Mr speaker I move the house
floor amendment number one to
house bill eight.
With this bill what this form
and it does is in the language
of the bill they currently
divide the the funds.
By the number of land grants on
the list from the other.
But since it's possible that
some of those land grants will
not be eligible.
We chose to divide the funds by
the number on the final list.
So we will revert as much money
and he's Land Grant potentially
gets a little bit extra.
In the two to number gentleman
is triple two three three two
point one is that correct this
is because that's for Is there
debate on the amendment is there
objection to it.
Three nine House foreman number
one house bill nine as amended
is adopted.
Back to the bill and there is
debate are you ready for that
challenge I am the speaker we
have a gentleman for Santa
Representative Harper.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman from a volunteer
Torrance and all those counties
yield.
This is the chairman I yield.
Thank you Mr chairman we have
the privilege of hearing this
that and the tax committee and I
I I I enjoyed the opportunity to
learn a little bit more about
cease.
What is a governmental entities
that Mr leader gentleman could
you just for a little for a
minute tell us what kind of a
story they have
And Alexion wise these kinds of
things and and specifically do
they have taxing authority.
They are political subdivisions
of the state of New Mexico seven
state because I their political
subdivisions they have
requirements in order to be in
good standing as political
subdivisions are not only in
what we call chapter forty nine
which lays out most of the
operational requirements but
also you know all the
requirements they are subject to
it for they are subject to open
meetings act if they are
political subdivisions the they
don't have a lot of the thirty
the service community center
some on properties some don't
noticeably they have no taxing
authority which is part of the
reason why they're really
struggling you can imagine how
difficult it is to stay in
compliance really one issues
historically has been paying for
the audit to stay in all the
compliance because they haven't
had the funds and they're doing
what they can to raise money
I I know one land grant actually
the gymnasium the the bill with
funds they received by selling
and easements are some of the
common lands and they're they're
telling me how like when the
there's a problem with the
plumbing.
If they don't hire a plumber
they think okay who do we know
that could fix this they will
they do it for free.
So that's that's how they're
keeping their operations going
the their their local community
entities they do not have taxing
authority.
Thank you Mr speaker and thank
you kind gentleman.
that that that was very helpful
and do you know Mr speaker and
gentleman about how many.
Of these entities exist across
the state.
Mr chairman historically there
were a lot certainly I believe
there is a hundred hundred
fifty.
Currently there are twenty four
act in the neighborhood.
this might be an incentive for
some of the plane requests that
still exist but are not
political subdivisions to sort
of get organized and take that
step.
So we think there might be an
increase in the number of
eligible.
In requests
currently it stands at your
neighborhood twenty four.
Mr chairman thank you I I think
that helps put in context what
we're trying to do here and and
what the potential solution
spaces so much bigger and on the
line I think I agree with you
that
you know if these folks do not
have a taxing authority and
they're having challenges with
their.
Regular maintenance let alone
paying for their audits you know
it would be nice for there to be
away and Mr chairman you mention
that they've had fund raisers in
the past.
Mr John and I'm I'm sure they're
they're very successful but Mr
Chairman could you.
Just talk about if this passes
and becomes law.
About how much total impact this
would be to the state and and
then what's the.
What's expected distribution
would be for all of these land
grants so we just have a general
idea of the impact.
Mr speaker Tallman the the
fiscal impact of the state the
is in the neighborhood of one
point five million dollars
annually.
The distribution of course
depends on the the total
receipts in the total number of
eligible recipients but we think
the distribution would be in the
neighborhood of fifty thousand
dollars for sixty thousand
dollars somewhere in their per
land grants.
Speaker and gentleman do you
believe that fifty thousand to
sixty thousand dollars
is the right amount.
Should be more or less Mr
speaker German
It is it's hard to give the how.
Much of a change that would be
for the land grants this would
be a huge boost.
To me it doesn't seem like a lot
of money when you think about
the size of the budget of you
know the City of Santa Fe County
it's it's it doesn't seem like a
lot of money for a land grants
that maybe has an income of a
couple thousand a year this is a
game changer.
In it it's something that you
know the land grants are they've
been working on this for a
number of years they're already
communicating like the slain
grant doesn't need its own
bookkeeper like we hire that
will serve these for land grants
the land grants or
It's a good Miner them for doing
a lot with a little.
In this this is enough for them
to do quite a bit.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for that
and again as we're looking at
the solutions please one of the
right options right I mean do we
offer them taxing authority
I'm not sure that's a great
solution is a potential one but
I'm not sure that's a great one.
Do we.
Only take from the G. R. T. in
the counties where they reside
Maybe that's a better solution
but challenging to implement.
and so Mister chairman how
you've structured this is the
revenue that we get at the state
level from gross receipts tax.
A fraction of that sum
proportion of that every year is
distributed
to these land grant is that
correct.
Mr chairman that that is correct
Mr speaker German if I may
interject one or this whole
point
one of the things land grants.
Funding for is paying taxes is
land grants own property the
property under of the server
quirk in our state constitution
is not tax exempt so they've
struggled historically paying
property taxes this will help
them pay the.
Mr speaker and gentleman that's
fascinating I I did not realize
that and and it's kind of
interesting that would.
Take G. R. T. to help pay
property budget all of these
things happen right.
Kind of a an interesting loop
there the Mister John and I just
wanted to say.
of all the potential solutions
to try to help solve this
problem by.
I think this is for the best and
has its cons as well right but I
think it's probably the best.
And and it sounds like
it is very.
small comparatively to our other
budgets that we look at this
relatively small now will make a
big difference to these
organizations and and I guess my
last.
Question Mr speaker John and I
just want to say I I appreciate
the amendment
as I think
it makes this condition of
making sure their books in
order.
It puts in a stronger position
speaker and gentleman can you
maybe just.
Explain to me how to the body
have explain to me how this this
is an improvement.
This is the gentleman as the
bill was originally drafted
it is that you know as we are
have for number years gone
through a number of iterations
the first was that the auditor
would certify would land grants
were in compliance in order it
was uncomfortable with the word
certification so we decided the
other would provide a list of
which currently requests for
compliance and submit that to
the lingering Council which is a
statutory body which has general
oversight over the land grants
the land grants council then and
we made it really clear in this
bill would would start with that
list.
And then to their own analysis
and and there's some some math
involved about the budget like
you whether federal grants or
capital outlay is included
things like that so to go
through the list.
Evaluate the budget submitted by
the land grants and then also
evaluate the land grants for all
their other governmental
requirements.
That are the compliance and so
that list if it starts at twenty
four here maybe that's a bit
twenty two or twenty one who you
know hopefully be hopefully
that's over twenty four but if
it does and that the smaller
number instead of reverting that
land grants here to the state.
It would simply stay in the pot
and be divided by the following
requests that were qualified
which is the basic structure of
the bill anyway.
Speaker and gentleman thank you
and and and I I think that is a
a good improvement to make the
bill stronger in that not only
do they need to be reviewed by
the state auditor but then they
also go through a secondary
process now is your amendments
to be reviewed by the Land Grant
council and and so I think that
puts lots protections in place
you know we want to make sure
that these folks were running
the Land Grant who are you know
in the winter time or whatever
so we make sure that they are
protected the people are
watching out for them that
they're doing the right thing
and I think by having these two
years I think that's a a good
change so with that speaker and
gentleman thank you very much
for bringing this bill forward.
Thank you so much.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Colfax mora Rio
Arriba and Senegal
Representative Roger Montoya.
Mr speaker and thank you so much
does the gentleman from Santa Fe
County a yield Mister speaker
German I yield.
Thank you so much I am standing
in absolute.
Honor and reverence for this.
Important movements really that
supports our land grants I would
like to give a nod to
Representative and former chair
Miguel Garcia.
I see that this bill stands on
the shoulders literally of the
late speaker Ben Lujan.
Is great son our junior senator
Ben ray Lujan has done
incredible work on the federal
level to support our land grants
they are indeed foundational
tenants of New Mexico history.
Very reason we are at
territories and inextricably
tied to these land grants.
I worked for many years in
nonprofit and I still do and I
see that there's a similarity
you're talking about
legitimizing
protection giving these small
entities that are vital and
important the kind of strength
that they need and deserve.
To build these legacies into the
future.
I will be brief them in my
comments in just that I am
assignee on this bill and it
brings my heart and soul right
gratitude that it is at this
juncture I urge my members in
this body to vote unanimously in
support of house bill fifty two
and thank you for your service.
Thank you.
there's further debate the
gentleman from the.
Just got.
Mr speaker will the gentleman
from Bernalillo Santa for
Torrance and Valencia please
you.
This is the chairman I yield.
Portion of road.
A moment.
Questions for consent and I
heard this from tax work.
And.
Subscriptions.
Google if.
You can close the term levels of
compliance in a present that is
the levels of compliance with
respect to the order could you
describe.
The situation involves.
This gentleman yes you are
correct so there are different
audits different levels of audit
depending on your income and so
the land grant with with no
income basically signs off that
they have no income there are
couple land grants that have
some earn income some more
considerable earn income there's
one with take a cell phone tower
you know it's it's from time to
time they might still easement
for a pipeline or another right
away so sometimes they do having
come and that might change their
audit level but that level does
in fact free for to the the
levels as described in either by
the state auditor by the state
audit act.
Mr speaker and gentleman.
Of course would be given to the
subdivisions that are fully
compliant at whatever level
they are required to be Mr
speaker de LA that's correct.
Thank you Mr speaker and
gentleman that answered
questions.
There's further debate the
gentle lady from tell us.
Thank you Mr speaker does the
gentleman yield Mister speaker
gentle lady I yield thank you Mr
speaker and gentleman I am so
grateful for this bill it it
does so much for my community my
district many land grants and
tells County and you know I just
want to say to the body there
are only so many empanadas and
these go to those you can sell
to pay for electricity or
infrastructure improvements and
this is going to do so much so
thank you.
It.
The general user the debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln representative Nibert.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman from Santa Fe County
yield.
Mr speaker down I yield.
Thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen.
If I understood the debate
correctly of this tax.
Is collected statewide is a
factor of.
Mr speaker German yes.
And so Mister speaker and
gentleman hi.
Generally with respect to tax
policy tax policy comes into the
general
fund for distribution for
projects around the state but
this is going to be earmarked
specifically for I believe
twenty four
Tracts of land or the twenty
four land grants of the that
exist.
Primarily
along the Rio Grande court or
would that be accurate.
Mr speaker tell me that I would
say the.
primarily in the northern half
of the state I would not say
primarily along the Rio Grande
quarter.
Mr speaker and gentleman thank
you for for the the.
Correction that and so.
What my real concern is we're.
This tax will be collected and
much of it collected and several
counties that that I'm more
familiar with here in southeast
New Mexico.
India for certain.
Those counties don't derive any
benefit whatsoever from the
gross receipts taxes being
collected in their community is
that correct.
This gentleman I don't think
that's correct all Pacific
doubled the gross receipts taxes
I understand are collected their
distributions made back to local
local communities I know the
speaker gentleman in my district
one of my communities have
struggled to get it's sort of
it's share of the G. R. T. in
particular because it's a newer
community it doesn't have its
own zip code and that's part of
the coding the gross receipts
taxes are collected statewide
and they are shared statewide.
But Mr speaker and gentleman
this particular portion of the
gross receipts taxes earmarked
specifically for of these twenty
four land grants for is this how
I understood the testimony.
This is the chairman that is
correct there are there are
other your marks.
The portions of the gross
receipts tax are earmarked for
particular purposes this would
add to that list of purposes and
Mr speaker and gentleman I I
think that is a point that our
citizens around the state need
to here's a we do have other
embarks and I would argue Mr
speaker and gentleman but that's
not good tax policy.
but we won't engage in that
debate now.
Mr speaker and gentleman that
that's my concern is that we are
creating another their mark
that's going to go to a.
Select group of people and it's
going to be borne by.
People in communities that have
no relationship with with the
recipients of that benefit them
and to me that's uh.
That's a difficult
Bill to swallow in many
instances even though in this
case it may not be a great sum
of money it's still money that
is being
earmarked for a specific purpose
that there is going to be borne
by the general population in the
general population may not
receive those benefits and I
certainly understand why our
colleagues from those areas that
benefit support this I'm just
concerned about those of us who
are quite removed from from
these land grants and really
have no relationship with them
our folks are going to bear that
the
tax burden if you will and
there for our I'm not sure that
I can support the legislation
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlemen the gentleman from
curry.
Thank you Mr speaker will
gentleman from Bernalillo Santa
Fe toward Senator in second
place you.
Mr chairman I yield.
Thank you John John I I see and
your bill at the talks about
audit Act compliant land grants
and assistance qualified land
grants in and I'm not sure.
How those two terms applied to
different land grants but my
question Sir is is
Regarding landless land grants.
And I don't know if if a
landless Land Grant can comply
with the audit act or if it's a
the assistance qualified so
based on the on the fact that
there are landless land grants
some of will have a small piece
of COVID lands and some have no
common lands no anything are
they qualified under this to
receive funds from this bill.
Mr speaker and gentleman I would
say there are qualified because
that's to use this term of art
in the bill I would say they're
eligible so to be eligible you
don't have to own land you can
own land there some the land
grants no hundreds or thousands
of acres
there's a lingering in my
district that owns the community
center and that's it there are
some lingering to don't own any
of their traditional lands but
they still operate they still
provide services to their
community their members and
they're still political
subdivisions of the state of New
Mexico.
Okay and and and that's probably
what I'm wrestling with of years
is if their land is land grants
they have no properties they
have I understand they have no
tax base.
And they're they're small
subdivision or because I
governmental I guess
That's difficult for me to
understand why the rest of the
state would be signing a group
that is has no land it is just
difficult for me I don't know
that my thoughts or questions
can be answered it is just if
you can help me sort that out I
would appreciate it but why
we're taxing and and giving
monies to someone that has zero
land but we're calling a land
grant.
just just difficult for me Mr
speaker Dillman
I I would first know that the
reason why many land grants have
newly in.
Is a dark chapter in our past
and I don't really need to go
into that they all started out
with land Mr speaker Thomas.
It's causing some of them no
longer have land doesn't mean
they no longer or community
organizations provide services
to their community.
Mr speaker dumb and I I would I
would suggest to you that if you
think of a county or a city we
don't fund them because they own
the land in the county or the
city the money on some right Mr
Chairman the by the the town
hall the might of the park maybe
Dawn something like that.
They provide services that go
well beyond the land they own.
And that's what we're talking
about these are the political
subdivisions are quality
governmental they are
governmental they provide
services to their community
we're helping them do that and
and Mr speaker John I appreciate
the that that helps a lot but I
guess I I still have a little
bit of a concern that we're
opening a door for other people
to provide services they can
become because I governmental or
or something and and then
they're going to want to tap
into the same fund if it's a
landless land grants it's just
difficult for me to comprehend
so that's all my questions Mr
speaker gentleman thank you very
much.
As for the debate the gentle
lady from Rio Arriba Santa Fe
inTaos Representative at at.
Thank you Mr speaker and I would
just kind gentleman from
Bernalillo Torrance and Valencia
to you.
Mr speaker gentle lady I yield.
I to stand in strong support of
this legislation I would like
somebody to understand that
district forty one has the most
land grants in the state of New
Mexico and I work closely with
the women and the men of these
land grants we need frequently
we talk about how they're going
to recover and in support of
these government institutions
and it is been a very ruffle so
I I know personally that they
put in their own money they're
all volunteers of not only do
they do that they serve in the
volunteer fire department they
had at the mutual domestic water
system they they do the work of
the rural front tier part of my
district and they protect those
lands that's a very important
part of this of their jobs they
they go out in the protect the
watersheds in the protect the
lands and they raise money
collectively to do that because
it it contributes to the
livelihood of that region and
for that reason Mr speaker and
kind gentleman I just stand in
strong support of this
legislation and I also to would
like to commend the groundwork
done by Representative Miguel
Garcia and I thank you for
bringing this to the floor.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis Eddie and
terra.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield.
Mr speaker chairman I yield.
Thank.
Representative curry touched on
what I was trying to comprehend
but.
So this distribution will be
made.
Without regard to the size of
the land grants the population
of the land grants.
Or whether they own land or not
it's it is just a the vision is
that correct.
Mr speaker German that is
correct there there is one
factor that does affect the
distribution and that is other
income so if the Langer and
there's a there's on this on
page three of the bill if a land
grant does have other income.
It's certain to use their
distribution would be reduced if
so a land grant and understand
there's one land grant is making
some decent money from a cell
tower they would get a smaller
distribution.
And gentleman that made me.
Thank you know of.
I wonder if we should encourage
or help.
Facilities that the state
sponsors by
So our facilities are when.
Facilities if we somehow off.
directed some of those.
These land grants.
We can benefit them save the
balance of the state another car
about.
Is that
We thought about that is that a
possibility Sir.
Is Mr chairman.
I am the of this bill were the
others have worked on and this
is the solution as as
The representative of Santa Fe
suggested.
in it's not perfect but we think
it's a good solution there are
communities that receive a bill
to payments payments in lieu of
taxes which are usually part of
a industrial revenue bond or
arrangement like that.
I imagine being a political
subdivisions a land grant could
get those if.
City were involved if the if the
you know the utility line or
whatever was nearby I I to my
knowledge of it and Mr Archuleta
confirms the that land grants
currently receive payments like
that.
So Mister speaker dumb and I I
do.
I think there are other
potential approaches.
this seems like a pretty.
The solid reliable approach that
we could use the budget all of
the eligible immigrants.
Thank you for that Mr speaker
and gentleman of the land grants
those that have millions today
on the minerals
Within the land grants.
Mr speaker German minister tells
me that some do and some don't
the sometimes there is a patent
all the reserves of the mineral
rights and sometimes are
awesome.
And then we can determine is
that the same for water as well.
Mr speaker and gentleman many of
the land grant communities also
have active a safety is in their
communities so as traditional in
in New Mexico that the sec is
rhetorical also political
subdivisions of the state the
the function separately.
But you know the reality is the
disease or small communities and
the the people on the executive
board there's probably some
overlap with people online
report.
Appreciate that Mr speaker and
gentleman I I I don't know a lot
about land grants it's not.
Committee of service on so
we're just trying to decide.
Why that need was for the car
about of.
Are there any of the land
grants.
That don't own land that have.
A ride to.
Mineral water right away
payments I mean are are are any
of those do they have they have
tangible Rights.
Even though they don't own land.
The gentleman
I I I don't have a clear answer
in its these are communities the
been around for hundreds of
years so you know there's a
little bit of everything kind of
going on you know some land
grants might have
an easement a grazing easement
you know the the we we've been
working over the years to try to
develop a better relationship
between the land grants in the
national forests many of which
used to be common lands to allow
for things like fire wood
gathering or to other
traditional gathering this of
the property rights or they're
pretty mixed they're kind of all
over the place.
All right I appreciate that
speaker and gentleman it's it's
a it's such a unique approach.
You know you start thinking
about W. nine values and all of
that kind of stuff the
harvesting would be.
I.
It's not a lot of money I get
that it's a it's a division
that.
Of other taxpayers carry across
New Mexico.
And I'll continue to learn and
appreciate your answers thank
you thank you Mr speaker.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Chavis the end
result Representative Anderson.
Thank you Mr speaker will the
gentleman yield Mister speaker
chairman I yield.
Thank you
To the children of I just had a
couple of clarifications of the
twenty four act did I understand
there might be some of the
twenty four act that do not own
title to land or am I mistaken.
Mr speaker seven that's correct
some do not own land.
In my next question with the A.
R. Anderson would you please the
internet kind is going to the
chair all yes Sir I'm sorry Mr
speaker thank you.
Mr speaker
then by.
Next question gentleman would be
really I guess going to title.
Under current.
Political subdivisions can a
land grant challenge title on
lands within and without the
land grants.
The this is chairman.
But I think a so that that's a
complicated question if they
have a valid claim they could
challenge the title they could
assert a title
there for the most part you know
a lot a lot of these land grants
have been dispossessed of.
Some all their land some of
their land there are few there
did or do pretty good in terms
of owning the close to the their
has their story Landais
most of the the title claims
At this point or resolved that
we don't see land grants the
claiming to like someone has a
cabin in what was maybe once for
the land grant you don't really
see a lot quite total suits
there are other types of title
issues there are of the a common
lands there can be encroachments
that they'd have to defend their
title there is one Land Grant
there tell us where the of the
land grants for divided calling
the coming eight for divided
into the what they call Linnaeus
which really literally might be
ten yards wide and a mile long.
And the government's attention
imagine how difficult it would
be to identify the property or
make economic use of it so there
are there other title issues
that the they struggle with and
there is that that background
that history of them being
dispossessed of their common
lands.
Thank you Mr speaker gentleman
of this
Number I heard in in the debate
one point five million dollars
per year.
It was that correct and then if
we just did a flat division on
twenty four that'd be sixty two
thousand five hundred per year
per land grants if it were
evenly distributed.
Mr speaker German as a
percentage of the gross receipts
the this gross receipts taxes go
up and down a little this is the
FIR has the first year which I
think we push back by here at
one point four nine million the
number of land grants that are
eligible and qualified in a
given year might fluctuate a
little too so that you your
mouth is basically correct we're
in the ballpark there thank you
David just a couple more
questions Mr speaker
Often.
Gentleman Mr speaker we.
We talk about things like
clawbacks reversion wins when
these funds are distributed is
there any.
Our reversion Mr speaker to the
On the funds of the one point
five million that's distributed.
Is it is it gone forever Mr
speaker.
Mr speaker
It would construe the land
grants for their expenditures so
it would be gone from the
state's coffers I would note
that in the the process of
determining the the share of
full distribution or seventy
five percent distribution fifty
percent discretion so if a land
grant has other income which
bump them into one of these
categories if only grant that
for example fifty percent
distribution the other fifty
percent that would revert to the
state at the end of the year and
then the fund would be
replenished the following year
by the the the point zero five
percent.
Thank you.
Mr speaker and gentleman
Relative to land grants being
political subdivisions is that
my understanding in order for
the distribution to occur from
this gross receipts this portion
of the New Mexico gross receipts
tax.
That they will be compliant with
the
many.
Burdens and funded and unfunded
mandates that we sent down to
political subdivisions will they
be compliant in order to receive
question.
Mr Mr speaker gentleman they
will be complied with all the
act the will be compliant with
the the requirements in chapter
forty nine out of one section
that's in which is our list all
the land grants operating
requirements they are subject to
it for a on a other governmental
requirements those aren't there
still legally bound by those
they're not in forty nine or in
the audit act itself so it's
it's those two it's audit act
chapter forty nine.
Thank you one final question Mr
speaker.
I noticed that there were two or
three different state agencies
that will be engaged in this yep
on the passage of the law
specifically DFA auditor
treasurer Mr speaker did any of
those offer comments to the
bill.
Mr speaker Devin they did the
and in particular we made some
changes in the language based on
the comments we receive from the
auditor.
Thank you gentlemen Mr speaker
that concludes my question.
There's further debate the
gentleman from San Miguel Santa
Fe and Torrance Representative
Castellano thank you Mr Senator
the general.
This is a German human.
Chairman I'm also in favor of
this bill I'm glad you brought
it forth I also have a land
grants in my community and
sending them out of money that
we can have to support these
land grants is available I thank
you for bringing this bill
forward thank you John thank you
Mr speaker.
Thank you John Cena further
debate the gentleman close.
I'm sorry we have the gentleman.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Cibola McKinley Sikora San Juan
and Lancia Representative Harry
Garcia.
Thank you Mr speaker with the
general details.
This gentleman I yield.
Mr speaker bill then I'm glad
you brought this up but I also
have land grants to my community
and of the drive these line run
of people the runner you know
there is a big struggle and it's
been a big struggle for years
and years and years I really
appreciate you of bringing this
piece of legislation for the day
we're here to help these people
no that's exactly what this is
doing to support tool thank you
Sir thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you gentlemen senior
further debate the gentleman to
close.
Mr speaker members of body thank
you for the debate I I I
appreciate the questions I think
they're good questions I would I
would know the in response to
the question from the gentleman
from Chavez.
We collect taxes in different
ways we spend taxes in different
ways it's not all one community
to the state back to the
community there there's some
variations there this is so this
is been a long time coming.
I I believe it's appropriate it
is going to make a world of
difference to these political
subdivisions of the state in the
members of their communities Mr
speaker German I move that the
house bill eight has.
Why is amended to that pass we
are on final passage of house
bill eight is amended the vote
is now open.
What is about to close.
The critical the members without
a recorded vote Representative
Alcon.
All.
Representative.
We strive.
One vote yes Representative
Alcon vote yes Representative
bash.
Yes Representative bash votes
yes Representative will go.
Yes Representative will go both
yes representative Cadena.
Yes Representative Cadena votes
yes Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
votes yes representative Lente.
Yes Representative Lente votes
yes Representative Roger
Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
votes yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero is yes Representative
Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes Representative Sweetser.
Yes Representative Sweetser
votes yes the vote is now
closed.
Six attorney firm is centered in
the negative house bill it is
amended has passed the house.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr chairman that we go
to the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business interjections order
members I've been asked to
recognize in introduce a few
guests Representative McQueen
and others in the gallery
Andrea Padilla she's the
president of the town of Thome's
Land Grant and member of land
grants council
re to do a gratuitous who is
also a former member the land
grant council Steve polako
president of the tier I'm Eddie
land grants and a member of the
council Melvin up with aka and
Bellarmine Archuleta both
members of the board of trustees
of the tier committee of Land
Grant walk into the house.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business third reading of
legislation no objections so
ordered.
Representative Hochman Vigil
given the.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
We're gonna go to the next item
of business item to.
Representative Lewis are you
ready.
Madam speaker I'm ready will you
get me to that point please.
The record reflect that all
action necessary for placing
House Bill fifteen as amended on
final passage has been taken is
now subject to debate amendment
or substitution gentle lady
presenter bill.
Thank you madam speaker house
bill fifteen is regarding gross
receipts has cells and similar
tax levied by tribes through
cooperative agreements
In the current statute tribes
had to charge no less than the
tax amount charged by the state
and political subdivisions.
And tribes that had a higher
rate could not implement that
tax especially if they were
surrounded by
Medicine polities that that had
a a lower rate so essentially
what the tribes want to do is be
able to implement their own
right.
We had amendment and taxed rag
which did away with the
provision that dictates how much
a tribe could tax in relation to
the county within the exterior
boundaries of the tribe.
So now
said house bill fifteen pass
tribes will be able to implement
their own tax rate.
In addition to that the other
revision we did and tax was that
we added the Fort Sill Apache
tribe as well as the Navajo
Nation so that they can have the
opportunity to also get into
cooperative agreements with the
New Mexico tax and revenue
Department without madam speaker
I stand for questions.
Thank you gentle lady there is
further debate Representative
gentleman from San Juan
Representative lame.
Thank you madam speaker madam
speaker will the gentle lady
from Bernalillo field.
Madam speaker I yield.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentle lady Ginnelly in this
bill that I go through either
one of my.
Committees so just have a few
questions about the mechanics of
the bill my first question is I
read the the statute itself and
the surrounding language and
madam speaker there's some
language in there about a tax
credit
can I get some information on on
what that means.
Madam speaker and gentleman will
you point me to where you're
looking at within the bill
please madam speaker agility
from Bernalillo.
If you look at that section one
subparagraph EA there's some
language about credit.
And then.
On the next page at the top of
page two starting line three and
again references the amount of
the credit and so I guess madam
speaker what I'm understand I'm
trying to understand is.
If let's say that I own a
business within a tribal
jurisdiction.
Is this a credit for me having
to pay a G. R. T. to the state
and instead I just pay gross
receipts tax the tribe is trying
to understand what the credit
is.
Thank you gentlemen I thank you
madam speaker so what is
currently happening is that the
tribes have cooperative
agreements with the state and a
lot of it was because the tribes
don't have the administrative
capacity to
administered the tax on its own
so the agreement is really a
partnership now where the the
state does that for the tribe's
and then there is an eighty
twenty split so that the state
receives part of that tax as
well as an administrative fee
for that tax so and I apologize
my computer was not opening up
so I could pull up the bill so
that's really what we're talking
about and then within that
section about the credits that's
where we struck that provision
regarding
Really the authority of the
state to dictate how the tribes
can implement their taxes
pursuant to also at local
governments are doing.
Thank you madam speaker thank
you gentlelady from Bernalillo
so maybe let me assessed more
foundational question just to
make sure I conceptualised and
so if I own a business within a
tribal jurisdiction is there
just one G. R. T. right there's
not a state G. R. T. ri ana
tribal G. R. T. right there's
just one right is that right
Madam speaker and gentleman
that's correct and madam speaker
generally from real I think that
helped so if the if I'm
understanding then.
What happens let's say the range
eight percent for an easy even
number.
That eight percent is collected
in the business owner pays that
to the state of New Mexico Madam
speaker generally from
Bernalillo is that correct.
Madam speaker and gentleman I'm
not sure about the actual
collection of how that works
with tax and Rev Ivey.
Really in that area I can I can
I can consult my experts if you
like madam speaker gentle lady
from Berlin no I don't think
there's and there's a need for
that I just know in my
experience as a business owner
at every month and I O. G. R. T.
to the state whether I collected
from services or or commodities
it doesn't matter I owe that to
the state and so if I understand
what what you're saying is that
money is paid to the state and
then there's there's a
cooperative agreement with the
state where they turn around and
send a percentage of that back
to the tribal entity is that
correct.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
believe that's correct and I'm
getting clarification from
expert right now.
Madam speaker and gentleman
that's correct.
Speaker gentle and from
Bernalillo thank you for
confirming that.
Are there and as I understand
with the amendment that was made
in the second committee hearing
that now it doesn't matter
whether the tribal entities G.
R. T. rate is higher or lower is
that right.
Madam speaker and gentleman
that's correct and in the first
committee we actually had a
couple of members vote against a
bill it because they wanted the
tribes to be able to have that
authority on you know what rates
they can tax.
Madam speaker generated from
Bernalillo and it seems that
particular change that was made
in the second committee would
probably give tribes of more
control over their weights rates
because it doesn't have to just
be higher or just be lowered
that fair Madam speaker and
Representative that's one
hundred percent correct.
Madam speaker gentle lady from
Bernalillo there are a lot of
tests I've taken lie forget a
hundred percent so I'll take
I'll take that one.
Do you know how many tribes
madam speaker
that have a higher G. R. T.
right and then the local
jurisdictions.
Madam speaker and gentlemen so
right now the tribe's pursuant
to statute and the cooperative
agreements can't do that but I
do know that tribes have tried
to do it so far the public of
Aqaba for instance has a tax
rate that is greater than Civil
accounting and so with this
in law now they'll be able to
tax the higher rate and is
actually a win win because and I
misspoke earlier the
the split it's not twenty eighty
it's twenty five seventy five
and so you know then that tax
that is raised by the tried that
and is also an increase for the
state as well.
Madam speaker a gentle lady from
Bernalillo so okay so the the
twenty five percent is still
going to be kept by the state is
that correct.
Madam speaker and gentleman I'm
sorry will you repeat that I got
my expert on the line just in
case we need to consult with her
I don't want to have that delays
so she's just holding now.
Madam speaker gentle lady just
in case you get any.
Questions are left field is is
that what I'm hearing.
Madam speaker and Representative
actually thought you said I when
you were talking about not being
correct a hundred percent of the
time I thought you're going to
click on a high note so now
let's just get back and have her
on the line in case we need to
answer some some questions Madam
speaker generated from
Bernalillo like like most
concerns we just don't know when
to quit so I will just that I
would just ask one more question
if if this bill does not pass
madam speaker
and there's a travel
jurisdiction that has a tax rate
higher than the local authority
if I understand right that tribe
gets zero of those G. R. T.
revenues.
you madam speaker and gentleman
see now you're incorrect.
So that's not correct so they'll
have to have the tax rate that
is at least as much as that
local government so I believe in
this situation and the example
that I brought up earlier the
public of Aqaba for instance has
and eight percent tax rate that
they're trying to implement but
now civil a counties is actually
seven point something so then
that seven point something will
continue to remain in effect.
Bensinger deliver so even though
the the rates higher.
They would just get the seven
and a half percent is that
right.
Madam speaker and gentleman the
seven and whatever percent rate
would be implemented.
And so they'd still operate
operating under the cooperative
agreement so that split would
still remain so the tribe in the
state would still get a portion
of that.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady from Bernalillo as maybe
three for four I mean if we're
playing baseball that's a good
that's a good average some thank
you madam speaker.
There is further debate the
gentleman from San Juan county
Representative Montoya.
Okay I will then try to go to
the gentleman from Lee County
Representative Scott.
Dealer okay we're gonna go to
the gentle lady from grant he
dog unfair counties
Representative Dow.
Thank you madam speaker.
And with the gentle lady please.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentle lady thank you so much so
I I am.
Trying to understand this on the
cooperative agreements are they
voluntary.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
they are voluntary thank you
madam speaker and thank you
gentle lady and what do all of
the tribes and pueblos
participate.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
currently not all tribes are
participating one of the reasons
that we added that amendment and
the second committee was to
include the Fort Sill Apache
tribe as well as the Navajo
nation tribe so with that
the Navajo Nation already has of
provision in statute that will
allow them now to enter into a
cooperative agreement but
the the Fort Sill Apache tribe
would have to implement of a
provision on our own so I I
think they're gonna take that
into consideration and perhaps
that will be before us in the
future.
Thank you madam speaker and and
thank you Representative for
that so we're all of the tribes
and pueblos consulted in this
and agree to I was just looking
at the supporters of the bills
and the F. I. R. and it didn't
list all of them.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
that's a really great question
so we had this bill it was a
Senate the last year and it
didn't pass the Senate and we
introduced to during the interim
Indian Affairs Committee so we
had a presentation to the entire
committee at that time it was
endorsed by the interim Indian
Affairs Committee and I think a
lot of the tribes were really
open to the idea of having a
provision in there that allowed
them to have it at a higher rate
but I think there was a little
bit of concern about what if we
wanted to keep it at the same
rate as that local government so
now with this
amendment from tax they're able
to do that so that came a little
bit you know later I think it
was last week during the session
and so I think in the second
committee with the amendment we
had more tribes speaking up in
support of the bill.
Thank you madam speaker and so
and and Representative so
there's nothing in the bill that
dictates beyond any existing
cooperative agreements nothing
could change or jeopardize
existing cooperative agreements.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
that's correct.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you Representative so are
there what what tribes what
tribes and pueblos does this
affect.
Madam speaker and and gentle
lady I can consult with my
expert I want to say that most
of the tribes do have to
cooperative agreements with the
state except for the Pueblo of
excuse me the Fort Sill Apache
tribe and the Navajo Nation but
let me see if there are others
that are excluded as well give
me one second.
Madam speaker and gentle lady so
my expert says that there are at
least twelve that have a
cooperative agreements with the
state and she's aware of others
that are working with taxes
around to enter into an
agreement thank you thank you
madam speaker and thank you
Representative and I guess I in
the Indian Affairs Committee
when there's a committee
endorsement does that do you
first seek the endorsement of
like.
A certain percentage of couples
are tribes or or or how do you
decide when there's an incentive
for committee endorsement.
Madam speaker and gentle lady so
it was a endorsement by the end
term Indian Affairs Committee
which is made up of both the
Senate and house members so
during our last meeting which I
think occurred in October of
twenty twenty.
One that's when legislators had
a choice to whether or not we
can vote to endorse it and so
that's what we did okay thank
you thank you madam speaker and
thank you gentle lady.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Santa Fe County
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam speaker does
occasionally yield thank you
madam speaker I do yield to the
gentleman thank you I think the
first question is.
Speaker gentle lady.
What are we going to do.
But the correct question is.
What are we going to do.
Madam speaker I was just calling
for prayers for you.
Since.
That's right okay so
generally
thank you.
So I I just want to.
First thank you for being on to
make a couple changes from the
original bill that I think make
this a much stronger bill Mr
gently.
my understanding was that when
this bill was originally
introduced.
It changed the language such
that instead of the tax rate the
the tribe could impose current
losses it has to be less.
And that of the the average of
those other jurisdictions that
borders.
And the regional bill said it
had to be greater than.
Speaker gentle lady so that
essentially would have forced
everyone every tribe that
participates in this agreement
to raise their taxes Mr Chairman
is that correct Madam speaker
and gentleman that's correct and
I do want to also thank you for
your input prior to the tax
committee and I'm glad we have
this bill that I also agree is
stronger.
Thank you Mr internally that
means a lot I appreciate that
and really.
what this bill now does is it
stretch the retired paragraph.
So there is no no no longer
madam speaker and and gentle
lady any requirements on what
the the tribe government
entities can set their tax rate
at the Mr gently I think that's
what tax policies of that day.
Are
the answer to their own
constituents
and and they should have the
authority within their
jurisdiction to decide what is
going to be lower or equal to
or higher the speaker generally
but connection with me what are
your thoughts with this change
are we gonna see.
always.
committees now go and raise your
taxes substantially.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
that's a really good question I
personally don't know but I can
tell you that when New Mexico
decided to raise the cigarette
tax rate I think we saw that all
tribes did that as well I think
especially now in trying times
when tribes had to close down
casinos during the pandemic you
know there was a lot of revenue
that wasn't being generated at
the time and there's still a lot
of need I think there's more
need now than there was prior to
that so this could be an
opportunity for tribes to
implement a higher tax rate so
that they can provide for the
services for other people
including law enforcement fire
social services school the whole
gamut.
So.
We thank you for that and that a
state that's the appropriate
thing to do and and their
constituents are fine with that
that's that's their prerogative
it was originally I think so
that we will not see.
incredible increases in the tax
rate and and Mr speaker Julie.
You've got a great example that
I can use the cigarette tax we
know that there is a state
cigarette tax and and that if
that goes to high.
you start encouraging people to
find other ways to purchase
cigarettes.
The leader go across the border
they'll purchase out of someone
strong soul the go to a
jurisdiction where a the tax
rate is lower Mr generally and
that's the the great things
about how our economy is
structured is that
you know if someone can sell it
for less.
people generally smart and they
will purchase it for last and
that drives the rates down the
price down and so we're usually
paying a good a good price for
something or other countries
where there might be an awfully
and such that's not the case Mr
gradually I don't think we'll
see a huge I'm not just on the
go up a little bit but I don't
see a huge increase happening
because then that'll mean.
The people in that area will
leave and go to the next order
jurisdiction and buy stuff so
it's kind of more so we have
that balance arms be generally
that's that's why I'm able to
support this at one there's in
flexibility they can choose
their own destiny.
And just because of market
forces folks are gonna be smart
and and I and I I'm hopeful that
we will see all the signs
significant tax increases in
these in these in these areas is
been doing the last comment I
have
regarding the other part of the
amendment we added for some
Apache and Navajo Nation as
potential.
Tribes that could in terms of
this agreement must be urgently
those are optional right we're
not mandating that they join
Madam speaker and gentleman
that's correct it's certainly
optional and the two tribes were
supportive of this measure.
Mr.
I appreciate that and I'll just
mention.
I would encourage them to
consider that because I I'm
aware that.
Because of the way the has the
tax structure is set up and and
the Navajo Nation side in New
Mexico that sometimes we get
accidental double taxation.
Mr generally so I I think it's a
good idea to work with the
taxpayer Department here so that
the
can help ensure that that that
doesn't happen as I think it
doesn't just have the aisle of
we're on
No one likes to be taxed EE some
Senator generally so I want to
again thank you for for working
with me and and I and I
appreciate where this bill is
it's going and I'm I'm happy to
support it thank you Mr.
Life is a pretty fast gentleman
if you don't stop and look
around every once a while you
might miss it.
Since further debate.
Let's try in for the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Montoya.
Thank you madam speaker does
that generally you.
Madam speaker you are hilarious
I do yield to the gentleman from
San Juan.
Madam speaker I'm not sure if
she's thinking you're so Vigil
areas for yield for even
recognizing a but that could be
the case thank you madam speaker
and gentle lady
speaking of a little bit about
the the Navajo Nation and for
sale I do remember in particular
them calling in and expressing
some support for this I in
particular I think the Navajo
nation's in a very unique
position and that is they have
it's a very very very large land
mass and the restrictive ness
was actually kind of confusing
the way the way the the
regulations or the laws right
before.
If they were near Gallup or
their near Farmington or they
were near Cuba.
How do you handle which.
One of those tax rates would you
have to be less than and I think
in reality what was you had to
be less than the least of those
options that correct the speaker
gently Madam speaker and gentle
lady.
Madam speaker and gentleman
that's correct and just for the
record I was saying that the
speaker was hilarious because of
her reference to that eighties
movie cast so no offense to you
Representative.
Thank you madam speaker gentle
lady so really I think all we're
doing here is what we've done
with him into the
municipalities.
And with counties who are able
to increase taxes as needed as
necessary without respect to any
other community that surrounds
them and so I I do believe that
the previous
Restriction that was in place
was a little onerous I I can't
imagine somebody who lived.
Who is in Alamogordo would.
any any any city councilor more
would want to be restricted to
less than equal to or less than
the neighboring community I
believe as a.
Representative Harper mentioned
a second ago
The.
The way that this bill was
written initially.
Would have the opposite effect
which would have meant that
we would have had to of the
tribes would have had to raise
their their taxes above but able
to are above their their
neighboring communities and I
think Madam speaker and gentle
lady.
Just allowing of the ability
likely allow every other
community determine their taxes
that that that's why this is
appropriate
So.
I I do.
I guess one last question
nothing in this legislation like
that as has been in the
in the casino agreement which
those who got in got in and and
others have not been able to get
in this allows for any other
tribe or pueblo to that comes
into agreement with the
with the state to be able to to
implement this is that correct
Madam speaker and gently Madam
speaker and gentleman that's
correct your reference about the
gaming revenues and the revenue
share is address by the gaming
compacts the to the this is the
agreement between the suit to
sovereigns the state of New
Mexico and then those tribes of
this has no effect on that.
Yes ma'am speaker enjoyed I
didn't mean to infer that it's
just that in in that particular
agreement only the tribes that
made the agreement at the
beginning.
for those who are not in that
agreement or restricted
From from future agreements so I
believe we've made one we we
made one adjustment to that
sense that was the Navajo
Nation.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
could you talk to me about the
administration how does this
work from a practical purpose.
administers the the accounting
portion of.
It is the state of New Mexico
and I've been kind of a fiscal
agent speak Madam speaker and
gentleman that's correct so it's
administered through the state.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady that is the reason
that the agreement has to be in
place for this to take place is
that is that correct.
Madam speaker and gentleman
that's correct thank you madam
speaker thank you generated for
for of answer my questions.
There's further debate the
gentleman from Lee County
Representative Scott.
Thank you.
Thank you will the gentle lady
from Bernalillo.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman.
The second surveillance from
where we started where we are
now.
The regional legislation.
Was less than or equal to the
tax rates in the surrounding
community Senator.
Mr speaker excuse me madam
speaker and gentlemen so the way
that the law currently rates is
that the taxable transactions
transaction must be at a rate
not less.
Excuse me not greater than the
total of the gross receipts.
Tax rate and local option
receipts.
Okay so madam speaker gentle
lady that would be less than or
equal to as long as it's not
greater.
The same.
Impression you have.
Madam speaker and gentleman you
are correct okay Roger.
This panel in its original form
changed worse for an organic
will to to quarter them or equal
to his son thank.
Madam speaker and gentleman yes
before it was amended in tax
that haven't read.
Okay.
The current the current
administration.
Of all restrictions it can be
less.
Cool to or greater than is that
correct Madam speaker and
gentleman that is correct.
So.
John this.
The only concern of the.
I have also was passionate about
this is with respect
to the competitive advantage
model crew transfer will stab
response on tribal lands.
As opposed to those located in
in the surrounding areas what
this.
Workforce now for ordered bility
to tax at any rate.
Find.
I potential convert to the
damage.
Two of those.
Tribal establishment.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
believe it could the bed as we
discussed earlier
the tribes are really interested
ensuring that a taxable rate
that can serve their governments
is something that they can live
with to provide for the tribal
communities and we provided that
could prophetically in the
cigarette tax where the state
implemented a higher rate but
that was not implemented on the
tribal side and again we did see
I think almost every tried
if not all has bumped up its
cigarette tax rate as well.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
to choose from get kind of
feedback during the development
of this legislation from.
Representative Sheryl
establishments that would.
Operating in the immediate
vicinity of tribal lands but not
all Milan's.
Madam speaker and gentlemen we
did not hear from retail
establishments and I my experts
just sent me a note saying that
the tax still must be
substantially similar.
And just one for last question
this is supplied to the gasoline
tax on tribal lands.
Madam speaker and gentleman I'm
gonna check on that but I want
to say no.
Madam speaker and gentleman.
I am correct it does not apply.
Once again it does not apply
Madam speaker and gentleman
correct.
Madam speaker gentle lady thank
you very much for your answers.
There is further debate the
gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative Rehm.
Thanks for the debate we will
try the representative the
gentleman from Chavis and NO
terra Committee Representative
Townsend.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentlelady yields madam speaker
I do yield thank you very much.
My question and I want to.
I want to make sure I
understand.
The gasoline tax issues.
Would not be affected by this
bill.
Madam speaker and gentleman
that's correct.
The second thing is you said I
believe I understood at least.
That the tribes had bombed their
cigarette tax.
Are they now charging the same
tax.
On the reservation as that is
charged off the reservation.
Madam speaker and gentlemen I
believe so I don't have a
hundred percent.
Knowledge on that but I believe
so I know we've seen a lot of
that
increases there's actually a
group of.
Tribal tax administrators as
well as lawyers that have a
collective group that talk about
tax issues on tribal land so I
want to say that I confirmed
with someone from that group
that most of them did students
so that is the same right.
And madam speaker and gentle
lady is is that monitored the
mean do you have of.
Do you have a way to ensure but
I'm thinking about is the
impacts of of.
The the cigarettes are to
Medicare and Medicaid and
insurance and all those things.
And I just wondering if there
was a measure that you guys were
using Tim can sure that that was
equal so that the.
The issues and the measures
that.
State government takes our map
so there's no.
Abuse of the process utilizing.
tribal entities unknowingly.
Madam speaker and gentleman
because this bill isn't
necessarily on cigarette taxes I
don't have that information but
I believe that the the tribes to
collect that data
on their own.
Appreciate that and I realize it
was a stretch but I it was it
was interesting to me
One of the issues that may have
been addressed and and
Is is the fact that.
The implementation.
Of this is almost in a good
faith effort.
Would you agree with that of
Representative.
Madam speaker and gentlemen I do
agree I think it's a win win for
both governments and I think
they've had a really good
partnership for their even
looking on the ways they can
collaborate on other issues as
well.
I think that the.
I think that's good
Representative
The state.
Reaches out and helps build
roads and infrastructure on
tribal lands.
and the tribe's bring a lot of
G. R. T. to the state in a lot
of different ways to solve it
the.
It should be
It should be treated with some
the quality and some oversight
so I appreciate the questions
thank you madam speaker.
Thanks for the debate the
gentleman from Chavis and
Lincoln Representative Nibert.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady my sure.
Please you.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from the best
committee to festivities.
Madam speaker and gentle lady I
would concur of madam speaker
and gentle lady
When it comes to tax policy I
hate to disagree with my next
door neighbor here.
But he said something that the
I'd I don't think it is quite
right near your responses
Wasn't the committee what I was
expecting and that's a yes if
they took off the
What was formerly paragraph
three B. three.
That required it to be
originally right not greater
than and then you're Original
Bill said less than.
you took that off then the
tribes are able to tax that
whatever right the the use of
shape and I don't quite read
this legislation like that.
M. B. one I think they're still
limited to being.
Similar in nature the rates have
to be some or they just can't be
out of bounds would would.
Am I correct in that region
madam chair speaker and gentle
lady.
Madam speaker and gentleman
that's absolutely correct so
that's where that substantially
similar provision comes in.
And and so madam speaker and
gentle lady this legislation it
takes out the the limiting
provision that it had to be
formally not greater them and
then your bills are of couldn't
be less them it takes out those
hard limitations but overall the
taxes that one would expect to
see on on the truck tribes and
and pueblos would be federally
similar to the county for
municipal tax rates that are in
the surrounding area would that
be an actor's statement Madam
speaker and gentleman that is.
Accurate
madam speaker gentle lady I
think in our debate in committee
the that was my real point was.
We we should it be.
Combining the two to just the
and specific tax rate but that
the state does have some overall
for gene concern that tax rates
statewide.
Should have some at least range
of
compatibility or at least be
somewhat similar in nature and
so I all right now support this
and and thing for the the
language that was put on and and
the the tax committee is good
and probably gets to the point
that you were intended in the
first place so madam speaker
gentle lady thank you for have
making those changes and I just
wanted to clarify that I was
seeing that correctly thank you.
As for the debate the gentleman
from San Juan Representative
Allison.
Thank you madam speaker will the
gentle lady from Bernalillo or
Albuquerque Health.
Madam speaker I yield to my
colleague from San Juan.
my other question is just part
of clarity.
This past summer and one of our
Indian Affairs Committee
meetings and building the
subject of a.
Of thanks for students was
talked about and at that time it
was mentioned that the Navajo
Nation.
But not the Senate the table
with the discussions and when I
read the title on your bill
mention tribes and and mention
the Navajo Nation.
Of.
I need to say that it would be
voluntary and I don't want to
vote for it jeopardizes my tribe
because no whole notion has
their own tax department and I
would not do anything to
jeopardize that department as
well so since the point of
clarity that if it's only two of
them I'm not in trouble either
way I vote thank you.
Madam speaker
and gentleman yes for clarity
the agreements are optional and
the Navajo Nation did reach out
to me to say they wanted to be
included so that they can have
that option.
Thank you
gentle lady thank you for that
clarity and I will support the
bill thank you thank you madam
speaker.
As for the debate signalman from
Bernalillo has returned
Representative Rehm.
Thank you madam speaker care
will the gentle lady yield.
Madam speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady I would I have a few
questions on want to clarify and
I think I heard you say that
this would apply to Fort Sill.
tribe as well.
Madam speaker and gentleman
not exactly so we did include
fort Ezzell the pharmacy of how
excuse me fort Ezzell Apache
tribe in the amendment and the
tax committee however there are
other provisions of the law that
authorized cooperative
agreements so far it still is
not included in that in that
place so give Fort Sill chooses
they can come a request that we
amend that provision of the law
so we are taking baby steps here
I think is the best way to put
it.
Madam speaker gentle lady thanks
for the clarity on that I
remember some.
Previous discussions trying to.
Move forward settle into some of
our legislation and I thought
that was problematic let me move
on.
And madam speaker gentle lady if
we go to page three we go to one
twenty two and we look at tribal
land okay the land within the
boundaries.
And all William held by the
United States in trust for the
tribe.
Would that be land such as
The Indian cultural centre at
twelfth and I twenty five.
Madam speaker and gentleman that
does include that that portion
of land owned by the nineteen
close.
Madam speaker and gentle lady so
the body understands this one to
obtain the land you purchase a
land.
And you move it over to be
administrated by.
For you.
I do I a.
Then it is taken off the tax
rolls for that county is that
correct.
madam speaker and gentleman yes
so if there is a land that is
currently not interested for the
tribe the tried if they
purchased the land they acquire
land in another way they have
the option of putting it into
trust and yet they're it is
taking off the tax rolls.
And madam speaker and gentle
lady I'm looking at the FIR and
when we were in government
affairs.
The FIR had.
In the FIR doesn't have it now.
So if you're quickly trying to
find it there when government
affairs I thought it had a four
five million dollars for
reoccurring
hip to the road fund and I don't
see that in the current FIR.
Madam speaker and gentleman I
have another tax bill that is
house bill one sixty seven and I
think that's the one that had
the FIR with the the the
That high amount we're looking
at that right now to because I
think we need to make some
corrections to that thank you
madam speaker and gentle lady
that's.
You're just trying to confuse me
I can tell there so.
Madam speaker and gentle lady
but let's talk about the road
fund in this one so excise tax
collected on the sale of the
vehicle would then be subject to
the seventy five percent
amount that could be kept by the
by the tribe is that correct.
Thank you.
Madam speaker and gentlemen so
That does not apply in this case
it could apply in this case of
the tribe and the state were to
have an agreement such as a
cooperative agreement.
But it doesn't apply here.
Okay thank you madam speaker and
gentle lady that's all I have.
Seeing no further debate the
gentle lady to close.
Thank you madam speaker and
thank you to my colleagues for
the lively debate madam speaker
I now move that house bill as
amended do now pass.
We're on final passage of house
bill fifteen as amended the vote
is now open.
The vote is not to close.
The vote is now closed at fifty
one in the affirmative.
Is to call those who are not
already on a roll with a report
of a.
Representative Alcon.
Yes Representative Alcon is yes
Representative bash.
Yes Representative bash is yes
Representative bone grafts.
Yes Representative boom guys yes
Representative then the.
Yes Representative Cadena is yes
Representative Harry Garcia.
Yes Representative Harry Garcia
is yes Representative Lente.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Roger Montoya.
Yes Representative Roger Montoya
vote yes Representative Roybal
Caballero.
Yes Representative Roybal
Caballero votes yes.
Representative Rubio.
Yes Representative Rubio votes
yes Representative Sweetser.
Representative Sweetser both
yes.
Okay now by vote of sixty in the
affirmative and seven in the
negative house bill fifteen as
amended has now duly passed this
house.
From Bernalillo.
Thank you madam speaker I move
that we go to the next order of
business announcements and
miscellaneous business.
Announce.
Dimly from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey thank you
madam speaker of the house
Judiciary Committee will be
meeting.
Fifteen minutes after we adjourn
here and I wanted to announce at
one point the analysts had
thought we might not be ready to
her house bill sixty eight but
we are and so the agenda will
proceed as you see on that
goldenrod.
And tomorrow morning the only
thing that is changed and I need
the gentleman from Chavis to
hear this gentleman from happens
House Judiciary won't start
until ten tomorrow.
Because House Energy starting at
nine and because the floor
session doesn't start till two
we're okay with starting at ten
in House Judiciary tomorrow so I
just wanted to announce that to
the body thank you all very much
see you there members take note
that members I've got some
generic bills.
Mr speaker we still
announcements yes gentle lady
the the general if you
Representative Rubio.
Thank you Mr speaker I just
wanted to announce that house
transportation is meeting
tomorrow at nine AM for just one
bill house bill one forty four.
Members take note the let's
let's wait on the for the
committee and since I've been to
junior bills to do.
the house bill two nineteen this
is a leader Townsend house bill
two nine two one nine.
so just repeat we have these
generic bills what we do is I
ordered it removed from rules
printed and referred to a
substantive committee I will
then read out a tool to number
which corresponds to a committee
substitute is been prepared
the the folks up in council
service will host the committee
substitute to the website I
believe the link is on the
committee's agenda it's also on
the if you click on house bill
two nineteen you'll see that per
the committee substitutes that's
the giving the public notice
and then members will take their
substitute to the committee
secretary for the committee and
it will then be treated as any
other bill okay so the first one
we're doing is for the Townsend.
Presented Pettigrew is going to
be the person doing the heavy
lifting on this has the two
eighteen is ordered removed from
the rules committee printed.
And referred to the house
government elections and Indian
Affairs Committee house bill two
nineteen is ordered removed from
the rules committee printed and
referred to the house government
elections and Indian Affairs
Committee.
The two oh two number is.
Triple to four four zero point
one.
In the two oh two number is
triple to four four zero point
one.
The next one.
I believe I only have two today
so that's wrong if someone else
has one please let me know if
you want to refer today.
The gentle lady from McKinley is
San Juan Representative
Lundstrom has house bill two two
seven.
House bill two to seven over to
removed from the rules committee
printed and referred to the
appropriations and finance
committee house bill two two
seven is to be removed from the
rules committee printed and
referred to the appropriations
and finance committee.
The to to number is triple to
four ninety six point two.
Two two two four nine six point
two.
We get that.
Those this year bill the.
The gentleman from San Juan.
Thank you Mr speaker I also have
an announcement.
The house appropriations and
finance committee will be
meeting tomorrow at twelve noon.
On our agenda is going to be.
House bill forty to eighty nine
twenty two sixty to eighty six
fifty nine twelve thirteen and
twenty three so we have a link
to the agenda tomorrow for the
house appropriations and finance
committee.
Thank you Mr speaker members
techno.
The gentleman chose idiota Tero.
Thank you Mr speaker this may be
more of a point of personal
privilege
Several days ago.
We uh introduced the bill Este
R. eleven which is an education
choice bill.
And I have been talking to the
chairman of education trying to
get that heard.
And there were some.
and we had a we had a
Robust debate over whether that
how that should go.
But what I would tell you Mr
speaker is
over the last couple of days I
authorized the pole in the
Albuquerque area just to make
sure.
This is not what people wanted.
Ninety seven point eight percent
of the four hundred people that
responded I believe that
children.
Should have the best education
they could.
Ninety two point ninety point
two percent.
Believe it's time for a change.
Eighty one and a half percent
believe PED.
Is.
Subpar and thirty one point six
of those I believe there totally
ineffective.
Commission Baker.
I think this bill deserves to be
heard it is germane.
It needs to be heard.
And I was studying yesterday
trying to figure out what was of
what the problem was and I came
across a quote.
From a retired American
federation of teachers union
president.
He said.
When school children start
paying union dues.
That's one I'll start
representing the interest of
school children.
And Mr speaker our school
system.
Is dead last.
I have sat on the floor and I'll
say it here this is a Republican
mission this is a Democrat
issues this system has not been.
I think the under Republican
governor or Democrat governor
I'm just saying it needs to be
fixed and the people of New
Mexico deserve to have the
opportunity to be heard.
And being elected I believe I
need to have the opportunity
have the bill heard in committee
thank you Sir.
They join the state was house
straight resolution eleven okay.
Thank you are there other
announcements the gentleman from
Bernalillo Santa Fe towards end
of Lynsey
Thank you Mr speaker the House
Energy Environment and that's
resources committee will meet
tomorrow morning at nine
we do have some overlap with the
Judiciary Committee myself and
the minority leader I'm
confident we will not be done at
ten.
So we'll see you at nine.
Okay.
Gentleman from Lincoln
Representative could you please
tell us where you get your
backorders of sweaters it's nice
looking.
I buy all my things in Ruidoso
Mr speaker provided.
Would you like to play your
favorite the men's wear store
and.
It doesn't.
They're just too many to the.
Offered too many options Mr
speaker okay fair enough.
The gentleman from Bernalillo
Representative last.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the house commerce committee
will be meeting probably at two
thirty two thirty house commerce
the house bill's one hundred
forty three one hundred seventy
nine and one hundred ninety one
thank you Mr speaker.
Thank you John.
Members of the former
Representative joining us in the
gallery for reserve Joe Thompson
is here would you please join me
in welcoming it back to the
house.
There further analysis.
The gentle lady from Olympia.
Right before right before we do
that Representative Lane Gemini
sartorial the thoughts are by
for us today.
Mr speaker it's dangerous giving
a lawyer the microphone but I
will I would politely decline.
The gentle lady from
Originally from let's see just
one second.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker.
It not being eleven fifty nine
AM I move we adjourn until
twelve a one PM.
House come to order.
Mr speaker.
If you Mr speaker it I ask
unanimous consent that the rules
be suspended on the journal so
that all those present in the
morning session are present in
the afternoon session.
Action is ordered Mr speaker I
ask unanimous consent that the
rules be suspended and that the
record shows that the gentleman
has been read in full and
approved subject to the revision
and approval of the rules and
order of the business community
committee.
No objections so ordered.
The.
Do we have is a former
representative Tom Moran in the
gallery.
Please and everyone is welcome
you back to the house.
The gentle lady from Olympia.
Mr speaker you know I've served
in the legislature for ten years
in politics can be very hard
after all these years I finally
decided to get rid of my back
you Mr speaker do you want to
know why I'm dying to know
generally it was just gathering
too much dared.
Thank you generally.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
the house and reasons until two
o'clock tomorrow afternoon is it
take that want to welcome
everyone I thank everyone for
being here.
In the gallery the with this for
American Indian day.
Thank you for good work on the
floor please be sure to follow
the work for committees
afternoon enjoy the rest of your
day and your evening.
So forget about committees
tomorrow morning we'll see you
