Representative worked in.
There.
Representative Scott.
Your.
Representative Strickler more.
Representative Townsend.
Here.
Chair woman sorry on air.
Here.
Mr chair you have court.
Okay thank you Arsene good
morning everyone welcome to.
House Energy Environment and
natural resources were worth for
a second
we have three bills on the
agenda this morning.
We have five hours until the
floor session begins.
There's no reason this needs
take five hours I was helped I
know Representative Townsend and
I.
tools have another committee
starting in our
so and I have an interest in.
Wrapping this up sooner rather
than later the three bills the
first bill this bill we've
already heard it's coming back
as a committee substitute I
would like to focus this session
on the changes and substances
reimbursement I think at least
three hours waiting for a bill
itself.
The second bill changes a couple
dates.
In the third bill proposes
To clean up uranium mines which.
At some level I think we would
all agree is a good thing.
So the any questions or comments
from the committee before we
begin.
Okay.
We're getting Center steel
Lopez.
just second.
It's.
Good morning center good morning
Senator will work since furry be
turned here.
yes I expected her to be here.
K. my join us yet or she might
be in our.
Attendee list.
I I would check because she
He had been promoted okay yes I
see here.
Senator Sedillo Lopez any
experts.
We will have experts just
available for questions but not
But not making a presentation.
Okay so I have to go to improve
the panelists so they are
available.
Okay that would be
Eric Jansen.
I'm not sure whether professor
via is able to to make it this
morning and my oven roasted.
And remind me of a professor yes
first name is cliff.
And.
And I'm not positive about
whether
norm down is available.
But those were our experts are
less well.
My and then Ross and was on the
legal team that worked on and
worked on the redraft of the
committee substitute so I'd like
to.
See her promoted as well okay I
don't see her on the list and I
don't see.
Professor do up but.
Chair I think we're going to
just work with Eric chance okay
that's fine and I appreciate it
in the interest of time
The not doing a full
presentation again just focusing
on the the changes I would ask
Since committee so the yeah we
have the ongoing the difficulty
of disturbing Committee subs to
the public which is actually an
issue that
Representative Scott and I are
working on fixing although I
don't expect to have that sits
and plays until next session
since it's a short
bill wonder if you could simply
read the committee sub it's only
a couple paragraphs.
Representative Ferrary.
Representative Ferrary I'm sorry
Mr chair you just.
Yes.
Are you back yes I'm here
for some reason the internet was
going in and out did you say
you'd like us to read the new
one or just give a brief
explanation well since since the
committee substitute is a short
I thought maybe you could read
it just so the public could
hear.
Okay I'd be glad to
Well just yeah we do you like is
to go ahead and begin then yeah
I think right to start okay so
the four years thank you thank
you Mr chair
H. G. R. two proposes to amend
the New Mexico constitution to
grant residents and affirmative
right under article two bill of
rights to a clean healthy air
water soil and environment
stable climate and a self
sustaining ecosystem for the
benefit of public health safety
and general environment the
committee substitute two two two
four six two point two removes
the language providing the
people of the state shall be
entitled to flora and fauna and
to the protection of the natural
cultural scenic and helpful
qualities of the environment and
here's how it reads okay.
For more at U. adjusters and
some house cleaning up first I
received a question do we need a
motion to get out table of the
bills not on the table it was in
limbo so it was a five five of
the bill simply been rescheduled
we should however if you could
practice have a motion to
consider the committee
substitute.
present for you just for the two
oh two number again it's two to
two four six two point two would
someone please move the
committee substitute for
discussion.
You chairman I move this to
committee says to for
discussion.
Is there is there any opposition
to that motion.
Us now we are just discussing
the committee substitute sorry
Representative Ferrary please
proceed.
All right.
So
In the bill reads it is proposed
to amend article two of the
constitution of New Mexico by
adding a new section to read
eight the people of the state
shall be entitled to clean and
healthy air water soil and
environment is stable climate
and self sustaining ecosystems
for the benefit of public health
safety and general welfare.
The state including its
political subdivisions shall
serve as trustee of these
resources and help conserve
protect and maintain them for
the benefit of all the people
including present and future
generations the provisions of
this section are self executing
monetary damages shall not be
awarded for a violation of this
section is proposed to amend
article twenty of the
constitution of New Mexico by
repealing section twenty one the
amendment proposed by this
resolution shall be submitted to
the people for their approval or
rejection at the next general
election or any special election
prior to that date maybe call
for that purpose.
That's that's the text of the
committee substitute I I know.
Hearing the tax the resume isn't
the same as having and funny is
so to the members of the public
I do apologize.
Representative Ferrary would you
like to discuss the just a key
differences between the original
proposal and it's may
substitute.
Right yes.
Mostly we remove to flora and
fauna
because seeing that as part of
the ecosystem and already you
know being included and to the
protection natural cultural
scenic and helpful qualities of
the environment
as you brought to our attention
these things are also already
indicated as being protected as
part of the environmental and.
Ecosystem.
Senator Sedillo Lopez would you
like to add anything to that
Representative no I just wanted
to say to really thank the chair
for bringing for bringing his
perspective and his legal
experience to that to us we
there was a legal team that
really worked on the suggestions
and I think that the amendment
is nice is much cleaner and
tighter and gives a clear clear
direction so I really appreciate
that the other thing that we
remove that wasn't mentioned was
cultural
cultural relationship to the
environment or cultural I I
actually don't have the old one
in front of me and the idea has
as a Representative McQueen
pointed out was to protect a
places like Taco but protecting
environment would still protect
places like job growth so as the
chair pointed out it really was
not necessary
but we are we're happy to stand
for questions and and we firmly
believe that it is cleaner and
we thank the chair for various
suggestions and input to make
the amendment stronger.
Okay
Center and Representative are
you are you ready for questions
is.
Yes okay so we will we'll do a
full and then we will go to the
audience so first we're gonna do
the whole Augustine are you
ready with all.
Yes Sir.
So this poll will be he up for
twenty seconds I know we have
over two hundred people in
attendance of which is should I
think has great interest in in
not only the bill but also I I
think it's
I just can't continue to say
that it's the effectiveness of
the zoom platform we don't have
the committee room that would
see these people so I'm glad
everyone is here I see go head
with all.
Okay so it's eighty six percent
in support and fourteen percent
in opposition.
And that's a hundred fifty eight
people and support in twenty six
in opposition.
Never go to the public.
We're gonna do opposition first
so if you have your hand up to
support this bill please put
your hand down we're gonna do
ten minutes on the side because
we've already spent a
substantial amount of time on
this bill
My request is if you can to
focus on the changes.
I'm not the bill itself the role
thrust us we've already heard a
lot of comments on that
so I I ask that you focus on the
changes I recognize that not
everyone has the committee said
in front of.
so with that we'll do ten
minutes each and our first
speaker in opposition is Terry
Sloan.
Mr speaker I'll I don't know if
you're Mr Terry Sloan are you
ready good morning hearing yes
thank you for your.
Time this morning Mr chair and
committee members
I would like to just stay on
your your.
Contribution to
Clear and cleaning up the bill
making it more precise and I
just want to say
I'm excited for this bill and I
appreciate everybody to so that
we'll do bill are
fun yes very.
Are you in support of the bill
yes I am supportive of that
we're we're doing opposition
first so
will come back to you if you put
your hand up when we just for.
so once again we're gonna start
over in opposition so if you
support the bill please put your
hand down
our first opposition is very
very.
Good morning chairman we members
of the committee Amy there be
the registered lobbyist for the
Mexico oil and gas association
I and just here to state that
the SABC does not address the
issues that memo had with this
bill initially which is turning
over the legislature's authority
to the courts primarily so
depreciate that hearing this
morning but we still stand
firmly in opposition to the
bill.
Thank you the next step we have
Caitlin's proudly.
Morning Mr chair and members of
the committee my name is James
probably and I'm a registered
lobbyist with New Mexico
Department my secretary out I'm
back over twenty thousand member
families across the state we
still oppose house joint
resolution two we believe the
language in the committee
substitute as overly broad and
vague as the terms I just clean
and healthy are overly ambiguous
and leave much room for complete
confusion among those entities
who will be held responsible for
upholding these rights further
we would posit that the earth's
climate has never been quote
unquote stable were firmly fixed
as that term is probably defined
in layman's terms we believe
this inherently thought the
state agencies and political
subdivisions up for failure and
finally we believe New Mexico
already has processes in place
to protect our environment for
the benefit of our citizens and
the addition of this
constitutional amendment will
convoluted existing authorities
and protections with that we ask
that you do not passed house
joint resolution two thank you
for your time.
Thank you next up with Lauren
Patterson.
Thank you chairman claim members
of the committee lord Patterson
on behalf of New Mexico cattle
growers association our
membership stands in opposition
to the committee steps to date
for house joint resolution two
we have no clear definition of
what clean and healthy is or
which state entity determines
that we also have no definition
of what a stable climate is we
have a little direction on self
sustaining ecosystem all of
these terms open significant
opportunity for citizens of the
state to establish a standing in
opposing projects that could
benefit the entire state for
example wrote renewable energy
and other infrastructure
projects might be included in
that list it could also be used
by government agencies to limit
access to properties and
projects that state and
agencies administer or manage
limiting public oversight and
recreational activities for
these reasons we stand in
opposition and thank you for
your time.
Thank you next up is Jennifer
Weber.
Yes good morning chairman
cleaning committee members my
name is Jennifer Weber and I am
here on behalf of the New Mexico
chamber of commerce.
The chamber has supported
efforts to address the climate
crisis from the passage of the
energy transition act to the
efforts to develop an effective
methane rule and from supporting
income tax credits for renewable
energy installation to the
development of a hydrogen
infrastructure we understand and
appreciate the intent of this
legislation but it is what this
history and commitment of money
that we oppose the H. share to
committee substitute which would
repeal the existing New Mexico
constitutional environmental
provision which requires
legislative action and replace
it with the statement of
environmental rights that would
be self executing and give
brought standing and also
enforcement power to the
judicial branch New Mexico faces
many challenges in getting its
residents opportunities to stay
and work and raise their
families in the state and to
diversified economy and make it
equitable the uncertainty
created by H. G. R. two remains
we asked you do not passed out
of committee thank you.
Thank you next up is Deborah
Condit.
Good morning Mr chair Deborah
Condit and the registered
lobbyists for Interwest Energy
Alliance we are clean energy
trade association that
represents over thirty of the
largest renewable energy
developers manufacturing
companies in the nation we're
headquartered right here in New
Mexico interested in state and
respect opposition to the
committee separate share to
interested members are committed
to helping the state meet its
clean energy commitments the
responsible development of wind
solar and storage projects I
respect the Sanchez intent of
this piece of legislation and
the goals of a healthy
environment however without a
stable predictable business
environment companies will go
elsewhere we go on Sir to do
will prevent clean energy
development in our state for
these reasons we respectfully
oppose H. G. R. two.
Thank you next up we have
Bronson corn.
Thank you Mr chairman chair can
committee members my name is
wrong or not speaking on behalf
of the New Mexico will growers
we're speaking in opposition of
house joint resolution two we
thank you for amending the the
bill but it it still does not
address the concerns we have it
removes legislative oversight
specific resources putting it in
the hands of of on elector
agency officials it will provide
to anyone the right to sue
anyone and that's still a big
concern even if it has been
amended it does not address this
at all it does not clearly
define what a clean and healthy
environment is or who is going
to be responsible for setting
the standards it does not
address possible implications
when multiple agencies
jurisdictions overlap on
specific environmental
resources.
It has not addressed anything
about that the trust fund that
we listen to last week there are
still lots of concerns that we
have and I appreciate the time
you letting me talk.
Thank you we have coming grow
all.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee Kevin grow all the
CEO The New Mexico role like to
cooperate Association.
And we stand in opposition the
reasons we stated before
We serve twenty two percent of
the population in the state and
eighty percent of the land mass
the state.
And how are members of farmers
and ranchers have been good
stewards of the land the water
in the air for generations
the language change to New
Mexico is entitled to we don't
believe that being good stewards
of air water and land is
entitlement it's a
responsibility.
And we're responsible for the
stewardship of our rural areas
as we have been like it's that
for generations so we still
stand in respect for opposition
dates J. R. two thank you.
Thank you Judy Blume to.
The need to secure.
So I don't know what happened
there GDC raise your hand you
know come back to you next up is
Jim Winchester.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee the independent
petroleum association of New
Mexico remains opposed to this
bill despite the committee sub
we do feel that this has
potential devastating
consequences on all sectors
and we'll turn the land of
enchantment into the land of
litigation so we respectfully
oppose and thank you for the
opportunity to speak.
Thank you Mr this Carlos ontact.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee on Carlos contact
with the New Mexico business
coalition.
The amendment that was made to
this does not change our
concerns we feel is really going
to be anti development it is
going to limit job opportunities
in New Mexico which is one of
the worst things that we could
be doing right now we're also
concerned about the option for
litigation.
We think that businesses are
going to be tied up in
litigation when they could be
promoting their business and
creating jobs so we still remain
opposed to this thank you for
your time.
Thank you Marco Gonzales.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee this is
Marco Gonzales and I'm a
registered lobbyist for pattern
energy.
Hundred excuse me stands in
opposition to the committee
substitute it does nothing
substantively to change the
underlying resolution pattern
just completed the largest
single phase build of renewable
energy in North America nearly
two billion dollar investment in
New Mexico and is currently
developing six billion dollars
worth of projects in New Mexico
to which the proposed resolution
would put in jeopardy
development of large renewable
projects states several years of
planning development permitting
construction and require stable
business environment for
projects become a reality this
legislation if passed removes
that certainty and would impede
future development of renewable
energy in the state of New
Mexico we had a quite a bit of
experience with this ammendment
in Montana pattern has a direct
experience where we were
developing a large renewable
project but a large Texas
billionaire that owned a ranch
in Montana opposed the project
into the participating
landowners and when project and
was granted in junction by the
court which created enough
uncertainty that patent side not
to continue pursuing the
development the local landowners
were supporter of the project.
Sorry about the timer we're
gonna try GDP pointed again.
Thank you Mr chairman I
apologize on my laptop I just
did not see it on mute button JD
Bullington speaking on behalf of
the greater Albuquerque chamber
of commerce which still is going
to remain opposed to this
resolution primarily because of
the lack of definitions chamber
believes this could lead to lead
to significant unintended
litigation thank you.
Thank you we're gonna do one
more in opposition and that's
Bernalillo treat.
Mr chairman members of the
committee Bernalillo treat
registered lobbyist for Xcel
energy in the name of time for
the reasons stated previously
this morning we stand in
opposition as well we're glad to
work with that Sanchez if if we
can be of assistance thank you
for your time.
Thank you everyone for keeping
it brief we're not gonna do you
go to support so if you're in
opposition.
Please be trained them because I
don't
Really have a way to track that.
Our.
So the first the.
Speaker we have in support is.
Main street eagle.
Thank you chairman the claim.
We are in Joanna nations Macy's
great turning planetary health
is primary human well being the
residents our elected officials
are trustees of our life support
system and this ammendment is
that astonishing that we will
need to make as a whole for an
ecological civilization rather
than humans Senator
consciousness will become earth
centered passing this amendment
will do Center structures of
power so we share power with the
more than human life forms we
learn to think in terms of a
well we learn to experience a
collaborative intelligence we're
in every entity has agency in
response to its neighbors
acknowledging our radical
relatedness to the natural world
is not poetry it is the
practical intelligence of
survival thank you.
Thank you next up is Glenn
Griffin.
You.
I am one group from summer city
member of the state democratic
party's environmental justice
caucus and on rate in southwest
New Mexico reports Tyrone copper
mine has I opened its existing
doubling our proposed all within
a mile or two of each other I
will drive down to wells nine
hundred feet eight be blasting
blowing heavy metal dust with
intense noise from huge trucks
that all client.
This is exactly what the green
amendment can address what
minerals and mining cannot
environmental justice means
adjacent neighbors not losing
homes water wells are property
values say yes to the brain
amendment let the public vote on
their environmental rights in
November thank you.
Thank you next up we have June
persons.
Honorable chairman
representatives my name is Jim
Parsons from Rio Rancho and I
appreciate this opportunity you
have provided me to speak
strongly in favor of H. J. R.
two I urge you to please make
clean and healthy air water soil
and environment and self
sustaining eco systems for the
health of all New Mexicans your
top priority.
Because without a healthy clean
economy and healthy New Mexicans
New Mexicans will not have a
better now nor a better future I
implore you to please support
and vote today for H. J. R. two
thank you.
Thank you next up we have the
call hello.
Chairman members of the
committee my name's Nicole one
of which I'm a disabled veteran
exposed to environmental toxins
leader of the on a lengthy
progressive caucus and a core
member of the green amendments
for the generation New Mexico
teen we stand in support of the
committee substitute for H. J.
R. two we've been working with
leadership the Sanchez and are
supporting communities to make
sure the language within the
substitute still pulled the
primary goal and that is the
people's right to a clean and
healthy environment this session
we're asking our legislative
body to allow this onto the
ballot in November for the
people to vote on there's an
overwhelming need to protect our
state from bad actors who are
far too long taking advantage of
our pollute now create policy
later standard this substitute
once given to the voters allows
us that extra layer of security
for these very bad actors for
the above reasons we ask for
your continued support on the
committee substitute for H. J.
R. two thank you.
Thank you ms Mitchell Friedman.
Yes thank you I live in Rio
Rancho I was a corporate side
lawyer for many years I now a
high school history teacher
thanks to the alternative
licensure program and I want to
speak on behalf of this because
there's been discussions about
how the changes are not enough
for the folks who are all these
chamber of commerce types and
there are right behind all this
stuff is about jobs and what
people need to know is that the
oil industry numbers about jobs
are overstated by a factor of at
least two to three that there's
a new report showing by the food
and water watch where they
literally understood what was
included in what was that the
oil industry includes people
working at also as being in the
oil industry and one should take
people like that out it's about
twenty thousand jobs and the
problem with my fellow Democrats
is that they don't stand for
helping those people while we
transition I believe that the
green new deal for a program of
this ammendment even with these
changes will help in terms of
getting the needed litigation to
force these issues but what's
needed is to make sure that we
are supporting the work.
Sorry about the time our next
step is Cindy paps.
In the past we take our
democracy and the Democratic
Party of Santa Fe County I am in
support of the HSA are to
substitute I was in support of
the original bill may I say that
as in the original discussion of
amendment most of the opposition
comments have been this not all
lobbyists to businesses people
with no skin the game except for
healthy future for their
children and their children's
children are in support of the
substitute bill.
The bill not addressing the
definition of a clean and
healthy environment the
Albuquerque metro area received
a D. rating from the American
Association for days of
unlimited smog levels and the
greater Los crucis region
received an F..
So I would say this is a great
example of what a clean and
healthy environment looks like
please pass this bill let us
vote on it in the next election
thank you.
Thank you next up is a list Liz
Smith.
Hello.
I am a tribal member of those
going to public people and the
UNM student a senior.
This bill is a beginning to
beginning of a new New Mexico
and eventually part of a new
worst.
Jobs I think together we can
create new jobs and
opportunities for true future.
Oil and gas and nuclear is not
the direction of the future if
we are to have a future with
Mother Earth.
We do need a share to we need
this ammendment.
Because now is the time to
follow the use for the seven
generations yet to come.
And clean water is life.
Thank you all so much.
Thank you next up is David
Thompson.
Okay got me I'm David Thompson
I'm a first vice chair of the
Democratic Party here in Santa
Fe County
and The New Mexico green
amendment is overwhelmingly
popular here in Santa Fe County
and that's why the Democratic
Party of Santa Fe County
unanimously passed a resolution
in support of the New Mexico
green amendment
We urged passage of the
committee substitute thank you.
Thank you next we're gonna go to
commissioner Anna Hansen.
I'm good morning Mr chairman and
committee members I am on a
have to and commissioner of
Santa Fe County and I stand in
support of the environmental
rights amendment and the changes
in on behalf of Santa Fe County
commission I urge you to vote do
pass and let the state move of
our state make the judgment
this coming November like each
of you at the public service I
am a proud New Mexicans and seek
the best for our citizens of the
state that as we look back over
the hundred nine year history of
our constitution we must face
the fact that state officials
have not always protected the
rights of our citizens or of the
environment we cherish the key
feature of this amendment is to
elevate environmental rights to
a status alongside reelection
tried to bear arms freedom of
religion trial by jury and more
at its best it will promote
better decision making by state
officials and protect our mental
bright.
not only known today New Mexico
the future generation thank you.
Thank you next up is all get
sent.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
members and I want us specially
thank the chair for his work
with committee sponsored with
bill sponsors on this let.
The substitute.
I've heard objections from the
opposition about general
terminology in the language but
that is very common in all of
legal practice whether it's
reasonable fair unacceptable all
our terms that are subject to
interpretation and are
commonplace in legal practice.
The bill doesn't erode provided
responsibility.
Or create creating what climate
legislation it just gives
citizens standing to insist that
the government does do its job
and protect the environment and
their health and safety thank
you very much again and we are
just strong to pass to this
bill.
Thank you and we're gonna do one
more we're gonna go back to
Terry Sloan.
Good morning again Mr chair and
apologize I left my hand raised
thank you again for your work on
this new of the amendments to
the bill which I do support
and again.
And to the committee also of one
remind everybody that well I I
am native lived in a New Hope PA
born here in New Mexico
and I chairs are beautiful beat
mountains desert lakes.
Rivers and our overall
land of enchantment
beauty and I strongly support H.
J. R. two and I.
Urge this committee to pass this
and let the voters of New Mexico
decide whether they want these
rights in our constitutional
constitution and please pass
thank you.
Thank you for that in yup with
that we still have quite a few
members public you wish to speak
with an interest of time we're
gonna go to the the committee
excuse me for the committee I
would also
Encourage the committee to focus
on.
the changes to the bill I I
expect opposition from some
members size to suspect support
from others
I would rather not rehash the
entire three plus are hearing we
already hit our hat
before I go to the committee
the I should go back to the
sponsors Center steel Lopez this
year industry and Representative
Ferrary give anything that for
we go back to the committee
Mr chair two of our co sponsors
are on and I would ask they be
elevated to panelists that's
chair representative on
Representative Gail Chasey and
are at one of our expertise
available for questions of
professor cliff via is also on
I'm and I I I do have comments
but I would love to save money
for the end if they're not
already addressed in questions.
In response I believe that that
my responsible we address the
address the questions so I I
don't have it closing statement
at this time okay I appreciate
that.
so we will go to the the
committee that we're working on
preventing people.
But first up from the committee
we have Representative Townsend.
Thank you Mr chairman and.
Thanks the sponsors for.
Bring a bill forward I would
tell you that this bill is still
very troubling.
When you stop and look at.
The affects the potential
impacts.
it's kind of overwhelming
You have.
The largest industry in the
state expanding and opposing you
have the second largest the
agricultural community standing
in an opposing.
You have the chambers of all the
cities chambers of commerce.
And when you think about the
potential impact to those.
Industry in the in the fall out
Education potentially yes it's
really troubling.
The the idea that this bill is
ambiguous.
An open mind and opens the door
for courts to take the.
The responsibility and
accountability of the
Legislature away from them.
Yes it's not I don't believe is
the best in the state.
Trying to protect the
environment.
Is absolutely something that we
should all that.
But trying to impose.
What look like today more a
people that were.
Part of the party in Santa Fe
verses all of these industries.
Yes yes
Very problematic to me.
Yeah we had the New Mexico
business coalition we have
pattern energy of.
Has.
Built out several
of facilities in New Mexico
every one of these that are
active in New Mexico see the
problems with this the potential
problems with this bill.
Now I.
I do thanks the.
Committee substitute.
Is a little better than the
previous original.
But it's still way too far from
anything that I think this
committee should support.
Senator can you help me
understand.
You know when you say the right
to a clean and healthy air what
does that mean and how do I want
to I and what where's the
description for that what.
What is that in your in your
mind.
The where is the the way this
would be
talking start early this time
okay I'm sorry.
I know you're going to get to me
and I apologize it's the to you
in particular.
Thank college eyes I apologize
Mister chair of the that what I
see on the screen is a big
picture of representative
Thompson and so it's it's hard
for me to remember and I
actually apologize for that
Mr chair
Wait all constitutional
amendments all constitution bill
of rights have brought language.
And then it's up to the states
to interpret them I'm and so
then what you do is you would
look to legislation that we have
our clean air legislation are
clean water like our of.
Regulations that we have methane
regulations and if they were
compliance with those courts
usually do not you're one step
in they simply would not step in
where you would see a court
stepping in is in egregious
horrible cases in which the
state does not take into account
environmental impact of the
decision they make as I said
last time the cases involving
green amendments and other
states involved up permits that
are granted with no
consideration of the
environmental impact.
and they and they also there's
one interesting case in which is
a city
municipality used it too because
they had previously
had a contract to to do real
well and then when they realized
they drilled this well this
water well it would it would
destroy an aquifer then they
said they use the green
amendment as a defense to the
obligation to drill the well so
what this amendment will do will
protect our air land and water
and and the definitions we have
you know you you asked about who
sets these definitions well it's
the state that's the definition.
Well Mr chairman and and senator
I appreciate that but I would
tell you is that you know I've
been involved.
And quite a few.
Permits for land disturbances.
Environmental air permits over
my career.
And the state does a thorough
and the federal government does
a thorough job.
Requiring modeling for all of
those instances.
What this bill will do.
Will be will allow for someone
like one of the.
one from the audience said are
you had someone from one state.
But because they are wealthy or
connected can impose their.
We all in another state like I
think it was taxes in Montana.
This is the this bill is going
to open the door for standing
like has never been done before.
And.
Senator I saw you shake your
head I'd like to know why
because I believe I'd like to
I'd like to argue that point
with you.
Thank you Mr chair
thank you Mr chair now I have a
little sticky this as Mr chair
on the top.
Mr chair
Standing is is what gives the
people the right to our borders
what the constitution and right
now people have the right to
enforce the constitution they
they have that now so when you
say has never before Mr chair
when it is said has never before
Mr chair it it it's just not
correct people can enforce our
constitution our bill of rights
right now and.
The other thing that I want to
say and I think this is implicit
in the question is but wait
constitutional bill of rights
work they don't give private
cause of action against
individuals so this is not going
to be a lawsuit against.
It against an individual or an
industry it doesn't create that
what it does is it creates that
an individual or an industry or.
Or anyone else to hold the state
accountable and so the state if
it makes a mistake as I said
last time it's involved about
four to ten lawsuits a year in
in Montana and Pennsylvania that
is not an extraordinary number
of lawsuits they are all against
the state I'm and I've read the
published lawsuits and they are
all right basis that they did
Industry of course move forward
there were no problems and in
the cases shot show light on
really important issues such as
destroying to create into
Yellowstone destroying the
farmers
Water.
It did great things for those
states and they were it was not
of this massive log is massive
flood of lawsuits that people
keep alluding to has never
before so I appreciate the
questions to check Mr chair
Senator if we have those rights
today what is the need for this
bill.
Miss Mister chair
Representative Townsend this
bill sets policy for the state
and it gives the state
responsibility to pursue that
policy to protect our
environment our air land and
water and then it also it allows
individuals to hold the state
accountable for not pursuing
that policy for not pursuing
what it has so if it violates
its own regulations if it
violates its own
responsibilities it fails to
take the environment into
account and the people of the
state of New Mexico for the
ultimate the ultimate sovereigns
in our state we represent people
it will allow them to hold us
the state accountable.
I just like to add Mr chair and
representative The New Mexico
green amendment will encourage
government to encourage
sustainable environmentally
protected and innovative
development of the industry and
business growth so this is
something that degree amendment
will provide broad guidance and
insurers government decision
making sustainability and
procedurally considers
environment impact early in the
process when preventive of
pollution prevention of
pollution degradation of the
environment and harm is most
possible and it requires
equitable protection of all
community strengthening
environmental justice.
Chair and representative I
appreciate that but I just don't
believe it to be in the bank
that that I believe to be true.
Today across New Mexico we have
of leave them one minute do keep
me with the ETA you're not
You're not silenced by.
Would be kind enough to make
sure you understood that but
You know we have.
The majority.
Utility warning people across
New Mexico right now to prepare
themselves for potential
brown outs in the next.
this high demand season.
We have.
Some of these companies that
are.
Are applying for and getting
industrial revenue bonds takes
hate that it takes.
Tax dollars away from education.
All across New Mexico and I
think that is supported by when
you see.
You know all of these big
industry and Representative
organizations that come out and
say this is bad this is
intentionally.
Something that is going to harm
Ms and stall industry and
develop and develop my in New
Mexico I don't think it's in our
best interest to ignore that.
I I cannot support this because
I do not believe it's good for
New Mexico I I I I think we
should take great rate I think
we should enforce the rules that
that because companies to be
responsible I think we should
enforce rules.
That support clean water clean
environment.
And I know the industry that I
work for and and another
industry that I grew up in.
Are very responsible.
But yes as a political tool in
my and in my opinion for someone
to force their idea live I did a
logical beliefs on others.
And that's not good for New
Mexico New Mexico are to take
care of its own business and we
ought to support one another as
we do it and I think the
children in New Mexico will be
harmed because there will be a
loss of jobs will be lost of
industry not be loss of tax
dollars so Mister chair I
appreciate the opportunity thank
you.
Thank you Representative
Townsend except we have
Representative Strickler.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
thank you senator and and and so
data Lopez and and
Representative Ferrary
How you know the substrate for
House Bill resolution to the the
the problem still exists
that's really problematic you
repeal on online sixteen and
seventeen you repeal the current
pollution control provisions of
article twenty section twenty
one even in Montana they they
have done that and I'm I'm
Montana is our nearest neighbor
so I'm gonna use them as simple.
I'm not familiar with
Pennsylvania the other state
only three states have done this
and in a port in Mexico on a
we're just gonna get poor
Representative you Mr Mr
chairman and and and ladies.
Every.
Every business and industry
sitting counties Ag all poses
maybe they just don't know how
to deal with.
And I think a constitutional
amendment is is a bridge too far
I think we can do some
regulatory excuse me some
provided
Bills it might might strengthen
the environment department the
energy and natural resources
department this does take twenty
four the authority of the of the
legislature and and the
regulatory agencies and and and
Mr Mr Chairman we're saying that
great strides.
And
the environmental protection
from the energy natural
resources and the the
environment department
concerning methane emissions and
had a
Get a good handle on that the
the industry is is working full
speed on that because if you
have any leakage it you know
that's that's profits
you know.
Going to go away so that's
that's a good thing.
the energy transition act.
September vicious goals for
renewable energy and the those
goals are that are not going to
be met if this if this for a
constitutional amendment to go
through and pattern energy is
that is exactly why there the
large one of the largest when
providers in our state of if
this if this goes through you're
gonna have another Montana
situation we have a wealthy
landowner whether you know
Ted Turner whoever can propose
wind farms that take up a lot of
land and and have a lot of
visual pollution in certain
people's us so this would
undermine the energy transition
act that was passed by this
legislature the state that very
strong ambitious renewable
portfolio standards so.
The the the the change in
language online so twenty two
three twenty five Mr Mr chairman
and and ladies the people's
state shall be entitled to clean
and healthy air water soil and
environment a stable climate and
self sustaining eco systems.
For the benefit of the public
health safety general welfare I
think I think the state or does
that.
Regulatory certainty is so
important and I I got a
In the cities and counties are
worried about this.
They're concerned.
Mr chairman and the and ladies
of that the this this ammendment
might violate the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act which is been
really problematic for cities
and counties because they're not
able to get liability insurance
we we
and that's a that's a real
problem.
And our our status is just
trying to heal up from COVID.
we still suffer from the fifth
highest unemployment rate in the
country we're still a forty
seven point state the country
with the poor state west of the
Mississippi
our our neighboring states have
have recovered appointment for
pre pandemic levels and you know
we need to get there we need we
need to get a chance to help
going to the voters for this the
rank and file citizens is.
Certainly they they expect the
state to take care of the
environment that's that's the
mission of the legislature in
the regulatory bodies.
this is just a bridge too far Mr
Mr chairman and and and ladies.
The PRC is a good example PRC
went to an elected position now
they're going back to appointed
positions because the elected
officials didn't have the
experts the the expertise to
handle regulatory matters.
Electrical engineers accountants
you know a regulatory attorneys
it's it's just hasn't been been
good for states were going back
and.
You Mr chairman we we looked at
some constitutional mention in
the tax committee to help our
veterans
concerning property taxes in in
the will the committee so that
just wasn't the proper way of of
dealing with that issue that we
can do to do something more
creative in legislatively so.
This is a.
This is this is this is not
good.
It says to extreme and I'm up
believe that our regulatory
agencies the the business and
industry the cities and counties
the act act community
they're they're doing their
best.
to comply with state and federal
regulations for clean clean
environment to it because it's
in their best interest.
We all breathe the same air no I
San Juan County we're we're
richer a natural gas producing
economic and.
Coal coal producing areas like
to generations and and we do our
best the industry does our best
employees do their best
to take care of the environment
under the existing current rules
so Mr chairman and and analyze I
I don't have a question for you
I just say this.
Citing this the amendment
doesn't related to much
difference it's still the same
the repeal
the pollution control provisions
in it that to me is it is a.
is inappropriate so thank you Mr
chairman and thank you thank you
ladies.
And
Appreciate Mr chairman I respond
quickly so Representative
Ferrary I'm gonna ask you to
hold your response to your
closing I I know Representative
Strickler said a couple things
which I don't think are accurate
but since you didn't ask any
questions remove on and it will
come back to you before we take
about.
Especially in advocate calling
us ladies instead of
representatives and senator.
I apologize.
Sorry about that thank you very
much I appreciate that and I
apologize for not catching up
myself.
Representative Scott.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman.
Senator and Representative.
Each with this.
Legislation Michelin was.
Slide to the subjective nature.
Right.
Senator developed in section.
And frankly.
Yes.
Worst committee.
I'm gonna.
I could just a couple of
specific examples.
One of the.
Right.
State would be entitled to.
Once a self sustaining
ecosystem.
Which let's think about those
words for a minute.
And put them in the context.
Irrigated.
Culture.
And could Mister chairman
senator or representative
described.
How.
Your gated culture.
Yes.
Yes.
What.
The consequences the to the
state.
Mr chair representative
Representative Scott
self sustaining of course that
would be self sustaining
absolutely
self sustaining ecosystem
actually has
There's there's information
that and science that goes
behind this and it's been used
in New Mexico particularly in
mining let reclamation I'm and
so when you read the regulations
about mining regulate mining
reclamation you'll see this
language and it gives guidance
in how to put the environment
back into a self sustaining
important and that's just a
given example of something
that's not self sustaining.
It's something that's turned
into a desert with no water.
so the death cert desert to
vacation of New Mexico would be
not self sustaining so if there
were is an industry that came
and absolutely ruined a need at
any go system so that it was
just more desert.
And the state but that was just
hunky dory and did nothing about
that that would be an example.
Mr chairman and senator.
We're growing crops let me
specifically addressed one.
Okay.
Increase hello.
You.
Don't require.
I think your sheet of water.
Thank you.
Three.
There is no possibility.
That case could be made.
To be.
So.
Would you agree with that.
Mr chair representative that I
I'm trying to follow all the
negatives no possibility that
there would not be it could you
rephrase the question because
I'm not sure exactly what the
question is farming by
definition is self sustaining.
Mr chairman and senator I have
to respectfully disagree.
From both.
People.
We should with our current
system.
There is.
We go back to truly is a
definition of self sustaining.
What we're doing.
Yes.
What would we be harvested in
your own budgets might be grow
naturally.
I can't think of any more.
The cultural activities it does
not require.
Significant young point of both
manpower and energy if I could.
Let me now to.
She.
Second.
Part of that same sentence
which.
Do we have a and all right.
To a stable climate.
Mr chairman and senator.
This is beyond the control.
A stable climate.
Is beyond the control.
Any entity governmental.
In the state of New Mexico.
So.
We're if you will with reality.
Mr chair and I just want to
point out inalienable rights has
been taken out of the amendment
at the suggestion of the chair
so it is not it is not there
It I I think that it's important
to understand that science is
what governs this and it's also
important to understand that
what you said about farming and
what you're saying about climate
change there is no kind of
lawsuit against acts of god or
or it and this would not create
a lawsuit against pecan farmers
so all this would do is is to
state so important state policy
and protect an important legacy
of environmental laws and
regulations that have been
passed by our wide the
legislature and also the
regulations that have been pod
passed by the Lujan Grisham
administration so what this will
do was protect that important
legislative legacy this parade
of horrible's it's just it's
just not conceivable that the
con farmers would be sued for
using too much water what a
constitutional amendments do not
provide a cause of action
against individuals it's simply
a mechanism for the voters to
hold the state accountable
I believe that answers your
question.
Mister chairman Senator I must
respectfully disagree costs.
The reading of the language of
section.
What should.
A cause of action just to call
and farmers for use in what
what.
If let me move over us.
We're going to.
Respectfully agree.
To disagree on the potential
consequences there but let me.
Move over to the potential
conflicts of yes.
A constitutional amendment with.
The responsibilities for example
of the.
State Land Office.
To develop.
Thanks resources for the
benefit.
Thank.
With those responsibilities to
the environment.
Or to.
What.
There was a conflict between
those two.
Responsibilities.
Representative Scott
and protecting the environment
you are benefiting the children
and the generations to come.
And and Mr chair representative
it's always a balance that is
with the what the government is
always doing it's always a
balance.
And well I totally agree agree
with my colleague Representative
Ferrary the children will
benefit from a clean environment
and that's one of the reasons
we're doing.
Mister chairman Senator and
Representative so for example.
State Land Office sure.
What have you opportunity issue
at least which would result.
Well additional gas significant
revenue.
The kids in the short term.
Against potential environmental
damage or climate change in the
long term let me ask the
question again.
Which of those two
consideration.
Would you.
Mr chair
I may let me answer again the
state doesn't the state has to
make the balance so if the if
the if the environmental
degradation was going to caught
should to poison children to
literally cause them to die.
Of course they should stop that
but that's not what that's
that's not what happens what
happens is the state has to make
a judgment how toxic the is this
to to the environment and and
and to those children to our
communities how toxic is this
are we willing to to to a.
To allow that or are we going to
protect the environment and the
future of these children.
That's the balance the state can
they they if never trump
building situation all this does
is it brings the environment
into the into the decision
making process and into the
balance where it should be has a
right of the people to clean air
land and water.
Sh Mr chair I'm and
Representative Scott I just like
to add they're not mutually
exclusive and there are ways to
continue doing certain in of.
Productions of but I'm in a very
protective and safe way and so
having those kinds of
Built in
Remedies are are protection of
the environment when something
might be approved such as
drilling that is the importance
of you know of the.
Mutual protecting the
environment and children or for
the generations.
Mister chairman Senator and.
Representative Ferrary are.
Which you.
Gentle lady's three.
That talks.
You the whole.
Particularly with respect.
Language in section Hey.
I think yes and I believe the
business communities.
Their testimony today.
Maybe one likely.
This creates.
Difficult level I'm sure it is
the responsibility for the
protection of the environment.
From the legislative and
executive branches of this
government
into the purview of the Courts.
I do not believe.
Mr Chairman.
Senator and Representative.
This piece of legislation is
rich.
New Mexico thank you very much
for your answers Mr chairman
that's all I have.
Thank you representative
Gutknecht we have Representative
Montoya.
Thank you
Mr chairman.
Senator Sedillo Lopez.
I'm.
You mentioned earlier the.
As an example
that in another state
and I don't know if this was a I
I didn't catch whether or not
this was an actual situation or
if this was just an example of
what can happen when you stated
someone drawing a water well.
And that the a course of action
against and I don't know against
who I I didn't catch that was an
actual.
Simple force that it was an
actual situation if that was
just an example could you
explain that a little bit
further to me.
Mr chair Representative Montoya
at.
If I I'm not sure which case I
was like I was gonna remember
which case I was talking about
but there are several examples
of drilling that could cause
harm to harm to aquifer's and so
I said water well I mean there
is a case and one cannot
involving exploratory drilling
for the point that a gold mine
operator wanted to do some
exploratory drilling and they
were gonna put twenty four if I
recall exploratory holes and
that was going to because
farmers downstream the way they
were they were drilling it was
going to affect the pumping and
the the water of farmers
downstream and it was also going
to destroy a creek going into
Yellowstone.
And so the they're a permit was
granted the permit was appealed
and the court said that the
agency who granted the permits
needed to take into account the
destruction or that or the
impact I guess they didn't say
disruption I'm saying disruption
the impact of
The drilling on the farmer's
Water the the both quality and
quantity of their water and the
impact on this creek
and so I don't know if that's
the case I was discussing a
device that water well in that
case that was the of.
Miss they were exploratory wells
that would effect a water no
for.
Thank you Senator so.
This
it possible that drilling water
wells.
For for whatever use could be
contested by someone else
because you got to go get a
permit for that is that a
possibility because some.
Because of the aquifer is
already over taxed or
I mean I'm I'm just trying to
because water is a huge issue in
New Mexico.
And so I'm just wondering if
this
What this will do to private
property.
from from private property who's
looking to do something maybe
I'm wondering if this actually
heard the the the the pot
industry we were talking and
that's a very heavy.
reliant upon the water industry
and we're talking about
expanding that now and I'm just
wondering is there right of
action against.
Whoever would be granting
whichever government entity with
SB would be granting
The the use of water.
In New Mexico eight years back.
There are there are several
instances of people taking
things of their own hands and
violence over water that's very
very that was a very common
occurrence and I'm just
wondering now is is that would
there be anything.
That.
Okay good if they are not
wanting that in their area
because once again have a depend
upon water.
Is there right of action.
With the state granting right of
action for folks who want to
say.
I have you know we already have
diminishing water here.
Mr chair Representative Montoya
thank you for that question
right now the state engineers
office has the responsibility of
doing that whenever there is
whenever there is a well they're
supposed to take into account
the impact on the on the apple
for and the and the impact on
prior users so that that happens
now and people can object now
and so this wouldn't
I mean if they if the state
engineer was acting in a in a
really outrageously
environmentally insensitive way
perhaps
the but right now there is a
regulatory scheme that that does
exactly what you say.
it's so I'm I the only thing
that I think that this would
bring is if the stage and
engineer for some horrible
reason were to grant a permit
that was absolutely going to be
going to destroy the water or
destroy the quality of the water
that might be a basis for appeal
into the green amendment but
right now what you describe is
the law.
So thank you for that the Center
and I'm.
Mr chairman and senator I I
guess that's kind of the
argument that's being made on
our side that is the law already
in a in a most of these areas
just the.
the state engineer the State
Land Office the individual
communities that requests so so
cities and counties across the
state that also grant the
ability for the destruction of
the earth for one reason or
another for for development.
There's already that in place
now just like you described for
the for the state engineer but
there's nothing in that's when
you're saying they have a right
to and you say water is one of
those rights and act clean water
clean air.
It does seem like what we're
doing is putting all of these
folks in harm's way a potential.
Lawsuits because somebody has a
disagreement over what is a very
very vague description.
and you said it's vague on
purpose.
That means.
Anybody can look at it and read
it anyway they want to and then
take a course of action.
the state yep Mr chairman and
and senator I repeatedly said
take action against the state.
The broad term state is not just
the state.
But any subdivision.
In the state is that is that
correct
Senator.
Mr chair representative Montoya
yes it includes subdivisions
across state includes a visit
patients there are lots of us
the division's eight rent
permits for various things so
yes but I think it's important
to understand that when courts
look at these cases what they
look at is they look first to
see whether that what the state
has spoken they look to see what
are the environmental
regulations and again with this
do it does well this will
protect the good work of the
Michelle Lujan Grisham
administration with regard to
protecting our environment and
so all point look first you to
you when you when people talk
about no standards
in all constitutional analysis
they look to what is the state
done and if the state is done is
done its job there's not an
issue here.
I called the Representative
Ferrary present Montoya if I may
can I just clarify one point.
Please so Representative Montoya
both you and senator Steele
Lopez use the shorthand
subdivisions I just wanna
clarify for the public well
we're not we're talking about
is.
Political subdivisions of the
state thank you to cities
counties other other
governmental entities we're not
talking about like a housing
subdivision or H. away or
anything like that just just to
be clear I.
I appreciate that Mr chairman I
have I.
Really appreciable correction.
Thank you Mr chair I just like
to add
Representative Montoya that
there's a distinction between
clean water and consumptive
right and if you like to hear
more about that
Mr chance can add to that.
Thank you I I think I understand
the difference I'm.
Representative Mr chair I just
a.
What anytime the ground is
disturbed.
Any time it it just it does
appear and and that right that
what was happening
In in
That the simple it was given
that was going to stop a creek
it wasn't about it being made
thirty it was about it not being
available.
so but if it's if the if it's of
course can take about brought.
That's so the consumptive right
I believe is in included in this
at least from the standpoint of
the potential for a for a for
litigation so Mister chair and
and Senator Sedillo Lopez on
this I want to talk about the
government subdivisions
There I believe are six cities.
In New Mexico only six that are
have a population of forty five
thousand people or more.
And then there's a pretty
drastic drop off to the
remaining cities in the state
cities villages towns
depending on what their
description is.
And the idea.
That.
Something that that litigation
could be brought.
Yes the majority of the cities
do not have the budget.
If.
What happens is continue check
continued challenges.
they just don't have the money
to do this but we are talking
about other political
subdivisions as well not just
us the state of the state
agencies the city's the counties
but we're we're going down as
far as I believe a sick yes.
We're talking about water there.
If one person disagrees if one
person determines that they
don't like something that's
happening there's nothing here
that.
Excludes.
These very small subdivisions.
Government subdivisions.
And most of them once again I
think the six cities above forty
five thousand and the state
would have.
Lawyers on staff and then some
of those in the twenty to thirty
thousand person range probably
have a lawyer on staff.
But the low that.
any time there's going to be a
challenge even though there's no
pay that's that's in this
there's no there's no damages to
the individual in this
constitutional amendment it
doesn't stop.
An action taking place.
And I just think this is
irresponsible considering how
few.
Of the political subdivisions
can actually stay with Stannis
if this was limited just to
state agencies meaning statewide
agencies.
I I think it's be a lot more
palatable but by saying that a
course of action can take place.
With any political subdivision I
I think this is reckless I think
the con the consequences we can
we could bankrupt.
A. K. A. town we could bankrupt
a small a small city we could
bankrupt in a second.
With one action.
Whether or not there's a there's
a.
I think that's what happens here
though I think this gives the
what gives the public is the
public right to bully.
To stop progress.
I think it gives the the public
right to go in and say look.
what we don't like yes I'm gonna
take this course of action and
rather not
There there has to be some
lawyer involved for these
organizations to to even go to
the courts and file and say this
this is what we've already done
these are the things that we
would that we we follow every
rule we follow this person's
bringing a frivolous case.
it's one thing for the state to
a stand out as one it's one
thing for these larger cities
from Farmington from the size of
Farmington all the way up to the
size of Albuquerque.
But you start getting below that
and especially these Townsend do
not have major industry.
Take out the north northwest in
the southeast and you take up
the big industry that's there
you start talking about small
towns.
Santa Rosa to arrest.
Roy.
You start you start going down
that list.
And this becomes X. this could
become very disruptive if
especially if if it becomes
organized that people really are
rather than just going what they
are but they're already able to
do which is go to city council
meetings to go to planning and
development meetings and and and
let their complaints be heard
this gives them one more Avenue.
And frivolous or not these
political these government
political subdivisions
has to have to at least respond
can't ignore it and so I once
again down to these the second
is I have no idea of land grants
would be included in this as
well
but that's that's a problem I
think this is overly broad
overly vague and has the
potential I know you're not
looking at that potential.
But because I think the idea is
the big subdivision the big
government subdivision I think
that's what's in mine but that's
not what this would say this is
a this is a across the state
right.
That would be granted so I'm I
can't support this because of
how broad it is I can't support
this because there are no guard
rails there is zero guardrails
and because of that every single
consequence that could happen we
just can't even contemplate we
got two million people in the
state and two million different
people with maybe two million
different.
ideas of.
What this rate is going to mean
to them and I just I think this
this is very reckless I think
it's one thing to liable the
state at the end when state
agencies I think it's something
else to a liable I'm all of the
other good government agencies
and government subdivisions all
the way down to the second is.
Hi I think this is this is this
is just reckless so thank you Mr
chairman I cannot support this
legislation.
Thank you.
Except we have Representative
Dixon.
Thank you Mr chair
First a question for you Mr
chair in terms of of the FIR am
I correct that the FIR is based
on the original or do we have a
new updated.
representation I believe the
fires based on the regional.
Thank you Mr chairman
I have a couple of questions
actually have a lot but I think
I can limited to you know half a
dozen or so
the first question that I have
Mr chair and presenters is why
we're doing.
Putting this into section two as
opposed to moving into section
twenty one of the constitution.
thank you Mr chair and thank you
Representative Dixon that's what
that's a really good question it
it's very important that it be
in the bill of rights because
what we're trying to do is
empower the.
to have good to have this right
to air land and water and
unfortunately if you look
through the miscellaneous
section of the print of the
constitution
there are these like little
things about pensions that we
don't even comply with
it some some people I have said
but I'm not sure that I I would
agree with this analysis is that
that
that if they're in the
miscellaneous six a section of
the constitution they don't come
for right there there simply
statements of policy and so
that's that's very important the
placement in turning it into
something that can be
enforceable by the people at is
is absolutely crucial.
Thank you Mr chair and Senator
another question in the FIR the
New Mexico environment
department noted that the repeal
of the name of New Mexico
constitution article twenty
section twenty one would remove
legislative power over pollution
control they also noted that the
inclusion of environmental
rights within the constitution
would created a trusteeship
within each political
subdivision of the state thereby
causing confusion between the
new constitutional privileges
sorry constitutional provisions
an existing environmental laws
and I was just wondering if you
Mr chair senator or
representative could
respond to that so I understand
your perspective
Thank you the legislature has
the power of to to
To pass environmental
regulations without article
twenty section twenty one that
did not come for the to confer
any power to the legislature
simply stated a power that the
legislature already had and then
I'm sorry what was your second
question.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
so creating transfusion between
the provisions in existing
environmental us thank you I'm a
trustee relationship with
impose an interesting
relationship imposes some
important obligation I I think
you could argue that we already
have but for example we have the
trust of the duty to our
constituents of loyalty we have
the duty we have the duty of
prudence I think of what but the
trustee relationship and and but
this is my personal perspective
but a trusting relationship act
actually imposes these legal
obligations and it's with the
duty of prudence for example
that the trustee would exercise
ordinary skill caution prudence
and act informed cautious way in
managing this so this creates
the natural resources are are
expressed so we have to be
prudent in managing the the the
corpus of the trust which is our
natural resources we have a duty
of loyalty that is to look at to
act in the interest of the
beneficiaries of the trust which
is the people of the state of
New Mexico and the duty of
impartiality which means the
trustee should treat all
benefits to beneficial
equitably which is what why we
talk a lot of last time about
environmental justice so those
trustee duties that are very
well established and law are
things that we specifically want
to include now.
Not everybody agrees that we
already do that but I try to act
in that way the legislature I
really try our to do to keep in
mind that my responsibility is
to the people of the state of
New Mexico and this just brings
natural resources into that
ambient of protection.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator so
what happens
what happens when
someone you know as citizen
argues that
you know their constitutional
rights
conflict with let's say B. ETA
just for you know for example
it's all know constitutional
right is is unfettered and so
it's always a balance and so you
know of every every
constitutional right has to be
balanced with the state's
interests and the state's needs
and I and honestly when you talk
about the ETA that's very
consistent with the intent of
this amendment because it's to
protect our environment and so
we would just be a very
frivolous thank and we have not
seen for who was lawsuits in in
other states.
Thank you Mr chairman Senator so
actually two other questions to
follow ups to that so I The New
Mexico Attorney General also
pointed out that there's a this
could create a conflict between
overlapping trustee
responsibilities of the state
and its political subdivisions
So that was that was one thing
that I I wanted to flag but with
regard to frivolous lawsuits Mr
chair and senator.
I believe you mentioned that in
Montana for.
There were four of ten lawsuits
on average a year background
money can intensive in sorry yes
Montana and Pennsylvania I'm do
you know Mr chair and senator.
Do those states have do they
have do they have Civil Rights
Act.
We do not.
And so we want Mr chair I
apologize Mister chair this is
why we specifically excluded
monetary damages because they do
not have a Civil Rights Act in
the Civil Rights Act imposes a
two million dollar cap on
monetary damages and of for
violation of the bill of rights
so that was a change we made
from the provision that we did
last year because this this is
an incentive for people to
protect the environment not to
get money damages.
Thank you Mr chair and Senator.
And I agree with with that
however one of the things with
the Civil Rights Act that we did
here is there is a two million
dollar cap on fees and so while
a citizen may not be able to sue
for ten million dollars in
damages
an individual citizen or a group
of citizens could sue
and then there attorneys will
could be awarded up to two
million dollars in fees is that
is that still correct in.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
thank you Representative Dixon
that is a that's a very good
point and and that is another
reason that it's important that
it be in the Civil Rights Act
because and and it just to
remind you about this or Rights
Act it is not an automatic grant
of fees it gives the District
Court discretion to give to the
prevailing party.
Attorney's fees and so it's it's
not an automatic act and and if
you recall that was exactly the
discussion we had about the
Civil Rights Act.
Thank you Mr chair and Senator
Question about the fiscal impact
based on the FIR so and
Mr chair Senator Representative
how does a constitutional
amendment proposal a fact
The.
How does how do we calculate
costs so there's the election
but then how do we look at
potential future impacts thank
you well it certainly would not
be the FIR it is the only
talking about when you're but
what I always talk about and I
would be happy to to have a
hearing just on this is the cost
of not doing anything I believe
we put sixty million dollars
into the remediation of that
What we sinkhole in Carl's that
for example if you look at the
health and welfare of the people
of the state of New Mexico and
the correlation with COVID
infants and COVID cases with
areas that have high methane
there is a really big health
cost more if you look at the
cost of remediation of the of
the pads it looks like we have a
billion dollar responsibility I
know that the federal government
is coming in and and covering
some of that but I believe that
the cost of not protecting our
air land and water are much
greater in terms of suffering of
the people and also just dollar
amounts to the state for fixing
things that we don't that we
don't prevents from happening in
the first place thank the chair
I just like to add Mr chair and
representative Dixon if you look
at the cost of not doing
anything and how the uranium
cleanup is going to cost us
billions of dollars.
Thank.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
and representative and I
absolutely agree I mean one of
that you know the what I
appreciate about this effort is
you know print protecting our
citizens and the future our
environment
But one of the problems we have
in the legislature that I do
find frustrating in other bills
is that we don't actually when
we do fiscal impact reports we
don't take into account as other
things and so my question still
stands as to what fiscal impact
we're looking at because I think
that's given that the Civil
Rights Act does allow for up to
two million two million dollars
in fees we know there's an
election
other agencies are going to be
impacted I think it's a fair
question to ask what the actual
fiscal impact would be on the
state and so unfortunately I
don't think that R. F. I. R.
that we've been provided
does that too
And you know.
That maybe that's a question for
another
committee your down the down the
line.
Mr chair.
I I apologize I was just gonna
say I agree Mr chair it does not
address that.
Mr chair and senator and
representative
One of the things that has been
interesting for me to hear in
the discussion that really gives
me pause is of the testimony
about pattern energy and their
experience in Montana.
And
You know the reason that gives a
deposit because I firmly support
renewable energy and the
transition away
from some of our fossil fuels
and and that zero economy so I'd
I fully support that but we are
what is the average length of
time for a trial for
if someone files an and an
injunction and the case is going
to go to trial what's the
average length of time here in
New Mexico actually I'm not sure
about the average with length of
time but if an injunction is
file they have to be a hearing
preliminary hearing within ten
days and then they they expedite
they expedite the the case
of what I've seen is getting at
getting a trial within actually
in the cases I've been involved
in I've gotten trials within
three months of filing for it
for injection because it by
definition it's it's a very
quick when I also wanted to say
about the pattern in education
one tanna I haven't studied it
but just from a brief review
that it did not really involved
of the the green amendment in
Montana it was a nuisance case
and so we have that now if if
our age if our industry create
nuisances I believe that was the
case in which of for example the
pipeline burst in in the and
that important outside Carlsbad
and they lost their dog and
chickens there goes that case
was a nuisance just a straight
nuisance case and we have that
now and so right now industry is
liable for damages that it
causes individuals and and this
wouldn't change that it wouldn't
make it stronger it would make
it weaker that's just the
reality of nuisance law now.
And I just like add Mr chair and
representative Dixon that this
won't harm or stall industry if
they comply with law and use
best practices to protect the
environment.
I'm thank you Mr chair and
senator and representative but.
An individual could if they have
concerns about the environmental
impacts of construction of a
wind farm or solar farm they
could still file for an
injunction if they believed that
it was gonna irreparably harming
their property.
Is that correct that well that's
true now that that is true now
this this is a lawsuit against
the state.
Because the first thing you do
in any constitutional case the
first question that the court
looks to is what is the state
action when you when you
teaching Conlon that's you
really need to get students to
understand what state action is
and where there is a state
action so but any kind of case
against individual would have to
sound in toward a new sense in
nuisance Law or other other
statutory scheme but not a
constitutional to.
Thank you Mr chair and senator
and representative I'm I don't
have any other questions I think
that you know for me what this
discussion it really shows is
that
I'm not a constitutional law
expert and you know the
system that we have here I think
I have concerns about sort of
the process and having.
Sort of a limited time for
discussion and.
Thorough review
I.
One hundred percent support the
the principles and that you know
the goals of this constitutional
amendment and you know
protecting the environment our
water air land for future
generations I also
I am concerned about the balance
of you know are we.
Making it more difficult for
agencies are we what are the
unintended consequences and
that's kind of what I don't know
and you know I sort of expect
the Judiciary Committee you know
if this goes to the Judiciary
Committee.
They'll certainly be looking at
some of those things
So I appreciate that and I
really do appreciate the
dialogue here this is you know I
think it's a an extremely
consequential an important
discussion and
so thank you very much.
I I truly apologize I'm I'm
being called in to Senate
Judiciary for another of bill
that I have and that has to be
in person so I deeply apologize
they're struggling to keep
quorum is what I'm getting
so I I.
I hate this because where Jimmy
but I I asked to be excused
Center that's fine
Representative Ferrary is here.
thank you Mr chair.
Sen.
Yeah I had no other questions
okay so we're gonna go.
Next to.
Representative Sarinana who just
disappeared from western.
I'm here.
I'm here there she is.
I just wanted to comment that
Right we're going to present
arguments move on all right
thank you thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you Sanchez for bringing
this bill
I think everyone should have a
right to clean air and clean
water and I really have just a
comment and with I I believe
this bill proposes to get things
for for our state.
And I just want to talk about I
remember driving from
Albuquerque to hops
Education Committee and it was
getting dark you can see that
the oil wells and you can see
the flaring going on but nothing
firing and I remember when I
heard about nothing and is
responsible for air pollution
causing premature deaths
in significant respiratory
problems and I remember thinking
I'm glad I don't live in this
area I'm glad I don't have to
live near oil wells.
Earlier one of representative
spoke about bankruptcy.
You know just the extracted from
the ground.
Earning power plants human
health is compromised people
live close to oil gas wells
Experience an increased
incidence of childhood leukemia
asthma attacks continue part is
effects low birth weight and
premature death.
So many families are going
bankrupt because of these
illnesses that are caused
because of the extraction of of
Extraction oil wells so these
are the people we're trying to
protect.
One of the people groups that we
are trying to protect and so I
love this bill and I did want to
move to do passed on the bill I
don't know if we have anybody
else to speak but.
Representative Sarnia are
come back to you for the motion
okay.
Was at the end of your come
renewal yes thank you Sir.
For further questions or
comments from the committee
before I make a couple comments.
Okay so seeing that
So first I wanted to
Clarify a couple points the
first is.
This this proposal does not
allow individuals to sue other
individuals.
It just doesn't so so that's
been expresses a concern but
that's not the case there's also
no financial liability either to
individuals who can't be sued or
to political subdivisions other
than the potential.
None this is not automatically
but the potential of an
attorney's fee award.
And I am not a litigator but I
think in general the the
attorney's attorney's fees would
only be awarded at the
discretion of the court if the
court felt that one side was.
perhaps a bad actor you know
clearly erroneous no some
something something the
creatures that the attorney's
fees for wanted to so those two
things
regarding we we prep pattern
energy appliance and I I have an
experience with pattern energy
myself I think the pattern
lobbyists dropped off.
Pattern apparently is present in
Montana that relief was not
agreement dictates.
The pattern has completed the
Western Spirit transmission line
in New Mexico.
They built that with the
assistance of Rita that
renewable energy transmission
thirty there was no public
process.
For that transmission line.
Credit crust I think hundreds of
miles.
No public input.
Pattern I will say to its credit
tell the public meeting at least
one down mountaineer.
The gun here full from
community.
And we look at their lot moved
further south.
and I think part of it was.
there they commit a further
south for their larger
landowners today if you were a
lenders that they need to deal
with.
They also
you'd we're dealing with lenders
that that wanted to compensation
for having the the line on their
property.
But.
Under our existing system
there's there's no public input
in citing a transmission line
about that the sun Z. a project
is under a different regulatory
regime.
With a different result but you
know this this bill would
provide the public voice and
something like that so I'm yeah
I think that's a good thing I I
appreciate the the Sanchez
willingness to make changes to
this.
I had the balls specific
concerns in general concerned
about the original bill they
have largely been addressed.
My specific concerns regarding
drafting we fixes the general
concerns about the impact
the impact is still unclear
But it's more focused in the to
me bringing in the trustee do
the the trusty relationship.
Makes it clear it brings with it
two things one essentially a
materiality standard that you
ended the original I felt you
could see to say County for
issuing a building permit.
and I don't think that's the
case anymore because I think a
trustee the trustee relationship
we're we're talking about more
significant decisions.
With larger impact.
The other thing that makes clear
for me is the trustee will be
given at least some differences
in their process and their
decision making so it's not a
matter of a court simply
substituting its judgment for
the end result.
Decision maker
the trustee mentioning the
trusting relationship.
To me makes it clear that there
is there is that decision making
process and that would be what
is challenge was that process
flawed or did it
To disregard the the interest
involved.
to the a recheck clearly
erroneous result.
So that's why I feel more
comfortable with the committee
said that I did the original
bill and that's slide into the
sport.
Before compacted Representative
Sarinana for a motion
this sponsors of any final
thoughts that like to add.
Mr chair I don't have final plus
I just want to say they took
another bill and I'm back.
Thank you for years statements
that I heard I I believe that
my.
The point I wanted to make I
think we're all addressed in the
questions.
Thank you we appreciate the
reconsideration and being able
to work with you on this hello
again.
This is protecting people and
this is a good thing.
Representative Sarinana.
Thank you Mr chairman I move to
pass on this bill so a do not
pass on the bill in the past on
the committee substitute for the
bill to yes yes yes correct this
is our second the second if this
is Representative PAM what are
the.
The second for Representative
turned in one scene should you
take the vote please.
Yes there.
Representative Dixon.
Yes and I would like to explain
my vote.
Representative Garcia.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative one point out.
No.
Representative for that.
Yes.
Can you hear me.
Representative.
Representative Strickler no.
Representative Townsend.
No Sir.
What.
Representative Garcia.
Vice chair are you yes.
The queen.
Yes.
The mobile.
I hear you there.
Yes.
If I.
The only.
For yes.
All.
Representative Garcia has a bad
connection but I heard include
yes is that correct is that
correct and as per act so I've
seen please but.
Representative Garcia down is a
yes.
Yes it's been so corrected.
The vote is six in favor or
oppose Representative David
Dixon would like to explain
about.
thank you for that reminder so
you do have a due pass on the
committee so Representative
Dixon to explain about.
Thank you chairman I just want
to say that I think the
principal and concept are good I
have concerns about the legal
and constitutional issues that
that may arise and so I
appreciate this is going to go
to House Judiciary for more more
review and clarification so
thank you very much.
Thank you Representative Dixon
thank you Sanchez and experts.
Chairman.
Yes.
I have I apologize if you know
we both have to committees going
on at the same time minutes.
Almost impossible I just want to
make sure that my doctor was
recorded as an of of that's
correct Representative Townsend
thank you very much sure.
okay thank you everyone we will
move on.
To our second bill today.
Thank you Mr chairman committee
we appreciate it.
Our next bill is house bill one
twenty five.
it's a cliche in the list
legislature that quote this is a
simple bill but
I think the changes to this are
impacted simple bill
Representative Ortez four years
thank you Mr chair and I wasn't
planning on saying that but but
you you did say for me so the
after we adopted hospital
fifteen last year this is and
will building tax credit we
learned that the funding for the
previous twenty fifteen program
would run out by March or April
of this year twenty twenty two.
The twenty twenty one funding
isn't available until April of
twenty twenty three so what this
bill does Mr chair members of
the committee is it closes the
gap between March or April of
twenty twenty two and April of
twenty twenty three I do have an
expert here with me Mr chair his
name is Steve Hale with bill
green New Mexico.
I'm not sure if he has joined us
yet if.
Mr chair if Augustine could
bring him over his name is Steve
Hale so I have he Steve there's
no last name Steve is that if
that's use detail please return
it out well there's never mind
thank you Mr chair if.
Mr Hale would like to make a few
comments are that the that the
fine and thanks.
Mr Hale.
Mr Chairman representative thank
you very much for allowing me to
testify on this important bill
of this is stable building tax
credit had been changed and up
whites the last time that we.
created a funding gap and we did
lose many participants during
that that gap and what we're
hoping to do with this date
change on this bill is to not
lose even more participants we
have a.
Over four thousand homes that
have been certified under what
is now called the twenty fifteen
program and so the tradespeople
of learned building science
techniques that give the
customer a much better home and
the tax credit allows that
better home to be done and the
affordable price so we would
really appreciate the ability to
have this.
Program transition to the more
rigorous twenty twenty one
standards without a long gap.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr chair I I see that
my co sponsor Representative
Lujan is also here she like to
speak for a second.
Thank you Representative Ortez
and thank you for
Bring this back up again and and
making the corrections and and
extensions that we need on this
it's very important as it is you
know being really utilized and
and the need is there so keeping
it brief thank you members and
look forward to the
conversation about this and I
hope we get you thank you.
Thank you.
Representative Ortez okay we'll
go to the public first we'll
start with the whole I've seen
if you already please but up.
So the poll will be twenty
seconds and it's just an
opportunity for members of the
public we sell over a hundred to
indicate support or opposition
to this bill.
And that's three seconds and we
have one hundred percent
support.
to no opposition.
So do any members of the public
wish to speak on this bill will
we'll do
ten minutes the.
No more than ten minutes
So then each so if you please do
pre I appreciate that first up
we have Randy trainer.
There again thank you Mr
chairman members of the
committee of the sustainable
building tax credit is been a
longstanding programs it's been
a successful program as our
building codes had become more
complex these stable billing tax
credit has helped transition the
construction industry to deal
with and cope with these more
complex building codes we
appreciate your support on this
bill thank you very much.
Thank you we have devolved.
Thank you Mr chairman the undo
button appear at that time thank
you I just want to say that the
I'm JD Bullington registered
lobbyist for the American
institute of architects acts New
Mexico chapter and we strongly
support this legislation thank
you.
Thank you Charles Barker.
Mr chairman members of the
committee on Charles good marker
speaking on behalf of natural
resources defense council we
thank the sponsors for bringing
this bill it's the it is I hate
to quote you Senator Neville.
We simply request your support
for the bill thank you.
Thank you.
Next we have Barbara Calif.
Good morning chairman green and
members of the committee my name
is Barbara Calif and I represent
the league of women voters of
New Mexico eight supports
policies and incentives that
reduce greenhouse gas emissions
by promoting greater energy
efficiency please encourage
investment in sustainable
buildings like giving a do pass
for H. B. one twenty five thank
you.
Thank you next up we have June
persons.
Honorable chairman
representatives I'm speaking in
support of H. B. one twenty
five.
We know that how we use energy
in buildings is forty percent
contribution to our climate
crisis thank you very much for
bringing this bill forward and I
hope everyone will pass on to
pass and vote yes for this bill
thank you.
Thank you we have Luis Carrero.
Yes good morning Mister chair
and the members of the committee
was gonna with the Sierra Club
Yogananda chapter I don't want
to take too much your time we
just support this bill last year
we support our this today we
also support with that that
money forward as well so
just want to ask you to vote yes
today thank you very much.
Thank you next up we have
commissioner Anna Hansen.
Good morning Mr chairman and
committee members I think you
are to representatives are yes
and Lujan for bringing this bill
forward I am on him commissioner
Santa Fe County and I stand in
support of sh H. B. one two five
thank you very much and also
Santa Fe County board of county
commissioners also supports this
bill so I urge you a do pass
As I think this will continue to
help our citizens thank you very
much.
Thank you we have added.
Mr Chairman thank you for your
time I'm speaking in support of
moving the date forward in this
bill
in order to so that we don't
have a gap I think if we if the
funding runs out for your may be
hard to get builders back on
track this program has been
highly successful we're building
far above code we're building
some of the best homes in the
country I'm out there in the
field I'm actually a bit of
verifier and again I want to
speak
in support of moving the date up
so we don't have that gap thank
you.
Thank you we had a telephone
number ending in three eight
eight four.
Mr chair can you hear me yes.
Thank you this is Tammy people
corn with southwest energy
efficiency project calling in
from my phone partners for that
pardon my problems here with
technology but I just wanted to
say that we support this bill as
you all remember this bill was
before this committee last year
and I want to let the committee
members know that this bill
that's before you today bring
this bill back to what it was
when you heard it last year the
funding gap was created in an
amendment on the Senate side and
so this is really just bringing
it back what this committee
supported last year we ask you
to please have to do that thank
you.
Thank you for that
there are no further members of
the public which is just fine
thank you for your input.
Representative Ortez reject add
anything before we get to the
committee thank you Mr chair.
Are there any questions.
There are no questions from the
committee with some way to make
most.
Mr chair I'd like to move but do
passed house bill one twenty
five.
We would you pass you in the
second.
Thank you please take the
booklets.
Yes Sir.
Representative Dixon.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Herndon yes.
Representative one point.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
No.
Representative Townsend.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative one going out.
Representative Townsend.
Vice chair Sarinana.
Yes.
Chairman the queen.
Yes so I seem four units of the
it is the practice of this
committee to hold a vote if
we're missing members of that
that might affect the outcome of
the I don't think that's going
to affect the outcome of the
vote although I do see
Representative Townsend are you
back.
Yes Sir I'm back I am.
Thanks for a I'm trying to do to
committees at the same time with
critical legislation and both of
them and.
And I think this is a.
Chaos.
To me wrong I don't think we
ought to have to to committees
run and at the same time
Mr chairman this this is
ridiculous of can you tell me
what can you brief me on about.
I appreciate the difficulty in
multiple committees the vote
currently stands at six to two
in favor with the two
Republicans with Republicans
voting in opposition and we have
not heard from Representative
Montoya.
I don't know.
Thank you Representative
Townsend or.
We are you out there.
Yes Representative Townsend is a
no.
I see I think you can now that's
the.
Yes.
It is six in favor three.
The servers were to is you have
a two passed.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
members of the committee
Representative just for quick
point of clarification on both
you and vice chair Sarinana
proposed a second
can I get clarification as to
act I just I seconded the motion
yes.
Representative Sarinana.
Next we go to our third and
final bill of the day and
proceed the last bill was quite
efficient our third bill is a
house bill one sixty four.
We do have a committee
substitute Representative
Sarinana will you be presenting
this or roll Senator Steinborn
be presenting this.
Mr chairman I will be presenting
it.
Do you have any experts that we
need to bring into the panel but
we were hoping to have W.
secretary Ruston not sure sees
here have Rose Rohrer and Susan
Gordon I believe there out
there.
So if you could raise your
hands.
That helps us find you.
Okay so we got rose.
isn't Susan Gordon I see if you
find Susan and I don't see the
secretary roots okay.
And Jerry ship nurse there but
he was going to be one also.
I don't see it Sherri.
Okay
because they they join us will
We'll try to get to them
Representative Sarinana four
years thank you Mr chairman
members of the committee I'm
here to along with my co
sponsors Representative Allison
Representative Johnson to
present house bill one sixty for
the uranium mine cleanup.
do you want the number for the
two of two for the committee sub
for.
That's thank you by any other.
Members to.
Go ahead read it thirty two two
two four four nine point two.
With someone like to move the
committee set up for discussion.
Mr terrible the committee set up
for discussion.
There any objection to that.
Okay so we're on the committee
said.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Bill one sixty four directs the
department of environment to
coordinate the state's effort to
clean up and reclaim former
uranium mine and mill sites
there are ten other agencies
that will also be supporting New
Mexico NMED in the cleanup and
remediation the duties of New
Mexico and and environment
department will be to develop a
strategic plan establish an
effective mechanism for
consultation and coordination
establish uranium mine and mill
reclamation as target economic
development to include
worker training and business
development programs for
reclamation activities they are
to develop and maintain a
centralized repository or
database of uranium mine and
mill sites and the status of
what is happening at those sites
at all times
they will establish or an annual
report that will come back to
the intermediate that has
displaced Committee about what's
happening but activities are
happening and it will create a
uranium mine reclamation
coordinator at both NMED and
EMNRD to carry out the
provisions of this section.
house bill sixty four also
creates a non reverting uranium
mine reclamation revolving fund
in the state and we're
requesting three hundred fifty
thousand dollars for expenditure
the balance that is remaining
after FY twenty three shall not
refer to the general fund Mr
chairman this bill is funded in
partially the budget and
partially with you money so
Mister chairman I'd like to
defer to my co sponsors to speak
on why we need this bill I'm I'm
hoping Representative Johnson or
Representative Allison both
speak are they here.
Representative Sarinana I
haven't seen Representative
Johnson Representative Allison.
Okay I want done.
You.
Yes Representative Johnson
welcome thank you I I miss that
is it my turn to make a comment
yes it is okay thank you.
What.
He.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
that committee members
colleagues and audience
everybody listening I am
Representative Doreen Wonda
Johnson and I represent house
district I McKinley and San Juan
counties.
And I have experience of this
horrific uranium spill one of
them.
firsthand.
I want to ask you to imagine the
largest release of radioactive
material waste in the history of
the United States larger than
three mile island near your
home.
Your ranch your farm your
grandchildren your family your
livelihood your legacy.
That's what I experienced I was
a little girl home with my
grandparents.
When the uranium spill occurred
along within the rail cargo in
northwest New Mexico.
And after a day the day after I
was standing next to my
grandmother she was standing on
the porch and you look out to
her land.
And our court feel my
grandparents were well respected
ranchers and farmers and they
were well respected for having
one of the largest corn field.
In the area.
And she looked out to her ranch
our livestock her corn field and
and she said she was crying.
And Shia took.
For a brand wipe her tears.
And she said what will I leave
my children.
What is the legacy that I will
leave my grandchildren.
Right point is the very basic
necessities to live a good life
was destroyed without warning.
Which is a water land and air
and they were the petty me
making a good living hard
workers.
And now the most important
natural and sacred resources
were destroyed.
So.
This bill I support this bill.
Working on this initiative sense
I was elected into office.
Half of my community and
communities alike.
And this is very important part
communities I think a
coordinated position will help
create a database and coordinate
existing stakeholders and
communities the opportunity to
fill facilitate and provide a
coordinated.
And provided transparent effort
to work on remediation education
workforce initiatives.
So I just want to thank you for
allowing me this time to share
Mr chair committee members.
Thank you Representative Johnson
for that
I see that Representative
Allison is here as well another
co sponsor Representative
Allison.
Good morning.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you members of the committee.
I would like to share with you
this morning why I signed on to
this legislation with my sister
Representative M. Sariñana.
I come from the four corners
area.
Where there have been a number
of abandoned uranium mine sites.
And I've attended several
meetings over the course of two
summers.
And the stories that are here
have been heart wrenching and
just really really neglect for
our fellow people in our area.
The testimony I would like to
share with you very quickly some
of the testimonies that I have
heard.
I want to make this quick
because I'm another meeting and
I that's why I guess come over
next door to
Representative Syrians anyway
the people that talked about in
their testimony for uranium of.
Compensation was so.
Today after over fifty years
since the.
Mines have closed they are still
suffering the after effects.
As we all know one of the
primary livelihoods of the
Navajo Nation is raising
livestock.
I have heard reports that after
a rain even just a gentle rain
when the little river starts
flowing.
After the aftermath you can see
what looks like call in.
Gold along the banks that is
some of the uranium status still
leaching from the many years
after mine closure and when the
water gathers the livestock no
one to go to those and the
during from that water.
Another story that I heard.
Was that.
People replace their food supply
when they butcher their animals
Sheet� for example primarily.
They have noticed that when they
get to the inside organs the
liver specialist would show
signs of blotches of other
redness and even parts of it
would be faded white and they
never knew what the cost would
be so they just think that the
majority because would be of
value from their uranium
tailings and because of they
don't know too much about the.
Effects of the uranium they
determined that if they stay
away from there.
insights and eat the rest of the
me like to rip in the leg and
arm there okay so they lived
with that for many many years
and it's just a heart wrenching
story to hear those.
Some of our young people or the
younger people I'm referring to
people my age okay.
Some of the stories that they
share is that when their fathers
or grandfathers were working on
the money they would sit at the
most of the money as their
father and grandfather went
underground and they would be
playing there as some of.
means of transportation gender
uranium L. would come out and at
the end of the day they would
notice that we would be covered
with.
Yellow dust and then they would
just shake it off and go home
and
just go about their business.
So they took it home unknowingly
take and a lot of of the
radiation home and spread it
through the rest of the family
members.
I am very proud to be a co
sponsor for this H. B. one sixty
four.
In a sense that it will force
the federal government to start
to clean up.
I think we have been talking
about it long enough.
Let's start doing something
let's quit talking let's start
doing what we said we're going
to do we need the remediation
process to start as soon as
possible another item that is
this hi store is in my mind
nearby community of Shiprock New
Mexico.
Where there is a stop uranium
tailings and.
Although there is a although
there is a berm around it when
we have a gentle lady some of
that water washes out and
sometimes over the neglected
berm.
And we have the San Juan river.
Running just the long side of
even less than a quarter mile
from the trainings are and
people have said that the water
that leaches from the mailing is
evident along the banks of the
San Juan river so another reason
why I'd like of New Mexico to
take control and forcing the
federal government to start the
cleanup process as soon as
possible like yesterday that is
my testimony for this morning
and I am a strong supporter of
passing the one sixty four thank
you very much madam chair
members of the committee.
Thank you Representative Nelson.
Representative Sarinana.
I believe Senator Steinborn
wanted to speak is he on
Senator Steinborn.
Thank you very much Mr chairman
committee great to be with you
again and Representative
Sarinana Allison and Johnson I
really appreciate your
leadership on this Mr chair and
committee New Mexico has.
about five hundred abandoned
uranium mine sites which there's
no title to
there's no chain of chain of
command two of responsible party
and this is what this is really
one of the saddest environmental
issues I've seen in fourteen
years serving here that that
communities are left to just
live with this these polluted
abandoned sites and so that's
really the purpose of this bill
is to create some accountability
create responsibilities in
statute to fund positions to
work on it and finally new move
the needle on cleaning up the
sites and is representative
Allison said we only to work arm
in arm to get the federal
government right very good chat
to do this work this year this
uranium was mined in service of
the country's national security
the uranium to make nuclear
weapons and
Needs of eleven with the after
effects for decades and so I
want to thank senator Heinrich
he's got an amendment right now
in Congress for sixteen billion
dollars to do this cleanup work
our committee of radioactive
hazardous materials committee
supported that amendment what we
really need to track it we need
to go to Washington the and
that's the second part of this
effort you know as to create a
robust effort to send funded and
we can and by the way and none
of the experts talk about this
this can be a major job creator
billion dollars remediation is
estimated to create about
thousand jobs so this this
really can be a new economic
development boosting the area's
was contamination access so
and the bill is funded and and
by the way was also coordinated
with EMNRD and NMED Mr chair so
it's ready to go.
Would very much appreciate
Canadian sport thanks what miss.
Thank you.
Representative Sarinana.
I
want to express the speaker just
answer questions
can I ask for quick.
You miss Gardner are rose.
If they want to just do a quick
comments.
Mr Chairman that's fine I would
prefer to be quick.
Mr chair committee thank you for
having me here today I will make
my statement fairly brief I just
want to go over the research
that the University of New
Mexico your business and
economic research did that has
led to some of the conversation
is happening with this bill.
My name is Rose Rohrer I am a U.
N. M. D. of Business and
economic research scientist to
talk about this research that
was funded in two thousand
nineteen to look at the
potential impact of the uranium
mine remediation on the state
you should have received some
slides in advance of the meeting
they have more details and I'll
be going into during this very
brief statements and I want to
just say to that I think
Representative formed Johnson
who funded the study that we
did.
So in two thousand nineteen and
two thousand twenty the pair of
Business and Economic Research
conducted background research
gathered hundreds of reports
technical documents interviewed
local stakeholders rights
holders and compiled a report
that evaluated New Mexico
strengths and weaknesses
regarding in uranium remediation
we also developed an economic
impact our economic impact
estimates designed to assess how
the dollars spent in uranium
cleanup would return to the
states as Senator Steinborn
district mention the report
itself is lengthy and we have
twelve fairly lengthy
recommendations I'm just gonna
go over a couple of items today
we tired we found that it's the
state would benefit greatly from
investing in uranium mine
remediation especially by
increasing communication among
the institutions because these
jurisdictions crossed because
there's federal they're state
there's private land because
some of the mines are owned
we're federal lines and some of
them were private there are all
kinds of jurisdictions that
crossed because this crosses
onto tribal land in various
jurisdictions it's important to
coordinate and communicate we
also found that supporting small
businesses in the very technical
ways that are required for
specialized cleanup of hazardous
materials and for supporting
them and bidding on federal
contracts would be very
important.
We found that New Mexico has the
resources and has the expertise
to do a lot of this work but
what we need to do is re
position some of those resources
resources in mining in
engineering and construction and
all of these different types of
jobs just a slight repositioning
towards environmental
remediation would create
opportunities for training and
for jobs that
our high quality jobs and long
term jobs.
We also found that.
Having a long term vision for
these things is critical we're
looking at decades since the
church Roxborough and.
What is being done we need
vision that goes backwards and
forwards and that New Mexico
might not always have the
dollars up front but that having
someone ready to capture those
dollars when they do come into
the states for federal
contracting and other other
betting purposes would be
advantageous to Mexico as a
state.
The jobs that we're talking
about range from the blue collar
to white collar and would impact
many sectors of the economy they
have the potential for these
training opportunities and long
term work.
The another thing that we found
that was that this goes beyond
uranium mine remediation that
once there is an initiative
developed to tackle uranium
remediation it could be
leveraged for other
environmental remediation
projects as well which affect
not only our state but the
nation and the world so if New
Mexico was position to have
Have this workforce in place it
could be advantageous to the
state.
So the key recommendation that
our report is for that this
legislation could potentially
impact from our report.
Is this complexity of
coordination that coordination
is important and having a
designated home for coordinating
these cleanup efforts is
critical an important first step
to addressing the other
recommendations that we make in
the in the report itself which
is linked in the slides
I'm here mostly to talk about
the research itself rather than
the legislation but to emphasize
that the the report looked at
the complexity and the community
the need for better coordination
and communication so thank you.
Thank you.
miss Gordon would you like to
say a few words.
Yes good morning thank you
Representative McQueen and the
committee I want to especially
thank Representative Johnson for
her long commitment to
environmental remediation and
her community and the
communities that I have
Representative for the past
seven years.
I think that rose summarized
excellently the potential that
is out there are for
environmental remediation is an
industry in the state
if you are able to look at her
slides there's one that has a
whole bunch of dots on it
representing all of the
different agencies and
stakeholders that are need to be
involved in making decisions
that
will be useful for the cleanup
and in particular there is an
emphasis in this legislation for
making sure that tribes and the
impacted communities are engaged
in this cleanup process so I
strongly support the legislation
I appreciate Senator Steinborn
and Representative Sarinana
bringing this forward and I I'm
available for any other
questions I also I I tried to
text
Mr chair the New Mexico
Environment Department and EMNRD
to see if there folks were
available I can't see the
participant list but maybe you
could see if they have joint
because they have both of both
agencies have given strong
support for this thank you.
However the two agencies.
EMNRD and and Mr chair that
they're not they're not able to
join today they let me know that
just to be clear that they don't
they they gave technical
guidance on the bill and and.
That's that's kind of where
their other support should be
catch so okay thank you for that
Sir we're going to the public
now first we'll do a poll the
poll gives the public the
opportunity to indicate general
support or opposition Augustine
whenever you're ready.
Okay so that's another one
hundred percent support pole
said the six members of the
public indicated support and
none indicated opposition so
we're just.
This is a.
Not a controversial bill
we're not we're just going to
tenants public comment.
each member of the public will
be given a maximum of one
minute.
Our first public speaker is
Laura.
Where you're needed on your and.
Thank you chairman and members
of the committee.
My name is Laura watching Pino I
am livid Aqaba Pueblo and.
I am a member of the multi
multicultural clients for a safe
environment.
I wanted to point out to members
of the committee that.
The uranium mining industry is a
good example of one that has
exploited our natural resources
in the state of New Mexico that
left many residents like myself
without the means to address.
The toxic legacy they left
behind.
All the damages to air water and
soil.
As pointed out by a
Representative Johnson these are
horrific legacies that will
likely.
Be passed on to future
generations.
The online waste piles that were
left behind by the uranium
industry.
We'll continue to state.
Probably in perpetuity.
They will continue to see
contaminants to our air water
and soil.
That will be dispersed
throughout the environment.
And of particular concern is
right on is right on biology.
Grades in the environment it
will persist for a very long
time the lower of the our our.
Timer quick miss that a little
bit thank you for your comments.
Our next speaker is in the hands
and the only thing I would note
that our timer still reads last
the last bill.
so when you get a chance to if
you could update that that would
be useful.
Our next speaker is Mr other
hands and
Mr I thank you Mr chairman and
committee members I fully
support this bill I also have
supported this bill at the
national association of counties
along with supervisor Fowler of
the Navajo Nation and we
strongly strongly support
senator Heinrich's bill and it
is supported by the national
association of counties naco I
think cleaning up uranium mining
cleanup is one of the most
important things that we can do
I also support our changes and
to the claim the clean water act
and reduce the and wrote yield
up to national
magical waters protection role
I have written comments along
with of the empire New Mexico
Environment Department in
support of protection of our and
femoral and intermittent streams
which is also
Need to be protected thank you.
Thank you we have Leona.
Hi thank you chair and members
of the committee can you hear me
yes.
I'm so I just will introduce
myself quickly yet ACA twenty
change left in this negotiation
Chianti anticipate totaling
additional I'm speaking as a
member of the Navajo Nation in
in New Mexico resident and
citizen the bill I support and I
strongly urge all of you to vote
yes I just want to reiterate
what Representative Allison said
that this was needed like
yesterday I like his quote and
this is a good beginning but
there's a lot of things to
stress especially in the
development of repository in any
of these activities they really
should go back to the point in
paragraph three about
establishing an effective
mechanisms for coordination with
affected communities so I just
want to thank all the sponsors
and everyone for who worked on
this for putting it together and
I appreciate you all for voting
yes thank you I sat.
Thank you Mr is a Tina
Christodoulou.
Good morning committee and chair
I'm I'm to think Christodoulou
and I'm a retired navy nuclear
power engineer and when I was
teaching I was amazed at the
power density well we still had
to remember the awesomeness it
could cost but I never thought
about it's tough to the reactor
until I became an environmental
engineer and I never really
understood until I came to New
Mexico and met people whose land
air and water and living
conditions.
And we're dying because of that
legacy so I asked to do pass on
H. B. one sixty four R. as
resources are to use not abuse
and toxicity is not our destiny
and it's time our federal
government started cleaning up
its own mass thank you.
Thank you we have Elizabeth
Smith.
Hello I am a tribal members of
the public people and a student
at UNM I'm a senior.
Right now local honey contains
radiation we must listen to the
bees this bill is a beginning of
a new New Mexico will become
part of a new Mother Earth.
You raining from the ground up
is a trail of waste and slow
down.
Nuclear energy is not clean know
the direction of the future want
to have a future with Mother
Earth.
I was for many years a home
health care assistant to
patients that were radiated
beginning with my uncle who was
a uranium miner.
My other patients NASA airforce
and Hatton project and Landel.
I watch them slowly die.
With all these abandoned uranium
mines responsibly left taking
only the profits must be
remediated.
Our nuclear legacy of death must
move into a new legacy for life
thank you.
Thank you except we have more
chance.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee Eric chance senior
staff attorney at the New Mexico
environmental law center.
The New Mexico environmental
excuse me New Mexico
environmental law center stands
in strong support of this bill.
Project decades after the
production of uranium ended in
New Mexico cleanup is nowhere
near complete and in my view.
A lot of the cleanup progresses
been hobbled by overlapping
complex jurisdictional issues
tribal state and federal inter
agency jurisdictional issues
and the lack of long term
coordinated planning.
restoring the billions of
gallons of contaminated water
billions of tons of contaminated
soil
that the uranium mining industry
has left in New Mexico is going
to result in billions of dollars
in economic development thank
you Mr chair members the
committee please vote yes.
Thank you for gonna hear from
della Duran.
Hello are you with us.
Okay next Mister chair I I
didn't beat myself.
It it's Adela Duran thank you so
much I Representative to uranium
mining companies that have yet
to mind their properties in New
Mexico but they strongly support
the goal of reclamation and they
wanted to offer comments on the
way the original bill was
drafted I wasn't aware this up
Mr chair so I will just note
that the real problem in New
Mexico is the smaller abandoned
legacy mines for there are no
responsible parties for
reclamation as noted by Senator
Steinborn a representative
Allison obviously uranium
reclamation is complex Mr chair
and based on the original
analyses from the agencies it
didn't appear that they were
consulted on the original bill
so we hope they have now had
some input on the sub my clients
believe that the legislature
wants to make a difference the
funds would be more effective
going to the mining and minerals
division at and to clean up some
of the legacy mines of it as
they have historically been the
lead agency in this effort thank
you very much Mr chair.
Thank you next up we have
Barbara Calif.
Members and Barbara Calif
speaking for the league of women
voters of New Mexico the league
supports rigorous regulation and
enforcement to prevent mining
and drilling activities from
contaminating surface or
groundwater or the surrounding
landscape however there is
little regulation in effect at
the time the uranium mines were
most active in New Mexico now it
is up to the state to coordinate
the efforts to complete
reclamation of all the sites we
ask you to give H. B. one sixty
four a do pass thank you.
Thank you next we're gonna hear
from turn next with the State
Land Office.
Good morning chair and members
thank you my name is Terry necks
I'm the deputy commissioner of
public affairs of the New Mexico
State Land Office we stand in
support of H. B. one sixty four
we have an extensive legacy
issue of your premium mining
contamination still left on
state trust land and as you know
we do not have the resources to
pay for that claim that so this
bill is coming at the right time
and very much needed at the
state office of we urge you to
pass thank you.
Thank you were here from one
more during the so C..
Yes.
My name is green associate I am
the net and grew up in upper
Fruitland chapter near
Farmington New Mexico I am in
strong support of H. B. one six
four throughout my life I have
witnessed a negative social
economical environmental and
health impacts of abandoned
uranium mines that plague
indigenous communities I have
relatives that passed on due to
cancer taken too soon from our
family unable to meet
grandchildren passed down
traditional practices are lead
our community uranium mines have
contaminated our families land
and water for generations how
many more lives need to suffer
before this environmental
injustice since the nineteen
eighties is mitigated.
I need to take responsibility
for the cleanup of the stingers
mines could provide central
creativity leadership to address
that uranium mine waste legacy
that disproportionately affect
indigenous communities please
prioritize New Mexico community
health environment and future
support H. B. one six for us
thank you.
Thank you and there are still a
number of number of people who
would like to speak.
In the interest of time we're
gonna stop there thank you all
members of the public for
attending for this thing and for
participating
Representative Sarinana would
you like to add anything before
we go to the committee.
Thank you Mr chairman I think
we're good thank you thank you
Representative certainly are
going to the committee first up
we have Representative Scott.
We could see you for a second
there.
I don't know what else to tell
you Mr chairman.
Mr chair representative sure
normal I cannot disagree.
At all with the objective.
This piece of legislation to
have a couple questions.
Expanding the cleanup of these
redirected flights.
The purview of the federal.
Your.
Mr chairman and Representative
I'd like to defer that to is
Senator Steinborn still here.
Yes.
I am Representative.
Representative Scott yes so
there is so there are sites in
the in the state that are
directly under the purview of
the federal government
but then there's others that
that are not under your direct
regulatory control some of the
smaller abandoned sites but.
We've got it's interesting we've
got some sites in the state that
are that are designated the
Superfund money you're going to
in the Navajo Nation we've got
some that are being managed by
the department of energy some of
the biggest.
Most contaminated sites so that
that that that's part of the
problem is that you've got and
then you've got you know five
hundred others with no ownership
no chain of custody at all so it
definitely involves the federal
government it just
But it but it also is our
responsibility of course because
they're on.
New Mexico Landon.
So we have a coordinating role
but I think we we need to lean
on the facts for the funding
will largely.
Mister chairman Senator is there
an established criteria.
For where the French or.
Concentrating their resources
and where they are I guess.
Proper word would be ignoring.
Cleanup opportunities.
Mr chairman that's a great
question Representative and I I
I can give a general answer I
think up I would defer to the
agency's to really get into the
tactical delineation lines other
than to say that Superfund sites
I mentioned were part of a big
legal settlement.
One particular company and
that's what triggered that.
I'm not sure what triggered the
legacy you know some of these
other really that contaminated
sites moving into the DOE legacy
program.
But
So it's a good question will get
you an answer to the after the
committee.
Thank you for that Mr Chairman
representative Representative
Sarinana.
Yes we're already a state agency
charged with coordinating.
These cleanup efforts and you
know what kind of a budget.
They currently enjoy.
Thank you Representative and Mr
Chairman I'm gonna defer to
Senator Steinborn again.
Thanks Mr Chairman
representative
so it's interesting this is
shared this is one of those
areas that actually has.
Little bit of responsibility and
EMNRD and little bit of
responsibility and NMED but one
of the suggestions we heard was.
You know that there are people
that are tasked to work on other
things is so it would be helpful
to the states have a focused
effort with accountable people
who work who work solely on this
issue and so the answer is there
is a little bit of
responsibility in two different
agencies to different parts.
Mister chairman Senator Woods.
Thousand dollars not very much.
Resources maybe a couple of FTEs
for.
Use these tips is that pretty
much what we're looking at.
Mr chair representative actually
thankfully it's a little bit
more of that assuming that you
and your bill gets signed we
At this point in time since the
bill was drafted.
we have also put in some junior
funding for EMNRD which is not
an appropriation this bill but
those junior funding for EMNRD
to also have a dedicated
position working on this so
actually I would say the amount
is probably closer to five
hundred thousand at this point
this funded through junior and
the budget.
Thank you thank you for that
answer Senator.
Mr chairman and senator.
I heard Representative was.
Going to be an effort to force.
Choose to do so.
Orrin hatch.
Why.
It's realistic could you was
or hello world.
Could you characterize that
relationship.
Senator can I defer to you Mr
chairman yeah you that well it's
it's really we can't compel the
federal government course to do
anything it's really that we're
going to we're going to become
the squeaky wheel we're gonna
elevate our game and we're not
gonna take no for an answer and
we're going to stick with this
this is something that's gonna
take a long time Representative
Mr chair and we need to be in it
for the long haul just like
these communities have been
living with this these polluted
sites for decades waiting on
action it's going to take time
to get the money but you know
senator Heinrich has that
amendment right now looking for
various avenues to get the
sixteen billion dollars of
funding for this work but
clearly this is the federal
government's responsibility the
sites were done in support of
the national security mission of
the country.
And they really have a moral
obligation to legislative staff
and so whether happens tomorrow
next month five years from now
we're with this bill does is it
says we're not going away and
we're going to elevate our game
and we're gonna.
Compel them in could you all
them and hopefully inspire them
and writing that check.
For multiple checks.
Ourself those.
Mr Chairman
representative and senator.
Thank you very much that's all
the questions.
Thank you Representative Scott.
We Representative Strickler.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you representative
Sarinana and Senator Steinborn.
I do have a copy of the
committee sub but I I have an
old FIR there's a lot of
concerns from memory EMNRD that
they will work properly
You know
Designated in the bill because
of their mining division kind of
does it does this type of work
can you can I help may bridge
the gap between the new that the
sub Center our our
representative and the the FIR
I.
To recognize Mr Chairman.
And the Sanchez that that
the department of the
environment department and inner
aren't fiber of this so I mean I
I wanna give you kudos to that
but help me figure out these
technical issues that they point
out and and I have just a couple
more questions thank you.
Mr chairman and senator or
representative.
It's an update for that Senator.
Thank you Mr chair so
Representative so yeah we we
address the comments of the F.
FIR for EMNRD in two important
ways number one we funded a we
funded a coordinator position
for them.
And and they do do important
work here and that was always
recognize but I think we needed
to kind of beef up there all in
this legislation and and so
number one we created a
coordinator position number two.
There's a fund which they also
get to help manage the fund
We up forgive the reclamation
fund so they eight so both
agencies will conduct co managed
the funding that comes into that
for reclamation works they will
work together on the reclamation
mission will also work together
on the planning part of this
bill and so what we're really
gonna have a team approach we
beef that up in under so I think
we address the issues in the FIR
Representative sure thank you
thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator Representative so in the
sub you you can handle these
technical issues
I know it's a law it does not
that long a bill but
you brought entered in into the
vote you know.
Sure what role very we get Mr
chair there are lots of direct
conversations with officials
there and also Legislative
Council and and their issues we
believe our were addressed
effectively very good that that
that's that's excellent and this
is a federal government problem
I mean they they contracted
these these minds for the
federal you know
nuclear program and and bills
are you know the federal
government shut ultimately
responsible and I'm encouraged
that center Heinrich is is
seeking a large appropriation to
handle these orphan wells.
Or from mines
to to clean them up and but let
me ask you this Mr chairman and
senator and representative
currently the the larger mines
in the larger
environmental problems are are
being handled by the super funds
that is that right so the big
the big minds are being
addressed somewhat.
It's a little minds that we need
some help.
Mr chair representative I would
necessarily say that states some
of the biggest sites are being
addressed but those are mostly
if not exclusively on the Navajo
Nation the ones you mentioned by
the super fun.
Then the legacy site I don't
know that it is on tribal lands
but we've seen some other
significant sites that
That are not in either yet so I
I wouldn't.
I wouldn't necessarily
delineated as large and small
it's kind of level of
contamination and.
Some that have fallen into a
more proactive status based on
other factors.
Mr chairman and and in center
Representative
What are the chances.
I know in in in the in the
Congress set the this regulation
Fund I believe you mentioned
fifteen billion dollars of that
that's a significant.
Funding source to is it is it is
it per progressing I know thanks
for slowing converse.
on funding Mr chair
representative yeah you know
it's interesting ThinkCentre
Hinrichs very crafty and
effective at working the vehicle
he can't to get important
priorities done so so I would
bet on him but having said that
I know he was looking at
different avenues are just out a
press release that about
abilities sponsoring a
bipartisan bill dealing with
abandoned hard rock mines so I.
I don't know what the chances
are but I know that when you and
I and everyone on this call go
to Washington hand in hand.
Bipartisan they can't say no to
us.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
sure thank you Representative of
the other fifteen billion
dollars wouldn't New Mexico get
most of those funds
Are we kind of unique in that
most of these
abandon of small minds are are
in New Mexico or or are there
other states that have similar
issues.
I'm not familiar I mean I know
I'm I'm very familiar with New
Mexico and
I would imagine it would get
most of those funds but is is
Wyoming in the same category as
we are.
Chairman Representative
Representative I I've looked at
a map and there's there are
uranium sites all over the
southwest but I defer to Senator
Steinborn.
Thank thank you.
Mr yeah Mr chair representative
you know New Mexico my
understanding is we produced
about thirty I thought it was
higher by fifty or sixty we
produced a a good chunk of the
uranium for the country and the
what's known as the grants
mineral belt
kind of in that grants Gallup
areas so I think a lot of the
money would come to us but but
as representatives of stern Jana
said yeah the sites are are all
over the west.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
senator thank you Representative
that that you answer my
questions.
Thank you.
Thank you Representative
Strickler.
Any further questions from the
committee.
Representative Sarinana Senator
Steinborn anything that before I
ask for motion.
No thank you Mr chairman.
The motion.
Mr chair in the past.
Do not pass on the bill if you
pass on the committee
substitute.
You are correct Mr chair.
Thank.
Sir second Mr chair a second.
In seconds I think could you
take the vote please.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Garcia.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative one point out.
Yes.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler.
Yes.
Representative.
Just.
Representative Garcia.
My eyes chairwoman Sarinana yes.
And chairman McQueen.
Yes.
Would you like me in a to
announce the total yes please.
The total is nine in favor one
at.
So Senator C. is excuse the
contacting me and had to attend
to a family matter
you have a do pass.
Unanimous that's nice that's it
for today
I never to Townsend I have
judiciary which is ongoing I
think agencies felt to me it
will be on for two o'clock of
have a good day we'll see you
next time thank you we're
adjourned.
