It keeps.
Here.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid your.
Representative Pettigrew.
Here and there was just supposed
on the comments from
representative Allison saying
he's our and our time get.
Actually he's having a hard time
with his internet so I'm
promoting him to panelists but I
think he wants.
to.
Full.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero.
There.
Vice chair Garcia your.
Chair Rubio.
Here.
Do we have eight members present
we have a quorum.
Thank you to reset the morning
everyone thank you all the
attendees who are here I know
that there's we have quite a few
folks here today
I want to go ahead and begin I
know that we have a couple of
items on the agenda today and
and we can go ahead and get
started
I know that there's House
Appropriations just ended so.
I'm.
I just want to give folks some
time get started I'm first on
the agenda we have health joint
resolution one the public
assistance for household
services with Representative
Chandler and representative
Allison for both here
Representative Chandler whenever
you're ready.
Thank you madam chair and it's
good to see you committee
members I just like to confirm
with my co sponsor
Representative Allison that he'd
like me to begin the
presentation.
Is that correct Representative.
Okay right.
It's been a tremendous co
sponsor with me on this bill and
I look forward to his
participation in this discussion
I do have an amendment but
perhaps maybe I could give a
little bit of an overview madam
chair and then
talk about the amendment when
you're ready to move that for
discussion
Most of you if not all of you on
this committee saw house joint
resolution I think it was nine
last year which was very similar
to this joint resolution.
This joint resolution home house
joint resolution one provides an
exception to the New Mexico's
constitution what is common
commonly referred to as the anti
donation clause.
And that clause I think has very
good and strong underpinnings
and all I I know many of you
feel that way as to why but it
also has a number of exceptions
that have been passed over the
decades many decades that it's
been in place to accommodate and
address certain needs of the
state.
So for example I don't know
maybe it was twenty or thirty
years ago there was an economic
development provision that was
added to the state constitution.
And it it allowed for certain
things and it anticipated
implementing legislation which
the legislature did do and that
is what is known as the leader
act and the league Act has many
safeguards and requirements and
so on that ensure that the
public monies that are involved
in
investment.
There are safeguards in their
standards and there are
measurements and so on so forth
well this bill is similar it it
to many of the exceptions in
that it's it attempts to address
a very important public policy
need in the state and that
relates to access to essential
services by our citizens it's an
infrastructure bill and I submit
to you it is a bill that is
focused on rural New Mexico.
Rural New Mexicans have a lot of
challenges.
not the least of which is access
to essential infrastructure
services such as internet we saw
internet was.
Incredible crisis for many
people certainly in urban areas
but most particularly in rural
areas where there is not a well
developed a backbone it's hard
for individuals to get access
and so on we also know that we
are a poor state and our rural
New Mexicans have needs in terms
of.
What drinking water we hear all
of us I'm sure on this call hear
a lot from our mutual domestic
water associations about their
needs.
There are a waste water concerns
we have many people who are on
septic systems which are often
failing and thereby impacting
the environment and we need a
way to assist them in getting
access to sewer systems.
electricity and gas it's cetera
so
this bill
it temps and I believe will
address those needs in a very
important way.
There will be again reminder
implementing legislation when
this is passed by our voters in
November.
And that will give all of us to
work in a bipartisan way to
develop legislation to address
these important needs for all
New Mexicans and most
particularly rural New Mexicans.
So with that I'll leave that I'm
happy to talk a little bit about
the amendment if you like madam
chair and if Mike co sponsor
wishes to way and I'm I'm I'm
delighted to have them
participate as well.
Great thank you Representative
Chandler representative Allison.
Looks like maybe he's having
trouble Representative we just
can't we can't hear you
Representative Allison.
I think I think I DO from your
from your computer.
Yeah.
Which.
What is an eloquent advocate for
this I'm I'm a geek well I'm not
a lawyer G. one eloquent
advocate on my side here.
Full opportunity if it to to
speak before the and
if it's in his computer to to
cooperate so Representative
Chandler can you go ahead and
described what the amendment is
yes madam chair and and really
and it does a couple things it
really just tightens up some of
the language.
And it clarify some of the
language in the what they call
the introduction part of the
Of the constitutional amendment
and what we did was we we we
changed in the introduction part
on page one public assistance to
public investment I think that's
a more appropriate word and we
deleted Aid of the words
primarily for residential use
because we thought it was
redundant because there's
reference to household services
in the previous line and that's
online thirteen
The amendment on the last page
six again is is just cleaning up
in clarifying language to to the
bill that was suggested to me by
various people including the
chair of rules in the Senate and
you know he's a he's a stickler
and not a word Smith and I
consulted with him very smart
guy about what he felt would be
helpful Ms language and so I am
proposing this as just a little
bit of a clean up on our draft
madam chair and members.
Thank you representative
Representative Garrett.
I move the amendment.
Great to have a second.
Madam chair I do not have the
amendment.
It was not sent out in the
packet.
Okay it's not it's in my share
it's in the Here file so
let me check Representative
Crowder.
Up madam chair I just had a
question.
I don't know when the amendment
was sent out but I think there's
a committee real that we're
supposed to have any amendments
during twenty four hours prior
to the meeting.
Yes.
That's accurate is the rule but
I wanted to just I I know that I
I have the chair file here in
front of the the document here
in front of me.
And it's in the Here file so I
don't know if.
And madam being it either.
Madam chair it's it's it's great
to share file but at least an
email it goes after it says Hey
we have an amendment in the Here
file.
You need to go find that we're
not gonna send it to you I mean
generally we don't do that you
get an email already saying that
there's something in your share
file.
Madam chair.
Madam madam chair.
Just text saying that it's been
in the share file since last
week and she also sent an email
out.
Yes I can confirm madam chair I
recieved it directly in an email
and on the shared file and
printed it out couple days ago.
Are there any is there anyone
else who'd who doesn't see it.
Are there folks other folks who
can confirm that they get that
they have it.
Madam chair on I'm confident
that it was sent out I just
seven added up to the lesser
file of a if it's there it's
there so of.
I would would have been nice if
I'd seen it but I did that's my
problem so thank you madam chair
and Representative Mr a wreck
Representative Crowder we can
email it to you shortly if
that's helpful.
Representative Romero did you
have a question.
Sorry madam chair I was just
going to confirm that it was
sent out and I see all of the
members that it was sent to
by Andrew chin on and.
All Monday.
Please.
Thank you Representative.
Madam chair and committee
members I I do want to say
there's not a substantial thing
it's like.
Changing excess ability to
access assistance to invest then
it's not like a substantive
change it's basically
vocabulary word changes.
Thank you Representative Garrett
I do have a motion on the
amendment for further discussion
do I have a second.
Also I can that madam chair.
Thank you vice chair.
So we are on discussion of the
amendment I first have
Representative Pettigrew did you
want to ask a question.
All.
No madam chair I am looking for
an email from Lynn Chen don't
have one the name than the ones
that are the.
I'm working on getting to the
amendment okay what we can and
let us know we can send risk and
we can resend it Representative
Harper.
Thank you madam chair I do have
one question on the amendment
and that and it's great to see
you
Chair Chandler great to have you
here
So the.
The one question I have on the
amendment the the the word swap
from assistance to investment
can you.
Can you talk about kind of the
genesis of that and the
implications of that I think
that's probably actually a
an important change if I'm
understanding it right.
Yes the genesis and is for me.
And it was after looking at it
and we felt that it more
accurately reflects what the
state will be doing in terms of
investing in infrastructure for
New Mexicans having the
potential for investments once
we scope out the implementing
legislation I I felt like
assistance was an ambiguous word
and also it could be viewed as a
pejorative word and I you know
I'll grant you that I think it
was Legislative Council is is
the one that often dressed these
things I'm learning how to work
with them and in working with
them I need to be more cognisant
of how they draft some of these
these languages frankly and I've
I feel like assistance is a
poorly chosen word and
investment is a better
descriptor of how we anticipate
this provision to be used you
madam chair and representative.
Chair and chair Chandler thank
you for that and to me it also
implies that
You know for making an
investment this I mean we expect
our return or receive some
benefit from from that as
opposed to just
Providing some kind of help so
can you explain to me I'm just
so I understand it the.
You know what state that we're
this passes the voters pass it
we pass enabling legislation and
and there's a community that
needs like you said some some
sewer lines right I I know my
parents and older Rio Rancho
they have you know septic you
know let's just say we decided
we're gonna give that
neighborhood sure.
is there some Representative
turned on that investment I mean
is it is the state of New Mexico
expected to receive some of the
dollars that would go to the
wastewater treatment folks in
Rio Rancho New you know you see
where I'm going with investment
yeah I think you're right where
you're going with that madam
chair is a very narrow
interpretation of how people use
investment we invest in our
children we invest in our
citizens and in this case I
think this has the potential to
advanced New Mexico in for at
tracking
businesses here because we'll
have more reliable internet and
service across the state where
people may have the ability to
work from home are readily
because they will have greater
potential for you know
interacting through their homes
parents it will help parents in
their employment opportunities
because there will be better
opportunities for them to work
from home when they have
reliable internet service at
cetera so
I know you're a money one
Representative the madam chair
but investment doesn't always
mean just money I think there
are it's it's a term that has a
broader connotation.
Yes so so thank you madam chair
and and and chair Chandler I I
appreciate that I just.
And I hear I hear you're coming
from now I I I understand but
I'm I'm now wondering if there
might be a better words that
Because investment can be
interpreted to mean that there
should be some return to the
state to those who have made
that investment.
so I'll I'll be pondering on
that if I come up with something
better I'll let you know but I
Yeah I think there could be I'm
messed it could be interpreted
that way so we we all know words
are important here salt I'll see
if I can come up with something
better that was my my question
chair thank you.
Thank you Representative Harper
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair of a
little aggravated my colleague
over there for make my brain
start working I was pretty
comfortable.
I have a.
In hearing your dialogue I I
find myself thinking differently
about the word investment.
Investment to me is always
implied that there is a degree
of ownership I am invested in
something therefore I have some
ownership that.
And not I I shared with you this
morning the gentle lady that
might my thought press process
was appreciate about twenty
years ago I have to be in
Washington DC the day that
Saddam Hussein statue was pulled
down.
We were there waiting also
congressman at that point we're
actually waiting on Congress
appears to show up.
Any finally came in he said he
just came out of a great
breaking and they told that.
Some of the things are going on
in Iraq time and and one of them
was you said the first thing we
do as we take this country back
to the people is we will
privatize housing will pull of
government out of it because
nothing will stabilize this
country as quick as private
ownership.
And so as I look at your
amendment and you want to invest
in it and get the the current
because the government's figures
into this housing now
throughout.
The rural areas that that
troubles me
Right I think that
Okay opening this up is a
Pandora's box I I agree that we
need to help.
But I don't believe that we need
to help is we the government I
think it's we the people and and
I've always believed that if
we're going to help it should be
us as individuals or churches
neighborhoods families working
together so
I'm I.
I find your change from
assistance two investment.
To carry a connotation of
ownership with that.
find myself wondering if that's
the best thing to do so thank
you madam chair additional
comments.
Thank you Representative Crowder
I know that we have
Representative Allison sharing
the screen with Representative
Madrid Representative did you
wanna maybe say a few words.
Thank you madam chair one of my
mono for share your screen and
room with me I'm sorry I have
problems with my computer but
yes I would like to add to my
excellent Coles constant.
But when I got tied into this
resolution.
I often share the story of the
results of the pandemic the
pandemic revealed a lot of
things that most people did not
know for a lot of things that
people took for granted.
For example on the Navajo
Nation.
When the pandemic one of the
first things that they told us
to do was
at every opportunity wash your
hands frequently.
That's a very easier said than
done because when you have to
haul water seventy miles one way
to get your water you don't
frequently wash your hands
because you don't want to make
continuous trips but that was
the condition that we were
exposed to.
And then the second one was
social distancing keep away from
a lot of people another example
of a easier said than done
because of.
The people on my nation they
were going into the border towns
frequently to to replenish their
food supply.
Why do we have to go to town
every other day or every day
because the majority of the
homes did not have electricity
therefore they did not have
refrigerators or.
Sciences to keep their food
fresh so there was more frequent
trips into the border towns to
replenish their food supply.
And then the third request that
the government made was the
let's close the schools and
listen to children home where
they can participate virtually.
Again.
Prior to the pandemic I used to
see our school students in the
places like Burger King or
McDonald's they were seated in
the corner.
And they had their laptop with
them and I thought they were
just there playing games and
enjoying a Cup of coke or burger
fries and things like that.
Little did I know that they were
doing their homework because
from where they were from they
did not have adequate internet
they were using the free
internet at the McDonald's the
burger kings to do their
homework because we do not have
brought broadband or adequate
internet.
When I shared the story upon the
introduction of our H. B. line.
We found that a lot of rural New
Mexico was very parallel of
situations where they did not
have adequate water supply they
did not have adequate running
water and some of them even had
sporadic the electricity so I
Was very glad to jump onto this
of.
House resolution with my
excellent co sponsor of
Representative Chandler and open
I think when we first introduced
it opened a lot of highs and a
lot of mines to say that the as
much as we talk about programs.
For New Mexico we should not be
talking progress thinking about
the urban areas when we say
progress we should be including
rural New Mexico.
Urban New Mexico cannot progress
New Mexico by itself we need all
of New Mexico we need all of
rural New Mexico to help
programs.
Constitutional amendment is
passed the voters will allow the
state to invest resources to
ensure that all New Mexicans all
New Mexicans have access to
basic infrastructure necessary
that.
That is necessary in life today.
So.
some parts of New Mexico have
been in the nineteenth and
twentieth century let's bring
everybody into the twenty first
and twenty second central that
is the purpose of this the house
resolution one.
With that
Madam chair thank you for
allowing me to comment on this.
Thank you Representative we
appreciate it and just for folks
who are watching representative
Allison is sitting with
Representative Madrid so if
you're directing a question do
either one they're sharing the
screen
Right so do we have any other
questions on the amendment.
Okay do we have we have a.
we have do we have a motion to
move on the amendment we had it
from Representative Garrett is
their second thank you madam
chair we have a second from
Representative Romero
so to reserve you can do a roll
call on of Bill on the a real
low on
the motion for a need for a
motion to
For the amendment.
Representative Crowder.
No.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Harper no.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Chair Garcia.
Yes.
Chair Rubio.
Yes.
Okay we
The
vote count is I yes and three
no.
Okay so we have an amended bill
so now we're on house joint
resolution one as amended and we
go to the committee for
questions I want to open it up
to of folks that are attending
right now and so if you can
raise your hand I will call on
you and
and and we can speak briefly on
on your supporter opposition to
the legislation we don't have a
poll like other committees do
just because we tend to not have
a whole lot of public comment on
on this on a lot of our issues
but we really certainly would
encourage you all to to speak so
first we have Bob the PO.
Thank you thank you madam chair
my name is Bobby nailed director
external affairs for eighteen T.
here in New Mexico speaking
today in support of house joint
resolution one and want to thank
representative Allison Chandler
for bringing this bill very
briefly madam chair eighteen T.
as a provider of wireless
broadband in New Mexico and
we're continually expanding our
network to reach more homes and
businesses we do want to be part
of the broadband solution
eighteen T. believes H. D. R.
one is needed if it's past
embraced by the voters we
believe this legislation will
help the state move faster in
getting affordable broadband out
to places in New Mexico they do
not have it today you would give
the state and local governments
another good option investing
public money that will offer
more wired and wireless
broadband across the state thank
you madam chair.
Thank you Bob next we have Dan
Fe.
All right good morning madam
chair and members of the
committee I stand state and I am
tracking broadband related
issues with the Adelante
progressive caucus I am speaking
here in support of H. J. R. one
the anti donation clause in the
New Mexico state constitution.
Is getting in the way of
implementing broadband internet
infrastructure as an example the
anti donation clause creates
roadblocks with the department
of transportation for for
allowing private entities to use
the right to wait at broadband
infrastructure such as optical
fiber.
Excuse me allowing private
entities to use D. O. T. rights
away to lay fiber is a fairly
minor subsidy that does not have
only increased the government's
involvement of private industry
by fixing this issue it will
become considerably easier to
bring broadband infrastructure
throughout the state and as for
the amendment to mention this
morning I also agree with the
wording change to investment
another are working changing
alternative wording change might
be capital improvements
something maybe worth
considering all right so thank
you again I am in support of H.
J. R. one.
Thank you Representative thank
you Dan next we have mark
Fleischer.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee I'm Marc Fleisher
I'm a registered lobbyist
restricted when communication
second when his building
operates broadband networks on
Navajo lands in northwest New
Mexico and has recently spend
other areas of New Mexico we
propose large and small
broadband projects in several
different rural communities and
counties in New Mexico C. in
collaboration with local
governments in the state often
are plans are frustrated by the
hesitation of governmental does
jurisdictions due to concern for
possible violations of the anti
donation clause this even
includes a hesitation of the
state to swap equal amounts of
space on their in our existing
communication towers.
To provide broadband unserved
customers such as what would
enable quick route expansion of
broadband in San Juan McKinley
and Cibola counties with little
to no additional investment in
infrastructure we find we fully
support the passage of H. R. one
as the only way to arrange the
ambiguity that exists.
In our consultation over public
private partnerships often we
find that there's more
hesitation to do things that
have no real cost the may be
interpreted as being a benefit
to the company such is the right
aways it's really important we
open up the the avenues to
expand broadband in this.
Passage of this so what more
would join the resolution to do
so so I appreciate your time and
I appreciate the responses bring
this forward thank you.
Thank you mark next we have pen
Baker.
Thank you madam chair and
members of this committee and
especially
Members who brought this bill
forward.
On the last year we passed a
sweeping bill to expand
broadband in the state of New
Mexico.
Well.
We would not be on this call.
We would not be doing the work
of our people if we didn't have
broadband access.
With all broadband access to
everyone there are people who
are marginalized and not
allowed.
To be part of this process
because of the current
conditions today.
As a member of the democratic
New Mexico veterans caucus and
the president of the time
chapter of the American veterans
for equal rights we stand in
support of this bill.
Thank you for your time and your
staff and your work.
Sh.
Thank you.
Next we have support nefesh.
Good morning madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is support and affirmation I am
the executive director and
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico thrives the state
nonprofit association and we
stand in strong support of H. J.
R. one it is a matter of equity
and it is a matter of public
health we know that when people
have access to services.
They do better and water
electricity broadband are all
essential in the twenty first
century thank you very much.
Thank you.
That is all for public comment.
We'll go now to the committee.
At first we have Representative
Garrett.
Madam chair woman I would
actually like to move it to pass
for house joint resolution one
as amended.
Okay we can do that let's go on
real quick to a representative
or.
Thank you madam chair madam
chair I do have some questions
for the presenters and.
Based on some of committee I
just heard.
I
first read this this house joint
resolution.
As.
A way to use public funds for.
Household services that includes
all types of infrastructure.
Madam chair and presenters I'm
I'm curious do you do you see
the.
House resolution as opening up.
Free right away.
For.
A hundred feet or a hundred
miles.
Madam chair I'm happy to take
that question I don't
necessarily see free right aways
for anyone madam chair and
Representative.
Would you okay thank you madam
chair and thank you for that
answer Representative I'm.
I just feel like I'm I heard
some comments for a in the in
the comments section suggests
that.
This infrastructure bill that
the anti donation bill whatever
you wanna call it
joint resolution.
Would allow us to place
affordable broadband to rural
areas.
And like I said when I first
read this of I'm thinking
inside the property.
Now it sounds like at least we
have some of the companies out
there looking at this bill is
something that gives them access
to take fiber or whatever it is.
Hundreds of files with public
funds not just.
Connecting homes.
Is that a fair assessment of
what we just heard and in this
what we just heard is that.
Anywhere inside of your vision
for house joint resolution one.
Madam chair and Representative I
don't think that's a fair
assessment of what we heard and
it is not a fair assessment of
what is in the joint resolution.
Where I felt I just wanted to
make sure thank you very much
for that madam chair and
representative of I would like
in your opening comments you you
talked about.
How we opened up
state funds with respect to
leader and.
You know as someone said on
economic development committees
for fifteen years now in
different communities.
Every time we use local R. or
legal funds there was an
expected return on investment.
Even at the state level when
when we use of state economic
development funds
specifically with respect to
infrastructure there was an
expected return on investment
Madam chair representative can
you can talk about your thoughts
on that.
Madam chair representative I
think leader certainly provides
performance measures and
expectations because it's an
economic development initiatives
I use that as an example but it
is not a one for one
hi I want to say it identical
provision I was just using that
as a point to make that we have
amended the anti donation clause
in the past to serve legitimate
public policies such as economic
development in this case the
goal is to ensure that our
New Mexico citizens have access
to essential services I think we
can all agree that every New
Mexican in this state is
entitled to claim accessible
drinking water as well as
internet service which we now is
a critical for their livelihoods
for their schooling of their
children and other essential
needs.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for that
answer so.
Diving a little bit deeper with
respect to what we can do with.
Infrastructure in leader why is
house joint resolution one
critical.
It's critical I don't really
understand the question maybe
madam chair the representative
could rephrase that.
Madam chair representative
invite I.
I heard your answer on my last
question and I I personally
believe with the multitude of
ways that we've used.
Leader in the past.
We could use that here.
If there's a conflict in that if
if you're able to expand on that
and help me make that gap I
would appreciate it.
I'm
actually Representative
Pettigrew I have worked with
Lena for a long time as well
having been elected official in
Los Alamos county council where
we act we did utilize leader and
it was all to support the
bringing of businesses into the
community for example agreeing
to install a traffic light for
example or agreeing to increase
the electric capacity to a
certain building as part of the
lead agreement in this case
we're talking about providing
essential services to homes
potentially I don't see I'm a
little perplexed by how you are
getting to the conclusion that
lead would allow us to hook up a
family who does not have access
to drinking water using lead so
it.
I can't answer that it it just
doesn't apply.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for that I
agree that lead in its current
condition doesn't apply but
instead of writing a new joint
resolution could there not have
been something we could have
done to the existing leader
Act that would have made this
easier.
Madam chair representative no
the constitutional provision
that route that that it
underscores the legal law
requires things like think job
creation or something measurable
job creation and you know that
would be a be awfully hard to to
try to shoe horn and when we're
talking about looking up
New Mexicans to water wastewater
internet service and the like.
Thank you very much for your
time.
Thank you representative
Representative pop Harper.
Good morning madam chair and
again good morning at your
Chandler we
we had a great conversation
about this bill last year.
and I know that you made some
changes
and
Hundred on my position again and
just wanted to maybe just a
couple questions.
And that and see where things
are at
I guess on a for state of.
Madam chair and ensure Chandler
that I I totally understand the
the impetus behind us the the
driving factors behind this
right there are lots of places
in the state that I mean I mean
we all know broadband is super
important especially with COVID
and you know kids having to do
school virtually and that kind
of thing but there's even just
basic things like water is is
not available to a lot of our
communities around the state and
and I know I've got you know
some dear friends on the the the
Alamo reservation that we we
going visits and and it's a you
know I opening to see
how some of those.
Families are living so I so I
totally get it
I guess.
Before I talk about the
entertainment donation because I
want to ask.
Are there you know when when
you're looking at a.
Trying to solve a problem.
you know it's going to like
basic engineering scientific
principles no you first define
the problem really well and I
think we all understand the
problem here so that's that's
great we've done that.
The second is there are lots
there's always more than one
solution to the problem.
and you need to wait pros and
cons to those different
solutions and then and then you
pick one and no problem is
perfect no solution is perfect
but you pick the one that has
the least the Wisconsin the most
pros and so I guess my first
question.
Madam chair Chandler is what are
the other ways that we could
potentially address these these
problems without changing the
anti donation clause
Madam chair representative I'm
happy to sit down and have a
glass of milk with you to talk
about all the things we can do
to help the state of New Mexico
but I'm here to talk about the
the constitutional amendment and
just to be and not to be
disrespectful to you madam chair
Tim my good friend
Representative Harper we could
spend a lot of time
brainstorming about these things
and I'd love to have a
bipartisan approach to solving
the problems of that work that
are on the table here but this
bill derived from a couple
things that I can share with you
one is when a number of west
we're working on house bill ten
which was the broadband bill
last year we heard repeatedly
from members of the do it team
that was struggling to try to
expand broadband in a crisis
situation that they were
hamstrung by the anti donation
clause so that was one of the
drivers that brought us to this
point another driver was
conversations with the secretary
of the department of
transportation and others when
they were looking at rule
changes related to access to
their right aways and other
sorts of things their poles and
so on and so forth.
Okay continually and repeatedly
brought up the anti donation
clause as a reason for why they
were charging what many people
thought were exorbitant and
unreasonable rates to access
their easements and this will
and and I and I'm not
dismissing their concerns.
it's drilled into you when you
work for state government and
local government the whole anti
donation clause and you get
you're almost terrified to make
a move with without some lawyer
telling you it does not violate
the anti donation costs this
will give us flexibility and the
departments both of whom
expressed sincere interest in
working with communities to
ensure that what they could
expand broadband and other other
essential services center so
that's where we're at as I said
happy to visit with you about
the many ways but.
We can spend hours talking about
alternatives and other things so
you know I appreciate the
question chair I hope I answered
what US occasionally.
Better hearing and thank you for
that and I appreciate the offer
for for a glass of milk
chocolate and they would be good
okay forget.
Yeah
no and and and I and I
appreciate that you know this
would be a long conversation but
I think it it's important to
discuss here that understanding
this is a real problem that
there are other viable solutions
so I I would guess
I ask madam chair New Jersey and
are you familiar with.
Of our state and quasi
governmental agencies that have
authority to provide.
You'll helpful purposes right
now
without amending the
constitution.
I am aware that NMFA has some
programs I have discussed those
programs madam chair and
representative with them and
certainly there's there are four
double housing programs where
the radically than they're
getting running water and so on
but that does not address home
where it's a familial historic
home that does not have adequate
services and affordable housing
programs not going to be able to
address that it's just not so
as I said madam chair and
representative this is
information we were hearing from
multiple sources that we needed
a change to the anti donation
clause these are people on the
ground working these issues
every day telling us we needed a
change to the anti donation
clause to facilitate access to
these essential service.
And it is a narrow exception to
the clause.
Thank you Madam chair Jennifer
that I.
I I I hear what you're saying
but I'm thinking I'm just in
reference to right of way and
broadband as an example I mean
we have we have now the office
of broadband that has find a
sortie to provide access to
essential household services we
have the public regulation
commission always also has some
of the story Rita the renewable
energy transmission authority.
And and I agree with you that
these folks by themselves do not
have.
The state authority that you're
wanting to implement here or and
find here but I'm I'm wondering
could we not develop another
state or quads I a governmental
entity.
That would have the authority to
do these yes exact same things
that you would like to propose
instead of going the route of
changing the constitution so
Madam chair representative so
for example use PRC they have
this fund that fund is not
supported with appropriated
monies that fund is supported
with I think it's a surcharge on
providers which takes it outside
of the anti donation clause so
that simple gently said to you
my friends madam chair and
representative is just a
misplaced example of Medicare
and your Chandler these were
examples of folks who have
authority and I'm advocating
could we not develop something
similar.
A different mechanism that could
have the same authority.
I'm Madam chair representative
as I said previously I thank you
referred to the broadband office
broadband office is part of the
page.
The do it was one of the
agencies with home us co
sponsors on house bill two and
can work extremely closely and
had probably weekly meetings
with and repeatedly it was still
it was suggesting to us that
they needed this assistance in
terms of amending the
constitution and I think my
colleagues who are also on the
on this committee can reiterate
that point.
They believe they do not have
authority to do some of these
things madam chair and
representative.
Yes some I'm sure and and share
Chandler so you're.
Your position is this is the
only possible solution.
Madam chair in New
Representative with respect only
is one of these boxy kind of
words that I think difficult to
work with this is a very
important and critical so part
of the solution there will no be
no doubt the other mechanisms
that will have to look at to
help advance the cause of
improved proving the lives of
New Mexicans so that they have
access to these essential
services.
And so some Madam chair Chandler
that's that's exactly what I'm
trying to get at here is that
there are always more than one
way to bake a loaf of bread.
And and I think that we have not
adequately explored other
possible ways to do this thank
you secretary it you know it's
it's very challenging for an
engineer scientist to say this
is the only solution to
something because that's never
the case there's always more
than one solution that's where
I'm coming from I'm trying to
say I agree with your problem I
agree with the need
but is there another way to do
it and and the reason why I'm
asking this is because I believe
strongly and why we have an
answer to mission clause.
the examples given earlier of
how it has been amended over the
years and and I understand that.
and we are economic developers
one of those.
examples raised and and
personally I think that was a
bad decision.
I don't think we should be using
taxpayer dollars to give
businesses handouts.
if a business.
Is viable if there are folks
that would like to purchase that
service are good if you stand on
itself.
and we should have the
environment Tax Code tax
structure in the state that
encourages folks to take a risk
and helps them take a risk but
does not provide.
Tax dollars from people who have
I've worked hard and that
money's been taken away for and
we understand that we need
essential services like K.
through twelve and higher ed and
roads.
And so there's there's a reason
why we have the intimidation
Clause and adventure addition
where you know this very well
because you you served in local
government right.
Europe how long were you a
county commissioner.
Two terms and chair vice chair
held all those positions was
very interested in trying to
improve our community on many
levels yeah so so I I totally
respect and understand your your
you have a great perspective in
that way.
And and I'll just give one
example there was a lady in my
district who wanted to build
this school for folks that
I am the school was a kind of
for postal for folks with us
severe disabilities her daughter
was one and after they went
through K. through twelve
education
you know there's really no way
for them to go sessions a
beautiful idea of what to do and
she came to us for for capital
outlay and other help to started
and.
We could not because of the anti
donation clause you know and my
heart goes out to all of the
same time we see all the needs
that we have in in in New Mexico
right now our state budget is
what two thirds of it goes to
education and another six goes
to to Medicaid right now we
just.
You know I I worry that by
adding this to the anti donation
clause is an exemption that
we're not gonna have even more
pressure.
Bond Fund how you know how do we
continue to provide or try to
adequately fund education and I
know what we know Medicaid costs
are just gonna keep going up
we're not the only state this
problem other states have this
problem.
I think there was wisdom.
when
the folks back in the day put
this anti donation clause into
effect.
and I think we need to.
More imaginative more creative
with our solutions to these
problems.
than than just running to well
the escalation clause the
constitution is in our way so
let's let's let's change it.
And I don't Madam chair chatter
unite I think we just we have to
agree to disagree on that but I
just wanted to share my and my
thoughts on that and and I think
there I think it seems more
people with their heads together
we can come up with a way to do
this without
changing the definition cost.
So those are my comments if if
you'd like to add anything
otherwise I'll I'll yield I'm.
Representative partner perper
Representative also did you have
something to say.
Yeah.
What.
If you can speak into you if you
can speak into it a little bit
closer because there is a little
bit of a of a vibration on your
voice.
Okay keep trying go ahead.
What was.
What we.
Well.
What.
What office.
What what what.
Representative Allison I'm sorry
to interrupt but there's folks
in public comment who are unable
to hear you and there's like a
static vibration on your voice
some of us I think we can make
out some of your words but not
everything so
I don't know if we can try
something else.
I think what you're saying is
very important to to hear.
I'm madam chair and
Representative Allison I think
I'm very shareable I'm in room
two oh six just as an
alternative location.
It.
It's it's the.
Representative it's still
it's still hard to hear you it's
it's sort of the static
vibration.
Share could we go to maybe
representative Garcia and then
Representative Allison could
give closing and then that way
we can does that make sense
representative Allison if you
could get it going to.
Madrid is.
Yeah vice chair Garcia.
Thank you madam chair all.
Representative Chandler for
bringing to the all more fun I
mean additional reversions ocean
in all of this in this time of
the conversation madam chair.
something was mentioned to the
fact of.
Earned on the investment.
Well.
Question a little bit better
madam chair the return on
investment is our kids get a
little bit
easier we'd all educate
themselves instead of sending a
quarter of all McDonald's or.
Other localities madam chair.
Hi Representative.
Six colonies and I think I
represent frontier New Mexico
more than rural New Mexico.
And with people I've never been
out there to see what's really
happening.
You really need to take a ride
out there madam chair.
In all comments have been said
about free rides it's not a free
ride it's about our kids about
giving these people out there
what do need running water
better rules the Christian
Mueller houses or these issues
these people have a the madam
chair and it is very very
important the we step up to the
plate and bring these people up
to where they should be in
society not not being left out.
You know I I represent all of
New Mexico and if you go out
there these people are sitting
for the convenience store these
kids not with kids received from
a convenience stores all trying
to get internet all these kids
walk to what.
I try to get to school was gonna
get to that but then we get to
the buses for money and it's
it's really tough on these kids
and remember at the end of the
day the gentleman on this
committee and the people
listening and we need to take
care to people we all the whole.
We're not doing that and these
people are really struggling up
there and I consider madam chair
if you need to go out there you
need to what differs of the New
Mexico business and you'll
realize exactly was going on
the.
Janitor thank you for bringing
this up really appreciate that
Mr
My body from whether county.
Sure all Senator Preciado tools
madam chair thank you for
reading speak.
Thank you Mr Garcia we do have a
motion for to pass from
Representative Garrett I I'm
happy to entertain a second I
will say though as wanting to
provide some comment myself
eight a lot of the in southern
New Mexico where it's a mixture
of an urban city like Los crucis
and also rural areas and farming
communities outside of the city
this issue that you're trying to
address Representative Chandler
is.
It's it's it's it's a sense of
urgency I mean there there are
communities that we've we've
heard we have families who are
experiencing
inability to access
roads where emergency services
can enter they're they're
propped their properties because
there's an issue with private
public nobody knows if they who
owns these roads like there's so
many different layers to this
whole thing and and we talk
about return of investment I
think that's another issue and I
think vice chair Garcia touched
on it is that
it's it's what we're trying to
do is something transformative
in the sense that we can reduce
the quality of life of people is
a return if we if we're
providing a good quality of life
for communities that is a good
return on investment it may not
show it to us monetarily
instantly but over time and
generationally it will and so I
think that is
important I appreciate you
bringing this legislation
forward on to you and
representative Allison and so we
have a motion for D. passed from
Representative Garrett do I have
a second.
The madam chair okay we have a
second from Representative role
metal and and Representative
vice chair Garcia
and surgery so if you can go
ahead and proceed with the vote
please.
Thank you to Rubio.
Okay.
Representative Crowder.
No.
Representative Garrett yes.
Representative Harper.
No.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
Yes.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Chair Garcia.
Rubio.
Yes.
We have.
I yes and three no votes.
Thank you trees with a vote of
five to three.
Representative you have a do
pass on house joint resolution
one as amended.
You thank you committee for your
lively conversation.
Thank you all and thank you
Representative Allison.
Thank you Rubio and thank you to
the committee.
Thank you all.
Great so next we on the agenda
we do have one more bill I'm
gonna allow Representative
Ezzell to come on and then
Representative Ezzell if you can
let me know who else will be
joining you.
Madam chair I did not hear what
you said they were transferring
me at the time yes if you can go
ahead and just let us know who
else is going to be joining you
and then we can bring them on
this panelists.
Madam chair of I am assuming
that Representative night
burdens on I'm not sure about
Representative Scott.
Or or Anderson I'm I'm not sure
okay Representative Nibert it
raises hands I'll be promoting
him now.
Okay.
Madam speaker with that are you
ready for me to start the
presentation of the bill yes go
ahead and begin madam chair
thank you very much members of
the committee
of I am here today presenting
House Bill number one twenty
eight we're asking for an
appropriation.
Of four.
Certain portion at US highway
three eighty this particular
stretch of highway.
Thank you on the east side of
Roswell at mile marker one fifty
eight and it runs through the
Lee County all the way to the
Texas state line is eighty four
mile long corridor.
Has no passing lane it.
It's estimated that over be
doing three thousand vehicles
use this particular stretch of
road each day.
And the it's expected to get
even heavier.
Madam chair and members of the
committee every K. on US three
eighty leaving Ross will going
either east or coming back west
and Ross will we have school
buses mail service a good
culturally Krugman with actors
and federal
Hey drug calling in alfalfa feed
folks coming in from below but.
We have ambulance service that
is very necessary for our
citizens their cabin canning and
Eddy County and linking County.
We have a oil field equipment is
also using this road we have
people are.
Always going to love it you a
doctor's visit over there.
We also have a high rate of
force that uses wrote a in New
A. out madam chair.
What we are asking for.
It is.
We need to special
appropriation.
To the at New Mexico department
of transportation contained in
house bill two that might be a
little after the fact.
I have also inquired for the New
Mexico state police and it came
through.
Excuse me Madam.
Came through the University of
New Mexico.
The geospatial in population
studies and right now it does
show Travis county in the study
from UNM have the third highest.
Fatalities in the state to me
that's very scary with increased
traffic on US three eighty
leaving hospitals the Texas
state line it is imperative we
get we.
Try to get the best we can this
road is in whenever we're
talking about what.
Our.
T. office has come up with
for some deficiencies on US
thirty eighty.
They don't meet certain design
criteria.
I first can't safely navigate
through this quarter.
And.
Excuse me then get in my throat.
A big impact on people that
read.
Madam chair members of the
committee.
The issues that have been
identified by the DLC.
On US three eighty is
imperative.
To be enabled to maintain the
robust Dixon the deficiencies
that are already present and I.
Using what.
R. D. O. T..
District office in Russell has
come up with as far as making.
Of.
Lance.
And also saving money for people
can safely versus Rhode madam
chair with this I will yield to
my sponsor Representative is not
part.
Thank you madam chair I don't
have much to add of the
since I do represent Lincoln
County stress the importance of
this our highway for bringing a
lot of tourists to the rear
though so area not only for the
horse racing but for in the
summertime golf and other
recreational activities
it certainly the major
thoroughfare by which folks from
Lubbock Midland at and other
West Texas communities used to
access the Rideau so area the
what sort of we provide on this
road is that people get very
frustrated be getting behind of
large trucks and agricultural
equipment that the
Representative Ezzell talked
about and get stacked up for for
some time this project is not
calling for a four lane highway
it's calling for passing lines
that would be at regular
intervals and try to eliminate
some of those dangerous
conditions that exist when
people do get frustrated we find
that this would be a very good
measure to help eliminate some
of the accidents and some of the
fatalities that have occurred on
the stretch and so we're trying
to get this
Moving forward sign some
spotlight on it and as
representatives else that it
might be a little late in
getting the appropriation part
but we do think that it's as
important for this committee to
pass it so that we can highlight
it with the
commissioners of the.
Transportation department and
it is moving up the priority
list but this would certainly
help thank you madam chair thank
you Representative Ezzell for
your excellent presentation.
And madam chair with that we
will stand for questions.
Great thank you Representative
Ezzell and representative Nibert
I will open it up to the public
given if there's anyone that
would like to make any comments
we are on house bill one twenty
eight which is related to
highway three eighty projects.
we have a couple folks a few
folks who want to speak so first
we have Michael Miller.
Good morning madam chair members
of the committee my name is
Michael Miller I am a registered
lobbyist with Permian basin
petroleum association I'd like
to speak in favor of this
measure as the Sanchez indicated
this road is heavily traveled
and had many terrible accidents
this quarter is important for
economic development for many
reasons that also recorded by
the Sanchez.
It's always the main path
between West Texas in the
tourist destinations in Ruidoso
NM Bordeaux
that's why we stress that this
is truly a economic development
project for New Mexico thank you
for your time.
Thank you Mr Miller next we have
Bernalillo treat.
Yes good morning M. you madam
chair members of the committee
Bernalillo treat I am the
registered lobbyists for Xcel
energy also known in the areas
yes yes.
Then in excel energy
southeastern New Mexico is our
service area.
We always
Focus on as on a safety always
culture within our company this
is a a road often traveled by
our our executives as well as
all of our line treatment we
have a service station
substation management and in
Lubbock lot of folks in and out
of there and we sure would like
to keep the roads safe for those
guys.
We also to back up what Mr
Miller said the tourism the
Economic use.
Also I've not heard mentioned
the amount of college age young
people that we have the travel
out of our area to go to West
Texas schools.
Texas Tech University.
Lubbock Christian etcetera.
Then lastly I'll close with I
had the unfortunate experience a
few years ago to be the first on
a a head on collision that
resulted in multiple fatalities
and it really instilled in me
the importance to get this road.
Situated to the new level of
safety I appreciate your time
and would appreciate your
support thank you.
Thank you Mr treat
Representative Ezzell I know
that Mr Francisco Sanchez from
DOT he's on I don't know if
you'd like to bring him on in
case there's any technical
questions.
Miss madam chair members of the
committee yes if he is
available.
Now that he was in a meeting
earlier we weren't sure if he's
gonna be able to make it but yes
we would appreciate any comments
you could make great I just
promoted him to panelist.
Okay next on the attendees we
have a gym Winchester.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Jim
Winchester with the independent
petroleum association New Mexico
yeah I just want to reemphasize
was already been spoken if you
travel on that roadway you know
that there is definitely some
spots that are often backed up
in potentially very dangerous so
we do strongly support this bill
would like to thank sponsors for
bringing it forward and continue
to like to see a broader group
went down to the participation
thank you.
Thank you Mr Winchester.
Next we have US secretary Santa.
Thank you madam chair I just
wanted to give an update I know
Francisco is on to answer any
detailed questions but this is a
road that is on our priority
list just an update for the
committee
the total cost that we believe
will be necessary will be about
two hundred million.
In our a request to LFC is a
priority road we did include
fifty million for this road to
complete phase one currently
it's in.
Finalizing the study and then
also starting the preliminary
design and so we agree that this
is a an important road we agree
there needs to be passing lanes
and we did submit this as one of
our priorities to LFC for any
surplus or non reoccurring
funding so I just want to give
that update to the committee so
that they have that information
as we move to discussion so
thank you.
Thank you Mr secretary.
Next we have the honorable
representative Phelps Anderson.
Thank you madam chair thank you
madam chair can you hear me yes
I can hear you Madam chair of I
need to.
And please to bring this bill
forward
I cannot be I know previous
testimony show will be redundant
but this is an important
corridor for transportation for
business for tourism board.
Education back and forth and
it's a very abundantly evident
when you hit the state line as
we say so there is a great male
great need to reduce the
congestion on highway three
eighty and I stand in full
support of the effort that
Representative is our neighbor
are are on thank you.
Thank you Representative
Anderson.
I'm so we're gonna go ahead and
go on to the committee but
before we do that Mr Sanchez is
there anything that you wanted
to add to that.
Madam chair there's a lot of
points in the Sanchez a
presentation you know it is a
priority for district two we
look at all this infrastructure
within the district to and we
look at the purpose of the needs
of our infrastructure and US
three eighty is is definitely a
pride for district two and
that's why we are we're in the
process of finalizing the the
the study and going designed to
get these projects out to the
public.
Great thank you Mr Sanchez so
first what the list we have
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and chair
of between the secretary and Mr
side just of the vast majority
my questions were answered I do
have a request of the district
to engineer such as
in some conversations I had with
you the other day you mentioned
that this would be what's called
a super to highway can you
explain to the committee what
what a super to is and how it
will address the concerns of no
passing lanes and and the issues
that were brought out of the
presentation.
Madam chair representative
Crowder I can address that so
this is somewhat of super to you
know we do we are finalizing the
the study and we looked at three
are turn it is for the score
number one of course the mobile
see how the quarter we continue
to perform if we did not take
any action and we look at three
are alternatives of four lane
and separate passing lanes and
then alternative passing lanes
so super to would be able to
earn a passing lanes were we
would essentially build a three
lane from.
One fifty eight away state line
and have alternate passing line
customize a consistent distance.
Separated passing lanes is
up some of the same concept.
Are we would have passing lanes
every I pressed by Senator ten
miles depending on what the the
best situation is out there on
US three so after going through
the study look at the the
traffic conditions accident data
the the preferred alternative
within the state sector
separated us right.
So that would give us a passing
lanes approximately every seven
miles travel portal.
What similar simple super to
because we would have to assist
in past years from now one fifty
eight to the jets Texas state
line.
Thank you madam chair this site
just thank you for that I I had
my first opportunity to drive
under super to over in Texas a
few months ago and was just
really impressed with what that
the again to the drivers as far
as inability to pass ever so
often it was a great idea and.
Whether it's passing lines were
super to.
I appreciate that this is on
your priority list it's it's a
wonderful much needed projects
so my questions thank you madam
chair thank you Representative
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative they'll never
got cooking Anderson for
bringing four I look this
legislation and I felt like
This is the right way to to
continue the motivation for US
three eighty this road does go
through.
Lea County as well and
photos more critical for
Representative Anderson the son
of the sun was for me because it
goes for an area goes through
his area.
Without madam chair.
And presenters one of the
things.
I really think it would be
critical for.
Committee to know if you have
the numbers in your head
what's the value the.
The racetrack and tourism and
we're done so brings to the
Mescalero tribal facility and
about god's on an annual basis.
Mr madam chairman Representative
group I can give you the number
to go in correctly is that
Mescalero Apache.
Coffers.
Overall resume industry that is
going to rid us to where they're
at during the summer months of
racing and golf or his family
outing or during winter months
whenever there is skiing
available or sites down around
Alamogordo in that area.
As I can remember back and
somebody correct me if I'm.
Not quite think it's just an
estimate right now because.
You can be caught me off guard
on the figures whenever the
racing industry could directly
not so I do know for a fact
whenever the race horse racing
industry does bring in over
eight hundred million dollars in
the state coffers this pretty
sizeable in need if these people
are coming in from West Texas to
go to the races or to white
sands or even bottomless lakes
state park Polis state park in
New Mexico.
Representative.
Along with everything else that
we do have to offer in that part
it is big big mouth.
Madam chair thank you.
Sure Representative thank you
for that answer go ahead
Representative.
Madam chair and representative I
just of.
Brought something up on my
computer and it talks about the
horse racing industry generally
birthday almost a billion
dollars to New Mexico's economic
output and with respect to Rio
does so R. that number would be
in the hundreds of billions of
dollars are which is significant
for southeast New Mexico and
Are you maybe look for better
figures specific to that
racetrack but so the The New
Mexico horse racing industry put
outlook better are about a
billion dollars for the I
racetracks around the state of
course
reduces maybe not quite as big
as our couple of a but it
certainly very very significant
contributor to that overall.
About so we'll be in the
hundreds of billions of dollars.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for that
answer last year on working on a
bill
and Mr Crawford the then more.
The ability rid us of provided
me those answers and I was
trying to pull it up I remember
correctly it's in excess of a
hundred million dollars that
that that we
That
we infuse into the to the tribal
area up there in so I'm actually
going to pull that information
will send it over to you guys
you guys continued for I think
this is an excellent piece of
legislation and and that.
The.
critical to all the state with
respect to tourism.
And
And
safety travel for for medical
services as well so thank you
very much representatives for
bringing this bill I appreciate
small.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew next on the list we
have Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chair and thanks
Representative Ezzell I drove
one three eighty this summer and
would agree with all the
analysis of it my question and
and this might be for secretary
Santa or others from D. O. T. it
is the funding there's so I have
a there's a priority list that
the OAG has
for special projects and.
this bill
for the the road the US three
eighty is on it so.
In looking at the analysis it
says that it's not specifically
house bill one twenty eight is
not specifically included in the
house appropriation acts for
fiscal year twenty three I guess
I want to understand the funding
with the forty six million B. in
addition to what DO team may be
able to pass through the house
appropriations act how does that
work.
Madam chairman Representative
Garrett secretary St Santa is on
there he can property even it's.
Secretary and Cisco sentence
either one of those gentleman
can probably explain it better
yeah I've gone ahead and
promoted secretary Santa so give
me one second and then I know
from the school is on as well
yes.
Yes madam chair I just want to
make sure how how will this much
needed project be funded if this
bill were to pass will get some
funding I just want to
understand the funding mechanism
to see that it gets done and how
it gets done.
Thank you madam chair and
representative.
What we've been doing the last
few years is we have if there is
any special appropriations and
house bill two there usually is
some list of roads that are
eligible for that funding so a
good example of that is in the
special session that passed
house bill two that passed in
December the department was
provided a hundred and seventy
two million and there was a list
of about ten roads that we could
use that money on so what we're
asking for in house bill two
this year when we were asked by
LFC to provide a list we also
added about four I wrote in a
couple bridges to that list so
you just three eighty was one of
the roads that we added now
whether or not we get any
surplus money or or non
reoccurring money and whether or
not you just three eighty will
ultimately be part of the roads
that are listed I haven't seen
the latest version of house bill
two but that would be what we
would want is for this for the
road to be added to that list
because right now we don't have
any funding for this road so
it's about two hundred million
for the whole stretch we're
leaning towards a super to
highway which would be three
lanes the entire way and so what
we would rely on is our normal
target funding and state funding
coming from Congress to fund
this bill so if this were to
make it in the house bill two or
if this bill were to pass then
we would kind of have a head
start on that so that's kind of
where we are with this project.
Thank you very much madam chair
woman thank you very much Mr
Secretary that's my only
question.
Thank you Representative Garrett
next we have moisture Garcia.
Thank you madam chair of I guess
this question before secretary
Santa
secretary that read being us
the.
you know you assure highway X.
is there federal funds available
for that.
Madam chair and Mr vice chair
yes this is eligible for federal
hunt for federal funding the
entire length we still have a
program get this year we don't
have any money this year to
program but we would look for
future federal funding in future
years.
Thank you Mr secretary of madam
chair of Representative Ezzell
thanks for reading of the bill
and the.
Your neighbor I appreciated up
you everybody's been talking
about all economic.
Values in this folder to me the
safety of this rolled always
everything else.
Four to be Lujan human lives on
the road the needs to be
addressed all and Mr of Mr
Secretary I don't know what
where the road is on the on your
list.
You feel very possible way we
can help these people out with
the with these projects out
there that sure would be nice
you know like I said you know
development on on world money
making of process is like the
dolls or whatever up there fine
but in my eyes a human safety
lives are more important
distributary.
Mr Garcia sorry about that.
No just my comments should you
know of the Representative
dollar not everyone at that then
we'll get to that that would be
nice.
Madam chair and representative
Garcia with your permission
madam chair I would like to
point out some a Cup one other
item.
If that's possible.
Okay representative madam madam
chair and members of the
committee in response to
Representative Garcia's question
we have gotten.
Like I said this road US three
eighty whenever it leaves New
Mexico what goes in to I didn't
County.
And.
Texas is already doing surveys
right now because of problems
that they're having over there
with the fatality rates on three
eight eight on US three eighty
and the Texas D. F. T. has
suggested that they expand that
highway to a six to eight lane
highway.
Madam chair representative
Garcia we are not asking for
that we are asking for the that
the super to or dedicated
passing lanes where there were
is not all the hard congestion
that we are experiencing right
now I think it's imperative one
life lost is one life lost too
many and madam chair that's why
we are here today to make sure
the US three eighty is into the
queue and the sooner we can get
to working on it the better off
we will be thank you very I hope
that does satisfy the comments
that representative Garcia has
made madam chair thank you very
much.
Thank you Representative.
Meister Garcia did you have any
more questions madam chair rod
questions the building COVID
think of Representative exile
just finishing a one life saved.
We're with this game and it's
and it's very important that we
really take a good look at this
and now I appreciate the phone
rings Bill thank you great thank
you so much vice chair before I
moved here Representative
Crowder I did want to ask for
clarification what what is a
super to for folks who are
watching.
Madam chair I think the the
easiest way to explain it is
It's a three lane highway.
And for this particular case
at any one time there would be
two lanes headed east one lane
headed west then that would be
two lanes headed west one lane
headed east and the purposes
every so so often the Easter
west has two lanes to allow for
passing but it's not four lanes
and that's not a passing lane
only every few miles but it's
three lanes a whole wages
alternating between two in the
east and west that's what it is.
I see great thank you Secretary
Santa I I a I I'm I'm wanting to
get out more on on all of this
so that it's good to know what a
super to is Representative
Crowder.
Sure I'd like to do we have a
do pass when it's appropriate.
Thank you Representative Crowder
all all know that are there any
other questions from committee
members.
I I do have one question and and
I know that we had a bill
earlier last week around public
and private partnerships I'm I
was just curious that because
this is such a priority highway
I mean as you all know I grew up
in that part of the state I was
born in Roswell and so I've
traveled three three eighty a
lot in my life so I I recognize
the importance and you due to
the to the sense of urgency to
making that making it as safe as
possible are there any plans or
potential for plans to
incorporate some private funding
to help with
some of the the costs for this I
know that we we had a few folks
from the energy industry call in
and in support of this
legislation so I was just
curious if there's any
conversations happening on that
at this moment.
Madam chair on by to date little
staff and then maybe our
Representative Ezzell or or the
Secretary might want to add.
The this this stretch of highway
may be a little different than
what we're seeing and southern
at a and and we counties where
we have a
very.
Condensed.
Group of very large companies
who are needing.
Substantial access to are there
well locations this stretch of
highway does not have the
intense
oil and gas activity that we see
in southern Eddy of Southern we
County it does have oil field
traffic but it's not.
It can't be compared to what
we've seen in southern Eddy of
and we counties so the
opportunities that would exist
without a public private
partnership are are maybe last
Less acute in this area it's
it's more
the the the number of companies
and and the number of people it
is more diverse on this stretch
of highway that then the highway
between Carlsbad and Jalur or
loving in jail for instance
where you have a handful of
companies that that really need
access to their locations there
is some oil and gas activity
along this stretch of highway
but it is
pretty sporadic and it is not as
intense as what you see of the
southern parts of about thirty
eight have a sell my impression
and I haven't talked to the
secretary about this but my
impression would be that it
would be more difficult to
secure those private funds for
this stretch of highway.
Mr secretary you might have
something that are
Representative Ezzell.
Madam chair I I would just agree
with with Representative Nibert
I have not been approached at
all on this highway for private
funding we were able to do some
things down closer in Eddy and
Lea County to the oil fields
where we were for every dollar
that a private company put in we
were able to match that just to
help get those projects done
quicker of course my door is
always open and hopefully people
have my phone number if anyone
does want to have a some private
money put into this I'm
certainly happy to take their
call or to visit with them but
at at at this point I have not
heard or been approached by
anybody.
Thank you Mr secretary all of
your phone number to the chat
shortly.
well that was really one of my
questions I I I know not what an
important road that is
for folks especially because for
the for for also for for people
who don't know I'm on the
committee and the folks that are
and been in the public we
there's a lot of of of people in
that area that actually drive to
Texas to do shopping and and
things like that because it's
closer for them than it is to
drive to say Albuquerque here
Santa Fe so it is an important
piece of of a it is important
stretch of road and and and I I
can I can understand the the
sense of urgency to get that
done I'm so we have a motion
from Representative Crowder is
their second.
I can.
We have a second Representative
Harper.
I'm so trees if you can do vote
what will please.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Crowder yes.
Representative Garrett yes.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Pettigrew.
Yes.
Representative how dual color.
Representative Romero.
Yes.
Vice chair Garcia yes.
Your review.
Yes.
You need to go back to
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative thank you I'm
trying Representative Pettigrew.
Madam chair I have to of staying
on the strip.
Okay thank you Representative.
We have a seven yes votes and
one abstained.
Okay thank you to reset with
eighty both of seven to zero
Representative Ezzell
representative Nibert you you
both have a due pass on also
when we.
Thank you madam chair.
More members of the committee
thank you very much.
Thank you all that is it for
today for our committee for
folks who are watching will be
back on Thursday and I am I know
that there's legislation that
slowly trickling into our
committee so we'll be sure to
provide you with any
announcements on any
cancellations or anything like
that but as far as we know we
will be meeting on Thursday at
nine AM.
So with that folks have a good
day we will see you all on the
for at one thirty.
This one isn't it it's one
o'clock I thought okay one point
thanks for letting me know that.
Thank you all.
