Representative one point.
Your.
Representative what.
Here.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler.
Here.
Representative Townsend Here.
Representative Herndon.
Representative Dixon.
Vice chair Sarnia.
And chairman of course.
Mr chair were there any excuse
absences.
Do we have a quorum.
We have a quorum okay so we'll
deal with the so I'll go over
that
Good morning everyone we're look
short today because for reasons
that are unclear to me house
appropriations and finance
committee meeting on Tuesday
were.
Two very members are over in the
GSC
I heard the chairwoman the state
on the floor last night
yesterday she expected to be a
short meeting.
Whatever that means I think
they'd be began at eight so
we're gonna have to we will if
we will go ahead and present
bill if our members aren't back
We'll have to we're gonna work
on making sure they have the
opportunity to vote.
because it soon.
It is possible to do two
different soon at the same time
if you have two different
prices.
so we're just gonna have to see
how that goes and also like to
note that house bill one twenty
five is being rolled at the
request of the sponsor so we
will not hear house bill one
twenty five sustainable building
tax credit states that will be
the.
I don't know when or when or if
that will be rescheduled we will
here today.
So we just have to bills they
are first bill will be house
bill thirty seven community
energy efficiency development
block grants and has fallen for
six distribution of copper Tax.
any questions comments or
announcements from the committee
before we begin.
Okay I I we're gonna service
house bill of thirty seven.
Representative Ortez I
understand your expert will be
joining us in a few minutes but
you're gonna go ahead and
present the bill is that correct
Mr chair I have one expert here
another will join shortly.
It is your expert a Pallister do
we need to what the I believe
that we need to promote Tammy
feeble corn.
She's had she has her hand
raised okay this thing could you
do that.
He has been promoted thank you.
And I think that's a
pronouncement so Representative
Ortez four years.
Thank you Mr chair good morning
everyone members of the
committee members of the public
watching the assuming webcast
there there is an imminent Mr
chair would you like me to read
that out right now.
I move the amendment for
discussion purposes.
The amendment for discussion
purposes this is Representative
Pamela Harnden.
Thank you Representative heard
in their second.
Also
So the amendment yes Sir since
the moment
the reason language.
Please be sure to go over that
so we don't end up debating
stuff that's not likely to be in
the bill thank you
Representative artist.
I thank you chair Mister chair
at so I'm happy to explain the
minute now or I can do that
later but I wanted to just give
folks a sense of what this bill
is about HB thirty seven is the
community energy efficiency
development block grant this
bill will improve utility
affordability reduce energy
burden for low income low income
New Mexicans all around the
state New Mexicans living in
rural low income community
spend a ton of money on their of
their income on on utility bills
sometimes as high as twenty
percent but on average about
fifteen percent that's just too
much so what this bill does
statuses are funded and to give
block grants to local tribal
governments and also the
mortgage finance authority to to
make some targeted energy
efficiency improvements in
underserved communities and I'm
happy now to stand for questions
but I also like to invite one of
my co sponsors Representative
Roybal Caballero to let to speak
a little bit about the bill and
also I expect many people court
from the southwest energy
efficiency project.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you Mr chair and thank you
good morning committee and thank
you to the great Representative
Kristine out this for this
wonderful bill and giving me the
opportunity to join with her you
know Mr chair I've spent all of
my professional career working
as an administrator chief
executive officer of nonprofit
organizations and as a public
administrator and one of the
greatest
Opportunities we had in helping
with neighborhood
revitalization happy helping
with low income communities was
working through the the notion
of the concept of community
development block grants and I
bring that up because this is
one of those perfect examples
that that fits in to the the
community block grant model and
that is that it gives it's a
wonderful opportunity to give
local communities and
communities community groups
community organizations to
actually Mr chair of work in
defining and determining what
will work for them to help
assist them in the air utilities
in this case on in the housing
needs in in all of their needs
so the model is actually gives a
lot more flexibility to local
communities to determine what
the needs will be and it Lycett
just by the very simple notion
of what it is on community
participation and then more
importantly than anything it
actually approve improves this
bill improves utility
affordability and it helps
reduce the burden that we
already have on lowincome and
working for communities on the
high escalating utility costs
that are insurmountable for
these community solar I think
the the representative on thank
you Mr chair in the committee
and I hope to have a very good
discussion this morning thank
you.
Thank you for this people are is
it commissioner if you look our
council at just just.
Thank you Mr chair I am too many
people born with southwest
energy efficiency project and I
am so thankful to the sponsor
for continuing to push this bill
and some version or another this
is the third year for this bill
and you know I think this is so
important because right now is
the time for bold action to
fight climate change but it's
also the time to make sure that
that climate change fight in the
benefits of that fight make it
to our lowest income most
disadvantaged neighbors and so
that's what this bill does it
allows us to reach our state's
climate goals by reducing energy
use but it also helps are
disadvantaged in frontline
communities reduce their energy
burden so that they can can can
be a part of the solution this
project this bill is based on a
pilot project that's happening
in Albuquerque right now we're
we are going into disadvantaged
areas of the international
district and going into low
income folks homes and helping
them with energy efficiency and
electrification upgrades so that
they can pay less for their
utility bills and have some
money left over for things like
food and medicine and housing
and also helps us reach this
clinical so I'm just really
excited for this bill it's the
time has come for climate change
and the time is come to help our
low income neighbors thank you.
Thank you for that
Representative Ortez anything
like that before we go to the
public thank you so much care
for the public okay thanks for
that so first off we're gonna do
Seoul Augustine you already for
this bill.
Yes.
Okay the full assembly dues for
the bill are not support the
bill I've seen please leave the
pull up for twenty seconds.
Munching and now it so for the
people and soon you can in.
On your computer screen you can
both whether or not he's for the
bill.
Okay.
So we have ninety four percent
in support six percent in
opposition and that's forty four
people in support and three in
opposition.
I'm.
To see that.
I hope
the we
We're gonna hear from the public
we're gonna do no more than
twenty minutes on each side.
we'll hear from opposition first
so if you are opposed to this
bill.
and you wish to speak on it you
don't have to.
If you speak on this bill please
raise your hand now.
If there is no opposition then
we'll go straight to support.
But we're still on opposition.
Okay so I don't see anyone else
to speak in opposition it now if
you want we can support now
please raise your hand.
And all the people to try to get
in early.
Yes so okay we're going to
twenty minutes it's amenities so
that's about twenty people can
be more if you speak of a
concisely so first up and
support we had June persons.
Honorable chairman and committee
members my name is Jim Parsons
can you hear me yes two hundred
homes are projected to receive
energy efficiency upgrades it HB
thirty seven the seat grand Act
passes the jobs created will
help you Mexicans transition to
clean energy this bill allows
local communities to decide how
their funds are applied and to
employ local people to do the
work proud work with real local
impact the energy efficient
changes paired with a call to
the PRC to reduce rates will
significantly lower energy bills
for low income households who
pay a disproportionately high
percentage of their income for
necessary energy to run their
refrigerators lights eating and
their children's computers for
school age P. thirty seven is an
opportunity to rebuild homes law
I and communities please vote
yes on H. B. thirty seven thank
you.
Thank you we have John Brown.
Good morning and thank you to a
chair committee and bill Sanchez
my name is John Brown in the
Franciscan sister director of
New Mexico interfaith power and
light and I'll pass a region we
work all over the state with
faith communities we've very
strongly support this bill and
have worked on it for the last
three years as well
for us this brings together
issues of caring for the health
of our communities human dignity
to have a comfortable home
addresses climate Care of god's
creation and local employment
plus other areas and our faith
communities are the ones on the
front line with people can't pay
the utilities that they really
try to help with this and other
other other needs because caring
for our neighbors so we very
strongly support this bill and
are so grateful for the sponsors
to work on it so hard thank you.
Thank you we have.
Travis Kellerman.
Thank you Mr chair members of
the committee.
My name is Travis county with
the southwest energy efficiency
project and I really want to
lean into the potential for the
economy here and the jobs to be
created Zacks about two thousand
homes that are projected to
receive some kind of efficiency
upgrade to be impacted if this
bill passes and the jobs to do
this work Representative this
new layer and new staff in the
energy transition economy here
in New Mexico so it allows local
communities to decide how to
apply these funds and there's
gonna be local people point to
do the work this is a real proud
work with real local impact
these are green jobs and these
for both community and economic
development it's not just for
those who are doing the work but
also those are going to have at
least ten percent or more of
their income for eight.
So represents a pilot project
and it's an opportunity to
rebuild homes and lives in
communities and once is proven
we can scale it up it's really
the first step to more green
jobs and they're designed
include everyone in budget
everyone in this transition to a
clean energy system so I ask you
to support this bill it's.
Thank you for that Sir about the
timer next step we have Robert
Romero.
Yes thank you Mr chair members
of the committee I'm Robert
Romero registered lobbyist for
J. cars electric cooperative.
On behalf of Kit Carson I like
to think the Sanchez finished
using this bill J. Carson is
very interested in lowincome
rate structures and is in full
support of this bill thank you.
Thank you next up we have him
are.
She could their dentures
selfless.
Hello my name is Pamela Rogers
and I mental health therapist in
Santa Fe also a member of
indivisible sos and working
families party and I'm just I
see this bill as a win win all
the way around
it's very important and part of
a really good the healthy future
for all there's really no
ethical reason in my mind to
oppose this bill please vote for
it and pass it it's it's just
very important thank you.
Thank you we have scanned the.
Thank you my name is can over
and I'm an intern with the New
Mexico Public Health Association
as because transport of hospital
thirty seven this bill not only
financially says those in low
income situations to receive
adequate access to energy but it
improves their physical safety
by protecting them from
environmental hazards such as
heatwaves and freezes.
The energy efficiency that the
override will positively affect
all by combating the mounting
issue of climate change thank
you for your time.
Thank you next up with Erica
Erica Kate Katie goes sorry.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee my name is
Erica they will all be director
at well let we stand in bureau
of health bill thirty seven and
you about the racial justice
issue this legislation provides
funding for local communities to
reduce any energy burden of low
income residents create jobs and
build capacity in communities
that need it hello this one will
also provide block grants to
local and tribal governments of
the mortgage I'm sorry to make
targeted energy efficiency
improvement and underserved
communities in partnership with
local community organizations
for these reasons we urged
committee members to vote in
favor of house bill thirty seven
thank you.
Thank you next up we have
Michael d'antonio.
Good morning Mr chair members
the committee Mike and Tony with
Xcel energy we do business as
southwestern public service
company serving electricity to
the eastern part of the state.
We do support the bill we had a
good conversation with the bill
sponsor she is removed the
sections that were problematic
for us we were totally behind
the energy efficiency portion of
the bill and that's what we
understand is in there so we
understand in strong support the
amended bill thank you.
Thank you next up with Jeannie
locks and.
Good morning can you hear me now
yes thank you.
Good morning chairman queen and
members of the committee my name
is Jane Austen and I represent
the league of women voters of
New Mexico we support H. B.
thirty seven as amended one goal
of this program is the reduction
of costs that lower income
residents pay for essential
household utilities to be more
in line with the percentage that
other residents pay this can be
achieved by requests for energy
efficiency projects that reduce
energy use another important
goal is the expansion of access
to essential household utilities
including access to adequate
water services and the internet.
Requests to expand access might
for example be used to extend
water or internet service to
households that are not
currently being served the block
grant structure in H. B. thirty
seven allows each community to
selected the most important
focus for its residents we
support this bill because it
contributes to the achievement
of the twenty thirty greenhouse
gas reduction goals and provides
necessary services to lower
income residents please do.
Sorry about the timer.
The next step we have Camillus
Eidelman.
Are you able to hear me.
Yes thank you.
Camilla I woman I'm the director
of the Rio Grande chapter of the
Sierra Club we and our thirty
five thousand members and
supporters stand in support of
this legislation we thank the
sponsor we thank all of the
stakeholders for helping to keep
the bill moving and you have a
bill that gets you low income
home energy efficiency great
jobs and helps the climb at all
it wants great reasons to vote
yes thank you.
Thank you we have Kevin
Grunwald.
Good morning chairman will claim
members of the committee
my name's Kevin rolled on CEO
The New Mexico will likely pop
Association we stand in support
of this bill I thank the
sponsors for working with us to
come up with a compromise
By eliminating sections eight
nine ten.
This makes this a stronger bill
matches up very well with
existing energy efficiency
programs that we have both at
the distribution coop level in
the generation transmission
cooperative level so we urge
everyone to support this bill
thank you.
Thank you we have Rico Gonzalez.
Good morning chairman the queen
and members can you hear me.
Yes.
A good morning it's always great
to share our our coffee with you
all Rico themselves without
passive electric we are very
much in favor of the compromise
that we have before us we want
to thank the good Representative
for working with us on this on
this issue and look forward to
working on these block grants in
our energy efficiency filing
recently of one of our new
community partners is MFA and so
to that end we think we'll be
able to to really take advantage
of some of these opportunities
for for our
Customers in in southern in Dona
ana county in southern New
Mexico so thank you very much
chairman and members please vote
yes on this bill thank you.
Thank you next step we have
Charles good marker.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee I am Charles good
mockers speaking today on behalf
of the natural resources defense
council weather is ation is the
best number great strategy to
cut pollution improve public
health state folks dollars and
put people to work we strongly
support the bill and hope to see
the fund expansive Niculae
before the budgets complete this
bill reduces exposure to energy
and security fuel poverty and
health and safety standards
which result and social
inequalities of Health
investments in energy efficiency
safe and affordable housing for
low income communities to re
establish so called social
equity by reducing the excess of
housing and energy burdens
experienced by New Mexicans HB
thirty seven as a jobs bill with
climate public health and social
equity budget for New Mexicans
in every corner of our state
please vote yes on SB thirty
seven.
Thank you next up with Carlos
the Cerro.
Yes good morning chairman the
queen and members of the
committee.
Carlos we start with the Public
Service Company New Mexico.
Wrongly sports energy efficiency
programs and grants to help New
Mexicans reduce our energy use
we work with we've been others a
few years ago to help raise a
cap on it energy efficiency act
along the more more funding to
go towards the creation of new
programs to broaden our reach as
well the addition of one million
requests will go a long way to
help are most in need we
appreciate the sponsor address
our key concerns on the
reporting studies and right
preferences and look forward to
discussions in the interim NM
sport to HB thirty seven thirty
seven as amended thank you.
Thank you Kelly shoot.
Hello my name is kiwi sheep and
I'm a community organizer with
citizens caring for the future
and Carlsbad I'm here today to
voice my support for H. B.
thirty seven as a young woman
organizes around oil and gas
issues and lives in the Permian
basin I made constantly aware
how much work must be done and
how much change must be made to
address the climate crisis
within the oil industry these
changes happen at a very slow
rate and we face many complex
issues in order to cut emissions
in this sector that is why when
I see something like the sea Act
a media we get excited about a
little more helpful for the
future why because you see
return on your investment when
you take action such as this
these requests will not only
help people in need in a real
and tangible way but they will
also slowly begin to address the
issue of emissions in this study
a very measureable way they also
give communities the opportunity
to collaborate and depend on one
another as the years passed in
the case of ramifications of
climate change so just food
shortages pandemics natural
disasters it will be essential
to folks know how to lean on
each other and work together
exactly the groundwork for that
team working at the same time
cuts emissions in turn will
lessen the burden of what young
people and future generations
will be asked to face in the
near future thank you for your
time.
Thank you and I said we have can
use.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee and continues with
a coalition of sustainable
communities comprised of Los
Alamos Santa Fe Albuquerque in
Los crucis always have good
grant writers will be glad to hi
Chris my.
But I also want to bring up to
smaller communities that don't
have good grant writers and
perhaps we could State Council
governments to help them with
sand as it did in twenty ten.
When the communities a wagon
Moriarity on sure so so damning
truth or consequences and Santa
Rosa all got small grants to
help sixty eight sixty
households become more energy
efficient I think that's a great
way to.
Presume is centered your support
for the bill.
Thank you except within like
kids.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Sam
Watkins and I'm with new energy
economy this is an important
bill for to move towards both
energy efficiency it residential
level and equity of energy costs
and availability in New Mexico
in twenty twenty eighteen point
two percent of New Mexicans
hospitals live below the poverty
level which is twenty five
thousand nine hundred twenty six
dollars a year for a family of
four of twenty four point seven
percent of New Mexicos children
live below the poverty line this
place is New Mexico's second
highest overall poverty and
highest from child poverty
nationwide and native Americans
a lot the team does make up the
majority of people facing
poverty energy expenditures in
several parts of New Mexico
range from twenty to fifty
percent of household incomes the
average energy burden in the U.
US is tipped typically around
two point five to three percent
but the average low income
household energy burden is two
to ten times that level people
of color and senior citizens are
adversely affected managing
economy.
Sorry about the timer is ward
McCartney.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee
in the eighties I was a
contractor in Montana and work
closely with flat head and like
electric coops.
Because most of the houses I was
building was out in the country
the heated with electricity and
they wanted reduce the demand
for sheet on the overall system.
we upgraded in the envelope in
insulation values and the extra
costs of about five to six
thousand per house.
The savings were paid back in
five to six years and those
savings we kept going for the
homeowner after that I also own
rentals a white fish one of my
houses was a two story
have apartment.
And I cut the energy bill from
two hundred sixty dollars for a
gas in the eight months down to
sixty so three apartments are
splitting today a sixty dollar
heating bill versus a two
hundred sixty and that's what
energy efficiency can do some
tools for this bill thank you.
Thank you next up with page
night.
Mr chair and members of the
committee my name is Paige may
with New Mexico voices for
children and the environment the
public health network to stand
in strong support of house bill
thirty seven.
This bill will provide so many
benefits to communities across
New Mexico by increasing access
to energy efficient homes and
reducing carbon emissions but
have also critical to the health
of our children and our
environment when I think the
sponsor for their tireless work
on this legislation and more to
support for house bill thirty
seven thank you.
Thank you we have set.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name is
Senica and here is the
spokesperson for yucca you've
never come across action as well
as a mother or first care which
is a community based
organization on the south side
of Santa Fe that by youth and
families from low income
communities of color we sent a
strong support of HB thirty
seven New Mexicans live without
regular access to electricity or
water especially our most
vulnerable community members New
Mexico needs to invest more low
income rural and community
frontline communities where
behind other states when it
comes to funding energy
efficiency improvements for low
income households and over half
the states US already provide at
least double the amount of low
income efficiency investments
per capita this time for New
Mexico to invest in to assist
out low income residents reduce
energy burdens while enabling
the state's regents chemicals
running out of time to take
meaningful claim action in every
state step we can take to reach
our goals in a good way is about
a one as we transition to a
sustainable and energy efficient
economy it's crucial we don't
leave anyone behind you must
have a just transition with the
V. thirty seven as a stepping
stone or wages transition could
look like.
Help you all will take a step in
supporting feature Instagram
Communities bicycling HB thirty
seven thank you to sponsors and
thank you for voting yes.
Thank you next up we have Shelly
Man Lev.
No I get their own.
Sorry sometimes the screen
scrolls around.
I think you would get the same
account.
The queen and members of the
committee my name is Stanley
coun the climate Energy addicts
with conservation voters New
Mexico is one of our high
priority bills because CNN
advocates strongly for New
Mexico reaching our climate
goals in a just and equitable
way.
In negotiating amendments to
this bill R. Sanchez experts
have been able to gain support
from utility companies we know
we have support from all parties
involved in this project this
bill the glowing example of how
environmental justice and social
justice can and must happen
simultaneously in the
consultation negotiation
negotiation efforts put into
this bill highlights how
community effort community and
cut utility involvement and a
willingness to cooperate can
bring forth policy that meets
the needs of all New Mexicans
for these reasons and those
you've heard previously CNM
urges your support of HB thirty
seven as amended thank you.
Thank you for that okay we're
gonna go the Shelly now.
Shelly Man Lev let them thank
thank you so much good morning
chair committee members this is
public health day and I am the
president of the New Mexico
Public Health Association
standing in strong support of HB
thirty seven with including are
over five hundred members this
is a public health bill
obviously it is many other
things as well but I wanted just
highlighted build on what our
new energy economy friends for
saying in terms of the impact on
our most impacted individuals
and communities this addresses
housing conditions both in terms
of the immediate effects on
health of for example heating
your home to a wood burning
stove or not having air
condition and your conditioning
when we are going to experience
increasing heat extreme events
so for health equity which we
stand for and for all the other
regions in terms of adapting for
climate change and decreasing
poverty we stand in strong
support of HB thirty seven thank
you.
Okay we're gonna do one more
from the public and that Stewart
what's.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee members my name is to
our what's the long term
resident of New Mexico and I
just want to say for all the
reasons stated above in support
of a house bill thirty seven F.
amended thank you for your time
and energy and pushing this
forward thank you.
Thank you for that so we saw
several people from the public
good racer in the state but I
said we do twenty Mentzer were
at twenty minutes Sen interest
of time we're going forward
Representative Ortez we moved
the.
Amendment for discussion to do
could you explain the amendment.
At the thank you Mr chair yes I
will do that so the amendment
does three things at first we
are striking lines sixteen
through nineteen are on the
first page in their entirety.
Not so sixteen through nineteen
we are striking
it goes through customers so
It does include a little bit
twenty secondly on the on that
first page lines twenty four
twenty five were striking
sections one through seven of
this and we're inserting just
this okay Representative Ortez
first two amendments or cleanup
amendments one is changing the
title and then one is just
changing the the verbiage that
leads up to the actual bill so
when you say you're striking
section twenty seven you're
striking the word inspection one
point seven not actual sections.
Check.
It would be a minute number
three.
Yes and we will be so we're
striking sections eight nine and
ten in their entirety that's
pages fifteen through twenty
one.
So that's basically the.
The bill back third of the bill.
Yes Mr chair.
Okay is there is there any
discussion on the amendment
itself or any objection to the
amendment well is there any
discussion on the amendment.
From the committee.
Is there any objection to
adopting the amendment.
Okay so the amendment is adopted
Representative Ortez as your as
your ex for doing this Mr chair
yes yes the Pakistani Act needs
to be moved over thank you.
Okay would you like to well we
move him over
would you like to give him a
chance to speak.
I'd love that Mr chair thank
you.
good morning
I believe it's professor prison
Act
hi
I understand we we simply do
with wire losses welcome to.
Senator Judy we've presented the
bill we've adopted the amendment
if there's anything you'd like
to add before we go to questions
from the committee now is your
chance.
No thank you and and thank you
for coming in appreciate.
Okay.
Thank you for that
Members of the committee.
Representative Strickler.
Thank you Mr chairman and thank
you Representative
can you explain the the funding
of this program.
You know normally.
We have five hours it talks a
little bit about it but
Can you give me a little detail
on the on the appropriation for
this and how long does it last.
I thank you thank you Mr chair
representative Strickler as I
understand it and I just got
some confirmation that there is
currently fifteen million
dollars in the budget for a
program such as this to provide
energy efficiency products and
services to low income
households so I I I don't know
exactly of how long that lasts
but I I hope that we can yeah I
do know that we can get through
a lot of homes with with that
fifteen million dollars of
funding about three about three
thousand homes all around New
Mexico.
Thank you to defer to agency
that Mr chair representative
Dick I'm happy to defer to to my
experts if they have more
information.
Okay just a follow up question
Mr chairman and and
Representative.
Okay so this is one time money
is that your understanding so
once this you got a bucket of
fifteen million dollars to fund
this grant program and
one is expanded do you just have
to come back to the legislature
to fill the field the grant.
Mr chair representative
Strickler yes one time funding
and I'd like when my experts
Tammy people point to to
elaborate thank you.
Mr chair representative
Strickler the way the fund is
set up is that it sets up a fund
and energy and minerals and that
that can be empty or it can be
full by various means so we
could take additional money from
the state legislature but it
could also accept money from the
federal government are nonprofit
entities that are granting out
money so it was it was set up to
be kind of a catch all we can
take money from a lot of
different sources if we're able
to get that money.
But as far as the state's
concern the state's going to put
up fifty million dollars of save
money if you will to get this
grant program up and running.
And then the FIR does have some
questions on
The number of employees stated
by EMNRD and in other agencies
and is that handle by the budget
to.
Percent of Ortiz
you're gonna have to have
personnel to administer this and
I do and I did see EMNRD and the
audience usually you know
usually they're real time to to
give us their you know their
Your feedback and usually they
need more help.
Representative Strickler Mr
chair representative Strickler I
think all of our agencies Lee
need a lot more help for sure
they they can take a little bit
of that important to our to help
them along and funds are FTEs I
like for miss court to give us a
little bit more detail on that
thank you Mr chair
representative Strickler so the
FIR mentions the PRC and I just
want to clarify that we amended
out all P. Garcia related
parts of this bill and so that
is no longer relevant the
relevant part here is that the
energy minerals department will
need some additional staffing to
be able to administer this grant
correctly there is an allowance
in this bill that any money that
in the seed funds can be used
for administrative costs so that
we can you know make sure that
energy and minerals is whole
they're able to pay for their
staffing out of this money.
Mr Chairman representative and
an expert this is a brand new
program we don't have a a
program like this and in place
so this is a new.
Mr chair representative
Strickler we do have weather is
ation programs in place that and
I think that this is this is a
new program that's that is you
know targeted specifically for
low income households in the all
around the state for very
specific kinds of energy
efficiency projects that miss
miss corn please please jump in
here.
Mr chair representative
Strickler I'm you're correct
this is a brand new program and
it is it is unique because it
allows this energy and minerals
to give out grants to local
jurisdictions so that they can
determine what's needed in their
community each community has
different needs and this is the
first time that the community is
been able to look into their
their geographic area find the
pocket of the most disadvantaged
folks with the highest energy
burden and create a program to
help just them and so that's the
first time that this approach
is being used to my knowledge in
New Mexico.
Thank you thank you Mr chairman
and thank you.
expert in where I come from the
city of San Juan County city of
Farmington State Farm agent has
a their own power light company
and they serve most of San Juan
County colluding other
communities such as a
Bloomfield and I believe
Kirkland and other St in
Shiprock if I'm not mistaken on
may be wrong there but
so in that in the case of a the
Farmington power light they
would
Apply for this grant target some
other low income housing and if
it put it to work of.
I have you know what might my
family owned several rental
properties kind of exec
corporate executive rental so
there for fully furnished all
bills paid so it's really
important for our for us to keep
those utility bills down
and not race you know what not
raise the Turkey rent to the
customers and we so what we've
done recently is blowing
insulation
it yet Daschle.
Attic insulation which is.
Very cost effective I think we
had in our fifteen and which was
inadequate for our climate.
And we blew annexure R. thirty
and and we've had tremendous
results.
That we would qualify for this
but is that is that your main
emphasis is a simply adding
attic insulation.
I know you have stored you know
you have whether rise windows in
what is.
What is your
the estimate of what would be
low hanging fruit for the show
underserved homes.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
referenced Representative
Strickler I I think at that
that's it exactly in the beauty
of this bill is that you know
that city of Farmington and may
identify new insulation as that
locating fruit but tossed Pueblo
or task county sees he pumps as
that low hanging fruit for up
for those low income
those low income households you
know for for the purposes of
your rentals Representative
Strickler Mr chair the
sustainable buildings tax credit
would work quite well for you to
make those investments to make
your renters you have have lower
utility bills you know that this
this bill.
Is is really flexible for for
each of the communities across
the state which have different
needs maybe it's maybe it's
windows maybe it's insulation
maybe it's he comes or
refrigerators and I think that's
why this bill so is so helpful.
Miss people feel free Mr chair
to.
To add anything else here.
Mr chair Representative
Strickler I I agree with
Representative Ortez that we we
really made this bill as open
ended as possible so that the
control over what is needed and
what is done in this program is
with the local government
because they feel that the local
governments no better than we do
what their community needs and
so they can look out we'll see
one community that maybe needs
all better insulation we'll see
another community that says we
have a block of into blocks of
homes that have forty year old
H. fax systems that are really
just a problem for everyone
living in those in those homes
so it really just allows that
Taylor is ation which is really
the key to being able to help
folks particularly in rural New
Mexico.
Thank you Mr chairman and and
thank you.
The thanks for.
When you get into a heating and
air conditioning system that for
expenses.
you know
The cost of really gone up I
don't know if it's a you know
shortage of materials and what
have you but put again a
refrigerated.
More in a twenty five hundred
square foot home I mean the the
heating and and cooling system
is about fifteen thousand
dollars so that's pretty
expensive I may want to units or
swamp coolers are much more
affordable.
And pretty low cost I mean
they're pretty energy efficient
as well they're not the
and then of course you know your
Your heating system is.
Would be a little less expensive
so this would include those
expensive ticket items.
Representative.
Okay okay all righty well this
is something new and looks like
the budget is got a bills and so
That that's that's a step in the
right direction so thank you.
Mr Mr chairman and
Representative.
Thank you.
Your sense required except we
Representative Scott.
Thank you Mr chairman
For yes just a couple questions
with the.
What we adopted.
There is no.
impact.
Or effect on.
Mr Mersch and no requirements
for the utilities to provide.
Reporting is accurate.
Mr chair representative Scott
you are correct.
Okay.
Would.
Come.
Subdivisions.
Structure.
Be eligible for these programs.
Mr chair Representative Scott
yes I want to confirm with my
experts.
Mr chair representative Scott
I'm I'm happy to address that.
This bill is not specifically to
because it's community block
grant program there are elegy
there our selection criteria the
NMED will use to determine which
grant applications are most
meritorious and those those
criteria are in section six of
the bill
a new selection community energy
efficiency projects so there is
no prohibition on.
And project proposal from a
local government that would
target new development for low
income energy efficiency but
presumably you knew you
construction would already be
pretty energy efficient and the
goal of this bill is to really
address those households that
have the highest energy burden
and are having the most trouble
paying their bills likely
because they're an old
inefficient housing and so
the selection criteria the NMED
will use include things like the
estimated reduction energy use
our geographic diversity of the
project
and so my guess would be that
those that unless it was a very
good reason in a project that
included new construction would
be less likely to be selected
because we assume that New York
instructions already more energy
efficient and provides less
energy for again there's no
prohibition on.
Mr chair representative.
Experts.
I didn't see.
Technical.
Objective criteria for.
The valuation of these projects
on carriers.
How they'll be vetted I heard.
I believe during the
conversation that we were going
to be able to buy.
New H. yes Representative
refrigerators.
A number
of very expensive.
This
income home so.
How do we the C..
For Maximo.
Thanks for the Buck if you will.
Mr chair representative Scott
and that's and that's an
excellent question I just wanted
to give a quick correction
energy minerals natural
resources department will be
will be reviewing these
applications and it is you know
on an application basis so the
better more robust your
application is your number of
homes types of projects I think
that the higher score you'll get
but I'd like for either Mr any
actor miss corn to to give us
more detail is needed.
Mr chair Representative Scott
I'm I'm thank you for the
question happy to write a
response so there's a number of
of
Steps that are intended to
ensure that the projects that
are selected are the ones that
address.
Largest energy burning although
again because it's community
block grant project part of this
is left to the community working
with technical service providers
and community partners to
develop an application so I will
note that in section four for
example an application from a
local government under for the
This six.
Identify the service provider
they will implement the energy
efficiency measures and targeted
households except for the
experience of the service
provider so there's a
requirement that this is an
experienced service provider
that is being as we provided the
energy efficiency services as
there's also as I mentioned
before in the selection criteria
among the factors that are being
looked at
are both
the degree to which a project
budget the underserved community
as well as the estimated
reduction energies for the
project one thing to know is
where this project where this
type of program fits in contrast
to the existing program is
funded by the department of
energy it is implemented by the
mortgage finance administration
that program which is intended
to constitute this pro this
program sees intended to
complement that federal program
that federal program is a all or
nothing is very relatively few
units to get energy efficiency
improvements when they do get
those improvements it's a whole
home retrofit it's pretty
expensive one of the goals of
this program our program the C.
program is that a local
government can come and say look
we want to hit a bunch of low
income households could really
use the help and hit just the
low hanging fruit to give a
broader number people so maybe
it relief on their bills it's
modeled on a hi the project here
in the south valley where are
the prosperity works has been
providing low income customers
don't even know about the
federal program that's part of
what they're reporting is shown
and they're providing them with
relatively inexpensive
efficiency upgrades are helping
lower the bills so thank you
very much hope that answers your
question.
Thank you Mr chair
representative is ready.
Matching funds school
requirement.
Folks that are requesting these.
Improved much.
We need to have any scandal
again at all.
Mr chair representative that
there is no matching requirement
program.
Requirement.
Okay Mr chair representative so.
How are you Sir complaining the
anti donation clause.
Mr chair representative that
that is an excellent question
this bill was drafted to qualify
for that affordable housing
exemption to the anti donation
clause
that as you know the integration
because allow state funding to
these are for the housing which
includes infrastructure
necessary to support affordable
housing projects.
Representative Ortez
Representative Scott if I may I
don't think circumventing is the
right word thank you lying with
and there are number exemptions
to the anti defamation clubs.
Mr chair representative got.
Which thank you for that Mr
Chairman.
But.
For structure.
For structure would not fit the
definition of what we're
proposing to purchase here but
but let me move on one the very
last question.
Mr Chairman representative you
are not representing.
These programs will have.
Impact on climate change.
Chair representative that that
is an excellent question.
I'm going to ask Miss people
corn and districts in the act
comment on that.
Mr chair representative Scott
thanks for the question you know
anytime we use less energy we
are fighting climate change and
so I in my opinion we're doing a
lot of big picture
programs and policies to fight
climate change and this bill
allows us to make sure that the
benefits of that fight make it
to our low income neighbors and
so in that way yes it is helping
to fight climate change but more
importantly it's helping low
income New Mexicans manage their
utility burden so that they have
the money available to pay for.
Housing medicine food and
clothing so it's really a win
win.
Mr Chairman representative for
district or not.
There are always looking for.
The percentage impact on climate
change about.
I believe I.
Accurately Representative yes
yes No.
One last comment the.
I find it ironic yeah.
Public policy in the state is
serving.
Creased utility bills.
Of our.
Not just our low income.
Years but all of our.
Where we now have to turn
around.
And dies.
To reduce the pain he's caused.
With each other policies I
think.
What were appropriate to review
the policies that are causing.
These utility bill increases.
And see if we could.
The problem at the source thank
you very much Mr chairman.
Representative Ortez and experts
appreciate the answers that's
all I have.
Thank you Scott Representative
Townsend.
Yes thank you Mr chairman thank
you Representative.
Couple of questions
Or.
Or.
standing that you have provided
within HB to.
For the funding of this project
is that correct.
Mr chair Representative Townsend
yes that is correct.
And.
Just curious.
Why did you do that other than
having the bill stand on its own
merit and have the funding
within this bill so that all
legislators would see that and
understand the implications
seems like it's a two path.
Process yet funding over here
and you get the bill over there.
Mr chair representative Townsend
you know we we've been talking
about this bill and this kind of
project for a very very long
time and I've been working with
folks on that committee on the
house Appropriations Committee
and through the LESC process to
you need to make the point how
important is to invest in energy
efficiency and that's the way it
went.
Representative but you're on
probation mentioned and is are
are you.
Mr chair representative has I'm
not on probation okay that's I
appreciate that.
What.
You know I am.
Representative Scott said you
know there was no.
Material affect climate change
and.
I think we all agree to that but
I would take it one step further
and say there's absolutely no
measurable effect.
I am.
I am interested in the fact
that.
Is energy efficiency and I can
get that and it drops
or hopefully it will reduce
those.
Individuals.
Pardon.
Energy costs.
I would hope.
And I think our I think our
chances of helping these people
is much more measurable and more
quickly obtainable if we do
thanks to lower the cost of
energy verses.
This type of program I
I think I'll just leave it for
their right now Representative I
appreciate it very much
and.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you Representative
Townsend Representative
printing.
Thank you Mr chair Mr chair
representative Ortez I am trying
to just understand the use of a
low income home so does the
individual who will be receiving
the benefit of this grant
absolute have to own the home.
I muted of Mr chair
representative.
Thank you Mr chair
representative Herndon I'm gonna
ask Mr CENIC to answer that
question thank you.
Mr chair representative heard
and thank you for the question
this bill does not require that
that household that is being
held owns the home once again
that's left up to the partners
are going to be putting in a
grant proposal starting with the
local government to tribal
government organization they're
going to target a community that
has hi
And you burn and I'll just note
that in the pilot here in the
south valley I believe that
they're both
houses they're owned by the
people who live in them and
houses are rented.
Okay so and what I don't
understand is exactly how the
what role are the utility
companies are going to play so I
heard Xcel energy PNM and the
other state we approve of this
so exactly what will they be
doing.
Mr chair representative Herndon
Mr CENIC if you'd like to answer
that Mr chair representative for
in thank you that's a great
question are at the very least
that so that's up to again the
grant proposal there is no
requirement if utility be
involved utilities are involved
in funding energy efficiency
improvements in through
the energy efficiency act
however in this case it could be
involved as an energy efficiency
services provider as one of the
partners working together so we
do encourage that any grant
proposal worker the Chiles it's
not require.
Mr chair and representative I
I'd like to just I just want one
more thing which is that we we
did remove all of the utility
related questions of the bill
through the amendment.
Madam Mr.
Mr chair Representative Ortez so
when they say they approve they
really are contributing in any
way to this.
To this project is that what
you're saying.
Mr chair representative Herndon
at that they have actually
contributed quite a bit on
setting up their own utility
affordability programs through
energy efficiency and providing
really helpful important
comments on this legislation.
Mr chair representative Ortez I
just want to also understand the
comments that were frequently
maybe that jobs would be
created.
Tell me how these jobs would
benefit these low income
communities.
Mr chair representative turned
and and that is an excellent
question this past summer I was
in Breckenridge please don't be
jealous of me it was a lovely a
time where I learned a lot about
energy efficiency and and and
energy in general and what I
understood there was that most
of the jobs in the energy sector
in energy efficiency so what
this bill does by creating these
block grants is there there will
be people who have to do this
work to install new systems a
new windows insulation and and
the bill requires but folks to
the you know the
yes political subdivisions to
work with the community partners
those are people who are doing
that that that work really
really good well paying jobs.
Thank you Representative.
Ortez and then finally Mr chair
representative or yes could you
please just help me with if if
this black with this block grant
is created and if I live in a
low income neighborhood do you
come in I mean I do I have to
I you to get to make sure that I
am being able to have the energy
efficient home with clean energy
and please help me there.
Thank you Mr chair
representative current and
that's a great question I'm
gonna let Tammy or gate answer
that.
Mr chair representative Herndon
so the way the bill is written
is that it's it's the local
jurisdiction so it's a city
county or tribal entity that
will submit the application and
they have to work with the local
community partner and so a non
profit that's already on the
ground in that community will be
a partner and the reason that
they're included in there is
because those are the folks that
really have an idea of where the
people in need are and what they
need you know having individuals
apply you know you only get the
folks that really know about it
and and have the the where with
all to go through the
application process we're asking
the local governments to do that
application and determine where
the need is so that everyone has
a shot at getting these the
service.
Okay and then just this for
clarification Mr chair
Representative Ortez.
miss corn could you please tell
me that if.
Is there education component of
this block grants so that you
can inform the communities that
this is an option available to
them.
Mr chair representative turned
and so it's not there's not a
requirement in the bill but the
way it's working with the pilot
projects that are happening in
Albuquerque right now is it
really is bringing community
together we found areas with
high energy burdens we went out
we had kind of community
meetings with folks explain how
this was going to work and so
it's really it's kind of spread
by word of mouth and it's really
educated the community all
around the area where the pilot
projects are working are
happening so that everyone's
really learning about how to
reduce those utility bills and
what energy efficiency can do
for them and their bottom line.
Okay
thank you Mr chair
Representative Ortez I I
appreciate your answers.
Thank you turn didn't
representative Garcia.
Thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative
You know I have a question
Is this the first time that the
energy department is eyeing
involved engaged and this this
type of energy efficient.
initiatives.
Mr chair representative Garcia
and then asked me to answer
that.
Mr chair representative Garcia I
know that previously many years
ago during the are of funding
there were requests that were
provided through the energy and
minerals Department I'm not
aware of anything in the last
several years.
Okay
You know the reason I asked that
question is because
During the Obama administration.
And the infusion of stimulus
money into our communities to
deal with the economic crisis at
that time.
there was a large infusion.
Of stimulus money into this
energy efficient initiatives.
And my understanding is that
they were spearheaded either by
mortgage finance authority or
the New Mexico finance
authority.
The fact of the matter is that
they were very effective.
In terms of connecting with
the folks at the grassroots and
the way that my constituents
learn learn about this
initiative is that there was
announcements there was notices
in the church bulletins.
And not only in the church's
online community but throughout
the the some valley as a whole.
And and people that really
benefited from those were people
that that had
enormous energy cost and one
example print was of
constituent.
Where this initiative went into
her on the media the the the
sponsoring entity whether it be
the mortgage finance or the New
Mexico finance authority.
Had a very sophisticated
messaging campaign where they
don't by the media to visit with
the pact with the with the
family in the household prior
to.
Done and then upon completion
where they were like a little
festive approach with this
country thousand whatever you
know and
in this particular case of three
incidents where I participated
in that kind of event with
constituents you know are they
installed a V. duty doors.
They installed the
refrigerators.
They did insulation all over the
place ceiling walls where they
could pump it in.
They did cocking processes the
data they do windows.
Was Raul brought real effective
and and and and and in those
three cases.
Individuals reduce their energy
costs by almost seventy five
percent.
Show you the effectiveness of
these type of initiatives so if
we had entities like mortgage
finance authority Michael
finance authority on for these
initiatives in the past you know
they probably have a better
grant handle you know in terms
of how to really inform these
initiatives not that the energy
department can't do that but you
know that was my question.
So I think you answered it
but I do want to share this
example how these initiatives.
Can be on full David Rowe
systematic way and how they have
been on for the role systematic
way thank you Mr chair thank you
Representative.
Thank you representative Garcia
Representative Montoya.
Thank you Mr chairman you Mr
chairman I think this questions
I really for you.
Just looking at the way that
this.
Bill.
It's kind of after the fact that
the money is banked already into
the.
Our house bill to the general
appropriation fund or bill.
And then we're just.
Coming in with the bill.
After the fact I mean it just I
know I know this is happened in
the past.
Especially during thirty day
sessions but it just just
concerning kind of.
Not.
We're supposed to do legislation
that we have already in the
budget.
And then when it comes through
this way and we just say well
the money's already been there
for this project rather than
voting on whatever.
Bill we want to put through and
then and then getting the
funding and it just kind of the
tail wagging the dog I I just
don't know that I like the
process.
I'm just really more of a COVID
I guess but I don't know if his
concerns anybody else but it
just it just to.
Kind of bothersome that
apparently whoever that that
that I I don't know if it's the.
offices the governor's bill and
some project the governor wants
but it.
We're dealing with this is an
assumption already you know that
the money's there for it we just
got a possible which and so.
Once again just it just doesn't
seem like this is the democratic
process.
For us to get new a new program
in place
so it just seems as if this.
Time that this was decided and
now we're just doing the
perfunctory job of sending it
through the process so.
I don't know Mr chairman you
have to say about that but
personally I is just the.
Justin of irritating it just
seems like a non democratic way
of handling.
Something new a new program it's
going it doesn't matter the
merits of that I'm not even
talking about the merits of it
it's just how it's already baked
in the budget.
Before we even all got here.
And so.
A couple things the
presentations in touch on this
issue too you know I.
I generally disagree I I think I
think we've all known for a long
time that
something like this really has
to have two tracks
my frustration
the isn't that the money's
already in house bill to my
frustration is my inability to
influence House Bill to.
House Bill to the appropriations
committee
the house bill two is the domain
of the Appropriations Committee
we're I consider us Policy
Committee we set the policy.
I did hear Representative Ortez
state there is money in house
bill two for a program like this
I don't know how specific it was
I will say you know we recently
spent six hours discussing the
policy baton behind house bill
four.
We also a table that bill that
bill has a hundred twenty five
million dollars in the budget
that's contingent on the passage
of that bill.
I don't know what the
contingency language looks like
but that's how it was explained
by chairman Lundstrom.
so I I you know I would say is
the tail wagging the dog I mean
is if the money wasn't there and
we adopt this policy it would be
an empty shell if the money's
not there and we don't adopt
this policy that doesn't get
spent on this program.
So it is
you know I I think it's it's to
track but you need you need both
legs.
So Mister chair I I I guess in
reality you're right that is the
problem plans of happening is
Committee that most of us don't
serve on.
makes the decisions as to
policy.
By putting money back into the
budget ahead of time and then
the policy hits.
And we're not really able to
affect that I I I agree I think
I agree with you very much on
this that the not being able to
help a second house bill two.
S. already baked in before we
get here I don't I don't think
that's the process we're
supposed to have I I know it's
it really limits.
the vast majority of policy.
To one group that that means
unilaterally makes that decision
that budgets nearly completely
done before we get here and then
Whatever little bit the rest of
us do along the way is
especially during the thirty day
session very very little
Very little voice to the rest of
the legislature so I I agree
with you Mr chair and if there's
some way to affect this going on
relative that conversations you
and anybody else would be
willing to have that
conversation thank you Mr chair.
If I may um we do have a the
member of our committee who also
sits on probation representative
Sarinana did you have a comment
on that point.
Thank you Mr chairman yes I do
this bill the the budget's been
worked on over in terms and to
committees also you have
representatives from your side
we have Representative from our
side we have LESC we have of the
appropriations committee there's
a lot of people looking at this
bill it's not like you you don't
have someone to tell you what's
happening in it as far as the
budget
it's vetted we work very hard to
get a good budget it is a good
budget we had as much as we can
everything is brought up is
looked at and looked at until we
get it to where it should be
so not just because you're not
on the Appropriations Committee
doesn't mean you can't put give
input
Mold it you know there's a lot
everybody can do it's just not
one committee and the LESC works
hard the executive works hard
everybody works hard to do this
bill so
if if you have prop if you have
parted with this bill or or how
the process works maybe you
should join our committee but
you do have a lot of great
representatives on your on the
committee that you just have to
talk about it.
Thank you Mr chairman.
So Mister chair one further
comment.
I do know that I can attend the
legislative finance committee
meeting.
participation by those who are
not members is is somewhat
limited ensure leadership you're
actually not allowed to serve on
LFC.
So.
That once again there's a lot of
policy that ends up in the
budget.
And and I don't think that's
deniable and it just seems to be
a lot of that is baked in the
budget ahead of time and the the
the rest of the legislature
seems ever hands tied it's
something that I've noticed for
a long time and I just on this
particular bill it was just a.
It was just getting to be a
little bit I don't mean to so to
the labor the point it's just
something I I don't think is the
right way to do things that it
does.
In my opinion seem to be able to
more of the tail wagging the dog
thank you Mr chair.
Are you on that point are you
raising your hand for a second.
I am on that point.
Representative.
Thank you Mr chairman I would
just I mean as as you well know
Mr chairman this is been a pet
peeve of mine for a number of
years.
I would just Representative
does this does this bill have
contingency language that get
the money reverts should this
bill not passed.
Mr chair representative Townsend
I just give me a second Dave
again or Tammy of COVID here so
the first for clarification
purposes I I Representative
Townsend.
The contingency language if
there was contingency language I
would think would be in the
house bill to wrap this bill.
Well and I understand that but
since she was aware of how it
was put in the house bill till I
it just us or did she know that
it.
It revert or does this happen
whether we pass this bill or
not.
All.
Mr chair Representative Townsend
go ahead County.
Mr chair representative Johnson
so to my knowledge if the if the
bill passes but the money is not
in the budget then we have an
empty fund set up energy
minerals.
Is that we get save some money
from the federal government they
can go in there and help folks
if the bill doesn't pass but the
money is in the budget it's my
understanding that the but that
that money that line item
reverts back to the general fund
and so it's no harm no foul all
around on that.
Well I appreciate that answer
and I'm glad it's that way I do
believe that
The inability of.
Many of the members sixty two of
the members to affect the
appropriation process.
Our hands are tied quite frankly
many of the meetings are private
meetings they're not schedule
meetings they're not a recorded
meetings not even all of the
members are are.
In in the meetings and
appropriation so it it's not an
eighteen member legislative body
it's a seventy member
legislative body so I'll hold my
comments for the floor.
Mr chairman but I appreciate the
opportunity in the second thank
you.
Thank you Representative
Townsend is there any other
questions from the committee I I
do have a couple questions of
my.
Okay.
So my first question
Yes so my first question and
that's that was a improving
rental units.
If you improve a rental unit are
you evaluating the financial
qualifications of the owner or
the residents.
Thank you Mr chairman I'd like
for Mr sinak to answer that
question.
Thank you Mr chair for that
question there are there are two
ways that a
So again this goes back to the
local government that puts
together the application and
there are two ways in which they
can identify.
Which units are.
The ones are going to be served
one of them is by looking at
The people who live in the
housing so they have to qualify
as low income otherwise there is
a method
it is going to be to establish
for the department will where it
is based on
Defining the housing it is going
to be improved as affordable to
low income people.
Sir two methods either one is
enough to be eligible
application one of those
messages is going to be defined
by the
I will make.
So if.
There was a landlord their own
of a bunch of.
Shabby units with port
insulation.
That that landlord is turning
out to low income people without
landlord be able eligible to fix
up his units.
Mr chair it again into the echo
through the committee block
grant caught process and so part
of the safeguards that we have
built in here is that there is
the goal is to have a.
You partner that understands the
targeted population and is
required to engage with that
population in the the the pilot
programs that we use to as a as
a basis for this bill
are being able to reach people
and understand the housing
situations of those people and
so they're able to put together
a group of homes that are well
deserving for improvement.
That being said that the problem
that you're raising is one that
Is there any when it comes to
energy efficiency work and the
look at a lot of energy
efficiency.
programs around the country
there's no perfect solution so
it may be the case that you know
there is a shabby landlord is
going to get some benefits to
the housing stock that Here she
owns but our goal based on that.
Variants of the programs were
basing it on here in New Mexico
is that this kind of community
approach is going to hit low
income people and help them in a
way that for example the federal
programs are not being able to.
thank you for that I.
I am.
I have a lot harder about fixing
up an investment property
yeah I understand we're could
benefit the family occupying the
property but I still think.
Investors should be responsible
for that and I also think that
that home ownership for low
income people is.
One of the best things we can do
as a goal we should be working
towards that the the stability
of the financial benefits of
owning your own home and then
you know the delighted to
whether I pick that up but
that's I mean that.
To my mind should be the goal
here.
Representative Ortez and Mister
sin Act on page ten section five
talks about the costs.
Find or rate the cost of
financing in for a structure.
What's infrastructure we talking
about.
Mr chair
Go ahead again.
Mr chair thank you for the
question.
This so just to give you a
little bit of background this
bill is modeled on the
affordable housing act in the
way that it dresses the
requirements of the affordable
housing exceptions the anti
donation clause.
Fireman's are in article nine
section fourteen F. and may you
spell out several things that
so that important housing
divisions not self executing
according to the constitutional
provision this legislature needs
to pass a bill that meets
specific requirements and one of
those requirements according to
the forum according to this
constitutional provision is that
it has to establish the criteria
for the recipients of land
buildings and infrastructure.
In the affordable housing act
which is already been passed
that specifically defines
infrastructure under this
affordable housing exception to
include weatherization and
energy efficiency services that
that language is already being
used in the affordable housing
act to authorize the mortgage
finance administration's energy
smart program which is the
program that uses both federal
money and sometimes state money
to provide energy efficiency.
And so this language and you're
referring to
refers to the authorization this
program to also provide energy
efficiency improvements
characterized informal housing
act infrastructure to be
consistent with the horrible
housing acts for housing
exemptions the anti donation
clause again that usage has been
in use for a very long time
since the former housing act
passed.
There were infrastructure
includes
Things like weather is Asian.
Yes in fact agent Sir in the
affordable housing at the the
worry infrastructure is defined
to mean lots and lots of things
but one of them and I have an
open right here that that that's
okay at that yes was was was was
fine.
So this so this I just one final
comment
this isn't a climate bill you
know the right bill I mean this
isn't efficiency bill it's a
it's a waste bill let's stop
wasting energy let's stop
wasting money it has the
benefits of saving money and
reducing emissions.
But that I don't think that's
the target of this bill now is
there some questions about that.
The cost the cost of utilities
utility rates.
I have found myself thinking
back to my mom's forward L. TD
country squire station wagon.
That I grew up in as a kid and
you know would roll around that
see that we're a seat belt that
thing was a tank.
And I think you got seven miles
ago.
So you you can complain about
gas prices but if you're gonna
be driving the vehicle like that
well that's a problem in you
know utility prices
or maybe they've got up.
But some of these houses are
gonna be a lot older than my
mom's station one.
In.
Living in the.
Was a rental unit was actually
for in Michigan.
Eight like a sieve.
We took.
Tuesday's in Kalk my windows
just to plug the gap because the
wind was whistling through.
Yes so there's there's no you
know yeah a lot we can do
affordably sort of low hanging
fruit.
and and that's what I I be the
target of this bill and it's
something I I certainly support.
Representative Sarinana.
Thank you Mr chairman I move it
to pass to house bill thirty
seven as amended.
That's correct that is correct
their second.
I second it.
Representative Herndon Augustine
he take a role please take a
look please.
Yes.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Garcia.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative one point out.
No.
Representative Ortez yes.
Representative Scott.
No.
Representative Strickler no.
So.
Not sure.
Chair during our.
Yes.
Chairman of course.
The miracle eagle Fund yes.
She's.
It's six in favor or oppose.
You have a deep passes meant.
Thank you Mr chairman thank you
members of the committee.
Thank you everyone thank you
experts.
Next up we have
House bill one forty six
distribution of property tax.
Representative trusses with us
and it looks like he's ready to
present Representative process.
and thank you members of the
committee
I was supposed to text Senator.
Bill and I got distracted she
wanted to be on this so let me
just kind of you're a quick text
letter no Mr chair I apologize.
Okay.
Hi.
Thank you Sir thank you Mr chair
so again I want to I appreciate
job fair.
Hearing this bill today in the
committee and those in the
public they're listening and
this bill is on as a section to
the tax administration act to
allow fifteen percent of the tax
and revenue departments net
route receipts attributed to the
resource excise tax on copper
which is about three quarters of
a percent severance tax payable
to the general fund to be
distributed to the county in
which the copper was mined this
diversion of tax money from the
state to the counties will start
July first twenty twenty two and
and your June thirtieth and
sensor June thirtieth twenty
twenty four.
And basically what this is Mr
chair and members of the
committee is we.
Grant County had a massive
impact.
As a result
of COVID the the shut down the
money were.
Our little county there are
about twenty percent of the
budget is comes from.
Copper is covered copper
severance tax and.
So we we were impacted.
In twenty twenty when the Dutch
they were shut down in April and
then open up until on January of
twenty twenty one so that that
is basically all we're we're
what we're asking to do is take
fifteen percent and reverted
back to the county were the
origin of of copper came from
and and help of it's just a
small asked what we can have on
our county kind of half we
restore itself I would like Mr
chair to introduce
Senator.
Hemphill who is a co sponsor the
Senate co sponsor and and get
some cut get some comments from
her please.
Thank you Mr chairman for the
opportunity to introduce a bill
today it's really important for
County just to make sure that in
southern New Mexico we have that
the resources that we need to
arm for our revenue to you know
as you know in rural New Mexico
we don't have a lot of
resources like in in northern
New Mexico in our industry more
limited bar so that mean a lot
to our local community and I
appreciate the opportunity to.
She's frozen on my screen.
Thank you my losses etcetera
percent trusted you have other
witnesses you want us to include
in the panel thank you Mr I do
Mr chair I have both teacher
Trujillo and I have him some
water who is the county.
Chair for County grant and I'd
like to start with the our with
TJ of policies on.
They're they're joining us now.
Mr chair.
Morning Mr chairman morning
members of the committee can you
hear me yes.
Thank you Mr chairman Mr
chairman today I'm occur before
you in my capacity as an
attorney with Trujillo law group
as an attorney at practice
administrative law natural
resources law and tax law here
in the state of New Mexico more
poorly it's a pleasure today to
have an opportunity to assess my
friends from my hometown in
Grant County.
As well as my Republican and
Democrat legislators there on
this bill.
Mr chairman I respect for your
desire to keep things shortens
to seeing I'll just simply say
at this point that I think
section two is the crux of the
bill
I will leave things there for
now would be available to
provide additional comments as
you as we get into questions
thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Mr the more.
Good morning and thank you Mr
chairman and committee members.
Appreciate your time here at
house bill one forty six it is
significant for us at L. provide
our County as a temporary leave
here copper production taxes.
They provide a significant
amount as Representative assets
and mentioned to our general
fund which runs are County and
and operates are County here
over the last since July of
twenty nineteen the increased
COVID we have lost.
We have lost one point two
million dollars as of as of
today by the end of this our
year expect that's going to be
up to one point six and some
change after that so that is a
significant amount of money for
for our smart small County and
every year it's continued to
increase I know at some point
that is going to start
decreasing what this temporary
relief will help us.
Through the time period until we
get back to pre COVID levels.
our county because we have such
a significant.
Impact due to the copper mines
here we experience the same
struggles that every other
counties experience due to the
pandemic.
But with the copper mines and
the shut down and Chino wine.
A partial shutdown during that
time period and Representative
access to mention it
significantly impacts on various
aspects of the county and not
just our our copper production
revenues that we receive but
numerous aspects so with that I
just ask your support on this to
temporarily relieve resulting
from house bill one forty six
it's going to help our County
and it's going to help our
community recover from one of
the lost a significant loss of
crop production revenue that we
have it's also going to help our
recovery efforts due to the
pandemic impending questions Mr
chair created time.
Thank you Representative
trusses.
With that
Mr chair we we go to public
comment to less you like for me
to answer anything at this point
now we if you're done process
process direct done presenting
the bill we will go to the
public first we'll do a whole
Also look for this bill.
Yes.
So the ball for the audience.
You can vote on your screen for
the sport this bill or because
this bill will need to pull up
for twenty seconds.
Whenever you're ready on scene.
Okay we have ninety three
percent in support.
US seven percent in opposition
and that's.
Fourteen people support and one
person in a position.
We will if if any members of the
public would like to speak on
this bill we will do the
opposition first.
So if if you are in opposition
and would like to say anything
please raise your hand that if
you're in support please keep
your hand down.
So first up we have seen across
to do.
Good morning chair and members
of the committee my name
something increase to do and I'm
just speaking as a concerned
citizen I think this is an
excellent bill and has this as a
true sunset and that's very very
important my only only only
concern is that it does possibly
establish a dependency on this
it needs to be a very firm
stance that as well as I kind of
question what this money is
going to go to it needs to make
sure it goes to clean and
diverse economy
otherwise it's an excellent bill
I hope they get the money thank
you bye.
Okay so that sounds like support
we're in opposition
In opposition Paul Gibson.
Three eight all.
Yes that opposition.
Okay now we go to support you
like to speak in support of this
bill please raise your hand.
Cats like to limit this to ten
minutes.
we might be able to get everyone
in that amount of time.
First we have to me trio.
Your muted I'm here and.
Your underuse is there for a
second and then you use it
yourself again.
What now yep.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee my name's Tony
trio of the registered this
report back reading Grant County
the largest aboard southwest of
Mexico three point stances
strong support of this
legislation let me make it clear
that report is not in any way
benefiting from this legislation
this does not increase or
decrease what we own on this
tax.
What is always supported the
communities of which we do
business that.
This legislation does is put out
one time mandate to the
significant budget reductions
that Grant County suffered when
that you know operation shut
down April of twenty twenty do
the COVID pandemic the state
budget forecast for twenty
twenty two of that resource
excise taxes about seven point
six billion Freeport in average
pays about five million of that
per year thank you fifty percent
of that money used the Freeport
pays out a Gregg county would be
a appropriate since the taxes
collected are right there in
Gregg county the budget the
reductions for the county where
significant appreciate the
support.
Thank you we need to do this.
Good morning Mr chairman
committee members my name is
nana benefit this I'm a
community organizer in grant and
Hidalgo County on behalf of New
Mexico cafe I speak to you in
this morning representative of
many community members who could
not be here with us standing
strong support H. B. one four
six copper is the lifeblood of
our communities and through no
fault of the employees are are
Freeport background layoffs are
necessary during the pandemic
and deeply affected our
community HB one four six would
help to make our community hall
after significant losses we have
faced due to our reduction in
copper production copper jobs
and job losses in the related
service come economy the amount
requested is more than
reasonable given the amount of
pandemic relief funds coming to
New Mexico copper and community
members of copper country offers
so much to the culture tradition
and most importantly the future
of New Mexico we ask this be
recognized and honored with your
support of H. B. one forty six
thank you so much have a great.
Thank you secretary brown.
Thank you Mr chair it's great to
be back with you and I committee
hearing last year we did quite
well I think
yeah I'm a great county
commissioner my name is Terry
brown and I think an important
piece that perhaps wasn't
described in the otherwise
excellent presentation by
Representative to harass us is a
little history of the property
tax on our copper mine was taken
away by the state legislature
back in the nineteen nineties
and replaced with this ad
valorem tax as a result of the
very ability of our revenues as
a county has increased
tremendously that's what this
bill addresses we dropped from
two point five million in county
revenue from the copper at the
loan tax to one point five
million this year you know
losing a million dollars is a
major hit to our budget this
bill will will go about halfway.
To plug that gap and I really
appreciate it we appreciate the
support thank you so much.
Thank you next up we have Chris
on site.
Good morning Mr chair of thank
you for for having me on here
thank you I stand in support of
H. B. one forty six due to the
deficit that we have faced your
view to comment for it
internally copper prices so this
would be the central for us to
get this that's to provide the
essential services and bring up
question to services for Grant
County and I do concur with what
has been said and and.
Thank you Mr brown
And the really thank you and
just to let you know I don't
know if I.
I told you earlier but I am the
chair of the Grant County Board
of commissioners.
Thank you chairman next up with
Franciscan dollars.
Good morning Mr chair committee
members and community members
anyway my name is Frances
Gonzales and I'm actually from
the mining district I hearing
Grant County where the copper
mining is and for our community
is a lot lower income and where
we can definitely benefit from
this from the monies that are
given to our county I definitely
support it I'm not going to
repeat everything everybody else
did but also I definitely
support and appreciate that the
mine does is willing to do this
and that Senator Hemphill and
Representative Deborah says are
supporting this bill I asked for
it to pass for this and
supported and thank you so much
for your time.
Thank you we have Republicans
also.
Good morning Chairman can you
hear me.
Yes.
Thank you Mr chairman and
committee members and it's nice
to share my third Cup of coffee
with you all this morning.
My name is Rico Gonzales and I
am in support I work from past
electric in in the member of the
greater Las Cruces chamber of
commerce and then the C. a
valley economic development
alliance of former chair.
We are in support of this bill
it down here in southern New
Mexico we all work together many
of my good friends here in Los
crucis are from the Silvercity
area and we are vacation up and
and and have families inside of
of.
County Luna County hello County
any anything that we can do to
support our community brothers
and sisters is is a great effort
for this legislature to help
accomplish during these times of
COVID thank you very much for
your time and
That's it.
Thank you we have hobby year
I'm here if you could introduce
yourself that be appreciated.
Good morning Mr chair my name is
have your son las I am up Grant
County commissioner I would
really like for your company to
do a do pass on house bill one
forty six the impact that will
have on the money is not at all
and it would be very minimal
what the it will have a very
minimal impact on our a state
government.
The loss in copper revenue has
impacted our County with.
Great problems we need to
continue our essential services
and this will go a long way to
assist us and continue to do
this I appreciate your time
thank you very much.
Thank you we've billion pockets.
Thank you I'm will Hawkins on
the superintendent here to over
schools I just wanted to
reiterate my support for house
bill one forty six the copper
mines in Freeport mac Moran is
continue to be an incredible
support to the school system as
well as the county despite their
one point two million dollar
loss in revenues they continue
to be a strong partner both in
the schools and the county and
so I think it's a great
opportunity for us to like wise
provide that relief funds to
them and show their support to
Grant County in our community
thank you thanks.
Thank you.
The.
That was my phone I apologize my
phone is muted but it is into
the computer and so it rings on
the computer
all just for that that does it
for the public for so we have
for the committee before I go
back to the committee present
trusses is there anything you'd
like that before we take
questions.
A poster Mister chair I I I
respect your time and it seems
like you want to run a quick.
Committee and and and resolve
this I want to I want to respect
the the committee and then take
questions right Representative
Garcia.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you
Representative Russ.
For bringing this bill forward
And I'm kind of jealous with
that I think it was Rico
Gonzalez that's a very was going
on its third Cup of coffee.
You know those of us with acid
reflux and are very kind.
Cuff is out of the out of the
under the scope for us you know
out of the playing field but I
do have some questions Mr chair
Center us us
what is what is the the amount
in the fund.
Currently.
I'm going to go ahead and in in
the ask our expert witness on a
to do to heal to go ahead and
answer that was Mr chair
representative.
Mr chairman and members of the
committee
there's nothing in the fund per
se but till but for last year
the mount of the server
severance tax rate was six
hundred and.
Of forty four thousand dollars
seven hundred forty per six
hundred forty four thousand
seven hundred forty two dollars
the research off the resource
tax is.
Okay.
The Jewish to add more to that
Mr through our at present the
answer that's the answer Mr
Chairman.
Thank you for that
Also another question that I
have Mister chair
You know at the end of the day
How much will Grant County
receive.
Mr chair representative I just
by Senator Mr chair.
Mr chair and representative of
it looks if I go by the FIR
estimate revenue impact FY
twenty twenty three it'll be
five hundred twenty five
thousand and in FY twenty twenty
for the five hundred forty
tells.
Okay thank you for that
And also
Is
Is taxed Representative via
department will need to delete
the fund.
Representative I believe it's
just gonna sunset itself and so
if there's anything additional
it'll sunset on its own is going
to expire in twenty twenty four
June thirtieth so there won't be
it should close itself off it is
just a again as as we stated
earlier Mr chair representative
it's just to suit in a small
bandaid for the losses sustained
you know during the COVID shut
down.
Okay so Mr chair and
representative that assess
So the finer twenty five
thousand that Grant County sixty
get from this initiative.
from what duration is that.
It'll begin Mr chair
representative on July first of
twenty twenty two this year and
will sunset in June on June
thirtieth twenty twenty four
okay that's what I was not there
on so basically kind of a a two
year.
Process in terms of this
initiative
You know I I kind of sympathize
with your efforts.
You know I kind of
Also have a soft spot in my
heart for Grant County you know
I back in nineteen sixty nine I
attended.
Western New Mexico university
and I made a lot of friends
believe it or not and that one
semester.
And unfortunately I was just
there one semester
and then transferred over to the
start to finish up my my
bachelor degree.
But there's a lot of a really
incredible
people there and Grant County
and
And I know that
The friends that I made to their
families and probably their
grandkids now that have families
are are still in that area and
and struggling to make ends meet
and I think anything that we can
go to.
Really a up with the community
is what I'd like to see happen I
think this measure kind of come
close to doing that in the short
term
and so I think you are isn't
that assessed in this for.
Thank you Representative Garcia
except we have Representative
Sarinana.
Thank you Mr chairman I'm thank
you a representative for
bringing this forward.
I think it's a good bill but I
worry that this is the
president's week I don't know
that we can start if we if we
help here your district the next
tested comes along and ask for
something we will help them also
and then at what point does it
affect our tax
The taxes and and
I just have a hard time with
that I'm not sure what to do but
I have to think about presidents
on this one I'm not sure how I'm
gonna vote on it though thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you thank you
Representative Sarinana
resentment so it.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
I I agree
with Representative Sarinana
this is is problematic.
but I would say I am looking at
the next committee is taxation
and revenue.
it's going to face a real uphill
battle.
There I I think the the issue
and that and that's the problem
we're gonna be I think for all
of us we're looking at this is a
tax.
Tax issue.
And if they were there.
Could be a problem down the road
if what what if all of the oil
and gas County said budget make
sure you remember money back to
those counties.
So I don't know that I will have
a tax debate in this committee
I know how robust that will be
in tax and
So.
I'm not sure if if if a yes and
no Representative would be.
Appropriate here.
Because I cannot imagine.
That that Representative Harper
is not gonna.
Have fun with this bill
thank you Mr chair.
Mr chair representative could I
am respond to the last two
legislators through my expert
witness Representative Terrazas.
Good it yes Sir can I I'd like
to direct to expert witness and
to answer that and and go from
there thank you Mr.
Did you.
Chair Mister chairman members of
the committee of just a brief
comment on on the two previous
comments that but working with
Legislative Council what we try
to do is pick of they're
appropriate mechanism that was
narrowly tailored to be able to
not open up a a larger tax
benefit
and and avoid the slippery slope
as much as possible this point
on the TRD analysis
that's why we went to this
particular tax because there's
only one County that produces.
Hopper as opposed to some of the
other resources mothers a
multiple counties we thought
that this was the program
mechanism to make as limited as
possible is shorten time is been
duration as possible as we move
forward and and that's why this
particular tax was selected to
be able to help is because of
the limited nature which we
could not opened up any
additional
possibilities thank you.
Thank you Mr chairman and
TJ and.
Representative I.
I think the discussions what
what this opens up
just a discussion about you know
Source of the income and where
it goes and what returns to the
community that's that's the
question that that ends up
happening in to be honest I.
I'm not sure this is the
committee this committee have
that conversation.
Thank you Mr chair.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr trio any other
question committee I do have
Google My on.
So
trusses.
I appreciate this bill to and I
certainly appreciate the
difficulty that.
Our communities are facing
The I don't think Grant County
is I'd.
Alone.
It and I do worry about the
president of differing
Tax revenue in this manner you
know I I recognize you.
You the as mystery pointed out
you you identify the sourcing
connected those I appreciate
that.
we did have a bill couple years
ago there there's an effort to
divert C. additional revenue to
the Permian basin I think it's
in particular the work on the
roads and the under the the
logic which which makes sense
that the.
the truck traffic was really a
wrecking havoc on the roads I
don't think that cut through I
don't think I don't think it's
correct I don't think this will
get through house taxation of
course being a committee chair
and I am sensitive to other
committee chairs and I know has
taxation short session as a much
heavier workload than we do so I
I would be.
I would like to spare them
having to have that debate this
isn't something I can support
so that's just that's just my
comment
you know I think we're all
sympathetic and we all
recognize.
Why you're here Representative
in your community and we
appreciate that.
with someone like to make a
motion.
I just Mr chair I'd like I'd
like to moves eighty passes no
rec.
We
second.
The recommendation motion and
the second there's a trust as I
should come back to you any
final thoughts before we take up
the.
I want to thank the committee
for for entertaining the the the
you know our our need in Grant
County and I did Mr chair try to
keep the the impact the smallest
possible from my understanding
of there has been in the past a
larger stacks that was was dealt
with in the same way I'm sorry
that I'm not provision that Bill
number and and the in the
history on it but that is I've
heard of of a bill that had to
be taken place in the and in the
past that helped with largest
tax something similar to this
but Mister chair I appreciate it
again.
My purpose in and running this
bill was to keep it small a
small amount and a short of a
time as possible so that I'm not
you know robbing the bank thank
you Mr chair.
Thank you Representative trusses
Augustine each take the vote
please.
Yes Sir.
Representative Dixon.
Yes.
Representative Garcia.
Yes.
Representative Herndon.
But no.
Representative one point out.
Yes.
Representative what.
Yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative.
Yes.
Representative Townsend.
This is the day passed with no
recommendation is that correct
that is correct yes.
Representative Herndon yes.
Chair Starr.
No.
No.
In favor to propose.
You have a due pass without
recommendations.
Sure thank you members of the
committee I appreciate you give
me a chance god bless thank you.
Anything else from the committee
before return.
Thank you for a.
The pain free committee hearing
I appreciate that we are turned.
