I'm here.
Vice chair Romero.
Your.
Madam chair for our.
Present.
I hope I you have Corman.
Thank you
we have an introduce ourselves
for a while and.
Representative Thomson you want
to go ahead and.
Thank you madam chair
representative Liz Thomson house
district twenty four which is in
the northeast types of
Albuquerque and this is a fun
Committee to be on.
Representative Pettigrew.
The group from Lee County New
Mexico southeast part of the
state.
Thank you Representative Lord.
Representative Lord I think you
muted yourself from being I need
it.
I need it thank you
Representative Lord from east
mountains disappointed.
Right I share more.
Thank you madam chair Andrea
Romero Representative Andrea
Romero from a northern Santa Fe
County all right we have a
memorial to talk about my
community today so I want to
work in one.
Never and I am chair Joanne
Representative joined Ferrari
from house district thirty seven
in Los crucis so with that I'm
just an ounce again we are not
hearing house bill one seventy
two
it has been rolled and then also
house bill one eighty six which
has also been rolled so we will
go ahead and hear house memorial
thirty eight
vice chair Romero go ahead.
Thank you madam chair thank you
committee this is hopefully I'll
be brief because the memorial I
believe speaks for itself in so
many ways for what we're trying
to do to modernize our ability
to train and educate our our
first responders or police those
who protect our front lines in
our communities every single day
this is a collaboration with
an organization that has been
working very very long and hard
to to improve basically the
outcomes for folks around the
state I'll just name the
different organizations that
help with this but this is
basically memorial built on top
of the memorial we basically
have convention meeting for the
past year to to identify
training opportunities around
the state hoping that it might
be housed in northern New Mexico
but more than anything we want
to be sure that
you know it their based
basically culturally relevant
socially relevant and and
basically responsive to our
communities that said the folks
that have been helping with this
effort
I want to get my list wrong so
I'm just going to be sure to
name everyone rain the reviews
and incest national network and
the New Mexico wishin of social
so programs sexual sole purpose
thank you I am a quality New
Mexico and the ACLU of New
Mexico
That said the folks who really
helped with this is the northern
New Mexico Law Enforcement
Academy coalition they're
basically a group of of retired
and current law enforcement
folks have been working with the
department of public safety and
others who see this as something
really important for our
communities essentially it just
the memorial itself just looks
it having a more modernized
training system that helps
responds to the community the
diverse communities of of of New
Mexico so everyone report it's
it's actually responding to all
of these different communities
coming together to do that we're
hoping that with the budget this
year this can become part of our
future of New Mexico and how we
do first response and with that
madam chair I'll let the
advocate speak we have folks in
the audience that I know are
really passionate about this so
I just want to give them the
time to do that thank you madam
chair.
And representative do you have
expert you want us to elevate or
just they'll just make public
comment with the public comment
that's okay madam chair of their
technical questions I know
there's folks in the audience we
can speak to become the because
of its of its memorial me and
just want to be courteous of
everyone's time we'll just or
answering questions anybody
house.
Okay thank you well let's go
ahead and do the whole.
For the audience.
Those who are in favor signify
and those who are opposed.
Okay.
Trying to read this six people I
are in favor and one is
supposed.
Okay so let's hear from the
person who is in opposition
please raise your hand we'll do
the first that approach the
person who is supposed.
Madam chair okay I know that
Chapuys says on in favor so just
wanted to make sure.
they might have misunderstood.
Okay it is precisely in the and
the so I don't want to miss him
for opposition okay.
So there's I'm.
Is there anyone in opposition to
the bill that would like to
speak.
What.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is John block united New Mexican
I live in Alamogordo and I'm
opposed to house memorial thirty
eight I believe that it is quite
divisive and I think that it
would not send the right message
to our great law enforcers who
protect us each and every day
with their lives and I believe
that every single person that
they encounter they use respect
and the use dignity with and as
someone who may fit and one of
these groups that is mentioned
in the bill I do not feel like I
am treated differently because
of a certain identity groups
that I identify with and I think
that it's quite offensive that
this bill would specifically
target myself in policing so I I
urge the committee to please
look at this bill a little
closer or this memorial rather a
little closer and be a little
more.
Caller and of what we have to do
as a community to stop bad
policy but also make sure that
we honor our great men and women
who protect our country and
protect our communities and our
police force thank you madam
chair members the committee.
Thank you is there anyone else
in opposition that would like to
speak.
That was the final hand raised
in opposition madam chair okay
thank you so those who are in
support of house memorial thirty
eight please raise your hand if
you'd like to speak.
Meriah and I.
You madam chair members of the
committee my name is money and I
and I at I'm here on behalf of
rating which is the right of use
incest national network I'm here
in support of house memorial
thirty eight you know this is a
really beautiful memorial at in
particular it brings together a
really diverse about a group of
organizations and entities
including the organizations that
you heard from a Representative
role metal before as well as the
department of public safety at
law enforcement officers so I
I feel like a lot of times were
usually on opposite ends of
bills and so it's really nice to
see everyone I'm willing to
identified this as a training
gap issue and willing to address
it across the state I'm so we're
honored to work in collaboration
with Representative role metal
to move this important each data
collecting tool and we hope that
we have the support of the
committee thank you so much.
Thank you.
Next.
Marshall Martinez if you wanna.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the committee Jim
Marshall Martinez in the
executive director of equality
New Mexico where the statewide
LGBTQ civil rights and advocacy
organization so proud and
honored to support house
memorial thirty eight as a
quality New Mexico we have
partners including the transfer
resource center in New Mexico
community aids partnership who
specifically have been reached
out to by individual police
departments and law enforcement
agencies across the state who
have said we need additional
training on how to be could be
culturally appropriate and
respectful of members of the
queer and trans community and so
we're excited to stand as part
of this memorial because we know
that if a couple of individual
law enforcement agencies are
requesting this on our own
already that this is a gap that
that as Representative Romero
and money on a I'm mentioned is
a gap that exists across the
state and we're really excited
about the opportunity to bridge
that gap so that all of us who
live in all of our communities
can truly engage with respect
and feel safe when engaging with
law enforcement thank you.
Thank you next.
Maestas.
Hello my name is Elaine Maestas
and I'm with the ACLU of New
Mexico we believe that this
memorial is a good first step
I want to highlight that last
year a piece of legislation was
presented that aim to prevent
the use of force this was Senate
bill two twenty seven
the FY are for this legislation
outlined the need for attention
to training the report reads
that only forty seven percent of
law enforcement agencies
complied with statutory
reporting requirements.
On another note the F. I. R.
also read that research
indicates that training alone
may not affectively alter long
term behavior without strong use
of force policies and
accountability we must have a
holistic approach that focuses
on training policies and
accountability all of these go
hand in hand this is the only
way that we can truly achieve
change while supporting our law
enforcement we support this
memorial and we think the
sponsor we urge each of you to
support it as well
I also am here speaking as
someone who has lost a loved one
to unnecessary use of force
twenty one shots up from the
deputies that were called to
help my sister that's how her
life had ended we couldn't have
a viewing I'm if her tragedies
and others like hers don't speak
to the urgency of this matter
I'm not too sure what what what
will I'm my family also urges
you to support this memorial.
Thank you next.
Wescott.
Good evening madam chair and
members of the committee my name
is Jake Bosco and I'm with the
New Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs in support of
house memorial thirty eight we
see this memorial as a win win
for law enforcement and the
communities they serve of
filling this gap is supporting
law enforcement by giving them
the information they're asking
for and uplifting the voices in
the communities they serve and
ensuring that particularly
organized committees are being
heard and their needs are being
met we stand in full support of
this more memorial and urged the
committee to do the same thank
you.
Thank you next.
Madam chair that was the final
hand raised in public comment
okay thank you
Representative or vice chair
Romero if we may I and I see
track these hand up I thank you
you might be on the phone he
added if you if we could allow
him to speak as well since he
was engaged in the memorial
process and then of course pre
dating this as well sure go
ahead.
Hello can you hear me yes we can
we want to start this or one as
much as they love the US my name
is checked before thank and
madam chair and members of the
committee on behalf of the
northern New Mexico Law
Enforcement Academy of
correlation we are we're told
supported this this house
memorial thirty eight would like
to thank estimates that
Representative Andrea Romero for
for sponsoring this because now
we needed in the north and
United existing gaps you'll
they are there and especially in
in service training for law
enforcement first responders in
our New Mexico would like to get
the kitchen table top
athletic on and and on the table
to really come out and really
conversation among our brothers
and our sisters there are law
enforcement with all the
community of all walks of life
so we supported we we appreciate
the time that you have given
given us willow RD
Where we were there for you guys
thank you.
Thank you.
Okay now go back to.
The vice chair.
Thank you madam chair just thank
you to the audience and to all
of the support that we received
for this in the different ways
that we have our communities are
so diverse and this is basically
a partnership with law
enforcement you know protecting
our communities but really truly
bonding together you know all of
the diversity embracing it for
what allows us to do better in
our communities as well the more
we know the more that we can
learn and train and and
reinforce you know who we are
and what we are I think the
better it is that we are we are
all served in that process so
I'm just really grateful to to
be able to present this today
madam chair and hope that we can
get it through this committee
thank you I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you.
Get can see everybody.
I think it that's it okay
I'm it Representative Lord.
Thank you madam chair okay so.
If you questions on this because
I'm trying to go back and we.
The house memorial before and
then I was trying to look for
data
madam chair and our
Representative can you tell me
first of all who are who are the
northern New Mexico Academy
coalition people what are their
names because of trying to get
that information I've asked to
the law enforcement officers and
and I can't find it since they
seem to be mentioned quite a bit
and this who who are they.
Thank you madam chair thank you
a representative for the
question so it's it's a group of
of again former and current law
enforcement agents within their
nor the New Mexico area I don't
have their permission
necessarily to name them by name
so I feel a bit uncomfortable
doing that
as far as the coalition goes
it's a group of people so it
would also be really difficult
to do that but that said madam
chair that the group essentially
had met over the course of last
year to discuss some of the gaps
in training looking at some of
the opportunity that may exist
in particular northern New
Mexico which is our neck of the
woods at for our district in
being able to to have both
culturally relevant and
substantial amounts of of of of
training in in different ways
and in total to combining
Different first response
together so you have you know
fire men and women working
together with law enforcement
to with you know as looking at
social what is it social workers
response to
working all together essentially
you so you're looking at the
identifying those gaps basically
the public
the public safety department was
interested in and how we might
be able to collaborate with this
when we started coming together
identifying that there wasn't
any of this type of training
available that how's that
cultural events that has that
you know
sort of adaptation to our
different communities and
working together that's why we
built upon this so it's just
this this small group of
committed community members that
started engaging in this process
we had the first memorial and
and so here we are today having
had that convert those
conversations and we have other
pieces of data that I'm happy to
share with you that aren't in
the share file for this as to
how it can be done and what was
shared their.
Thank you madam chair and vice
chair that was my biggest issue
on this I don't know who these
people are I don't know how many
there so could you please tell
me how many people are in the
group how many are law
enforcement officers how many
are firefighters and how often
you Matt over the past year.
Madam chair representative
I would be happy to you know
convene with you on that I would
rather stick to the contents of
the memorial what we're seeking
to do moving forward so as far
as just a group of people that
you know there's fifteen twenty
people that Representative met
remotely we had one convening in
person that basically discuss
discussing everything from that
facilities from educational
leaders to again retired judges
law enforcement officers those
that we're looking at some of
the the trainings available that
we're experts in those fields
and then of course our public
safety chief then the secretary
who is now the chief of police
of our
Of our state police and so the
commitment has continued on
going with that leadership and
having these discussions and
being able to can be that said
that's built upon all of the
that time in an effort that had
been spent to be able to come to
this memorial today and see what
we can do moving forward madam
chair.
I thank you madam chair and vice
chair to me it's very important
because when I read through this
we have all these stipulations
about what we want to do what we
want to move forward work with
and I'm assuming that the
specific things that are listed
here for the gap is a very very
very specific came from these
meetings so if it came from the
meetings I want to know who is
in the meeting and also it is
their data other graphs is there
will people hold our were I want
to know how did we get to these
are the specific things that we
decided is this antidote all our
was are actually real statistics
and scientific method used to
find out what the specific needs
are.
Madam chair representative so
basically convening all of the
subject matter experts together
who understand where the gaps
are in their trainings and their
communities this was all
basically a group together at
their meeting minutes it's not a
you know a public meeting again
this is a memorial these are
people who are underpaid who are
volunteers who are coming
together to be able to have this
discussion because of its
criticality that said moving
forward because this is building
upon that effort and the moments
and that was received having
being been able to discuss some
of the gaps this is building
upon that knowledge that we need
to have something that may be
more formalized we'd like to
have a bill in the future but
this is basically these
committed.
People working together and that
coalition as we've heard even in
the audience is built on out
even further for those that want
to be able to be part of this
movement and how we move forward
and how we have these
discussions were formally but
the memorial was really a
building block for us to be able
to have those discussions
convene just put together what
it was that that was lacking in
in law enforcement so I can I'm
happy again introduce you to the
this committee group of people
that have you know put this
together I moved just
continually forward to get to
where we are today but again
this is the momentum that we're
discussing now.
Thank you madam chair vice chair
more were there any current
shares whether any current state
police or were there any current
city please and were there any
people involved that were
specifically doing training
right now in the state of their
art with this or any.
Yes I'm sure Representative we
are working currently with that
the chief in the event secretary
of department of safety now
chief of police of our state
police we've been working with
our secretary will wait
currently we've been working
convening with the Espanola
police department there
workforce again former judges
chaplains in the state police
currently folks that are on the
ground every single day Madam
chair representative.
Thank you madam chair vice chair
still have problems with not
knowing exactly who all these
people were specific by name
because we're dealing with
something again that is very
specific needs and I'm not
saying that those needs are
valid but usually when you have
a group of fifteen people talk
about and to double things that
they think are important to them
does not apply to scientific
method where you do actually
real science to develop what are
the issues at hand which is a
column who are boots on the
ground and people that we get
their names appear when talked
is that's my biggest issue with
this is that I don't know where
all this information is coming
from especially when you're
asking for eight hundred ninety
two thousand dollars now so this
is going to be if I understand
correctly this is going to be a
training center that even though
it's only fifteen to twenty
people that I don't know who
they are have put these ideas
together then every once it
moves forward the goal is then
for every single law enforcement
officer to have to be have the
specific training is that
correct.
Madam chair representative let
me first clarify the first piece
of legislation was a memorial
those are not connected to any
funding it's not a bill there is
no money attached to this bill
this memorial either there's no
there what we're talking about
is how we can continue to move
an idea forward convene folks
based on the fact that it's
important to this legislative
body that we continue to have
these conversations and can be
if we could have the statistical
analyses and the waiting out the
data that you're discussing
unfortunately that doesn't exist
currently in the way that we run
our police forces around the
state that is what we're calling
for that is what we're saying
that we need to at adopt
training to the needs of our
community that doesn't exist
currently we would love to do
that the fact of the matter is
madam chair representative that
this group of dedicated
individuals have come together
to help the state understand
that there are gaps that help
the state understand that we
don't have the data to identify
to pinpoint and to show you what
it is that we need to do exactly
and that is why we convene
that's why we're here today
that's why we're trying to
continue to build momentum to
let this legislative body
Representative the people of our
state let them know that we can
do better that we know that
there are gaps that we know that
we want to be able to respond to
the needs of our communities and
we're not doing that effectively
at the moment that is why there
folks supporting us so as far as
everything that you just said I
wish I could be presenting that
to you today and the fact that
we needed the eight hundred and
ninety three thousand dollars to
be able to see how we move
forward we're just not prepared
to do that right now that's why
we have this memorial that's why
we convene this group of subject
matter experts and that's why
we're seeking your support
today.
Thank you madam chair and vice
chair amount again it goes back
to what I would have rather seen
in this is a wider reach of
people and not specific people
I'm only a small group I can
grow up to fifteen to twenty
people not saying they're not
valid I'm just saying we have a
very specific things listed on
here and and we know that there
are certain gaps for certain
things but there's very very
specific things listed in here
and I have no validity to are
these the top things that need
to be addressed or are there any
issues with this because I also
know I talked to a lot of law
enforcement about this tell me
about the training that they get
and the de escalation training
and the fact that they do have
sensitivity training that there
are things that you have
training in already and I would
have rather seen you reach out
to thirty three shares and all
the state police and all the
firefighters and the unions
because I've talked the unions
and they don't know anything
about this and this becomes very
problematic because I wasn't
there at these meetings I don't
know what was going on at these
meetings and I think the final
thing I have to say on this.
My parents were lesbians which
I've talked about numerous times
and how much my friends are are
gay and lesbian and I guess what
I don't understand is
What.
My parent was arrested in front
of me was child understand why
there's a difference and it's a
rhetorical question my part was
arrested and I don't understand
the difference of why somebody
would be treated differently
because she was a lesbian she
committed a crime she was
arrested and that was that I'm
not saying that there's there
could be gaps or training that
what I'm saying is I see the
specific things and I don't see
well Representative work we have
you know we talked all those
people we talked to you so we
talked to that you know the head
of the this you and that you and
and we did our due diligence to
talk to two hundred different
law enforcement firefighters and
here's the thing that they're
saying which again is anecdotal
but at least or something more
than you know fifteen to twenty
people so now I I will not be
supporting this because there's
just not enough there's no
research behind us and their
specific thing listed and from
talking to law enforcement
they're ready telling me that
they already have a lot of this
training so I feel like they
were not spoken to and I'm
trying to be the course for them
to say they have plenty of
training and if there's gaps
then there should be some
research and what those gaps are
in everybody should have been
included every single state
police every single city police
every every current sheriff and
all the different counties and
then possibly import because I
could talk to them and they
would sit down is yes if we have
some serious problems and these
are the issues and would like
you to support it but because I
don't have the backing and there
and according to the FIR this
money well with this I can not
support this bill so I yield my
time thank you.
Representative Thomson.
Thank you madam chair I'm in
just listening to the for more
questions I'm in it but we we
would all love to be able to
talk to everyone who might be
affected by whatever we do and
knowing that a memorial is
essentially a suggestion and
there's no weight of law behind
it there's no appropriation and
there's no way possible for us
to talk to everyone who might be
affected I will tell you madam
chair that I I've been working
on a bill for years about Adam
driver's in car passengers with
disabilities and I have spoken
with different groups of law
enforcement I spoke with the AP
folks I spoke with the state
police folks and the one thing
that they continue to tell me is
knowledge is power we would love
to have as much knowledge as we
can have to do our jobs better
to keep ourselves safe and to
keep our community safe.
So I think this is a really good
idea madam chair and and
Representative are madam vice
chair I remember reading
something earlier this week and
I can't remember where about how
they're supposed to be tracking
of law enforcement officers
continuing education units for
lack of a better word because
that's what I know in terms of
of medical staff is continuing
education units.
What I read is that there are
mandatory things like child
abuse and
I think domestic violence sexual
abuse trainings that are
supposed to happen but
essentially in the state we are
not tracking them I have do you
know what I'm talking about
madam vice chair.
I I don't know the specific
article you're referring to
madam chair but this is a
nationwide issue in my
experience and what was built
out of to a memorial with that
what or what rather out of
junior bill money in twenty
nineteen was other now movement
for is he murdered indigenous
women and girls and that was
speaking to the lack of data and
now we're seeing what policy
initiatives we can put into
place based on convening a task
force of folks around the state
because we were able to fund
that so precisely what you're
discussing when we can actually
put resources for identifying
where the gaps are we data is
the huge dearth of information
that we are lacking right now in
our state and and I don't know
exactly again what you're
referring to it's it's happening
across the board in different
ways okay thank you and then
this is that a little bit
outside of outside of what we're
talking about but it is your
right and up and coming up
coming lawyer is it I'm just
curious this that really doesn't
have anything to do with this
memorial per se but if there's
if something goes wrong and the
and there's a lawsuit
legislative the woman who spoke
in public comment if something
like that happened in and the
law enforcement officers were
supposed to have you know four
hours a year the escalation
training and we don't have the
records I would imagine that
that would not look good in
terms of of a lawsuit against a
law enforcement individual our
agency.
Thank you madam chair
Representative and and now
having a light local out in my
head I know what you're talking
about about the missing records
about where they were trained
how they were trained and over
the course of years what was
going on so again how we were
speaking to accountability and
everything else among our
community that's precisely the
just the data itself is is so
critical to to be able to
identify how we can tweak and do
better moving forward.
Thank you madam chair and then
essentially the question are
what you're trying to do with
this bill up I can sum it up in
for my home bring is to bring
folks together to figure out
what it is that we need to do
nothing is prescribed in your
ballots we need to look at these
things and decide with the
experts whether they be law
enforcement whether they be
judges I don't know who they are
that's kind of outside of my
world but your idea is to bring
those folks together and and
have meetings and figure out
what it is that they need to be
trained on and and how we can go
about tracking and getting that.
That's correct madam chair and
that's exactly what this effort
has brought to us today and we
don't know it's it's asking for
a statewide assessment not to
just have this group of
committed individuals they are
meeting you know on
independently but to make sure
that every important person that
needs to be there is there and
so that's the intent of this and
again if we we're moving we're
continuing to move forward
despite having the resources to
do so because we're committed to
figuring this out.
Thank you madam vice chair thank
you madam chair that's all I
have.
Thank you.
And you.
Can you hear me.
You Mr Representative group.
You're one works okay
so I find your memorial very
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative for your
moral I find it interesting and.
I'd like to kind of talk through
and.
What I think I heard today.
So that I have an understanding
of it.
Madam chair and and vice chair
I.
I believe I heard someone say
there are couple law enforcement
groups that are asking for this
and I was wondering madam chair
by the vice chair if you could
tell me who those well for some
groups are.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Pettigrew so this
we've been convening again with
the state police department
the the we've been looking at
some of the police departments
in our tribal communities as
well as the city of Espanola
you know as far as just being
able to look at some of the the
law enforcement groups this is
in in our community in in
northern New Mexico.
Thank you madam chair thank you.
Vice chair in in.
I sure is is madam chair.
If I understand correctly you
representative sent a good
portion of Santa Fe County and
the are there some counties to
the north the Representative
well.
Madam chair representative I am
just getting from the advocates
in the audience as well I'll be
Alamogordo police department
asked specifically for LGBTQ
training and the Los crucis
police department also asked for
that same training and in Gallup
so the more that we're even
makes creating awareness around
the ability to have a training
like this the more you know
traction it receives I I
represent northern Santa Fe
County and because the city of
Espanola is it is also includes
Rio Arriba county I often work
with my colleagues in the north
because our communities
obviously span beyond the
borders of our districts.
Okay thank you very much madam
chair and vice chair for the
answers so.
Through the the conversation
through the the testimonies you
know I I heard a common theme of
something that we need this in
the north it's it's it's good
that you just got some comments
from from down in Alamogordo and
in Los crucis as well with
respect to the be.
The state room.
Bill B. T..
I'm sorry.
So I think that's I think that's
good the that we have that.
Starting to spread out a little
bit.
Madam chair and vice chair.
One of the other things that I
heard was so we need something
that's more culturally specific
and relevant and so as I look
through.
The six bullet points on things
that we think that we may want
to focus on with respect to the
memorial.
I think I find it very difficult
to.
To take certain parts of the
community certain.
Unity certain counties and and.
Deal with some of the cultural.
Specific and relevant issues
that that exists in the northern
parts or even down the line in
accounting because.
The the group senator so
different the moral perpetuity
of the of the areas completely
different and so having training
for my Lea County law
enforcement officers the deal
with the the moral turpitude the
of maybe some some of us no more
Sir we're now on the bottom half
of the state along the Rio
Grande wouldn't work.
Wouldn't work at all and and so.
I personally don't have an issue
with you having madam chair and
and vice chair having a long
term goals have in a the
satellite training center up in
this part of the country that
the the deals with the the
cultural issues that that that
exist up here and if we need one
of those down in the south in
Denton Daniela in the all of
your I will go to area I
wouldn't have a problem with
that is as well.
That we need to be able to focus
on.
The different issues that exist
with the different communities
and the very specifically are
tailored towards the moral
perpetuity of that to that area.
And so I'm not opposed to the
concept from that standpoint I
am.
As
One of the other representatives
fact about.
I am concerned that that.
This was such a small focus
group.
And we want to deal with that on
a statewide basis.
That focus group deals very
specifically work with things
that maybe may or may not exist
up there and that's the purpose
of the memorial to determine.
Whether or not we need to add
the center whether or not we
don't in a figure that.
Those pieces out.
I just I struggle with we take a
very focused.
Focus group and and very minute
segment.
And then one hour prior
statewide so.
I propose that from that
standpoint not from the
standpoint that that the focus
group up here and focus group
that came together from the
previous moral doesn't have very
specific and very specific needs
that need to be addressed I
don't disagree with that
and and I will always support
that.
So that that can happen I just
can't support that concept.
From a statewide standpoint when
we're not gonna have the
statewide perspective in still
from a statewide perspective or
I mean I listen to the debates
question right I hear the DA and
Bernalillo county say one thing
I hear the dust from another
area another districts say
something completely different
and and so the needs of every
community are completely
different and and I think that
we we need to look at that we we
don't want to create parcels
pockets but at the same
standpoint we don't want to
hold.
One group of people to one
standard when that has nothing
to do with that community.
You may or may not agree with
that I'm I'm trying to look at
it from a hundred thousand for
level and I get drill down into
the lease and so Madam chair
representative I think it just
depending on where you you are
looking at far as far as
cultural relevancy it's you know
coming from say the LGBTQ
community LGBTQ identifying
people exist in every county in
the state thirty three counties
we have tribal communities that
span the state they have come
you know completely different
perhaps cultural practices
at how they identify how they
speak how how what language they
use for instance all around the
state and that's the beauty in
our diversity as a state however
what we're asking for in this
in this memorial is to identify
those communities to be able to
insure that folks know that they
are members of the community
that they that we want to have
that cultural and socially
relevant training to help
identify what we're missing from
a law enforcement perspective or
first responder perspective so
as far as just knowing that this
and knowing that all of these
folks absolutely reserve that
that level of respect and
identification that's what we're
asking with this as well madam
chair representative so to to
think that they don't or to
think that we may be missing
something here as far as what's
different in the north or south
or east or west you know this
spans any sort of order any sort
of
you know what what any
identifier between north and
south but this is what we're
actually trying to understand
about these communities Madam
chair representative.
And I appreciate that very very
much and in what I would what I
would offer up.
Madam chair and vice chair is to
bring you down to the southeast
part of the state and let you
get to know.
Our our our shares in our law
enforcement.
In.
Lee County Chavis county and the
County Roosevelt County and see
how
for sure and and and our
municipal.
Police departments integrate
with our communities.
We you know when when we talk
about this from the standpoint.
Our law enforcement agencies are
so integrated in our
communities.
That.
The training so they have a very
specific.
To the needs of our community
yes we have people in in
everyone of these areas down
there and none of them are
ignored in any form or fashion.
Very specifically are are
sheriff's department has.
Has.
Houston has breakfast and all of
our different communities to
make sure that they're bringing
them in and they they they they
still that way.
Always doing community events
and always working with those
individual communities and it
doesn't matter if it's
gosh.
During the pandemic we're having
all kinds madam chair and vice
chair all kinds of
of rallies and protests.
Our.
Can you keep your comments to
the bill please I'm doing my
best.
And so I'm sorry if you disagree
with your loans this but I feel
like I'm I'm keeping a very much
on target.
Well if you can.
Make it for question or you
know.
Okay so
Anyway what I'm trying to say is
I agree that there may be areas
that this needs to happen with
the law enforcement is a
integrating into their
communities.
In my neck of the woods in the
southeast part of the state our
law enforcement agents doesn't
matter if it's a rally for this
company for this this group for
this group it does not matter
they're there to protect.
In there with them.
They don't care.
When I say they don't care it
doesn't matter the purpose of
whatever it is it can be any
different group I see this need
an inmate and that may be a very
clear and specific need just
because of the presenters and
the COVID for to night something
that exists in the north I just
don't see it existing on a
statewide basis and I would love
to have this conversation
continue on Representative with
respect you're more of the right
now we're we're where we stand I
can't support this thank you.
Madam chair representative I'm
just understanding the advocacy
that's come out for instance
southeast New Mexico has the
highest level of sexual assault
in the state and I think that's
important for you to know as far
as just what is needing to be
learned and responded to and
what we're asking of this group
of what we're asking of our
legislature in and how we're
hoping to educate you know
everyone about the problems that
we that are still had no
community is perfect and
regardless we're trying to do
better and we're hoping that you
know as far part of of this
effort that that training is is
understood so that that just
continues to to be the best the
the the statistics that were
receiving and information that
we have about what's going on in
in our diverse communities so
that said this is hoping to
spend that and that really does
affect your community and and on
percent Madam chair
representative.
Madam chair representative on
that point and I'm very aware of
the statistics down my neck of
the woods with respect to that
the reason why from the sixty
day session to the thirty day
session I had no less than eight
meeting meeting with respect to
former.
In in dealing with that issue
down here and so once again I
say we're very cognizant of what
the issues are meeting on that
looking at it to figure out okay
what we need to do better how do
we need to work better in those
meetings are consistently
happening we're just not.
Looking to.
push our situation on to
everybody else's this is
something that somebody else can
learn from just like what I
offered madam chair and and
madam vice chair come down or
community see what we're doing
see how it works.
We may not need a memorial we
may have it figured out thank
you.
Madam chair and move it to pass.
Madam chair second that okay
thank you it's been moved and
second for do passed would you
please take roll call.
Representative Lord.
She's trying to you.
No.
Representative.
No.
Representative Thomson yes.
Vice chairman.
Yes.
Madam chair for our yes.
To to pass madam chair.
Thank you.
Is chair amero you have to do
past with this tree to vote on
your house memorial thirty
eight.
Thank you madam chair thank you
to all the advocates who stuck
with us after floor session and
I appreciate your in the state
yes thank you all I'm so this is
our only bill tonight and we
just got a referral so we will
go ahead and meet Thursday but
it probably would just be one or
two bills so thank you all and
the madam chair before we
adjourn a point of order.
Yes Sir.
Madam chair I would request from
this point forward for
committees that we have a member
of Legislative Council on our
calls to to deal with the.
The continual requests from the
chair.
At my request to stay on point
of the bill.
Your per annum chair
respectfully your perspective on
staying on point my perspective
changed and I'd rather have the.
The non partial Attorney
Legislative Council on the call
to make a decision with respect
to whether or not we're phone
committee rules.
I will look into that
respectfully thank you madam
chair I'm I'm wondering it could
connect I'd not sure what
committee ruled is being
questioned here.
Thank you explain that please
Representative Pettigrew.
I think is here is that he's
left the meeting yes I think
it's the call of the chair how
the committee is run and that.
That's correct lawyers are
audited to ensure that there's
no dilatory actions as we
proceed and if they're delaying
or thank you set off the
substance of a memorial or bill
it is your prerogative madam
chair.
Thank you it pays to have a
rules chair.
On our committee.
Three committee chairs on our
committee.
Yes I would that it is it is
totally up to that I mean you
are not doing you're not you
haven't shutting down you have a
gap of him so I think it's a
completely a programming this is
just a memorial and and madam
chair as long as I'm talking I
was a little disturbed by we are
still being recorded that no.
I go the suggestion that the
sponsor had something other than
the best motives and I know
that's one of our the tenants of
our the decorum in our houses
that you do not question the
motives of another member and I
felt like that if they were it
wasn't over the line it was very
close thank you madam chair.
Thank you.
Well with that of we will recess
and thank you all for.
Being here and and committee and
our analyst and people making
public comment good night.
You're gonna.
