Representative Scott I'm here.
Morning thank you Representative
Strickler your.
Thank you Representative
Townsend present.
Thank you vice chair Stansbury.
And chairman the queen.
Your call thank you we have a
quorum.
Thank you
So we just have one bill this
morning should be if you could
comment Senator Neville to the
panel.
It.
The bill we have this morning of
course we have heard I think all
of us have heard at least twice
and maybe some of you lucky if
you have heard it three times.
Yeah I I see some people are
smiling so Sen Bill there isn't
and it isn't amendment hopefully
this doesn't take too long
Yeah we all want to do we will
be meeting this weekend I don't
know yet whether it'll be sorry
morning or Sunday morning we're
checking on the floor schedule
and other committees.
Let's see if I forgot anything
Representative Montoya can
remind me are there any
announcements or questions from
the committee.
Before we go to the personal.
Okay.
Senator Neville will continue
House Energy.
whenever you're ready the.
Thank you.
You are muted sorry about that I
don't know if they have a long
in or not I had two witnesses of
senator John Ryan former senator
John Ryan former representative
rob per pro and that we may or
may not need them I know you for
this bill a lot I'm not gonna
just do well a lot of what it
does is I'll just give you a
quick synopsis we will talk
about the amendment the bill
basically allows a city or
county I'm a primarily counties
to.
The agent in industrial revenue
bond arrangement that would
essentially benefit all the
schools within the school
district are within the county
not school district.
Your goes to the location of the
project in the logic of that is
a County.
Many of these projects and are
typically located in the least
populated areas of the county
and they would like to be able
to utilize the revenues could be
generated from the supplier of
the payment in lieu arrangement
to fund all of the school
districts on proportionate basis
based on religion in that
jurisdiction that's the synopsis
of the bill.
You're you're familiar with if
you've heard it a couple times
this amendment clarifies there's
there's language in the Energy
translation Act we're not sure
we needed this but it was
important that we make sure that
there wouldn't be any if this
bill passes any judicial issues
relative to the energy
transition act so this is a
couple three words what a small
short sentence that says unless
otherwise provided for the
energy transition act and it's
located in the city municipality
section and the county section
of the bill and the I'll stand
for questions that you have seen
need for some more specific.
Detailed Mr chairman.
Your muted Sir.
Thank you senator Senator do you
do you did you want your expert
to have opportunities anything
or should we just go to the
public your they get on I see Mr
pope and I see Mr and.
Let me speak to right twenty
right now.
Mr Paul you're needed.
Thank you Mr chairman and the
Representative that are well I
think I'll just the we can maybe
responded to questions from the
committee.
Okay that's fine and we do have
a.
I see it blank square there's
Jon Ryan.
Mr idea of anything you'd like
that before we go to the public.
just real real quick Mr chairman
members of the committee I mean
you guys have heard this but
these incentives for
transmission and generation
really important they've been
around a while and there's
there's a lot of activity right
now in the renewable area both
renewable transmission renewable
generation whether be solar or
wind that New Mexico should
should take advantage of and
without these incentives we
aren't nearly as competitive so
I know you all know that and I I
would just say I I'm here for
questions thank you Mr chairman.
Do you need to address our
amendment first on how you run
your committee Mr chairman that
you center your amendment is
pretty minimal so I think New
Mexico the public first and then
we'll move your amendment thank
you.
so we have a very light
attendance today so I think
we're gonna skip the whole if
you would like to speak on this
bill please raise your hand.
And we're probably skip the
timer but if you can keep it
short first up we have actually
Wagner.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
Ashley Wagner director of public
policy for the New Mexico
chamber of commerce we support
this bill because it ensures
local financial support for
schools well ensuring we're able
to continue to build our
renewable energy infrastructure
thank you so much.
Thank you for that next up with
Marco Gonzalez.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee mark
opens Ollis said Representative
pattern energy it obviously we
support the bill and appreciate
the committee support of this
legislation the various times
that it's been before you on the
amendment is very simple and we
supported as well and all it
does is make sure that there's
no conflict between the
excellence law that was passed
and worked on by the committee
in the legislature with regard
to the ETA and and this bill as
it passed and we appreciate the
you know the a careful look at
making sure that both can exist
without any sort of.
conflict and even though there
may not be one we just want to
make sure that there is not one
and.
With that Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for your support thank you
very much.
Thank you for that next up we
have Larry current.
All.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee learn more and
register lobbyist for Sandoval
County we rise and support of
this legislation of this creates
a fix to allow counties to
utilize our bees to help expand
and and utilize renewables and
it's the the same is house bill
one of five and we appreciate
your support as you did on that
legislation as well thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you and I think that's it
for the public
before I I see your sentence and
has its hands up already but
before we go to Representative
Townsend let's do the amendment.
would someone like to move the
amendment for discussion.
So moved.
Good enough
and senator Neville I think you
basically already explained the
amendment and you.
I did go Mr Chairman it's
basically to make sure we don't
have any conflicts of the Energy
transition back to the last
language within the act as a
little bit vague and so we just
want to clear clarify it doesn't
this didn't change.
The.
Of the bill and.
Okay and is there any discussion
on the amendment before we go to
the bill.
Is there any opposition to that
amendment.
Hello.
So seeing no opposition of oil
about the amendment unanimously
of those in attendance and
they're on the bill.
and first up we have
Representative Townsend.
Yes thank you Mr chairman
Senator
can you explain as you well know
there's a big project
At least one big project right
now that's driving yes
and I think it's probably as
good as any to.
Try to explain to the committee
and to generate some questions.
on a one point four billion
dollar project.
What is the impact to the state.
And to the county.
If this bill passes.
Mr chairman of the R. B. laws
been in effect for some time so
the impact with or without this
bill would probably be more or
less the same exact numbers all
of turnover to one of my experts
to give you that I don't know
those off the top of my head Mr
Burkle can address that the.
Probably has.
Involvement if I could have rob
would you address that please
sure thank you Mr chairman and
the.
Representative Townsend I think
the number that you mentioned
during your debate about forty
million dollars in the in gross
receipts tax that would not go
to the state off of compensating
or the tax on the on the
equipment everything is is a
pretty good number I think
that's a reliable number we
with that the one thing I'd like
to share though and and and Mr
chairman this is a study that
was done by the Torrance County
of finance record is present to
the commission there is a study
that shows that this year for
example of the fiscal year they
were budgeting about two point
seven million dollars total
gross receipts tax revenue.
the gate they just didn't know
how the of the the the COVID
issues not to take have affect
but also they didn't know of the
impact of the construction on
the the wind farm that you
mentioned.
What's going to happen though is
the county just the county alone
is going to get an extra two
point two million dollars in
gross receipts tax in the
county.
Now the county is exactly one
seven.
Of the the tax revenue increases
that is going to go to the
states of the state of New
Mexico yes for the construction
this is from the guys and gals
that are working out there you
know buying stuff drive in out
of town no not camp at this you
see now and they're standing
water have you the state of New
Mexico going to get an extra
fifteen point four million
dollars and this is just the
first.
Eighty one point four million
eight billion dollar.
And trucking contract.
Three years to fully develop so
if you just take that fifteen
point four million and multiply
that times for.
New Mexico going to generate an
extra sixty one million dollars
in gross receipts tax that they
would otherwise get
and that doesn't and this is
just for Torrance County.
The remind the.
Representative Townsend the a
delegation of one down to beat
him in December when we came
back we had to stop and bond
that will wipe the it took us
twenty minutes standing in line
at the also in beautiful
downtown Bond.
There were so many workers
they're getting their dinner and
that's what we County that's not
endorsed county so they're
getting a big impact of those
receipts tax there too so I
would just say that while you
might miss something on the
front end from the gross
receipts tax on the equipment.
Right in the counties are going
to be seeing substantial impact
to the gross receipts tax that
more than well that number that
is a loss to the state on the
top leading groups the second
group.
Thank you for that so.
Or above and Senator can you
tell me
Has the has the proponents of
this legislation Shyam the
county data that substantiates
your testimony today so that
that when they make a decision
they basically they Medicaid on
fact not
On anything less than.
One one of the complaints that I
heard was that the county
commissioners are never hello
the facts in that they have to
deal in the dark is that wrong.
Mr chairman and and and and and
Representative hello I can tell
you that on all of the
industrial revenue bond.
Components in everyone of these
and whether it's Intel or a
pattern project or PNM probably
doesn't matter one of the things
that have to happen is they have
to report to the county isn't
alone in the least documents in
the financing agreement they
have to report to the county
every time they spend money so
that the end of the day with
those two years three years in
the year of expenditure
homebuyer be process the county
will have an accounting of how
much was actually spent and how
much of it was the the reporting
as required has to be based on
both the equipment component.
The transportation department
and the the services as and you
know the service industry so the
county is no the reality though
Mr chairman and and
Representative Townsend Here
question.
The county never knows the final
numbers until the project is
completely built out and I'll
give you for example into a
project in in the in general
General county is still because
of the way it was set up
Sandoval County is still getting
statements every quarter from
Intel showing how much was spent
on that project so and this is
my R. V. that was done in two
thousand four.
So that the new law offices of
the very process is you know of
the New Mexico one point four
billion dollar project but my
guess is the actual costs will
come in probably around one
point one one point two billion
we will number three four maybe
even five years what the final
tally.
And it's so.
It's money we never happened so
any benefits that you can glean
from the project is what to what
the county commission wants to
see whether you hire more people
for the county whether you get a
up front construction ship to
the county for gross receipts
are or whatever whether there's
additional property in twenty
years from now or whenever the
bond is paid off there will be
property taxes and says so I
think every county commissioners
our our city council for that
matter would know that there are
benefits and there's money
they're leaving on the table but
on the other hand they may or
may not get project in in
different kinds of projects in
these these these are pretty
much married to the geography of
the land that's that's the
situation what if you if you
have an intelligent you're could
have gone anywhere they could
have gone to Sapporo the could
have gone where they could tap
into the resources they need or
that some other state for that
matter so the higher be is
always been an economic
development tool this is a
little different animal I grant
you that and that's a that's
part of the situation where
we're trying to make you aware
the county can share amongst all
school districts is because by
choice a power line does it goes
to the metropolitan area they
try to stay out in the Moonies
of course they don't have to
spend a lot of money acquiring
right away and those kind of
things there's a lot of reasons
the windows of wellness assuring
the places where all the people
so they don't do like an Intel
and build right now in the metro
area of the city so it's a
little different animal I grant
you that this is an unusual
situation but the counties will
be able to
benefit all of their students
within the county's best that
can that's the that's the
genesis and.
Mr Chairman Representative
Townsend if if I might add there
is a Moss Adams study Moss Adams
does a lot of economic analysis
for various industries within
New Mexico they're well
respected their independence and
they did the study
you know comparing New Mexico's
competitiveness on renewable
energy and compared it to the
western states right now our our
incentives provide New Mexico
with the number one rating with
regard to competitive.
If you take away IRB's one of
the incentives or you put in a
wind tax and and make it more
expensive to build mas Adam says
that New Mexico goes from first
to fifth and that's you know I
study that says that these
incentives work they they bring
industry here they bring
developers here and and that's
kind of where we are we have a
lot of projects in the works but
not a you know none of them are
of of the nature of the
potential we have here that if
we were to get our industry
really rolling in a bunch of
different counties that whole
east side central New Mexico on
the wind side is is full of
potential that that needs to be
tapped there really it's really
expensive to do this is really
competitive and New Mexico has
an opportunity to continue to be
number one and and really be a
leader in this area
so that's that's what I would.
Thank you Mr.
Thank you
Senator
chairman I would J. at that one.
I have always been and continue
to be strong I R. B. supporter
when used to create jobs.
Yes process of including
transmission I have seen no
proof from anyone that it
increases jobs slide in the tail
or any of these others that you
mentioned and that's where and I
are be derived development
because it brings people to your
community it brings to your
school it creates no businesses
that are are required for these
new jobs but this are including
transmission to me is kind of an
insult to the IRB process but
because it is.
And I have.
You probably have seen and I I
have.
I am the.
Made the statement that I I.
I associate it with corporate
welfare.
There is no reason in my
opinion.
That.
Thank you should be giving away.
In the state should allow can
you get away forty plus million
dollars on the front of a
project.
That that the county would wreak
much greater rewards and I it is
true but you say that the county
is going to get two point two
million dollars or whatever
right yes on property tax
increases but what has not been
said that is without the I. R.
B. the county would get much
more than that.
In there is not a one point four
billion dollar project and I've
been I have never been involved
was one point four billion
dollar project but I've been
involved in one billion dollar
projects and I can tell you that
that the number that you're
talking about is a rounding area
around the air in the actual.
Project development costs the
reason that project is located
where it is is because the
resource the brand is there.
It's not because I our beach
there it's because the wind is
there.
In New Mexico currently has
taken this.
The order of the position.
That.
Renewables in particular are
going to.
Yes place also deals in time.
And we have heard Mr chairman
you say that it's inevitable
that five to seven years I don't
know what number you you use
that but you you gave a number
M. my point is what you're doing
with this I are beyond what
we're doing is facilitating a
process right now that has
absolutely no tax to it to
offset fossil fuels so.
Yeah.
I am not aware of a.
Fossil fuel project off of the
top of my head that is utilized.
An IRB process recently I'm sure
there has been one I'm just not
aware of that and that is
without regard to the
conversation my point is.
Are these and the transmission
world is not.
Process that creates jobs that
supports communities it allows a
candidate to give away multiple
tax dollars without a state
person being at the table to
negotiate on the states we have
and it's just I'm I believe it's
bad policy
for multitude a response and so.
Mr chairman with debated this on
the floor
Well debated again extensively
that comes up
I don't believe this I R. B.
process for.
For this this action is in the
best interest of the state and I
think it makes are working on
the or County that's trying to
get a little bit make a bad
decision for the future their
own County and their
constituents so all continue to
oppose that as I believe it's
bad policy.
Thank you Mr chairman.
Thank you Representative
Townsend.
Any further discussion from the
committee.
Senator Neville of the you
closing thoughts before we
Take a motion just quickly you
Mr chairman the R. B. law that
allows for transmission is on
the books I I'm not doing that
in this bill this is just a
formula for allowing the county
if they choose to do so they
don't have to and if it's bad
policy they probably shouldn't
do so but it allows them to take
some money and spread it amongst
all the students in the county
Memorial basically that's the
concept it's not changing the
statute is not expanding the
statute
I could agree with many of the
things that Representative
Townsend said but the loss of
their and to take advantage of
it and allow these counties that
want to do so to benefit all the
students that are in there
county as opposed to the ones
that to the areas that don't
have any students that's that's
the point here and with that
I'll defer to the committee
thank you Mr chairman.
Okay before I take a motion
Representative Montoya rejoined
us Representative Montoya at
we're still on debate from the
committee do you have anything
you'd like that for we take a
motion no Mr chairman I just a I
need to get on as a panelists
like about.
Was the will of the committee.
Mr chair I would move a do pass.
In yes we have a two thousand as
amended as a in the second
Chile could you take a look
please.
Representative Chandler.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Ferrary yes.
Representative Montoya.
So.
Representative Ortez.
Yes.
Representative Sariñana yes.
Representative Scott no.
Representative Strickler
Representative Townsend no.
Representative Chandler.
Vice chair Stansbury yes.
And chairman the queen.
Yes.
The motion passes with a vote of
six to four.
Senator you the best
This.
Is a.
The committee appreciate it.
In less there's anything else
from the committee that's it for
the day.
Real quick if it's possible if
we were going to meet this
weekend I would love for us to
meet Saturday morning if
possible.
Okay doing about that Sir do you
want mornings fine with me
Leave the floor session Saturday
is gonna start at twelve thirty
I haven't heard about other
committees yet so we we are
looking into that but I wouldn't
mind meeting Saturday as well
thank you.
Your.
And I think that's it thank you.
I'll see you soon.
We are turned.
