All of.
Point of order Mr speaker.
The clerk to call the members
without a recorded response.
Good morning everyone
Representative Alcon here
Representative all point is here
Representative Anderson.
Representative bash.
Here call you.
Representative bash is here
Representative muka.
Present Representative bone guys
here Representative Brown.
Representative Brown is here
Representative Cadena.
Here.
Representative Cadena is here
Representative Chasey.
Representative Chatfield.
Representative Cook.
Representative Ely.
Representative Fajardo.
Representative Fajardo is here
Representative Ferrary.
Representative Eli
Representative Ely is here
Representative guy Aigles
Representative Gallegos is here
Representative Harry Garcia your
Representative Harry Garcia is
here Representative lane.
Representative Lane is here
Representative that day.
Representative Lente date is
here Representative Lewis here
Representative Lewis is here
Representative Lujan.
Here Representative Lujan is
here Representative Madrid.
Representative Madrid is here
Representative McQueen.
This.
Yes Representative Rod Montoya.
Representative Rod Montoya is
here.
Representative Roger Montoya.
This is the Representative.
Roger Montoya is here
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Okay.
Representative Roybal Caballero
is here Representative small.
Representative small is here
Representative ten off us.
Here Representative Ortez is
here Representative Strickler.
Representative Strickler is here
Representative Scott.
Representative Scott is here.
Representative Maestas
Representative Maestas is here
Representative Trujillo.
Representative Trujillo is here.
Representative Ferrary.
Representative Ferrary is here.
Representative hundred is here.
And Representative Herndon is
here.
The road was closed reform.
Please rise for today's
vacation.
the verges education offered by
the gentleman from Valencia
Representative Baca.
Thank you Mr speaker.
Stormy.
I forgot we come before you we
give you thanks we thank you for
all that you have gathered here.
Or god we just a two sided
lighting was them upon us or
that we may think it's a good
decision for folks I pray for
all those here for their health
I pray for the speedy recovery
of our colleague Representative
Montoya was ended early this
week for does mention to this
next phase of us assessor to be
with us the to give us the
wisdom and the courage to do
what's right for all of our
fellow New Mexicans.
For god we we would may we never
forget.
Your mercy thank you for the
love in Jesus name we pray.
Thank you with the gentle lady
from Bernalillo Representative
Sarinana please do this in the
pledge of allegiance.
Deleted to the fact.
The gentle lady from Otero
please listen saluting New
Mexico's flag.
Really of.
Morning Mr speaker good morning
members I move that we go to the
next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business.
No objections so ordered.
Good morning everyone.
Today's H. H. H. H..
We do have that memorial are
there any pressing announcements
before we go to the memorial in
recognition of four H..
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Buka.
Thank you Mr speaker I was
hoping we can take a moment this
morning to remember suing a
frontier and her family and
community and to keep them and
are.
This fund was a wonderful moment
issue is under wonderful miss I
miss I miss our issue is robbed
at gun point recently and she
fought for her life that she was
unfortunately shot and killed
before that she was a victim of
attempted right there's been a
string of robberies and Asian
massage businesses in the City
of Albuquerque and this was
another one that I had and the
horrible results.
This fund was reason China and
she came to the United States in
her thirties and she was an
excellent photographers she
liked to sing she had a thirst
for knowledge she recently took
out hiking during the pandemic
and spent her time traveling and
yet there is.
I know there's been so many
causes session and and
throughout the years to prevent
and address violence across the
state and I think organizations
Asian families and and the crime
victims reparation commission
which continues to support
victims and survivors of crime.
Tonight there will be a kennel
in visual and remembrances to a
fund in front of wonderful
massage at six thirty key and
time us all of us to please take
a moment for silence to remember
initially and all victims of
violence across our state and
our nation thank you.
Thank you generally have members
please rise for a moment of
silence.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr speaker.
To have any
other answers for for four H.
the gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thomson Mr
speaker someone left their
glasses on Representative
Allison's desk so if you can't
see this is where you need to
come.
left the agency to make a
spectacle out of themselves.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker I move that
we go to the next order of
business introduction of
legislation no objections so
ordered.
Click to read.
House memorial thirty introduced
by Representative Dow Sweetser
these L. Samarra Representative
Gail Armstrong.
Morial declaring January twenty
eighth two thousand twenty two
as for aged eight in the house
of representatives House
memorial thirty introduced by
Representative Dow Sweetser he's
L. Samora and Representative
Gail Armstrong.
House memorial thirty having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and placed
on the speakers table.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr Gramm move that we
go to the next order of
business.
Fund knows is a miscellaneous
business interjections ordered
the generation granted all go
and Sierra to make a motion
thank you Mr speaker I move that
house memorial thirty be removed
from the speakers desk and made
the next order of business no
objections order but the record
reflect that all action
necessary for placing House
memorial thirty on final passage
is been taken the gentlelady to
explain the memorial thank you
Mr speaker is appropriate to ask
the more you'll be read.
It is the clerk to read.
Morial thirty introduced by
Representative Dow Sweetser is
elves a more and Representative
Gail Armstrong.
Oriel declaring January twenty
eighth two thousand twenty two
for H. day and the house of
representatives whereas for H.
is the largest youth
organization in the world five
seven million youth members and
six hundred three thousand
volunteer leaders and whereas
for H. as been a premier youth
leadership organization in New
Mexico for over one hundred
years and whereas forage Sanchez
clubs in rural and urban areas
throughout the state and whereas
more than thirty thousand youths
between the ages of five and
eighteen participate in four H.
youth development program
statewide and whereas more than
three thousand volunteers Aid
four H. youth development
programs and more than two
hundred projects are available
in New Mexico and for us four H.
youth development programs are
diverse and help participants
acquire important life skills
including leadership responsible
citizenship.
Critical thinking problem
solving decision making conflict
resolution and communication
skills that directly contribute
to the successful transition of
young people to productive
adults and we're as forage
participants report having
greater confidence anymore
positive self identity stating
that they have greater control
over events in their lives and a
better ability to make decisions
on their own that they set goals
and take responsibility for
their actions that they can take
pride in many things and that
their lives have purpose and
meaning and whereas four H.
projects are offered in creative
arts health nutrition natural
science it's an animal's
communications and many more
areas and we're just the
objective of four H. is to teach
members how to think not what to
think.
Now therefore be it resolved by
the house of representatives of
the state of New Mexico that in
recognition of the contributions
of four H. to the state January
twenty eighth two thousand
twenty to be declared for age
day and the house of
representatives and be it
further resolved that a copy of
this memorial be transmitted to
New Mexico state university's
four H. youth development
program.
Thank you Mr speaker yeah it's
it's it's always fun to
celebrate the New Mexico for
each day and you got the topic
gift from New Mexico State
University which is the land
grant university and and as the
host of our statewide four H.
programs most of us in this room
if not everyone of us have a
county extension agent in our
counties that are promoting four
H. which is why we have so many
yes members and so many
volunteer leaders throughout our
state that are that are keeping
this program diving
one of the things that's
commonly misunderstood about
four H. is that it's only active
farming and ranching community
there are literally over two
hundred projects there's urban
clubs and there's so so many
opportunities for you to engage
and so I do have co sponsors I'm
I guess they'll rise to to speak
but my daughter was a for each
officer very much involved in
four H. as a four H. volunteer
and it is really just these
community volunteers mostly
parents and community leaders
that come together and make for
a such a strong program and
funding from this body to our
county extension agents to make
sure that you their supported
with quality programming in the
creek for four H. is pledge my
heart to clearer thinking in my
head my head my head to clearer
thinking my heart to greater
loyalty my hands to larger
service and my health to better
living for my club my community
my country and my world and it's
not uncommon to meet legislators
who are for former four H.
members and this is a great
leadership youth leadership
program that that I'm proud to
support and to to host this
memorial today thank you Mr
speaker without I'll stand for
questions thank you generated
I'm question what what are the
four H. is.
It's hard hand health and
What.
Had had.
Hard hands health.
Very good.
The gentle lady from Chavis
there is debate Representative
Ezzell.
Thank you will the gentle lady
please thank you Mr speaker I
yield to the gentle lady from
Travis.
Mr speaker ladies and gentlemen
the house I cannot brag enough
on this organization and as was
stated earlier it's not just for
country kids.
There is all sorts of projects
that help for use learn.
It teaches them responsibility
until such a teaches them.
The ethics behind being a good
citizen and put Representative
Dow stated was not the creed
that's their pledge.
Mr speaker I was a member of
cotton wood four H. club.
Mr speaker I do like to brag on
that particular four H. club but
because it is the oldest
continuous.
Four H. club in the state of New
Mexico.
And this goes back all the way
to miss isolate funk started
this club out on cotton would
whenever her daughter Margie
Thigpen Marjorie funk they can.
Was nine years old.
And of then.
Progressing up through the years
of my mother was a leader.
I was the leader of cotton wood
four H. club for over twelve
years I guess it was.
And it's very.
It makes me very proud of what
we were able to teach all of
those kids there from selling.
To needing to banking Mr
speaker.
Projects aren't just role
oriented or boy oriented and my
son.
The year that he was a junior in
high school.
Should the reserve grand
champion steer.
Left the arena at the.
Eddy County four H. and FFA
fear.
Came back in with his black hat
and has a plan on carrying the
first place cake.
That sold for sixteen hundred
dollars.
So like I said these projects
are not.
Just for boys just for girls
just for country kids this
embellishes every aspect of
every young person's life we
were instrumental Mr speaker and
gentle lady.
For getting shooting sports
authorized through four H. we
also started a very very robust
for a to rodeo program that all
kids can compete in.
Mr speaker.
I was a national winner that won
a trip to Chicago Illinois
whenever I was seventeen years
old.
And my sponsor for that trip was
the Eli Lilly and it was one of
the best experiences of my life
there's all sorts of
ambassadorship programs that are
available through four eight.
And with everyone.
Of our counties with the
exception of one.
They are all great related but
every one of those counties has
an extension office senators
will.
Mr speaker.
I wish that we had all the great
all the kids in there for a two
out fits here today in the past
we have.
Maybe next year we can get that
done but I can not applaud
disorganization and for brag on
them enough Mr speaker gentle
lady thank you.
Generally the reserves on
curious when you were a member
of the conduit for H. did you
were you did not investor.
Mr speaker I don't think you
really want me to answer that
right now no I really do.
Mr speaker what we would do
because all these kids that
lived up my particular area.
Of.
It was really unique what we
would do because live in a rural
areas a lot of you do it's kind
of hard for these kids to even
go trick or treating so the
cottonwood for eight clubs
whenever I was later I gathered
up parents fathers and mothers
and we created a carnival for
all the all of country kids out
there.
It was one of the best things
that we ever started because
then all the kids from Artesia
started coming out there because
we had face painting we had
apple bobbing even name it we
had it but the speed chaos was
totally terrifying the fathers
put that one together and they
had to make sure that the parent
was waiting at the end of this
because whenever those kids came
out.
when we're talking about
participation yes.
Currants also participated in
the activities by giving them
supervision and that's what
makes for eight and FFA so
unique Mr speaker.
Thank you gentle lady of this
further debate the gentleman
grants Hidalgo and Luna
Representative Sweetser thank
you Mr speaker will the gentle
lady my neighbor yield thank you
Mr speaker I yield to my
neighbor all right thank you Mr
speaker I too am a product of
New Mexico for eight
interestingly I started in
Torrance County in very rural
but moved to Albuquerque when my
family moved and continued in
Bernalillo county four eight so
I just am supporting the the
fact that it is also an urban
program as well as a rural
program course we raise sheep of
Corelli's road so it was sort of
a hybrid I guess at that point I
mentioned earlier in the week
that my daughter was Deming FFA
chapter president she's also
Luna County for each president
so I like to brag she holds to
elected positions her father and
I only hope one each so we're
pretty proud of our.
Her projects are shooting sports
which my colleague from the
candy caucus mentioned she it
does light rifle and this year
she's taking up shut again she
also raises show pigs but
earlier this month she placed
third in the nation in sewing
with the dress she made so when
she's not shooting raising pigs
she's selling I mean it's just
across the board and my son who
also was raised on a farm was
really big and leadership
citizenship and rocketry as well
as some of the more and get
things so a lot of stem programs
a lot of other kinds of
leadership and citizenship
programs that for H. really
excels when one thing that that
we've all mentioned that I
wanted to mention again is it is
volunteer driven it is really
the heart of New Mexico I teach
or lead the public speaking
program including county and and
my husband has done some tractor
leading and for nine years.
We are at across the board
Supporting because in small
community communities and large
communities we are volunteer
driven and that's one of the
things I'm most proud of in four
eight so hi rise to support your
memorial and I thank you very
much for bringing it forward
thank you Mr speaker thank you
gentlelady.
there's further debate the
gentle lady from Sapporo
Representative Gail Armstrong
thank you Mr speaker someone
zoom zoom in on muted so with
the zoom participants I think
it's Representative SS would you
please a hit the mute button
please.
Thank you Mr speaker and the
thank you
Will the kind lady from zero of
my neighbor and grant and held
I'll go please yield thank you
Mr speaker I yield to my soon to
be state representative my
neighbor from the north
Representative Armstrong thank
you kindly and thank you Mr
speaker thank you all for the
the great words about four H.
you know there's I'm I'm going
to keep it short sweet my mama
was a four H. leader she taught
leather work but this is really
in the memorial is that said
that they teach you how to think
not what to think and that is
key in my book also these are
life skills.
The children keep with them for
the rest of their lives and so I
want to make that really clear
and the tween the life skills in
the citizenship why we couldn't
ask for more thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentle lady Mr
they rated generally from any
representative from.
Thank you Mr speaker
No need for the gentle lady to
yield that I just want to thank
her for bringing this forward I
announced yesterday when we were
doing the recognition for
another group that does similar
activity that the Eddy County a
parliamentary procedure team won
first in the nation just a few a
few weeks ago actually and so
very very proud of them.
This is such a vital program and
anything we do to the developer
for youngsters is is very
important but you may not know
this Mr speaker but students who
go through four H. and FFA
programs actually get some bonus
points if they apply to military
academies it's recognize that
these experiences are very very
formative and so if anybody
wants to encourage one of the
members of FFA or four H. to
apply just that they get some
bonus points thank you Mr
speaker.
Thank you generating extra the
gentleman from Chavis the end
result Representative Anderson
thank you Mr speaker and really
a quick comment on a great
memorial of as a former for a
teacher myself.
I realize is we come here to
Santa Fe and deal with the many.
Issues that affect the youth of
New Mexico it is easy to
overlook those institutions that
are doing a great job.
So I think taking a few minutes
to recognize for age.
Is not to exclude many others
that are doing great work but
today it's for H. and I salute
the lady for bringing the
memorial thank you.
Thank you gentleman next to the
general intensity into terror
Representative Townsend thank
you Mr speaker will the gentle
lady yield thank you Mr speaker
I yield to the gentleman of.
Thank you gentle lady and thank
you for bringing them memorial
forward
Anyone I'll tell the body the
first time that Representative
is a all scared me.
I was probably
Twelve or thirteen years old she
was a year older by the way.
And it was it it was part of
four H. and we're speaker it's
not it's really important that
we remember.
For that I be concerned.
With the first time she scared
me I'm more worried about the
next time she scares me so
but with that due to.
May Day.
gentle lady.
This organization is.
Is paramount.
To
Rural New Mexico.
It has been open to.
all New Mexican children and
widely supported.
but.
In rural New Mexico as we spoke
yesterday about the FFA memorial
these organizations go hand in
hand their
they're like butter and biscuits
I just they would that work for
each other they do the same
thing
many times you have children in
the same family that are in each
organization.
So it works well for rural New
Mexico it makes of all of New
Mexico better.
And having spent.
Ten years in the organization
growing up and watching other
families.
I mean there you need develop a
lifelong friends.
Points's.
Traditions and certainly skills
that we use today so thank you
very much great organizations
and great memorial.
Gentleman there's further debate
the gentle lady from Rio Arriba
Santa Fe inTaos thank you Mr
speaker of the kind lady you
thank you Mr speaker I yield I
just want to say that when I was
a young legislative assistant
Washington DC I think I was kind
of one of the younger staff
members it was my job to me
every every semester with the
foragers that would come in and
for those of you who don't know
they have a wonderful wonderful
kind of the youth in government
program and at the capitol and
they have a gorgeous residency
and the kids come in the state a
week and they learn how
legislation works they learn how
the bill gets through Congress
so it's always my job to go meet
them to kinda usher them to kind
of take them on alert the little
terror and they were the
greatest kids and the greatest
parents and and I still have
fond memories of four H. and for
those of you don't know it's a
great training ground for future
leaders and I'm sure many of
them are elected today that I
knew way back when and so that
kind of training that kind of
knowledge you know when you're
sixteen or sixteen is really
important and that's how we
train our kids so I'm grateful
to all of the you who have
really supported this
organization as I have through
the years and thank you for your
leadership.
Thank you gentle lady is there
further debate the gentle lady
from Chavis first time Mr
speaker I.
Allow me one more time with the
gentle lady you'll please thank
you Mr speaker I yield.
Mr speaker I also want to point
out to the body I forgot to say
whenever I was speaking earlier.
Whenever these young kids in
four H. and FFA do have a
livestock.
And if they are lucky enough to
be selected by that just just
one of the top finishers in
their class they get to go
through the auction.
You Mr speaker.
Gentle lady.
Several years ago is whenever
the eastern New Mexico state
fair the all the state for in
the state of New Mexico which we
will be celebrating our
hundredth anniversary in twenty
twenty two.
I.
Realize that there was a young
lady from Santa Fe County that
had made the sale.
In the call to speak.
Speaker ego I think you were
still yes Representative at the
time.
And said.
Do you want to pitch in and do
want to help this lady to
further but she has done.
Because I explained to him that
there was a group of legislators
from southeastern New Mexico
that always pool their money to
buy an animal.
Mr speaker sincerely I do thank
you for participating in that it
makes their day because these
young kids.
Taking care of their livestock
before they take care of
themselves safe those animals
get fed breakfast first.
Probably a long time snack.
And they get food before that
kid has their supper.
Mr speaker that money goes to
further their education so thank
you for participating in that
thank you for your very it was
and I was very pleased that you
got the call that you called me
and I was glad to partner with
you and that was very good the
gentleman from Lee
Representative.
Thank you Mr speaker and does
the gentle lady yield thank you
Mr speaker I yield to the
gentleman from Lee County.
Thank you Mr speaker and gentle
lady lie growing up on a farm
and ranch this's been an
organization that we have been
very tied to my wife and I both
the for.
For several years.
All three of my daughters went
through four H. shooting sports
and competed in multi state
competitions and I would suggest
Mister speaker and I would
suggestion lady the.
This legislative body.
Wrote legislation that allowed
for our four H. shooting sports
programs to come in and teach
gun safety in our schools we
would not have the problem we
have a New Mexico today thank
you Mr speaker thank you gentle
lady.
The minister further debate.
Seeing the gentle lady to close
thank you Mr speaker I just want
to thank everyone for standing
up and and making their serving
our memories of a of national
youth leadership organization
that has impacted many of us I I
you know I did a my life's work
a lot out of school time
programming and a lot of kids
that have no connection to
farming and ranching even for
the consequences it was
considered an urban program when
you go into an after school
programs I encourage all the
members who are constantly being
asked for probation for stem for
for financial literacy for life
skills classes when they talk
about two hundred projects
that's the type of projects that
are out there so you can go to
New Mexico State University
there is a site there called
cases and when you click on aces
you will find those two hundred
projects they are free to
download you can call and
request hard copies at no cost
to your community at no cost to
your school district these are
evidence based high quality
programs that are used all
across the United States and are
absolutely free and then you can
recruit volunteers but you can
also put those into your after
school programs here extended
learning programs to twenty
first century programs so this
is something that's very well
funded very well supported very
well produced and available to
all of us at no cost and so it's
it's a great program and people
should take a look at that and
just you know thanks to New
Mexico State University for
being a clearing house for that
and and Mr speaker that I just
move that house memorial thirty
four H. state now B.
as is passed now pass and I
would like to request that all
the members be shown present and
voting in the affirmative.
well there's a request that the
vote on house memorial thirty
show all members present and
voting affirmative hearing no
objection it is so ordered the
vote is now open.
As opposed to seventy the
furnace zero negative house
memorial thirty has passed the
house.
The general release.
Thank you Mr goodwill to go to
the next order of business
messages hearing objections
ordered to read.
House executive message number
twenty three there speaker you
often members of the House
pursuant to article four section
five B. to the New Mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty fifth legislature's
second session submission of
house bill forty six a bill
enacting the family
representation and advocacy act
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor this is
will be introduced.
House executive message number
twenty four dear speaker Egolf
and members of the house
pursuant to article four section
five B. two of the New Mexico
constitution I am authorizing
for your consideration during
the fifty fifth legislature
second session submission of
house bill fifty six a bill
requiring issuance of six month
temporary permits to practice
veterinary.
Edison to certain non resident
veterinarians employed by or
contracted with the state and
municipality or county to
provide veterinary services at
nationally accredited zoos or
aquariums located in New Mexico
respectfully yours Michelle
Lujan Grisham governor Mr
Beatrix.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
We'll go to the next order of
business introduction of
legislation no objections
ordered click to read.
House bill one sixty one
introduced by representatives
Powdrell Culbert Serrato
Figueroa brown Crowder.
An act relating to taxation
extending the date to make a
qualified investment to be
eligible for an angel investment
credit increasing the annual
aggregate cap of the credit
house bill one sixty one
introduced by representatives
Powdrell Culbert Serrato
Figueroa brown and Crowder.
House bill one sixty one having
been read twice by title is
germane pursuit to article four
section five B. one of the
constitution order it printed
and referred to the commerce and
economic development committee
dense taxation and revenue.
One sixty two introduced by
representatives Powdrell Culbert
Rehm Baca brown and Crowder an
act relating to law enforcement
connecting the blue alert Act
providing free blue alert
notification plan for the
purpose of rapid dissemination
of information regarding a
person suspected of killing or
seriously injuring a law
enforcement officer house bill
one sixty two introduced by
representatives Powdrell Culbert
Kareem Baca brown and Crowder
house bill one sixty two having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the rules committee.
House bill one sixty three
introduced by Representative
Chandler and act relating to
taxation creating a twenty
twenty one income tax rebate
defining disclosed agency and
the gross receipts and
compensating tax act reducing
the rates of the gross receipts
tax and the compensating Tax
providing for an increase in the
gross receipts tax if gross
receipts tax revenues decrease
providing a gross receipts tax
deduction for the sale of
services to a manufacturer
providing a temporary gross
receipts tax deduction for food
and beverage establishments
providing a five year moratorium
on new increments of municipal
and county gross receipts taxes
declaring an emergency house
bill one sixty three introduced
by Representative Chandler as
for one sixty three having been
read twice by title is driven
and determined to be germane
pursuit to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order printed and referred to
the taxation and revenue
committee.
House bill one sixty four
introduced by Representative
seventy on a an act relating to
the environment directing the
department of environment to
coordinate the state's efforts
to clean up and reclaim former
uranium mine and mill sites
providing duties creating the
uranium mining reclamation
revolving fund making
appropriation house bill one
sixty four introduced by
Representative Sariñana one
sixty four having been read
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order printed and
referred to the Energy
Environment and natural
resources committee that's
appropriations and finance.
House bill one sixty five
introduced by Representative G.
Andrés Romero.
And act relating to public
education creating the native
American web based resource tool
for native American studies
excuse me for native American
students making an appropriation
house bill one sixty five
introduced by Representative G.
Andrés Romero ask for one sixty
five having been read twice by
title I determined to be germane
pursuit to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order it printed and referred to
the Education Committee then to
appropriations and finance.
House bill one sixty six
introduced by Representative G.
Andrés Romero and act relating
to public education creating a
web based resource tool for at
risk students making an
appropriation house bill one
sixty six introduced by
Representative G. Andrés Romero
has to one sixty six having been
read twice by title I determined
to be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order it printed
and referred to the Education
Committee then to appropriations
and finance.
House bill one sixty seven
introduced by Representative
Lewis and act relating to
taxation providing a credit
against the motor vehicle excise
tax for similar tax rate to an
Indian nation tribe or pueblo
house bill one sixty seven
introduced by Representative
Lewis.
House bill one sixty seven
having been read twice by title
I determined to be germane
pursuit to article four section
five B. one of the constitution
order it printed and referred to
the government elections in
Indian Affairs Committee then to
taxation and revenue.
House bill one sixty eight
introduced by Representative Dow
Representative Harry Garcia and
representatives Baca and
Crowder.
And act making appropriation to
the Veterans Services Department
to establish a program to
provide disabled veterans for
transportation to and from
medical appointments house bill
one sixty eight introduced by
Representative Dow
Representative Harry Garcia and
representatives Baca and
Crowder.
One sixty eight having been read
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuant to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order it printed
and referred to the labor
veterans and military affairs
committee thence appropriations
and finance.
House bill one sixty nine
introduced by Representative
Zamora and Townsend.
Act making appropriation to the
New Mexico department of
agriculture to assist dairy
processing and manufacturing
facilities to comply with
executive orders to lessen their
carbon imprint address water
savings and reduce energy use
house bill one sixty nine
introduced by Representative
Zamora and Townsend house bill
one sixty nine having been read
twice by title I determined to
be germane pursuit to article
four section five B. one of the
constitution order it printed
and referred the agriculture
sec use and water resources
committee thence appropriations
and finance.
House bill one seventy
introduced by Representative
said at a Chandler Rubio Allison
Martinez and act relating to
minimum wages amending a section
of the NMSA nineteen seventy
eight to provide for minimum
hourly wage rate of fifteen
dollars for state employees
higher education please licensed
and non licensed employees of a
school district or state charter
charter schools and employees of
state contractors preventing
this salary compaction as
appropriate.
It's been one seventy introduced
by representative said at a
Chandler Rubio Allison to
Martinez.
House bill one seventy having
been read twice by title is
ordered not printed and referred
to the rules committee.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr Gramm move that we
go to the next order of business
committee reports no objection
it is so ordered click to read.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
and military affairs committee
to has been referred house joint
resolution six has had it under
consideration point it was
recommendation that it to pass
and that's referred to the
taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted Eliseo
Lee Alcon chair.
To the report Mr speaker we are
on and option of a favorable
committee report on house joint
resolution six all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
All this was Nate Committee
point about that.
Mr speaker your labor veterans
and military affairs committee
to is been referred house joint
resolution seven has had it
under consideration report same
with recommendation that a do
pass and that's referred to the
taxation revenue committee
respectfully submitted Eliseo
Lee Alcon chair.
The report Mr speaker we are
honored option of a favorable
committee report on house joint
resolution seven all those in
favor please signify by saying
by.
All this of those names.
Representative.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee to is
been referred house bill three
has had it under consideration
point in with recommendation
that do pass as amended in
answer for to the appropriations
and finance committee
respectfully submitted and how
the code of your chair of
adoption Mr speaker we are
adoption of a favorable
committee report on house bill
three all those in favor please
signify by saying aye.
All this was named.
Three point that.
Mr speaker your transportation
public works and capital
improvements committee to is
been referred house bill fifty
five I had it under
consideration point in with
recommendation that it to pass
and this referred to the
Judiciary Committee respectfully
submitted an have a could Rubio
chair of adoption we are an
adoption of a favorable
committee report on house bill
fifty five all those in favor
please signify by saying aye.
All those photos today.
Three point that.
Mr speaker your consumer public
affairs committee to is been
referred house bill nine has had
it under consideration point
same without recommendation and
that's referred to the Judiciary
Committee respectfully submitted
Joanne J. Ferrary chair.
Unanimous consent of the
committee point road together
acted upon with the single
voting record journal so they're
acted upon individually hearing
no objections so ordered click
to read.
House bill seventy one do pass
and then so the taxation and
revenue committee.
House bill seventy nine do pass
and it's to the Judiciary
Committee.
House bill eighty one to pass
and then three for to the
Judiciary Committee.
House bill ninety six to pass an
answer for the appropriations
and finance committee
respectfully submitted Joanne J.
Ferrary chair.
The committee report we are
adoption of favorable committee
reports on house bills nine
seventy one seventy nine eighty
one and ninety six all those in
favor please signify by saying
aye.
All this was a committee reports
are adopted.
Yes.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Thank you Mr speaker and now
being eleven to nine AM I move
we adjourn until twelve a one PM
Costco order Mr speaker I ask
unanimous consent that the rules
be suspended in the the journal
show that all those present in
this morning session are present
in the afternoon session.
no objection it is so ordered Mr
speaker I ask unanimous consent
that the rules be suspended and
that the record show that the
journal has been reading full
and approved subject to revision
and approval of the rules in
order of business committee no
objection it is so ordered
gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that we go to
the next order of business
announcements and miscellaneous
business hearing no objection it
is so ordered came members we
have two bills have versus house
bill forty six Representative
Chasey.
Yes forty six Representative
Chasey pursuit is germane
pursuant to house executive
message twenty three.
Order it removed from the rules
committee printed and referred
to the consumer and public
affairs committee then see
Judiciary house bill forty six
germane pursuit Taos executive
message twenty three is to be
removed the rules committee
printed and referred to the
consumer Public Affairs
Committee that's Judiciary.
House bill fifty six.
Is germane pursuant to house
executive message twenty four
Representative about us right
order it removed for the rules
committee printed and referred
to the can.
Sumer Public Affairs Committee
thence government elections and
Indian Affairs house bill fifty
six Representative Barreras.
Is your range so it has
executive message twenty forced
to be removed the rules
committee printed and referred
to the consumer Public Affairs
Committee that's government
elections and Indian Affairs.
Are there any.
Gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker the house democratic
caucus will be meeting at one
fifteen today.
In room three oh seven.
Members take note John from
Bernalillo.
We have a birthday on the zoom
web in our.
Chairman of corn is celebrating
his birthday today.
Happy birthday chairman.
The leader to sing.
Is zoom zoom those K. gun.
The committee of those tools
Warniment tools it's gone
domino's soon.
The gentleman.
You should be in the improv
improvisation layer jelly.
Are there other assets.
Any announces the general from
Bernalillo Santa Fe Torrance
and Valencia.
Thank you Mr speaker the House
Energy Environment that's
resources committee will meet
tomorrow morning at nine
o'clock.
there are a couple other
committees the meeting at the
same time so we're gonna have to
sort of balance that we'll be
hearing to built first we'll be
hearing house resolution two of
our bill rates and second we'll
be hearing house bill six clean
future and there is a committee
sub for that bill thank you Mr
speaker.
Members say no the gentle lady
from tell us.
Thank you Mr speaker members of
the body tomorrow morning my
daughter the that my second
daughter will turn eight so I'd
like for all of you to join me
in wishing her Happy Birthday.
Happy birthday.
Thank you Mr speaker.
The gentle lady from Bernalillo
Representative Thompson thank
you Mr speaker health and Human
Services will meet Monday
morning at eight thirty.
Members say no the other
gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey thank you
Mr speaker house judiciary will
meet at one thirty today the is
to see if there we have to bills
that are on the calendar and we
will have on the district
attorney in Albuquerque are the
district attorney's office and
the office of the public
defender to talk to us about pre
trial detention after that.
Members say no the gentleman
from Bernalillo Representative
from metal.
You can speak it house education
committee will meet at eight AM
on Monday morning so eight AM
Monday morning House education
thank you Mr speaker members
take those the gentle lady from
Bernalillo Representative
Figueroa.
Thank you Mr speaker house
commerce and economic
development will meet at one
thirty this afternoon.
Members a note the generated you
Representative Ferrary thank you
Mr speaker your house consumer
and public affairs committee
will meet tomorrow at ten AM in
room three seventeen will be the
extra room otherwise you thank
you members take over the gentle
lady from Los Alamos thank you
Mr speaker house taxation and
revenue will meet tomorrow at
two PM by zoom thank you Mr
speaker members signals
generated from Chavis
Representative Ezzell.
The gentle lady from reddit
although no thank you Mr speaker
your house appropriations and
finance committee will meet
tomorrow morning at nine thank
you.
Members take note.
Are you bringing rectus Rideau's
gently.
The gentle lady from Chavis.
Mr speaker point of personal
privilege to please state your
point.
Mr speaker I have been trying
for the past three days to get
my financial disclosure
statement done I'm having
problems logging into the
secretary of state's website to
get that done.
As mandated.
I'm just kind of curious what is
the secretary of state's office
closed today.
I was unaware that is closed
today.
I don't believe that's news to
me gentle lady
I will ask the chief clerk to
give a ring over to the
secretary of state's office and
get you an answer and get you
help logging in that's also a
good reminder that the financial
disclosure forms are due Monday
they're due on Monday.
There's a lady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey what ARE
financial disclosure forms to.
Gentlelady from Bernalillo
Representative Chasey when our
financial disclosure forms to.
They are due Monday also a
deadline that is on Sunday again
this is an important one.
Gentleman in the back row
Representative Hernandez please
stop bothering the other members
this is an important deadline
everyone I want to make sure we
have everyone's attention phone
issue right everyone's attention
the capital outlay request forms
these other forms that require
the signature of a member of the
house in order to be in order
for a project to be added to the
list of projects that are
eligible to receive capital
outlay funding Katie's the
capital outlay request forms
that we need to sign the
projects get added to the list
of the fund will projects those
are due.
At five PM.
By five PM on Sunday January
thirtieth to the council
service.
Sunday five PM your capital
outlay request forms are due to
the council service again Sunday
and I please please please if
you want to project to be on the
list was eligible for funding
the capital outlay bill it's due
Sunday at five.
There's no reason you could turn
the today but that is the
deadline.
Mr speaker okay the secretary of
state's office I'm told is
closed due to the inclement
weather that we experienced in
Santa Fe today.
If they do have people in the
office who working and.
And anyone who needs help please
be in touch with our chief clerk
please
Ortiz McCutchen at least we'll
get you a mobile phone number of
people who are working at the
secretary of state's office
today okay.
Any other announcements
questions.
Generally from once.
Mr speaker knock knock who's
there.
A little lady.
Setting me up.
All right a little lady who.
You could yodel.
Is one of my hidden talents
gentlelady.
Thank you for giving me the
opportunity to shine.
The gentleman from Bernalillo.
Mr speaker I move that the house
stand in resistance recess until
not tomorrow not Sunday Monday
morning at eleven thirty.
It is a take that motion I have
just been the representative
that access is just push the
button Representative do you
wish to.
Make an announcement.
Representative SS going once.
Going speaker builder was about
the secretary of state's and
throughout the two hour delay
but for the delegates of stolen
sister do that thank you Mr
speaker thank you gentlemen all
right I wanna Jareth weekend
please remember there is a
democratic caucus promptly at
one fifteen in room three oh
seven please do not be late.
we want to have it done in time
for committee started one thirty
thousand recess until eleven
thirty AM Monday have a great
