Representative Barreras.
Representative.
And present.
Representative Garcia sent.
Representative Herndon.
Representative Montoya.
Representative Ortez.
Here.
Representative Scott.
Representative Scott.
Representative Strickler here.
Representative Townsend and.
Vice chair Sarinana.
Representative Ortez.
I'm here sorry.
Internet problems.
Representative Townsend.
Vice chair Sarnia on.
Your.
Madam chairman McQueen.
Here.
Mr chair we have a quorum.
Okay.
Good morning everyone the before
we begin first I need to know is
that we will not be hearing
house bill fourteen that's
requested the sponsor so our
only business day is house bill
one oh one.
we hope to hear house bill six
on Thursday it'll get it'll be
scheduled for Thursday.
There I think they've been
working on the bill so hopefully
they'll be ready by the end.
But anything from the committee
before we we begin any questions
comments announcements.
Okay our first bill is house
bill one on one New Mexico
reforestation center act and
based here Sir now that will
present this.
The floor is yours thank you Mr
chairman and members of the
committee I'm like you said
Representative Sari√±ana and I'm
here to present because the
little one New Mexico
reforestation center act my two
expert witnesses are Dr Joshua
was flown from New Mexico
highlands university and Dr and
Bernie from New Mexico State
University.
So we'll get those we'll get
them promoted to
with.
Let's let's.
Just promoted to win that
Winchester to panelists will
see.
Okay I think we're good.
All right great Mr chairman I
have a committee set up.
Would you like me to present
that first with someone the.
Move the committee set for
discussion.
I move the committee substitute
For discussion purposes Mr
chair.
Thank you representative Garcia
is their second I'll second
chairman.
Thank your temporaries is there
any objection to that.
And is that I I'm gonna assume
that everyone has the committee
so that anyone doesn't please
let me know it was emailed out.
so if you still need a copy that
listeners will get to.
Us on the committee said
representative Sarinana.
Needed to know to number or yeah
that's a good idea.
It's the number is two two two
one three seven point one.
Thank you.
Right thank you Mr chairman how
much of the language is not
needed anymore because it was
tied to the a memorandum of
agreement that has been
introduced to already so in the
employed pretty much mimics the
bills so the M. O. a memorandum
of agreement to me partners are
New Mexico energy minerals and
natural resources and they've
entered into agreement with the
Mexico highlands the forestry
department with New Mexico State
University agriculture
experiment station and the
University of New Mexico biology
departments to create New Mexico
reforestation center.
The purpose of the center is to
address the impact of climate
change on the state's forests
and meet the current the state's
current and future of
reforestation needs the
establishment of a State Bank
program a nursery program in the
planting program the goal is to
producing ceilings for five
million trees per year.
The bill has appropriation of
four million six hundred and
eight thousand one hundred and a
major portion of this
appropriation three million six
hundred thousand will be
allocated to conduct a
feasibility study a site
assessment drafting design
budget development to complete
the project.
I'm Anne unexpended or
unencumbered balance remaining
at January thirtieth of twenty
twenty three shall not revert to
the general fund.
In in.
The reason we need this bill
last year we were lucky as a
state not to experience the
devastating wildfires the
California Arizona Colorado did
The New Mexico right
reforestation center and its
reforestation activities are
vital for enhancing ecosystem
services including water
resources mitigating climate
change reducing future risks of
catastrophic fires and restoring
posed fire landscape that will
benefit all communities of the
southwestern US and with that Mr
chairman I'd like to defer to my
expert witnesses beginning with
Dr Bernie followed by Dr Sloan.
Thank you very.
Thank you Representative Mr
chair and committee today I'd
really want to talk about and
just give a little background on
New Mexico's forests and why
we're doing what we're doing.
So New Mexico's for supply many
valuable resources to the
citizens of the state which
includes fifty to seventy five
percent of all water use.
However forced health in our
state is experiencing some of
the most destructive wildfires
in history and this trend will
likely continue.
And sadly many of these force
that have succumbed to these
fires are not growing back
natural which is resulting in an
overall loss of our force in New
Mexico.
So therefore it is absolutely
critical that we invest in a
reforestation program that will
help to benefit for health.
Water resources carbon
sequestration wildlife habitat
recreation and many other
valuable resources.
In the reforestation needs right
now in New Mexico or
approximately about one million
acres which would require a
hundred fifty to two hundred
million seedlings.
In our current production
capacity is about three hundred
thousand seedlings per year at
New Mexico State University
which is the only program in
nursery program in the state
this would take over five
hundred years for us to re
endorsed this current landscape
and it it does not include
future fires so you can see that
we're just losing our forest
three time.
So in response
we formed a partnership with New
Mexico State University
highland University University
New Mexico in the forestry
division with them or to create
the New Mexico reforestation
center and as already mentioned
we have a memorandum of
agreement in place and sign that
formally acknowledges this
partnership.
So the New Mexico reforestation
center will help meet these
reforestation needs by producing
five million seedlings per year.
It will establish programs to
support the entire reforestation
pipeline from seed collection to
nursery production and planting
and it also support education
research and outreach activities
related to reforestation.
And it will help develop and
support force based economic
growth within the state.
I thank you for your time.
Mr chairman of doctor Sloan.
Thank you doctor Bernie drive
slow.
Yes.
Mr chair and and Representative
Sarinana thank you very much for
your attention or support in
this issue and and committee
members as well.
Of I don't see myself in a
little box but it looks like I
have audio so.
I feel like the Representative
and Dr Bernie did a good job of
introducing what we're trying to
accomplish here and the reason
behind the bill and I want to
say that you on behalf of New
Mexico highlands university we
wholeheartedly support this
effort we are all in on this one
thing I would like to add up Dr
Bernie mentioned that.
There are economic and workforce
development aspect of this.
And as critical as this effort
is to the health of New Mexicos
forced to the health of our
ecosystems to the future of
water and natural resources in
our state.
We should not make the mistake
of looking at this is just a
costs some or or otherwise here
we commissioned an independent
economic analysis of the
reforestation Center is proposed
and that analysis projected the
creation of four hundred and
seventy five new reforestation
related FTE in the state as a
result of the reforestation
centers activities as well as in
addition of approximately nine
million dollars to the Mexican
army over the course of the
first thirty years of the
center's operations
we have quite a bit more depth
in that economic analysis but
these are really the highlights
that no this is not only the
right thing for us to be doing
in terms of saving our state's
forest and all the resources
they provide but it's also an
excellent opportunity for us in
terms of a new direction for
building a reforestation economy
state.
And with that old all stand for
questions and I think everyone
very much for your attention
support.
Thank you doctor Sloan
Representative Sarinana anything
that before we go to the
audience I thank you Mr chairman
I think we've covered everything
thank you okay.
so we're gonna Mr chair Senator
see it Mr chair is a motion in
order to adopt the substitute
bill.
We've already moved it for
discussion.
We we okay so the so we're we're
on the substitute bill and at
the end of the special take a
vote whether or not to the the
motion.
If it's favorable will be do not
pass the bill if you pass the
committee so.
Unless I'm messing it up so.
That's okay Mister okay thank
you Representative for C..
We're gonna go to the audience
and we're going to we're gonna
try to pull we didn't have that
capacity last week so hopefully
we'll be able to put the pull up
for
about twenty three seconds in
the audience will be able to
indicate their support or
opposition to house bill one I
want so I guess even if you're
ready let's go with the Paul.
The poll has been launched.
Would you like for me to take
down the pole yes so let's let's
bring to an end at twenty or
thirty seconds is plenty.
so I don't.
Okay I click sure results.
Can see that so I I see twenty
seven out of twenty seven in
sport and no opposition.
Okay.
So hopefully we'll get that's
another
In that will go to the audience
for for comment
if you wish to comment please
raise your hand we have that
the timer on the screen C. will
have two minutes
it first up we had Matthew her
top.
A good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee thank
you for the opportunity to speak
my name's Matt her toe and I'm a
professor in the biology
department at the university of
New Mexico I've been
collaborating with this group to
develop the reforestation Center
and a big part of my interest in
that is that we've got
incredibly low planted seedling
survival rates following
wildfire and my research group
here at UNM secured nearly two
million dollars in federal
research money to construct a
model to improve those efforts
and and we've been working on
that our most recent
collaboration with doctors
Bernie and Sloan will improve on
that model and that's really
what's going to serve as a
mechanism for improving the
efficiency of out planting for
the New Mexico reforestation
center I'd also like to add that
we've got a relatively small
time window to effectively
reforest many of the burn scars
in the state as Dr Bernie noted
we've got substantial number of
acres that burned severely so
tree seedlings are way more
sensitive to heat drought the
mature trees and they're really
the limiting factor for
reforestation these burn scars
in another ten to fifteen years
we're going to we're gonna lose
the window that we currently
have to reforest some of our
lower elevation areas where
temperatures increasing faster
and we're exceeding the
tolerance of those seedlings for
survival so the reforestation
centers use of data and models
are going to allow us to
capitalize on good conditions
now to improve reforestation
success and really help
contribute developing contribute
to this reforestation economy
thank you.
Thank you for that next step we
have our state forester or
whatever.
Good morning I'm Lori McCarthy
state forester energy minerals
and natural resources department
and we absolutely support the
committee substitute and I want
to make two points our first is
that this New Mexico
reforestation center is part of
the strategy in our ten year
forest action plan and second
this appropriation is
desperately needed there is no
other way to get the start up
funds for this New Mexico
reforestation center and the two
things that we need to do with
this appropriation our first we
need to get started on the CD
collection the seed collection
is vital without it we don't
have seedlings and we need to be
doing it in a climate smart way
and the
academics the professors that
you've heard from have a
brilliant plan as to how to go
about that.
And the position that the energy
and minerals natural resources
department has a position in our
executive budget that was also
in the LFC budget for this seed
collection support from the
state agency secondly the
funding is needed to get the
preliminary design work done on
this nursery that will be
capable of producing five
million seedlings per year and
that will be offering the
research and educational
opportunities once that design
work is done and then we can
come back with a capital request
that is
At the stage where it can be
implemented right away thank you
Mr chairman Representative
Sarinana for bringing this
forward and members for hearing
this today.
Thank you for that next up we
have Britney Fallon.
Good morning chairman and
members of the committee I am
delighted to be here today it's
my first time visiting your
committee and welcome to the new
members to and so happy to see
here as well I'm not a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico while we're a nonprofit
that focuses on lands water
wildlife and the environment and
I'm here to support this bill
which is unusually personal for
us and we one this year from the
U. S. Forest Service that Bob
Marshall award for our
wilderness ranger program that
monitors New Mexico's forests so
our staff had seen first hand
the dire need to protect habitat
and watersheds and we're excited
to stand with admired our state
forester to get this program
going thank you.
Thank you for that we have Tom
Solomon.
Thank you Mr chairman and
members of the committee my name
is Tom Solomon I am up a co
coordinator with three fifty New
Mexico and we along with I guess
all of the other twenty seven
participants strongly support
this committee substitute in
this bill to move forward with
the reforestation program for
New Mexico for us
research has shown that changes
in the global warming and
climate that are creating warmer
and drier crude conditions and
increased route are causing a
longer fire season and boosting
these increases are wildfire
risk.
Just region the sentence for
much the US west production show
that an average annual increase
of one degree C. in temperature
would increase the median area
burned per year by as much as
six hundred percent in some
types of forests so we are
facing a climate crisis we are
seeing the impacts right now in
the news recently was the fact
that in the middle of January
forests in the Big Sur area of
California are on fire and
burning before our eyes in the
middle of winter and so we
absolutely need this program we
need to reforest the burned
forests but we are playing catch
up in a dangerous game and we
are far behind so I strongly
support this program and other
actions to
Improve resilience in the state
but we really need to stop
burning fossil fuels which are
at the root of all of this
increase in global warming thank
you Mr chairman.
Thank you for that we have L.
park.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I'll park
registered lobbyist on behalf of
the nature Conservancy we stand
in strong support of this
legislation the nature
Conservancy has worked very
diligently with the state
forester and various
universities and local
communities to address this
issue we've been long concerned
with the lack of natural
reforestation in large burn scar
areas this is an important step
and we strongly urge the
committee to support will pass
this legislation thank you Mr
chairman.
Thank you for that except we
have Barbara to less.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee I'm Barbara
Calif speaking for the league of
women voters of New Mexico the
league into the US Eccles
supports the creation of the
reforestation Center to help
preserve habitats and natural
landscapes I have one request
though I did I have not seen the
committee substitute.
And I will but I would like it
if if substitute bills could be
posted on the website sent out
to committee members thank you
very much.
So thank you for that and the
committee so those are a little
tricky because they're not
actually they have been
introduced in till we make a
motion in committee and so it's
a we're not supposed to post
them on the website.
into until they've been there
dues and as a result of the
public doesn't have them and we
haven't really figured out how
to address that because we do
recognize it as an issue this
committee said mostly just takes
language out of the bill that's
already in the M. O. H. I think
it's memorandum of agreement
between agencies so a lot of
that's already covered and and
away but I understand your
concern and not sure what to do
about.
Thank you next up we have decent
estimates.
Chairman members of the
committee Jason Espinoza
registered lobbyists with the
New Mexico coalition of
conservation districts we stand
in support of the legislation I
believe her really does support
forest and watershed management
that will help ensure the long
term sustainability and
resilience The New Mexico's
natural lands really reduce the
vulnerability of natural
resources in communities so we
stand and support thank you.
Thank you for that next step to
we have Julie this person.
Thank you Mr chairman members of
the committee my name is Joyce
far send I'm a registered
lobbyist and deputy executive
director for New Mexico counties
we have had a long standing
partnership with New Mexico
state forestry as well as other
state and federal partners to
address wildfire risk reduction
and reforestation in New Mexico
we manage a wildfire risk
reduction grant program that
includes community wildfire
protection fund development
outreach and education as well
as fuel treatments we find that
this bill is really an important
component to having a
comprehensive forest management
plans in New Mexico and we think
it's a very thoughtful
environmental bill that brings
in that key element that we
currently are lacking and so
with that we stand in support of
this bill thank you.
Thank you for that we have the
four Stewart skill.
Thank you chairman committee
members my name is a time
crystal estimate that the
director at the far storage
skilled forestry focused
nonprofit conservation
organization at the the kids
works for resilient forests
watersheds in communities that
we stand in support of this bill
this past year are you score
planted eight thousand seedlings
and a high severity burn area
and so I can say with experience
that this is hard work but
important work and it will also
create jobs careers and pathways
for our young New Mexicans and
support local economies so thank
you chair and committee members.
Thank you for that next step we
have.
Processing Sir.
You might be needed on your end.
There you.
Are you there.
Okay we can't hear trace a
Let's move on we can come back
if you figure out what's going
on next up we have so we Parker.
Thank you and good morning Mr
chairman and members of the
committee my name is Sally
Barker I am the political and
policy associate for
conservation voters New Mexico
here to speak in support of HB
want to one As You Mexico
continues to experience hot dry
summers the state inherently
becomes increasingly more
susceptible to wildfires year
round on average there are over
a thousand wildland fires per
year in New Mexico.
High severity catastrophic fires
significantly reduce the ability
of the forests naturally
regenerate itself is damage
service product loss of trees
and altered soil chemistry
making it hard for seedlings
naturally regenerate this
degradation really affects
ecosystems services and the
current and future economic
benefits associated with forces
areas.
Reforestation is seen as the
only means to ensure the
continuation of this landscape
for the protection of its
benefits and values for current
and future generations.
Not only will prove beneficial
for our environment but this
bill is projected to support
hundreds of jobs a year and six
million dollars a year in
fueling sales alone.
We thank the bill's sponsors and
did you pass vote on H. B. one a
one thank you for your
consideration of this
legislation and for the
opportunity to provide comment
today.
Thank you so a next up is David
Hanson.
Sorry I got it now thank you
thank you Mr and again the
members of the committee my name
is David Hanson and interim
assistant vice president for
research from the university of
New Mexico and I'm here today
does to support this bill and
Jen state that the University of
New Mexico is a behind this bill
it's incredibly important
research and and activity to
continue to build back and
reforest
with this work and it's it's
also incredibly urgent raises
been mentioned before every here
that that we wait is another
year that were behind even just
getting the seeds and the forces
that we're going to be
replanting if this is funded
protect all kinds of of
wonderful resources including
our water in in the state and as
a plant physiologist myself on
this I can also speak to the the
science saying that it's a very
sound process we know a lot
about micropayments we know a
lot about what ceilings need any
tickets to do research and
modeling to to do that as we
successfully replant so thank
you very much.
Thank you next up is Debbie
Hughes.
Yes my name is Debbie Hughes I
am the executive director for
the New Mexico association of
conservation districts we also
stand in support of this bill
the soil and water conservation
districts are local delivery
system there local government
that helps do a lot of the for
standing but also a large amount
of the restoration especially
when we've got federal funding
available through USDA natural
resources conservation service
for this type of work and so we
look forward to being able to
help leverage should bring that
federal funding to New Mexico
for this and we want to
especially keep in mind the
importance to the water supply
of New Mexico with healthy
watersheds and also our water
quality thank you very much for
the opportunity to support
additional thank you next is
Caitlin's Bradley.
Good morning Mr chair members of
the committee my name is Kate
once broadly and I'm a
registered lobbyist for New
Mexico farm and livestock bureau
on behalf of our twenty thousand
member families we support
cooperative approaches to
improve the state's watersheds
forests and grazing lands that
we believe that house bill one a
one well accomplish that as you
know healthy forests benefit all
users and farmers and ranchers
are some the **** of billions
the banking preservation and see
distribution ensures the healthy
forest insurers are healthy
forest so that reforestation can
take place reforested land's
offer numerous benefits such as
habitat for wildlife
recreational value we realize
that droughts forest fires and
other impacts of course help can
increase surface runoff which
increases the solar Roshen and
affects our water quality we
also know that reforestation
insurers forests are healthy and
grazing and so grazing can
flourish so the successful
planting of seedlings in the
southwest it's very difficult
due to harsh conditions such as
drought and wildlife
disturbances and may get more
difficult as these factors
increase in intensity and so for
those reasons we support house
bill one a one thank you very
much.
Thank you and next we have used
that
Hi good morning
committee
And everybody sorry I am
actually reading on behalf of
the Theresa seems certain who
was having trouble getting
herself
she is a member of this year
we'll go down the chapter and
she's also a member of the New
Mexico forest and watershed
health coordinating group and of
course speaking in strong
support of this bill the center
could be capable of providing
some three hundred million
climate adapted seedlings to
help restore a backlog of public
and private land damaged by
wildfire.
This caused by leaving coast
wildfires land and restore are
well known and we're evidence
even when the G. canyon post
wildfire flood destroyed most of
Dixon or three years ago it also
less toxic debris and water four
feet deep in the GDM Cienega
farmland.
Causing millions of dollars in
property damage and loss of life
there are many critical
investments we need to make in
rural communities throughout the
state reforestation center will
bring new nursery in forestry
jobs increase the number of
replanted acres each year to
capture carbon and will bring
the expertise and solutions and
we need to cope with while sorry
planet in New Mexico so again on
behalf of Theresa
and the Sierra Club we're just
asking you will support this.
Thank you Lewis I'm going to go
ahead and skip to recess
teamster and we'll go to Alan
Garten.
Good morning Mr chairman and
members of the committee I'm
doctor Allen Barton I'm director
of the New Mexico forest and
watershed restoration institute
at university I thank you for
the opportunity to speak to them
to show support for this bill
and for the New Mexico before
station center the staff at the
New Mexico for some additional
watershed restoration institute
works year round on force
Martian restoration including
economic development around the
state of New Mexico and
reforestation center will serve
to enhance the mission of our
martyrs restoration to protect
New Mexico's forests watersheds
and right needed jobs and
economic development for
northeastern New Mexico force
watershed restoration C.
standard supported spell thank
you.
Thank you very much and next we
have Leslie occur.
Good morning Mr chairman members
of the committee thank you for
the opportunity to speak Leslie
at great service the director of
agriculture experiment station
at New Mexico State University.
Grateful for the opportunity to
stand in support of the
committee substitute for reasons
previously articulated by other
presenters as well as I wanted
the opportunity to note that New
Mexico's forests supply many
valuable resources to our
citizens including fifty to
seventy five percent of all
water used by many
municipalities and agriculture
so we are grateful for this
opportunity to be able to stand
in support of this bill and look
forward to working with other
institutions universities as
well as an art thank you.
Thank you so much and that
concludes our public comment and
I'd like to turn to
Representative said adding I'm
not to ask if you have if you
have any are anything to add
before we go to committee chair.
I'm just before we close
discussion would you like for me
to check room three seventeen
point one percent.
Thank you very much Augustine to
do that.
And madam chair what we're
waiting I just want to thank
everybody for supporting the
bill it's a great built
something we need and supported
and funded and I think that's
all I have to say once we get
the people thank you.
The current there is nobody in
room three seventeen.
Okay thank you so much Augustine
thank you Representative
Sarinana.
I see that we have a
Representative Dixon.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you at vice chair Sari√±ana for
bringing this bill my question
deals with the appropriations if
you could just walk through
how much of funding is needed
and if there are other funding
sources thanks.
Thank thank you madam chair and
representative there we are
asking a four point six million
and there are federal funds
coming.
Is that good enough answer.
Yes thank you.
Vice chair and thank you madam
chair.
up next we have Representative
Strickler.
Thank you madam chair
quick question we've got a lot
of you at we have a New Mexico.
Hey as a lot of US force lands
I'm not sure what percentage
that is is anybody at on the
panel no how much a U. S. force
lance comprise of the state's
total force lance I'm guessing
at over seventy percent but
maybe you can help me on that.
Representative sure neon off
your experts can can
Answer that question
maybe the state forester it can
defer to her she still on.
For any of the experts.
Otherwise I do not.
Madam madam chair Representative
Strickler I I don't think I have
that exact data in front of me
but I would argue that yes for
service has a good portion of
the force of landscape in New
Mexico what that percentage is I
I don't have that data in front
of me at this time.
Well thank you thank you.
professor Bernie
that should put that in the
reason I'm asking that question
is do we have.
A memorandum of understanding or
some sort of a
work relationship with the US
for service because.
They are most of the force lance
in New Mexico I'm pretty sure
that try to I don't know if it's
I'm guessing if I remember
correctly around seventy percent
so without the US for service
cooperation.
You know.
What's the next step to find the
ceilings and the resources on
force lance is that where we
leverage federal dollars do they
pay for surely that they be in
favor of this program
pressure burning do you have a
any ideas about that.
You madam chair Representative
Strickler I I the game plan
right now is we are working with
the for service
to kind of build that
relationship and that
collaboration we have multiple
things that are working in
concert so one is the replant
Act would increase the
reforestation funds by magnitude
of about four so that would give
us opportunities to work with
the Forest Service to reinforce
those landscapes on on their
land
we have the good neighbor
authority agreement which allows
and and I'm pretty sure that the
state Forster could at to speak
to this will be better than I
can but that allows the state
forty programs and the
reforestation center to operate
on federal lands four seed
collection and outstanding
efforts
and we actually have a meeting
with their national
reforestation
Forster added DC to kind of help
consolidate our our plan and and
kind of build build the
direction for what we're gonna
do you in terms of the
reforestation Center and the for
service collaboration.
Thank you for the answer up
faster
Somebody just sent me a note
that US for service controls
about twenty five million acres
of the prime for Solange and
that has to be a mineral
integral part of this program so
currently
Mr speaker
madam chair and and
Representative sure Syriana
this program would go
immediately to private lands and
state for slants
that that's that would be the
the low hanging fruit is it is
that how you understand how this
program will work.
that you would address
those two areas of of a.
Private land sand and in state
lands state for Solange.
With the courts Mrs Mr chair I
mean Madam chair and the
Representative Representative I
believe it they go to state
porcelain first but I'll defer
to doctor Bernie.
Okay.
So I think it's the sorry Madam
chair Representative Strickler I
I believe that it's it's equal
so I think that it will actually
go to federal to again I'm not
of well versed in this and so if
if we wanted to get state force
raunch my bill to speak a bit
better to this if that's
something of interest to folks.
I would love to hear for the
thank you professor and thank
you.
madam chair and Anna
Representative sure now this you
know this is a good idea I'm
just trying to understand
you know it's it's as large
funding.
Component to this I know we have
current ceiling programs that
According to the testimony is
not adequate three hundred
thousand ceilings to or not
enough and we've got a lot of
burned out force I guess the US
for service the LFC allow
natural.
Earnings because it's just you
know it is is John fortunate
that we don't send the endorsed
properly for for various
beneficial use and that
lightning strikes and other
other natural occurrences you
know Barbara the force and that
the the situation comes up the
Big Bear fire right does that
were forty thousand acres of
force lance state private and
federal burned up in in less
than ten hours and the the did
damage to the watershed there
was catastrophic
and you could you have all the
run off and all the silt filled
up the the local reservoirs and
so this is very important.
extremely important I'm just a
just curious if the state
Forster's available to kind of
give us that there there
cooperation with the U. S. for
services I don't know if they're
still on Representative
Strickler state forester Laura
McCarthy is an attendee and
Augustine at like for you to
move her over so she can answer
this question may take a second
thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Sheryl Jana
for.
Having her available.
Madam chair she's been some of.
Thanks.
Forrester
chair Representative Strickler
and members of the committee
thank you for and muting I was
jumping out of my chair wanting
to answer these questions so
Representative Strickler you
asked about where the seedlings
are going to go and so we are
statewide forest action plan we
have already specified the
criteria.
Two point Odyssey things first
and those criteria are based on
ecological need and downstream
values not on who owns the land
so it is entirely possible that
it will be the federal lands
that happened to be the most
critical from a water supply
perspective where these
seedlings Mexico what what is
absolutely critical to
understand is that the state
investment in the development of
the nursery and eventually.
Option is absolutely critical
once we get that in place then
we will be able to receive
federal funds to purchase the
seedlings I.
The federal legislation.
And I have seen does not fund
that capital expense of
constructing the nursery that is
why this bill is so and the
appropriation is.
I.
Thank you thank you madam
Forster Preciado
that that's that that that helps
me out a lot in a this is this
is a
very much needed with all the
cash from fires that we've
suffered and I would like to see
our force or private forcing
industry
be able to have access to U. S.
for slash to fend the force for
beneficial use I don't know if
you've bought a two by four
lately at at the lumber yard
they've gone up dramatically and
and because of the lack of
supply so I'd rather I'd rather
just harvest good timber then
let it burn down so thank you
Madam Forster and and and Madam
chairman and thank you
Representative share any on.
Thank you Representative
Strickler and madam Forster can
you please stay on I think that
you'll be needed for some some
further questions next up is
Representative Barreras.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you madam vice chair so you for
bringing this bill
they also thank you to the
public for getting really really
great testimony and comments
this morning very thoughtful and
I really appreciate it and it's
really early so besides the
massive my question is besides
the massive impact on the
climate crisis that this is
going to make we're also
creating hundreds of jobs and I
just wanted it maybe we could
just get a quick description of
what those jobs would look like
and where they would be located
that that would help me out a
lot thank you.
Thank you Representative miss
and madam chair can we defer to
doctor Sloan not one.
Is doctor and and Representative
setting and I'm not sure Dr
Sloan is still on here.
I don't see doctor Sloan here.
Okay he he's gonna have the data
less.
Augustine can you please move Dr
Stewart Sloan to the panelists
thanks Josh motion one Joshua S.
land grant yes thank.
It's been some.
Madam chair representative thank
you with regard to the job that
this is going to create it's
going to be a broader range of
you know skill areas and levels
so we're talking about
everything from tree climbers
that would be out there
collecting the seed from the
landscape through the planters
through growers working with the
nursery three transportation
sector workers to move seed and
seedlings around the state up up
through you know the supervisor
was for the planting for
managers planners to support
these efforts so you know
picture basically of a very
broad spectrum of levels of
expertise in disciplines here in
terms of location you know
picture everywhere there's
forced in state this need is not
localized to any one area and in
New Mexico so.
No.
Broadly geographically across
the state and and full spectrum
of of skill levels and and we're
really looking forward to
getting started on this.
I really appreciate that that
answer a doctor's phone I'm
sorry madam chair I really
appreciate that a lot so it
sounds like you're saying that
everybody's could benefit from
this and it's going to be such a
broad
Range of jobs jobs that really
any skill set would be able to
benefit from this is that is
that what I'm getting out of it
absolutely Representative there
is not a single citizen of New
Mexico that would not be
impacted in some way by this
project.
I appreciate everything you've
done a doctor Sloan thank you so
much for answer my question and
madam chair that's all I yield
thank you.
Thank you Representative bye
that ash and next up is
Representative Scott.
Chair.
Representative presenters just a
couple of questions here.
I was represented that.
In testimony.
We have learned thank rich.
Approximately one million acres.
Do we know how much of that is
on federal land how much of it
is on state and private.
And.
She is the state authorized.
Right.
With the Forest Service.
To operate on these federal
lands if.
Yes that's where most of the
damage has occurred.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative for the question
I'd like to defer to the and
Forster.
Thank you madam chair
representatives
It's kind of a complicated
question but I'll I'll try to
give us a simple answer that yes
the majority of the burned lands
are on National Forest and yes
the state has what's called a
shared stewardship master
agreement with the US Forest
Service that up basically lines
up with our statewide forest
action plan.
And while we don't have a
specific agreement in hand to
day to do planting on the
National Forest that is what we
are working toward our whether
it's run through state contracts
or run through federal contracts
that is to be decided we need
the seedlings first and with the
up bipartisan infrastructure law
now in place and it has a line
item of two hundred million
dollars for reforestation again
if we get our if we are able to
move forward with this
reforestation center then the
state will be able to access
that federal money specifically
to do work on the National
Forest.
Chair.
Madam Forster appreciate that
answer.
Are the French providing.
Funds just have one of these
seedlings centers under
construction or in operation.
And
could you tell me I'll.
The state for my coordinate so
that the responsibility.
On these mostly federal
advantage would not fall
completely to the state.
Madam chair Representative Scott
I I'm I'm sorry I implied that
the responsibility would fall to
the state what I was intending
to convey is that we are in this
together and that the state is
the voice.
Making this a very high priority
for the federal government for
the the US Forest Service
leadership and our
Our particular emphasis is on
complementing the existing
federal infrastructure for
nurseries there is no federal
nursery located currently in the
southwestern states so when the
Forest Service wants to re plant
they have to bring seat they
either by from are very limited
in state supply at New Mexico
State University or they have to
bring seedlings in from pretty
far away genetically those the
the genetic and and
doctor Bernie can explain this a
lot more clearly to me by
genetically it is really
important that New Mexico and
the southwestern states have our
own nursery capacity because the
genetics of trees that come
from.
From our southern tier and even
into Mexico are going to be very
important as we experienced
warmer temperatures and
increased drought.
Madam chair and then forced her
thank you again for that answer.
And I'm curious as to whether
there was one time in.
Recent history.
Robust timber industry in New
Mexico and I'm curious as to
whether there is any private
sector component that might be
available to assist with this
seedling effort with the idea
down the road just there could
be some economic benefits from
harvesting or.
Madam chair Representative spot
are you just articulated the
vision that we have it is
spelled out very clearly in our
forest action plan and we hope
to bring it into reality.
Thank you very much Madam chair
representative Sarinana and.
Forster that's all.
Thank you Representative Scott
Representative Herndon.
So thank you very much madam
chair members of the committee
and I'm.
Representative Sarinana or to
any of your your
expert witnesses I'm just
wondering about the
appropriation that a that has
been requested here and about
the sustainability of what we
are doing I'm really excited
about the people that I've been
here and been been testifying
but will any of this
appropriation money be used to
enhance bringing students into
studying this of forestry land
and be a part of the
continuation of a program that
will protect New Mexico in the
future.
Thank thank you madam chair and
thank you Representative for
that great question I'm gonna
defer that to Dr Sloan.
Madam chair representative
affirmed thanks for the
question.
The short answer is yes this
appropriation a portion of it
will be going toward workforce
development and education of the
you know four step one in
building this workforce is
building the skills building the
knowledge of the individuals
that would be doing the work New
Mexico highlands university
which is my home institution
houses the state's only yes in
for street program we are
credited by the society of
American foresters and this type
of reforestation education is
part of our program and we're
viewing it as a group they're
you know it this is absolutely a
need for the state and we're
working to build out that
program part of this
appropriation would be to help
expand that to train Garcia
collection crews to train our
planting foods.
so that so that would be part of
that and and
early on it was mentioned that a
lot of the language
had been stricken and
representative Sarinana
substitution because it had been
moved to the Emirates which
we've assigned assigned at this
point a lot of that language
dealt with among other things
that workforce development
component and New Mexico
highlands university being
responsible for that education
piece so so that's absolutely
part of the plan
representatives.
Thank you doctor Sloan I'm in
them madam chair and can you
also tell me I just want to
clarification so at New Mexico
State University you can get a
degree in forestry is that
correct.
Madam chair representative and
and it's New Mexico highlands
university.
Which houses the for street
program.
Okay I thank you again very much
and madam chair and Dr Sloan the
other question I have is looking
at the the use court that was
described in in one of the
testimonies that was presented
today and so I am also wondering
is that part of your program
that you bring in a youth
development part of this so that
the growth in interest in this
program is also sustainable and
is that use court part of that
growing interest in our younger
students particularly looking at
high school getting ready to go
into college.
So chair and and Representative
turned and.
The use of course so that was
with us before stewards kids and
they were brought in in
collaboration with New Mexico
State University as part of a
broader research in
reforestation effort we have and
that's part of our our regular
practice yes to bring in use for
a person to bring in volunteer
groups to work with local and
and tribal organizations and
other partners
whenever they have an interest
in getting involved in this work
and so so that's already to an
extent formalized in our
operations and and part of our
regular practice and we
absolutely expect to continue
that.
Thank you very much thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative Herndon
I also have a question
Representative at madam vice
chair setting I'm not and
panelists to actually comment
first which is that you know
I've been to this this place the
Herington research center I
believe it's what it's called
and doctor bring the previous
correct me if I'm wrong and and
I want to let folks on the
committee and watching no just
just how important this place is
for community we've heard a lot
about jobs we've heard a lot
about climbing Education
reforest in all of that but I
just I want you to know how
important it is for our young
people to to visit and and what
doctor Bernie and his colleagues
are doing out in the surrounding
communities my daughters at one
point the girl scouts they were
at they benefited from a lovely
fire making training by Dr
Bernie and they got to learn a
lot about trees and I think you
know that the sooner we can do
that in in really integrate
these practices into the
community the better so I I do
have one question for I believe
us Madam Forster which is you
know how if you could just
elaborate a little bit more on
how this reforestation Center
checks in with the forest action
plan.
Thank you madam chair.
So our forest action plan it's
very comprehensive it has ten
strategies and it covers
everything from.
Wildfire management to forest
management to.
The economic benefits to the
land conservation benefits and
you strategies and.
One of our ten strategies is
devoted to reforestation.
And the strategy itself was
developed by the team of doctor
Bernie Dr Sloan and drive her
to.
I thank you madam Forster that
that concludes my question and I
would like to invite madam chair
and vice chair sitting on a to
use any of course before we go
to the.
Thank you madam chair I just
like to state listening to
everybody who's spoken today we
know that we hear that how
important this is and I'm hoping
we can get this past and
continue on to the next
committee so
please vote yes thank you.
Thank you madam vice chair thank
you panelists and and members of
the public for for commenting
I'd like to entertain a motion.
Madam chair.
I'd like to do not pass on house
bill one oh one and I do pass of
House Energy Environment and
natural resources committee
substitute for house bill one
oh.
Second.
We have a motion to table for do
not pass HB one a one to to pass
Committee sub by Representative
sorry I'm but I just and
seconded by Representative
Dixon.
Augustine can you I please take
Senator on the vote.
Yes ma'am.
Representative Barreras yes.
Representative Dixon yes.
Representative Garcia yes.
Representative Herndon.
Yes.
Representative one plant.
Yes.
Representative what is yes.
Representative Scott.
Yes.
Representative Strickler yes.
Representative Townsend yes.
Vice chair signing on a.
Yes.
And chairman McQueen.
Can't believe he's still out
the other committee yes ma'am
and he is excused correct.
Right well with the unanimous
vote we have a do not pass on
the H. on H. B. one I wanted to
pass on the Canadian side for H.
B. one a one.
Congratulations madam vice chair
Sarinana and and thank you
everyone.
And I.
I believe that concludes this
committee hearing unless anybody
has anything they'd like to add
before we go.
All right well everyone thank
you very much thank you folks
listening be safe and wear your
mask and we'll see you soon.
Thank you guys.
Thank.
