Representative Powdrell Culbert.
I don't
care.
Thank you.
Here.
Okay.
Right we have a folks present we
have a quorum.
Thanks Mario welcome everyone is
watching and welcome back Center
once that is
but I appreciate you being here
it's good to see you.
soon to.
we have a couple of items today
on the agenda Senate bill one
twenty one and Senate bill
twenty for both from Senator
Gonzales and then we'll have a
presentation afterwards around
the trip report we have rocking
already as the director of
policy and research and then and
then we'll adjourned so for now
Senator whenever you're ready.
Okay well very well thank you
good morning no madam chair and
members of the committee and
that's my stomping grounds will
transportation committee okay
all with Senate bill one twenty
one but the status of the
amendments the bond statute to
allow the New Mexico department
of transportation to issue the
remaining the authorized amount
of two hundred thirty four point
six million.
In bonding authority the
proceeds of the bonds will be to
fund projects authorized to the
twenty nineteen regular session
and the additional projects that
the New Mexico DOT has developed
and included in the state
transportation improvement
program the skip.
In the DOT has sufficient
projects developed and ready to
move construction yes there is
funding available well madam
chair members so the remaining
bonding authority from House
Bill fifteen in two thousand
three the grip legislation is so
two hundred thirty four point
six million during the June
twenty twenty special session
The New Mexico DOT has.
Was authorized to issue seventy
five million of transportation
project bonds after July first
of twenty twenty two which is
only a portion of the remaining
authority currently allowed by
the New Mexico just a sixty
seven dash three dash fifty nine
point four the bill will
increase the amount to the
remaining authority to thirty
four point six and allow the New
Mexico D. O. T. to issue bonds
after July first two thousand
twenty one this bill will allow
the New Mexico deal T. to take
advantage of low interest rates
in order to fund projects that
will assist with economic
recovery for the state.
Madam chair members so with that
I would like to be able to
cabinet Michael Santa and then
it might want to call someone
staff also.
Secretary you're on and and I
know that time rise is on as
well.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Mike Santa cabinet
secretary for the department of
transportation with me today I
have Tammy Haas who is a
director for asset management
bonding capital program and then
at some point when questions
come up my do if you don't mind
that you Rick Padilla was our
executive director over highway
operations center in the help
answer any questions but thank
you Senator Gonzales for
bringing this bill forward on
behalf of the DOT I think you
explain the bill one thing I did
want to do that there was
questions about during the last
meeting was just share a couple
slides that show our debt
service and so if Mario could
allow me to share my screen
these are also provided to you
so you should have copies of
these but just want to explain a
few things about the funding
program how that would affect
the department's debt service
and then I would be happy to to
stand for any questions.
The screen sharing capability Mr
Secretary okay thank you all
just go over those two slides
really quick.
I like it.
Can everybody see that.
Yes you can see okay all right
so just to let you know this is
what our bonding debt service
looks like right now
I'll just go over a couple of
these columns this great column
right here that says just that
R. F. which is state road fund
this is basically our state that
which is the real runner thank
you Secretary church on.
He did in his
the last couple years is cabinet
secretaries get Republican
really appreciate that's working
with us on.
And so all of our our under
payments are
It leveled out and because we
paid a tour to be end up paying
twenty seven million this year.
Forty million and alleged my
dogs being let out so that would
go in a minute and then forty
million all the way to twenty
thirty but in twenty thirty will
be completely out of debt for
the rail runner here's our
federal debt service we're using
about a hundred eighteen million
dollars of federal money to pay
debt this year as you can see
there's a big drop off in twenty
twenty four to twenty twenty
five it goes from a hundred
twenty eight million down to
twenty six million so that's a
gain of about a hundred million
dollars in federal money that
will be able to use for other
things based on the current that
program in twenty twenty five
and then here's another program
that we use which is our highway
infrastructure when you look at
the total right now this year
will pay a hundred and fifty two
million dollars in debt that
goes up to a hundred eighty two
million dollars and twenty
twenty four and then of course
that drop off in twenty twenty
five all the way down to we're
pretty much out of debt in
twenty thirty we have a couple
payments of nine million dollar
payment seven million dollar
payment in twenty thirty one and
twenty thirty two but for the
most part rather that in twenty
thirty so Senator Gonzalez
mention that
we did get permission to death
I'm sorry to bond seventy five
million in the special session
last year those projects have
already been identified and we
will be moving forward with that
this is what are the additional
debt service it would add
because we have so type it
payments over these first four
years we're really only going to
provide interest for these
efforts for years so we'll be
paying about three and a half
three point seven million the
twenty twenty four and then we
really take care of the
principal those last three years
when our debt is low we got
we're hoping to get a low
interest rate when we did some
refinancing recently art or
interest rate was point six
percent and as you know because
of the pandemic interest.
Rates are the all time low at
this point is we certainly want
to take advantage of that sooner
rather than later if this bill
were to pass we could we could
bomb the the existing full
amount left in Representative so
the full two hundred and thirty
four million it's a two hundred
and sixty million additional
from what we already have
approval for and so that we
would structure the payments
like this once again though
interest payments these first
few years where that payment is
high once that technically falls
off in twenty twenty five is
when we start paying the
principal off in one of the
important things is we're not
gonna go past twenty thirty with
that payment so unlike past
funding programs where to put
the department in debt for
thirty years we're not an extend
that date passed twenty thirty
it's a ten year bond program and
with the majority of it is paid
when when we have a more
federal.
Capacity as far as paying that
debt so the last thing I just
want to show you this could end
up with this visually of course
the Orange Line is what we
currently have which is this
kind of rising debt payment
falls off in twenty twenty five
kind of goes up and down a
little bit and we're done in
twenty thirty two when we had
the seventy five million it
follows the same kind of half
and then if we were to get the
full amount that the advantage
to this also is follow that same
path but then we kind of have a
more level payment which helps
with was planning to twenty
thirty and then we get that big
dropoff and so we think this is
a a really good investment in
our roads structure what's gonna
happen these for years if we're
not able to bomb this amount is
we're gonna take a hit in our
construction program as our debt
goes up that means more going to
debt less going on to the roads
and we feel with this additional
hundred sixty million dollars
that we're going to get this and
help us get through these four
years to make sure that we have
a consistent construction
program so let me step stops
sherry my screen.
All right.
And I'm back in so like I said
one of the reasons we want to do
this is we already have that
seventy five million permission
what are you gonna go through
the process so it wouldn't be an
an extra process we just
increase the amount we're
already did end up paying fees
for the seventy five million we
can save some money there and
then interest rates are at all
time low and so it really ends
up being is what Amanda pain
over time three hundred and
twenty million dollars we're
gonna get about three hundred
million dollars worth of
proceeds so ran up to the pay
twenty million over ten years so
the question is is this worth
budget that is worth no more
than twenty million and I think
it is when you look
Representative Crowder brought
up some good points about the
inflation and those type of
things just the cost of doing
projects what will that look
like in ten years and we think
the cost benefits of the are
they out weigh the twenty
million that were the end up
paying over time and interest
for the next ten years so with
that madam chair
our expert witnesses are also
available Tammy and Rick to
answer questions but we would
all distressed at this time and
and staff any questions you may
have so thank you for the time.
Thank you Secretary and thank
you senator Senator did you want
to saying anything before we
moved on to folks in attendance
and to the committee
Madam chair of the so.
We're fine you can go ahead okay
great so for folks who are in
the audience is there anybody
that would like to speak in
support or in opposition of this
legislation if we can have
support first.
We have a couple people first we
have Jim Garcia.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee my name is Jim
Garcia I'm the executive
director of associated
contractors of New Mexico the
heavy highway utility Division
where the worker bees that are
out there doing a lot of the
work for the state we are
of really is.
In support of this bill we think
that this is a great tool for
the secretary of the department
of transportation and we look
forward to that bonding capacity
they have the ability for have a
having more options to get more
work done in the community so
with that thank you madam chair
appreciate time.
Thank you Mr Garcia next we have
Eric Martinez.
Eric if you wanna meet yourself.
It doesn't look like he can hear
us Eric do you want to because
that yeah go ahead.
It okay good morning madam chair
members of the committee my name
is Eric Martinez I'm the on this
for the New Mexico soul
development group as many of you
know Mexico sold is the
developmental site where
Netflix is a developing
expanding we also have a big
spot immiscible sold reserve for
sustainable renewable energy
development as well too we're
working closely with you'll need
to develop an interchange to a
help access to up to these
contractors to get out there to
develop these this renewable
energy to develop Netflix little
more which are stimulates on New
Mexico economic development so
this law significantly help
projects like the miscible soul
interchange to develop a whole
lot quicker.
A lot of New Mexico's back to
working with that we support
this legislation thank you.
Thank you Eric.
Next we have Jareth fanning.
Yes madam chair members of the
committee jury fanning the.
Public and government affairs
director for Eddy County we
believe this Senate bill one to
one will allow the emote in in
the need to focus funds and have
a security of funds they need
for shovel ready projects
throughout the state and Eddy
County is in great support of
this bill and we thank you for
your support.
Thank you Mr fanning I'm is
there anyone in opposition.
Great so we'll move on to the
committee first we have
Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you senator for bringing this
forth and and the Mr secretary I
appreciate your explanation so
I guess my first question is for
clarify the Senate I've heard
the word seventy five million we
talk about a hundred sixty
million and three hundred twenty
some million as I understand it
the seventy five million is
included in the three hundred.
For two hundred thirty four
million is that correct.
Madam chair and representative
that is correct so it's a total
of two hundred and thirty four
million of that we already have
approval for seventy five
million so what this bill would
do it just add the rest of that
which is about a hundred and
sixty eight hundred fifty nine
point four I think million is
what it is okay thank you Mr
secretary in the madam chair Mr
secretary I noticed the last.
Two three weeks that the markets
have increased considerably
right Sir are going up on.
Do bills and stuff what what are
your bond rates done the last
two or three weeks or are they.
Percent percent have two percent
you know what they are today.
Madam chair representative I
don't but maybe Tammy does
that's one of the reasons that
we want to do this sooner rather
than later they're still low
they're not as low as six like
we were able to get a few months
back but they're still really
low I think when Tammy.
Visitation she thought we could
still get about a one point two
to one point five percent
funding right and if this bill
were to pass we to initiate that
process right away to take
advantage until well these
funding rates or until you know
as he's bonding rates grow if we
don't do anything we're still in
up on that seventy five million
but we don't have permission to
do that till July first of
twenty twenty two so that's
fifteen sixteen months from now
so who knows what they'll be by
then and so we're looking to do
this sooner rather than later
but I would defer to Tammy and
see if she knows what the
funding rates with the grant
and.
Madam chair Representative
Crowder yes the rates have been
trickling up
they gone up about point two
percent so when you look at what
we would bond compared to the US
treasury rates the rates are
typically lower when you look at
the triple a
we noticed minister Paul bonds
we are going to issue tax free
municipal bonds in.
We're looking at probably the
five year and ten year level of
bond somewhere in there and
those are actually lower than
the thirty year bond the longer
you go out the higher the
interest rates are so yeah the
markets been creeping up on but
it's still within the projection
of what we presented in the
slide when I did the
presentation last week.
Thank you I appreciate it very
much it was in the Senate bill
one twenty one that moves up
your authorization on the
seventy five million to bond
that sooner rather than later is
that correct Mr secretary.
Madam chair representative that
is correct we would do
everything all in one
transaction save on transaction
fees and if this bill were to
pass we would not have to wait
till July one twenty twenty two
we could start the process and
get that started sooner rather
than later C. R..
Okay thank you for that I
noticed on the page ten of the
bill it talks about what the
purposes could be used for
acquisition rights away planning
design construction that
separate sector in we also
received several last one of of
small projects one of large
projects.
The historically I believe when
we do a ponder when the when the
state is that upon they have
identified what they're going to
spend it for we are very broad
language in this bill do you
have a plan Mr secretary of how
you're going to.
Deploy those funds you have
projects in mind.
can.
Why do we not identify we're
we're gonna put the bonds.
Madam chair and representative
the other three the bond the
bill right now says for projects
that are in the state so those
are the projects have gone
through the process and planning
process there in the state of
the reason we can identify any
projects in this bill is we're
trying to look at the overall
picture so we'll probably be
getting some federal stimulus
money we are getting probably
and capital and in the LFC
budget in the budget right now a
hundred and seventy million or
so of capital half of that's
been identified and then with
this funding bill you want to
look at is how we're going to
make all that money work
together so that we can get full
projects income and projects
that we can move forward I think
one of the issues that happened
in the last funding programs and
there had been a couple projects
I did never got done is projects
were identified in there and
sometimes even amounts and
things change over the over the
over time and and projects maybe
that look are looking good right
now they run into an issue and
they you know have to be
postponed two or three or four
years and we want to be able to
put this money into use as soon
as possible we want to put it in
in places that have been vetted
that's why we're referencing the
state and not representing a
particular project.
Most likely it's gonna go off
the list that have been provided
that's the plan but I still what
we still wanted some flexibility
in the sense of if we put all
this money together how can we
put together a full project is
ready to go so that this money
doesn't sit around so that's the
reason for that Madam chair
representative okay thank you
for that and it's that's logical
and makes sense
It are you.
During that I know the the
document that we saw has it
broken down by district greatest
needs in each district are you
contemplating that it would be
spread out through the districts
fairly evenly or or is there one
or two really big projects that
have a great day.
Madam chair representative I
think we're gonna do our best to
be equitable I know that's how
this committee likes things to
be done
I think it would be difficult
just to split it in six and have
an even amount but certainly we
want every part of the state to
be involved in this but if it's
not with this money then it
could be some of the hundred
seventy million that we got that
can be shifted around to make
sure that when you put all the
pieces of the pie together the
the one hundred seventy this
bonding bill any federal
stimulus money that we get
everybody's and they get about
the same amount but I can't say
that each part of money will be
divided equally but when you
look at the overall picture that
is the plan is to try and be as
equitable as possible.
Standing thank you madam chair
thank you Mr secretary I
appreciate your comments.
Thank you Representative next we
have a vice chair Garcia.
Thank you madam chair of Senator
Gonzales thank you for bringing
this bill up for you Terry.
And all of them to be here
today.
I have a question on that slide
you showed earlier.
On the pay Mr we'll Federal
Highway Administration why was
there such a job on what we're
paying from to again twenty
twenty five twenty six one
seventy seven full the twenty
twenty six and about the same
and then on twenty twenty seven
madam chair it jumped up to
sixty four four ninety nine what
was set to jump in on the
payment in between those two
years.
Madam chair and representative
Mr vice chair it was just the
way the bonds are set up when
they and when the grant Fund was
done
originally if you remember there
was a some big cliff payments in
twenty twenty four and twenty
twenty five they were going to
be about a in additional hundred
and twenty five million the like
I mentioned before we thank
secretary church when he was
there even doubt these payments
and got rid of that huge cliff
payment that was coming and that
was just the way that the bonds
were set up in in payment forms
that wasn't made totally equal
there were still was a little
bit of a cliff at that time but
the cliff was greatly reduced
which really helps us be able to
afford those payments moving
forward and so it was strictly
just the way that the bonding
company together the bonds in
and that's how we are are going
to be paying them back based on
the.
Thank you should you madam
chair.
Of just for the the committee
here.
And all of this two hundred
thirty four whatever million
that we want to bond is that
gonna be available for use right
away instead of having to wait
two years ago the little
distributor manager.
Madam chair and Mr vice chair
yes we would try and do this
sooner rather than later to take
advantage of the interest rates
we think we have projects based
on the list that we've been
going off on for the last couple
months and we wanted to take
advantage of those interest
rates and get that done and not
wait until July first twenty
twenty two which like I said who
knows what the interest rate
will be at that point I want to
do it sooner rather than later.
Thank you Mr secretary of madam
chair and love glad you
mentioned earlier was secretary
madam chair of being of equal
with all districts that that's
awful important that one
district doesn't overpower
another district of the funding
for with us and I appreciate
that very much sent Mr secretary
general fund is thank you madam
chair thank you all of which is
I have.
Thank you vice chair on next we
had trouble monster.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Senator Gonzales for
bringing this bill forward if
you have a question for the
cabinet secretary we talk about
three different potential
sources for projects bonding
that's tied to the state.
House Bill to our general fund
on reoccurring and has a hundred
and seventy million currently in
there that hasn't been
identified for projects and then
then another hundred seventy
that was identified in the house
version and then we've got
federal money.
I know you can't take any one
source and split six ways.
But at some point madam chair
I'd like to see a minute matrix
of sources and how all the
sources are tied to ensure
equity it is a big deal to me
that each one of the highway
districts received a fair share
it doesn't matter to me what the
sources are interested bonding
or house bill two nonrecurring
or federal.
But what my question is is that
what is the total again I I
looked at the chart with the
total was coming on source.
Madam chair and and madam chair
Lundstrom so if we were to get
this bill were to pass the total
amount in proceeds that we would
get so the bonding amount would
be two hundred and thirty four
point six but when we sell the
bonds we think we're gonna get
about three hundred million
dollars in proceeds which means
they'll be three hundred million
dollars worth of money out there
available for projects
number seventy five million of
that is already identified from
house bill two a couple years
ago but that would be an
additional proceeds of about two
hundred and twenty five million
so.
Okay so Mr secretary madam chair
we're talking about about two
hundred twenty five million tied
to step related projects and
then house bill two we had
substantial amount of non
reoccurring that goes in there
Senate has not identified the
projects of the half of the
house House Madam chair in those
house projects they're all tied
to the step also.
Those are projects provided by
the department that we that we
put in and then under the
federal sources is this tied to
the Biden stimulus plan that
just came out or or are you
anticipating more money
From from the national DOT.
Madam chair and madam chair
Lundstrom it's a it's both it's
not the the biting plan on the
federal side but it was the one
that the last one that was
signed in December the
department the state received
about ninety two million dollars
directly to the D. O. T. it's
formula basis some of that went
to the Albuquerque MPO in el
Paso MPO so that are missing the
end up getting about seventy
five to eighty million dollars
of that comes directly to DOT
we're still looking exactly how
that can be spent but we think
it can be spent pretty liberally
there's not a lot of
restrictions on that board and a
way to finalize that and then we
do expect under the new
infrastructure plan we met with
Congress folks last week that
there's gonna be an increase in
some more funding programs under
a new federal infrastructure
plan so we don't know what that
amount would be but they're in a
focus on shovel ready projects
so when you add all that up
madam chair the with three
hundred from this the hundred
and seventy that is in house
bill two and then the seventy
five or so that you're looking
at I think that brings us close
to
One that see the lower four
hundred million is that.
Yes so madam chair so it's four
hundred million above the
regular construction budget for
the department.
my question then is
Madam chair Mr secretary how
does the commission fit into
this now I mean you're gonna put
a plan together and they'll be
have to be approved by the DOT
commission is that is that
correct.
Madam chair in madam chair
Lundstrom that is correct so we
do a bonding that does have to
go through the commission and
they're they're very likely done
I want to see more detail about
exactly what's going to be in
there and I think that's when
you would see the more detail
and like I said I understand how
this this committee works and
what you on a absolutely hundred
percent respect that and so our
goal is always to try and be
equitable among the districts I
want to do nothing to upset the
committee or go against the
committees wishes and so that
would that's our goal madam
chair all right no problem on
that I'm just trying to figure
out that Mr our madam chair that
and then the hundred seventy
million that's in house bill two
does that go in front of the
commission.
Madam chair and madam chair
Lundstrom that does not
so there's been half of that
it's been identified on the
house side and that does not go
to through the commission the
one that would go through the
commission would be the local
art the hundred and twenty one
hundred twenty million those
projects to go through
commission but the house bill
two one time general non
reoccurring does not go through
the commission goes directly
into our budget and then we find
that Mr and Mr secretary white
mint madam chair why wouldn't
the commission have a.
Get to be able to see how that
hundred seventy million is being
spent I'm just curious it seems
like it's a budgetary issue.
Madam chair and madam chair
Lundstrom we certainly let them
know there's just not any
provision for them to approve
projects through that like for
example they don't necessarily
approve projects to the state.
that doesn't go through
commissions so if there is a
step amendment we're adding or
subtracting projects that does
not currently go through the
commission that goes to our
federal highway partners not to
the commission that's just the
authority or the process it's
been done
for years now so that's.
They don't they don't to approve
this hundred seventy million.
Scanners price thing to me that
they wouldn't have any say over
how that hundred seventy million
is being spent
and so I think that's one of the
reasons of course that.
On the house side madam chair Mr
secretary that we did identify
projects in house bill two you
know the appropriations process
lies with the legislature and
it's not that we wouldn't have
confidence in the staff it's
kind of a dual activity but I've
never been wanted wanted turn
over our appropriating ability
to
agencies I don't think that's
appropriate so I I just wanted
to get better clarification on
this so the only.
The only oversight then on this
to become from a staff level or
what we put in the house bill
two except for the peace that
the house had identified in
terms of projects.
Appreciate that madam chair it's
important for me to understand
and and the you know it's good
bill we need the extra dollars
in their thank you very much.
Thank you chairman next we have
Representative Pettigrew.
Good morning and thank you madam
chair and I just had a few
comments
I think everybody is aware that
I've.
Who was originally not in favor
of of.
Going with this bond and
I feel like we need to pay down
debt and so since hearing
looking at that we're we're on
our bond values and I appreciate
to continue working to sectors
done on this and I will support
this bill I I do want to.
Just go on record as
disappointed with house bill two
one of the many reasons why I
voted against it was because we
didn't have any projects done in
Lee County.
This project does this this bill
does identify a couple of
projects in Lee County
I.
I will be interested and and
watch very closely to make sure
that the the roads to the were
having issues on the deaths that
are occurring because of road
conditions and and the traffic
that we have down there I do
look forward to seeing those
dressed and very specifically
so.
Thank you Sir and I have changed
my mind with respect to the bond
and I will support this bill.
And I'm very hopeful that the
Senate side does.
With with thirty five million
and the at a project for Lee
County and I raise talking about
equity and spreading them
around.
I have a little different
perspective on that so but at
the end of the day I just wanted
to speak on that and so
Secretaria do appreciate your
effort madam chair appreciate
your time are you about.
Thank you Representative we have
a vice chair person for the
second time.
Madam chair Monday if you'd like
you can the motion of bass on
Senate bill one point one.
The motion for a new from vice
chair Garcia and a second from
Representative Madrid I do have
just a couple questions well
actually just probably just one
secretary is in relations to I
mean clearly there will be an
influx of of of money coming
into the state to work on
infrastructure and I I certainly
feel that that's a great way to
not only create jobs but it
really does help the economy I'm
moving forward one question that
I that I had and this was
related to there was a floor
hearing on a bill and I can't
remember the exact bill but
there are people.
Legislators on the floor talking
about how so many of these jobs
and I'm going to out of state
contractors and so my question
is is that with the influx of
this this this the funding
how do you foresee
A lot of those dollars staying
within
the state in terms of I know
that there's that there was
comments around I'm not enough
training for folks to be able to
to do the work from in state so
sometimes we have to go out of
state to to have some of these
contractors I just kind of
wanted to get your thoughts on
that because
all while I see this as as a
great opportunity for
stimulating the economy I want
to also under like this also
understand how we can also
promote the importance of of
making sure that the dollars
stay within the people hearing
this goes on committee this
morning.
Thank you madam chair for the
question yeah I I think one of
the most important things that
we can do is department is is
really
Put out a predictable
construction schedule and so the
legislature over the last two
years has provided us five
hundred and thirty five million
dollars of one time non
recurring general fund so those
five hundred million above and
beyond the current construction
code.
Program and so what we're able
to do is kind of land that out
over several years on how that's
an to be spent and for the most
part of our local contractors
and consultants are the ones
that have been getting those
that money
and I think what we when we
struggle as a state is when we
put a bunch of money out at the
same time and so that's why I
think this is a good combination
of one time money that we can
put into the field right away
state money that's planned over
the next two to three years and
then this bonding money we're
looking at bigger projects it'll
be left for the next one to
three years and what I've been
told by the contractors when you
have a real consistent program
you don't have the spikes up and
down they can be really
strategic about how they hire
how they buy equipment how the
bid on projects to make sure
that they're not going over
capacity and so that's why I
think it's important that when
you look at all this money you
put together a good consistent
construction program we haven't
had a lot of that the state is
more fact I'm not even aware of
any out of state company that's
come in and and and received any
of this five hundred and thirty
five million dollars that you
have provided us over the last
couple years because we've been
able to strategically let
projects out and the consistent
with our leading schedule and I
think that's that's a big thing
that we're not trying to with
the if this bill were to pass
and with the additional hundred
seventy million that getting if
if else the two passes away it
is now so that's kind of how
we're dealing with that I will
tell you that there's an to be a
big project coming up in the
southeast part of the state New
Mexico thirty one about a
hundred million dollar project.
A little concerned as to
knowing if there is any local
companies that have the capacity
to do that project not because
the dollar amount but because of
the location and trying to get
staffing down there and housing
down there and people to
relocate down there for a two
year project the place that has
a high cost of living right now
and.
That we could get some out of
state interest in that project
so that would be the one project
that I'm a little concerned
about that the state folks could
come in and try and get on that
but otherwise I think we've been
done a pretty good job of
spreading it out being
consistent in keeping the money
local.
Thank you Mr secretary and
lastly I mean I think that
there's been a lot of
conversation around how do we
distribute the funding equitably
and I I certainly agree with
that I know that I represent a
lot the second largest city in
the state and while we certainly
could could have much better
infrastructure in this area I
also see I also think about
things more in in sort of a
statewide
the thought process because I
feel that a lot of like our
districts as important as they
are to us infrastructure and
roads don't just live within the
districts that they have to
really connect all of us and so
I'm really looking forward to
seeing what that
what that will look like
statewide so that
and and how that we've how
that's done equitably because I
think it's it's critical to make
sure that there are projects
that
that there are there are
communities that route that have
dire needs and and my hope is
that we can address those
through this through this
process.
Vice chair Garcia did you have a
question thank you madam chair I
just have a concern on all.
Why the commission is not has no
facial were hollow that the
house bill money and I mean how
the money and how billing tool.
not reoccurring to spend you
know we will have to revisit
that at one point.
And madam madam chair and and Mr
vice chair and and I guess when
I say they don't have any input
I guess I should clarify and say
they don't have any official
input right it doesn't
officially have to go through
the commission and get voted on
it doesn't mean that we don't
talk about it doesn't mean that
they don't call in and ask about
it doesn't mean that they don't
want to see things.
and what I say that is it just
doesn't have to go to them for a
while but certainly all of our
commissioners are involved in
the process to communicate they
expressed their wishes and their
concerns on anything there's
just certain things that go
through them for of unofficial
vote and certain things that
don't and stip projects or money
that comes in right now does not
go through them for any time
type of official vote so just to
clarify of the thank you madam
chair Mister could cheery you
know I I know you're very for
person but in all other people
accessing question it just
returning all of the.
Thank god chairman all just say
no we we need to make sure that
it's equal between all districts
because of we all have needs the
legislature of madam chair
restrictor thank you.
Thank you Mr Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair just a
quick question for secretary I I
hope we all support this today
on our plan voting for would it
be possible to have a little bit
of a guiding document or what
your plan is before we vote on
this on the floor R. it I I I
think there's a high level of
confidence this is all going to
ask would you have time to kind
of just sketches out.
Something before we get to the
for about.
Madam chair representative I'd
be happy to put something
together I think the document is
where we want to go off those
projects that we provided to you
and I can share that with you
again.
Can I nail it down to this
specific project or that I'm
trying to avoid that because
first of all want to make sure
that I can meet any commitment
that I may but second of all
after the session I want to sit
down and and if you want to be
part of that process I'm happy
to include you and anyone on
this committee to put our one
seventy together our federal
money that we've already
received but we're still waiting
to see how we can spend it well
whatever bonding we're gonna put
together and put a plan together
there that makes sense once I
know exactly how much money we
have and I think we can plan I
think it would be a little
premature for me to give you
some some information but then
be no money go away our money
come in I'm I want to make sure
that we're doing all projects so
that money doesn't sit out there
if that makes sense Madam chair
representative.
Makes perfect sense and I agree
I see what you're.
I very much appreciate your
offer to invite this committee
here this group into at least of
those of us that would like to
join I would be honored to be
part of that I I think some of
my colleagues with as well so
I I thank you for that and and
our.
I'd like to talk to you look
more offline when we get done
but I plan on supporting this I
I think you're heading in the
right direction.
And madam chair I I would just
put the offer to you just as
chairwoman when the sessions
over and and all the dust is
settled we see exactly how much
money we have and how much
federal money we have I will
send out the invitation to you
to talk about this and then you
can in turn invite your
committee or however you want to
do it the kind of talk through
this and we can go over that I
have no problem with that
whatsoever I want to be as
transparent as possible and as
equitable as possible so I
that's an invitation to you once
once all the dust settles chair.
Thank you Mr secretary and I am
committed to ride my bike to
every projects so just putting
that out there.
Representative Garrett
Gen question thank you madam
chairwoman
I I just want to re reiterate
what Representative Crowder said
and thank you Secretary I think
it would be good if everybody on
the committee was invited up
reading the trip report a whole
new you know rose we're
introduced in my district that
aren't on the stove and so we
have these different lists for
different purposes so it would
be really good to sit down and
then there's references to house
bill.
To from twenty twenty at with
all these competing less I would
really appreciate I'm sure
everybody on the committee would
appreciate really reviewing the
list so we have a better
understanding thank you.
Thank you Representative we have
no more questions at this point
we have a motion for the past
from vice chair Garcia second
from Representative Madrid
Mario could you go ahead and
call the roll please.
If you were on a two passed for
Senate bill one twenty one
Representative Crowder.
Yes.
Representative Garrett yes.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Lundstrom yes.
Representative Madrid yes.
Representative Pettigrew yes.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero yes.
Vice chair Garcia.
Yes.
Chair of you.
Yes.
So we have a nine it is zero to
pass.
Thank you senator you have nine
zero to pass.
Thank you madam chair thank you
members of the committee and
also thank you to the Department
deal T. in cabinet the Santa.
Thank you senator so if you're
ready we can move on twenty
trans budget fund yes madam
chair on the Senate bill twenty
of what this does is it changes
the distribution of the eighteen
point seven five percent of the
motor vehicle excise tax revenue
collected from local government
ruled Fund and the
transportation projects madam
chair and members so but this is
brought to me hello from the
department is that all this will
allow for efficiency and also to
be able to expedite the funding
to local government and also to
assist with the matching funds
part that goes to this so it it
really is more of an opportunity
to just now that we have
experience in working with this
page of the local government
transportation project fund was
created in twenty nineteen and
now with the department has
being able to implement this
they see this as an efficiency.
It does not change anything any
part of all.
You know what local government
is entitled to so with that I
will be able to also.
Cabinet from Santa.
Thank you madam chair and if it
helps the the committee
on the committees already heard
this bill it was house bill two
twenty eight it's the same exact
bill it's already actually
passed the house and on the
Senate side so the duplicate is
already passed the house I'm
happy to still discuss this bill
or answer any questions but I
just wanted to bring that to the
attention that committees passed
this bill before and it's
already passed the house
unanimously so thank you.
Thank you Secretary
Does is there anyone in the
audience who would like to speak
on behalf in opposition of the
legislation.
Please raise your hand.
I'm so we do have questions
first we have chairwoman
Lundstrom.
Thank you madam chair I would
just simply going to make a
motion for two thousand is a
companion to another bill.
Straight
that number first from the
chairwoman and a second from
Representative Crowder
Representative Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair I lance my
question was answered as soon as
you said House Bill.
Two twenty eight because of the
Senate a lot like customs bill
so I would support this as well
okay great so we have a due pass
promotion for two passed from
chairwoman Lundstrom a second
from Representative Crowder.
I'm is there any opposition to
this to this bill.
See non Senator.
You have a do pass.
Thank you madam chair thank you
to the members of the committee
thank you for your work sh thank
you thank you.
We'll have to go mountain bike
soon up Intel's Kay.
Right.
Thank you all we do have a
presentation thank you Secretary
for joining us we do have a
presentation
From the trip that was requested
by Representative the dread and
so we do have Rocky Maria it
rocking already from the
director of policy and research
from trip so we can bring them
in.
Yes.
A good morning madam chair and
and Committee members thank you
for this opportunity to briefly
talk about the new trip report
we've been doing annual reports
probably pretty much for the
last decade and New Mexico
normally I would be able to meet
with you in in person
as an organization is based in
Washington DC were supported by
a coalition of transportation
organizations across the state
and they look for us to put up
reports that the state and
national level looking at the
latest at all on the condition
of the transportation system its
use its safety an impact on on
economic development and this
year we're celebrating our
fiftieth anniversary and last
week we put out reports yeah and
and in addition New Mexico and
Colorado Mexico being
Connecticut will private about
twenty.
State reports this year.
This report was based on looking
at the latest data from a number
of of levels the Federal Highway
Administration and the national
highway traffic safety
administration which also
collects data from the New
Mexico department transportation
and then also information that
we are requests from the
department.
I am the also in the report in
addition statewide data which
all talked about today also
includes data for the
Albuquerque Santa Fe and Los
crucis area
and we include in the report and
I and I believe a member the
committee alluded to.
A list of two point eight
billion dollars of our projects
that are needed in the state but
currently not funded we do ask
the department annually to
provide an illustrative list by
region of some critically needed
projects and if you look at that
list you'll see that all of them
involved either improve the
condition of roads and bridges
enhancing mobility and economic
development opportunities are
proving the safety that system
as report points out the state
transportation system is
carrying a hundred twenty three
billion dollars worth of goods
annually we're seeing during the
pandemic that axle truck travels
come back faster than the
passenger vehicle travel as the
the supply chain that we all
rely and it's never been more
necessary and as the data shows.
It's estimated by twenty forty
five that the value of goods
adjusted for inflation in New
Mexico are are going to
approximately double now we're
all wondering how the pandemic
is going to affect a variety of
patterns and in terms of
transportation but I I think
we're we're sort of learning as
we go on that front
has a point route report points
out of the our investment in
transportation system in New
Mexico annually supports
approximately twenty six
thousand jobs so it is obviously
very critical in terms of
supporting jobs in the state and
and and as as New Mexico address
the country looks at economic
recovery obviously that
investment is is very helpful in
providing a lot of of of of good
jobs and and and and jobs that
that really attracted very
diverse workforce we also point
out that about three hundred
fifty thousand jobs in the state
are highly reliant on the
quality transportation system
whether it's in agriculture
manufacturing tourism all of the
state's businesses are just
operate far more efficiently
with the good transportation
system of the pandemic that hit
last spring obviously had a
massive impact on travel to two
thousand and nineteen New Mexico
it seen it twenty two percent
increase in vehicle travel since
two thousand us a steady
increase in in the use of the
system reflecting economic
growth but by April in New
Mexico travel was down forty one
percent on the state's roads at
due to the pandemic but by
December the last year we had we
have data of that reduction was
only five percent from the
previous year so in that regard
we've seen a pretty significant
rebound in in travel in New
Mexico of the report takes a
look at
what is the impact.
When roads are deteriorated
oftentimes congested and also in
many cases lack adequate roadway
seat safety features we monetize
each of those and we estimate
that annually the cost to the
public in New Mexico was two
point seven billion dollars a
year and that breaks down to the
cost of rough road which means
your your your vehicle is
working harder and and and quite
frankly is is falling apart that
much more quickly so you're
saying xcelerated depreciation
there is a we monetize the value
of lost time and and wasted fuel
due to traffic congestion which
also includes additional
missions and then finally we
estimate that about a third of
of roadway traffic fatalities of
the lack of adequate roadway
safety features why they didn't
because the the crash certainly
was a contributing factor in the
seriousness of those and and
that in in in in some urban
areas across the state of more
than two thousand dollars a year
promoters now if you look at the
actual condition the system as
we point out in this is is not
just state maintained This Is
data on everything up outside of
of local roads sensually the the
roads that that people take as a
part of the driveway but once
once you hit that first stop
sign you're typically on a
collector arterial road and our
data shows that thirty two
percent of those the last years
for two thousand nineteen are
important dition and twenty four
percent are in mediocre
condition and we estimate just
the cost alone of driving on
rough roads is seven hundred
sixty seven dollars per driver
in the New Mexico area.
Up we also took a look at
bridges five percent of the
state bridges are rated
important decision previously
that that category was defined
as structurally deficient but
essentially it means the
engineers are expected it's seen
significant deterioration that
are in need of immediate repair
it doesn't suggest the bridges
in any danger of collapsing or
danger to the public or or would
be closed and another fifty
seven percent of the state's
bridges are rated in fair
condition well that's the
engineer saying that there has
to strongly deterioration on the
bridge but it's it's
deterioration that with with
routine maintenance and
preservation work that bridge
can be capped in in relatively
good condition more critically
avoiding falling into poor
condition when costs are are
significantly higher about half
of the State Street a more than
fifty years all and and we know
that the bottom line is is is
that bridges built more than
fifty years old the the
materials used the style of
construction.
Make it very difficult to extend
those bridges indefinitely and
and that's really a challenge
across the country particularly
as as major bridges carrying
large traffic our region age
where that the repairs you you
you reach a point of diminishing
returns and and more critical
repairs are needed we also
estimated in the report based on
the Texas transportation
institute Sienna report that
motors in the Albuquerque area
or spending additional forty
four hours annually stopping
traffic in the Santa Fe area
another twenty eight hours those
are the amount of time people
are driving it's really a number
that suggests because of traffic
delays that's the the additional
time that you're losing.
Now if you would anticipate
obviously the pandemic
ironically was would get again
it would sort of a break from
traffic congestion but we're
seeing traffic patterns come
back we're we're seeing evening
rush hours coming back quicker
than morning rush hours and
we're we're seeing during the
the mid day significantly more
traffic and that may be a
reflection of new employment
patterns people working at home
but but the bottom line is is is
that people's don't demand for
mobility is coming back quickly
and and and and we suspect will
eventually to population growth
and and just.
You know people's need to get
places what we'll see those
numbers go beyond the pre
pandemic level shortly.
We look very closely at traffic
safety
obviously we see far too many
traffic fatalities across the
country and certainly in New
Mexico where the from two
thousand and fifteen to two
thousand nineteen so five year
period there been one thousand
eight hundred and ninety four
people killed are probably three
hundred seventy nine people
annually approximately one fifth
of those fatalities are
pedestrians or bicyclists from
again during that five year
period there were three hundred
sixty nine pedestrians killed
and thirty three bicyclist
killed in New Mexico again about
a fifth of all traffic
fatalities.
According to the national
highway traffic safety
administration any any of those
the talons of an on Motors what
would involve a a motor vehicle
There's a number of improvements
that one there maybe we see
a significant benefit in terms
of improving safety that
includes improving pedestrian
and bicycle facilities adding
turn lanes for their appropriate
removing or shielding ops
obstacles are adding rumble
strips both center lane on on
the outside rate in shoulders
all of these are are are are
cost effective.
Rudiments I never states were
working states are are looking
to incorporate that I'm sure
that's happening in New Mexico
and to projects as their
legislative but obviously it
takes is adequate resources as I
mentioned earlier there's a.
Unless you have listed two point
eight billion dollars of
unfunded projects across the
state and and I recognize from
the the comments earlier of the
that the you know there's a
number of of efforts and and and
and it looks to identify which
of those projects where they
might fit into the pipeline but
I think as you heard from the
secretary ultimately the the the
level and pace of funding is
going to affect how quickly they
can move forward in terms of
additional funding in New on
conclude my comments on this
note the federal program which
expires in September is
absolutely vital to provide to
both three hundred ninety one
million dollars in new in New
Mexico for roads and bridges and
and transit and then at the
state level if you take a look
at at work by the transportation
investment advocacy center which
is maintained by the American
road and transportation builders
association they do a very good
job of tracking state
legislation and they point out
that since two thousand and
twelve seventy four state
legislatures and move forward
with major.
Legislation that was with the
approved to significantly boost
state transportation fund forty
three of those increases were
based on an increase in in user
fees whether it was traditional
fuel taxes it was the electric
or hybrid vehicle taxes
registration fees of that has
been the the basis of the major
those increases sixteen of the
states that have moved majority
of funding initiative with with
based on additional bonding and
then another sixteen on one
time.
Or or in some cases recurring
investment been from a non user
fee basis our weather was a a
general sales tax or general
fund money and in this year this
is states are are scrambling to
put their their budgets back
there are no financial houses
back in order and we've seen
major bills introduced in twenty
five states for funding packages
but only one a significant
bonding package is Massachusetts
has has been approved so far.
So I know to all my comments and
and happy to take any questions.
Thank you thank you Sir for your
presentation we do have some
question is from the committee
First we have Representative
Powdrell Culbert.
Thank you madam chair rocky good
to see you again yeah.
Mexico compared to.
To our surrounding states in
regards to
I think you mentioned the.
The where and chair the ropes
calls on your vehicle so I'm
just wondering how we comparing.
To our surrounding states in
that and also how are we just
compared to our surrounding
states in general.
if you take a look at that
pavement conditions to start out
New Mexico it's thirty two
percent of of roads overall poor
condition and and I and I
believe I don't have the number
I mean but for urban roads it
was forty percent and that's
based on the international
roughness index it measures the
smoothness of roads and and and
and states are required to run
those monitors annually to teach
and and really what what rough
this tells you is it's
indicative of what's going on
underneath the surface and and I
I think it transportation agency
will tell you that this move
this is what the customer cares
about but what they worry about
is what's crumbling underneath
because obviously if they let
that go too long the cost of
making those repairs is about
four times as much and there's a
sense that there is a
diminishing returns of simple
repaving if you haven't dealt
with the the the the crumbling
of some basis so up New Mexico's
average both nationally and
statewide or is higher than the
national average
in terms of urban pavement and
overall pavements and again that
is locally maintained as well as
state maintained are the bridges
with five percent in poor
condition compared to national
about seven
and then our vehicle travel
growth through two thousand
nineteen is is generally
consistent what we're seeing in
western states are nearly all
draw attention to is traffic
fatalities New Mexico is third
nationally in their traffic
fatality rate behind only at
South Carolina and Mississippi
and and so that that definitely
jump so we just very quickly
look at where New Mexico is
nationally.
Okay but in regards to being.
If you're just looking at the
national numbers you're not
looking at how we prepare to I
mean compare to Arizona and
Colorado.
And I know Texas roads are in in
great shape then I think there
were among the leaders in sports
or highway construction is
concerned sure I think you I I
mean I don't have all the
regional numbers right in front
of me but I I I think would be
fair to say that the pavements
fall behind the average of
western states is certainly does
nationally.
And this is may be a silly
question probably one I should
ask our secretary but you know
New Mexico is so sandy.
And
Doesn't that have some impact on
the condition that our our roads
because always see New Mexico's
shifting sand and the sense.
And so are do you all look at
the the soul and everything I
know that they have to do
certain things to prep.
For the
Before no roads are laid and
everything that goes on but do
you all ever look at that.
We have an and and and then as
your fairly technical question
they'd probably secretaries
pavement Office could could
address any typically what we
look at is volume of traffic
certainly large trucks which are
critical for the economy also
put the most significant wear
and tear on the system and
typically we see urban pavements
in worse shape than rural not to
reflection of of having have
your travel obviously weather
has an impact when you get into
freeze thaw cycles that's a
challenge but you're right
certainly are the service is I
have an impact with the reports
and in Louisiana where where
where the high water both in.
You you know what service levels
have an impact so I think the
secretary of the department of
probably reflect more on on how
that impacts
New Mexico payment but
ultimately I I think anyone
payment engineer would point out
that regardless of the volume or
the weather or the sub basically
you're dealing with are you can
have good roads but obviously
each of those factors are going
to affect the type of work you
need to do in the type of
investment that's necessary.
Okay thank you madam chair.
Thank you Representative next we
have Representative Crowder.
Thank you madam chair and I
agree with a lot of your
comments the one service your
you use was at the age of the
roads in and we have several of
our our smaller state highways
that are getting a lot of H.
John we've got three four my
district that that three eleven
a two forty five and in the one
going out to our airport the
those roads are just old.
it's it's a difficult to take
care of the smaller ones that
don't have a lot of traffic but
yet there state road so.
Might might reside I raised my
hand was I would love to have
the.
A paper document of of some of
the data and statistics that
you're giving us it's great
staff but all school and and I
need something I could collar
with a highlighter in the think
about for a little while I
retain it longer I do that so
can you find the the staff with
the document that we can sit
down and go through.
Certainly what after this
presentation all calls and Mario
it my actual comments which
include a link to the material
that I referenced are on on what
states are doing so you can go
directly to the site and and
explore that and then also to
our actual report itself that
was released last week so you'll
have all that material up and of
course I'm always happy to to
take questions individually or
emails.
Thank you very much appreciate
that it and madam chair possible
maybe Mario could print one copy
and delivered to the room to all
one for that all god that it's
up there and help them out.
I would appreciate it thank you
for your thank you
Representative Crowder will do
we do have of one more quote we
have a question Representative
Madrid.
Thank you madam chair thank you
for all Rocky for presenting
this to us madam chair that is
wrong the state thank you for
allowing us to have this report
I hope you get in the central
idea of how we are values are
how we are viewed in the whole
perspective of our of the
country and at the same token I
think it's it's just it's
important that we understand
that this report is generated by
associated contractors of New
Mexico and and I want to shout
out to Jim Garcia for everything
he's done for us in years past
and up to the state now and
continue to support because they
are probably our number one
contract to the does the roads
in our state and supports New
Mexico duty and I think the
courage of funeral I do get down
there and see the facility in
Albuquerque you'll see the
apprenticeship program and
everything it does to help
support the state of New Mexico
on our roads that being said I
wanna of and by saying that this
is a perspective of what we have
as as a representative Crowder
indicated there's a lot of roads
that are just old the fact of
the matter is a rather than
repairing a we need to replace
and while we're looking at
replacing roads of that's the
the essence of our state in
hoping to build more corridors
to do so support infrastructure.
One level I will say yes we're
we're ready to go senator in the
and the strip report for the
worst roads but I also said the
other day in a in a press
conference at that also shows
the viability of our state and
its potential for growth in the
way we do things and I think it
makes our state that much for a
potential ready for things to
come so I hope you enjoyed it
madam chair and hope you take
time to get down there and see
the the support system again
thank you of a socially
contractors of New Mexico we
appreciate you.
Well
you know in in an answer to that
what I think both to
representatives of pointed out
with with older roads at that is
a real issue a lot of research
recently at a perfectly in in
state report done by the
National Academy of sciences
just found there was a
diminishing return on a roadway
if eventually you didn't get to
the sub bases that that and that
the sport to structure the
centrally up a simple repaving
that might have lasted ten years
now going in the last eight one
day one last five or six years
and so it's really a life cycle
cost issue I I think the
secretary presentation I heard
earlier reflects that if you
could make the investments in a
timely fashion you save money
over the long run.
Thank you Mr Moriarty and more
Eddie and spend and yeah that
was one of the comments that I I
was going to make it was
specifically around that that
eight I think many times we do
fall into the pattern of just
repairing without really making
those investments and I think in
the long term it it really is a
disservice especially with what
Representative Crowder mentioned
earlier around even just some of
these roads that we don't
necessarily
Of drive as often
Utilized and so I think that's
that's right on I did want to
just make mention part of the
and I think someone already
mentioned this and might have
been Representative Powdrell
Culbert around the fatalities
that even though
there was a significant
reduction in in in driving over
the course of twenty twenty and
the pandemic that the number of
fatalities that exists that that
existed did really go up
significantly and can you be can
you share a little bit about
what types of I mean how what
were some of the the findings
around that in terms of was it
mostly in urban areas was eight
just sort of some idea of how
that
What was the the result of of
the of that certainly and in the
report itself reflected safety
data from two thousand fifteen
to two thousand nineteen now you
have based on what what we've
been seeing in the numbers I
don't have a New Mexico number
for twenty twenty you you're
right that overall fatalities it
did not drop in in in in in
concert with the drop in travel
and so you know we anticipate
once all the data is pulled
together for twenty twenty will
see finality is not only going
up but certainly the traffic
fatality rate for a hundred
million miles of travel which is
the standard will have gone up
significantly now you know what
we see across the country is is
certainly two lane roads rural
roads are are continue to be a
huge challenge in New Mexico and
across the country and a lot of
states we're working the and and
and and you know maybe to New
Mexico which I just haven't you
you know as the department about
that but but states are are
certainly targeting are trying
to to do again cost effective
safety programs instead of just
add a few spots where there were
a lot of crashes but more
systematically across the state.
At the urban level certainly
that's where the majority of
bike and pedestrian traffic
fatalities are occurring with us
catalysts tend to be R. the end
of the majority of of you know
not Motors fidelity's but again.
It the you know and and that may
partly be a reflection of of
more pedestrian and bicycling
occurring which is obviously
very positive so so that is
certainly I think gaining more
attention appropriately.
As part of the improvements that
are being made yes this is
mutually exclusive you know
you're you have growing freight
you have bottlenecks that need
to be addressed but you also
need to improve the rural system
you order some of the projects
that that we look at we're
certainly addressing rural
transportation adding passing
lanes in some places all of
those would be helpful for
safety and and at the urban
level it largely as is looking
at design intersection issues
and and certainly bike and
pedestrian.
Well thank you so much Mr
Moretti already we appreciate
your time and your presentation
and we will certainly get that
link out to you all
for further research and and
noting out if this is something
that is incredibly important to
you and so I appreciate your
time and for the committee
members I know that there are
several Senate bills that are
making their way to order in our
direction so at this point we
have a house memorial on
Thursday that we will here and
then I think by then we will
I'll also add maybe one or two
more Senate bills for Thursday's
hearing so if there's any
questions between now and then
please feel free to reach out
otherwise we will see you all on
Thursday bright and early.
Have a good one we'll see on the
floor thank I think you really.
