House Bill three is the
transportation bill
and if folks were here on
Tuesday
House Bill three.
We did an overall
overview and we let folks know
that there is a technical
committee that is part of that
process and so will describe
that there but before we begin
the most important thing is we
need to do roll call so
Teresa if you can go ahead and
start that I'd appreciate it.
Rubio some of those little
needed but here we go.
Representative Crowder.
Representative Garrett.
Here.
Representative Harper.
Here.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
Representative group.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero.
Your.
Garcia.
Rubio.
Here.
We have a quorum.
And I know that some legislators
right now are presenting in
other committees so folks will
be coming back and forth so just
for folks to know that that we
are in the thick of it here in
the this this thirty day session
so a lot of of going back and
forth so we're gonna go ahead
and start
with house bill three
it's there are there and and
will that we presented the
overview on Tuesday there is an
amendment this morning to
provide us with on the
consideration from of the
technical committee who is made
up of the department of finance
legislative finance committee of
council and of course our
analyst luncheon so I will go
ahead and and handed over to
Lynch and to provide us with
updates on this ammendment and
and I'll ask for someone to move
that amendment at some point
this morning but mention if you
can go ahead and and get
started.
Okay thank you madam chair good
morning members of the committee
I am.
We're discussing house bill
three and then it this morning.
which we already heard.
Just like madam chair thank you
the original bill which was a
recommendation made thank you
LFC.
The bill three amendment the
transportation appropriation act
you madam chair the financial co
who in the early and two
additional.
Is being worked in the.
So this is in a consensus
recommendation paycheck through.
And we met twice this time due
to time constraints I know
everything has a very I think
that the money Medway and came
to a consensus.
Well I'm going to report you
there are concerns that you're.
The number one we added in
hello.
In three thanks to the help all
out thank you
I thank you okay.
If you haven't already open we
can give you some.
Go ahead and and do that.
It's it's available right now go
ahead yes.
Do I.
Madam chair from.
Sorry to interrupt but I can't
find where I have a copy of the
amendment.
It.
Has the amendment met been sent
out to everybody and I'm in my
just missed because a lot of
can't find it.
Yes it was it should be in your
share file
Let me.
Sure if you can describe what it
looks like some people are
looking for the regular
amendment form.
Right give me a second do you
have it open luncheon.
Right now
and we see the.
A copy of from that yet.
Your hard copy for now.
So not not so what what they're
looking for is the actual
amendment
That was emailed out.
Give us give us a second
Representative.
You
find it.
I do apologize on that
Working with the rest of my.
Republican members.
Representative Harper and
Crowder did you all receive the
amendment.
The madam chair Mister senator I
have not seen it.
I have the spreadsheets madam
chair but not the actual manta.
Okay thank you all there must
have been some technical issue
than with that let me
go ahead and find out what
happened
we can go ahead and move on to
the next item in the meantime
and lunch and if you could
please figure out what happened
with that amendment that.
All the members I had a target
of that review it yeah
Senator now okay
still Representative Chandler is
next with house bill and the
resolution one Representative
Pettigrew thanks for pointing
that out I appreciate it.
C..
I am going to promote our
Representative Chandler.
House joint resolution
Actually.
C..
Madam chair.
Yes Representative could we
please roll the bill.
Sure Representative
Let me all yes I will call you
shortly.
I'm.
Representative Garrett are you
ready for here you wanted
discussion on this so here we
go.
Thank you so much Madam
chairwoman I'm thrilled nervous
and thrilled I'm.
Members of the committee and and
madam chair woman I I'm I'm
looking forward to a robust
discussion on house bill fifty
five I already know that
amendments are needed but what I
love about the transportation
committee is that we genuinely
discussed are built issues and
needs so I'm looking forward to
that discussion today I thought
of rolling over but I felt like
if it needs are more work that
the people in this committee
many put who have been active in
this sort of project who's seen
previous bills for those of you
been here for several years
that this would be really
helpful to really look at so I
just want to make a few remarks
before you talk about the bill
it's deeply appropriate and and
Representative Pettigrew again
thanks for
slide in this with the speaker
to move it to this committee
this is really appropriate for
this committee to discuss that
house bill fifty five.
Is the public private
partnership act and sometimes we
nickname as peace three because
there's a three piece all the
sponsors of this bill have been
chairs or members of the
transportation committee for
many years and have worked on
many of them have worked on
previous versions of the bill
over the last decade I'm co
sponsors Patricia Lundstrom sure
Lundstrom Representative Brown
Representative of how drill
Culbert and senator Bobby
Gonzales our current Sanchez.
Excuse me that now Smith and
it's coming out in my room.
I'm in the past Representative
Jim Trujillo Senator Padilla
senator Clemente Sanchez has
been involved in I also want to
thank during the interim
committee I'm The New Mexico
bioscience Authority and others
presented some really valuable
information.
So I want to thank all those
people I'm some people don't
realize that in twenty nineteen
there are two versions presented
house bill two eighty six which
not so amended that they made a
new bill House Bill five thirty
four yes passed the house
unanimously sixty ported nothing
it received a do pass then and
Senate judiciary but it failed
to pass the Senate so I'm it has
some success I'm and this year I
truly believe it's going to get
done I think it's important to
try to get it done this year and
get it done well because we
millions of dollars of federal
infrastructure money coming in
and of president Biden himself
has listed our P. three
partnerships as a way to do some
of this work I think that well
written and slightly fixed from
what we have in front of us that
a public private partnership act
will really enable our
communities to use this
mechanism to build out our
infrastructure of this bill
particularly talks about roads
and broadband but some of the
analyst comment that we should
be expanded in future
legislation which I think it's
true we've received some really
important feedback from our
analysts are agencies in our own
analysts so I'm I'm really
looking forward to robust
discussion I want to add one
more thing why this is so
important to me from two
thousand three to two thousand
and six my husband me taught
English in rural Karia
conversational which is South
Korea you know that's over
sixteen years ago one of my
assignments was to work in a
rural middle school.
I drove through rice fields to
get there they had ceiling
mounted projectors internet
which are class used to talk to
losses in the United States I
came back to take care of my
elderly mother in Pasadena
California no internet this is
ten minutes from cal tech no
internet everything plugged in
no capacity I'm so when we
worked with our team worked on
house bill two and the connect
New Mexico act last year I'm and
I found out that it was like
over ninety four percent
connected I researched how how
did you get connected they
actually use public private
partnerships that was the
vehicle that help them to speed
the process so that's why I took
on this bill but again I I feel
like this bill belongs to the
whole committee I also want to
acknowledge the work of all the
analyst and in related down some
of the things.
So to go to the bill again
I am not the number one expert
on three keys I'm learning so
much some of you know more than
me it's just been exciting to
find out more about this I I
want to add the thirty nine
states the district of Columbia
and Puerto Rico have some
enabling laws for public
private partnership so this
isn't new in terms of states I'm
so.
Fifty five I hope you have it in
front of you or or online I'm
just gonna go through it a
little bit I'm it affects the
public private partnership it
allows public partners which it
defines to ensure into a public
private partnership agreements
that defines what a private
partner is it creates the public
private partnership board it
creates the public private
partnership project fund it
talks about exemptions to
procurement which is an area
that needs a little more work it
authorizes grants loans and
bonds and it provides the powers
and duties and so as you go
through it I'm and as you read
what analysts have said I'm.
There are some questions I'm.
How this interacts with Indian
nations tribes and pueblos I'm
on page three it talks about the
public private partnership
agreements what kind of approval
requirements distractions how
it's publicized.
I'm who knew that the New Mexico
press association would come to
me yesterday with amendments to
how it's publicized but yes that
happened I'm it talks about the
fact that I page for that you
have to under the public entity
has to under take a cost benefit
analysis versus using a P. three
it's not just boom you jump into
a public private partnership you
need to
figure out is that the best way
and there's many ways to do that
I'm there has to be public
hearings people have a chance to
respond
For example on page I do it
explains public private
partnership has to define
clearly the roles and
responsibilities of public
partners and private partners
provide clawback recapture
provisions that protect the
public investment this is why
some people are opposed to the
three agreements because they're
very concerned that our
taxpayers are gonna get ripped
off and so there has to be
stringent contractual agreements
about how all the many works how
the responsibilities work other
people are concerned that
private companies and private
entities will get their fair
share so the contractual part is
very very very important private
partners you may need to find
their guarantees or letters of
credit you have to make sure
that when they come to the
agreement they actually can
carry it out.
I want to just look at a few
more things there is a public
private partnership board
created the specific members are
named I'm I noted you know what
I'm excuse me to second you
called
Mark Edwards and tell them to
come the drafter.
He needs to be invited in as a
whole.
Well I yeah he's actually
attending out okay when the
drafter and me went with market
rates is the drafter and you'll
make a statement about what that
means we realized that because
we worked off of that.
House Bill five thirty four at
that time there was no office of
broadband access and expansion
so I'm.
Either they do it person or that
person that position needs to be
added our public members are
appointed.
For the board of their powers
are identified.
on section six page ten the
duties of the New Mexico finance
authority or
Outlined the administer the
public private partnership fund.
Which is established in section
seven.
And if you know each of the FIR
there's
and our committee analyst report
I'm there are some amendments
that needed to be added there.
I'm moving right along.
The section eight talks about
the applicability of certain
other laws including the public
works minimum wage
subcontractors your practices
act public point of tennis and
training act we did have this
reviewed by us several of our
labor organizations because it's
it's vital that everybody
involved working in a public
private.
The partnership agreement
their rights are fully honored.
I'm.
Section ten talks about
refunding bond forty and again
there's a statement are from
analysts say about.
Adding that then.
What were
Exciting I I promised excitement
we have some excitement so
that's all I'm going to say
there are some issues that
despite the similarity to the
bill that passed in twenty
nineteen need to be addressed so
I including my presentation I
just want to say that I believe
that it's time to.
Past this enabling legislation
however.
Legislation that we passed has
to address all the concerns that
have been identified and any
concerns that the committee
members may bring up it has to
be done right
port we shouldn't do it but I I
feel like because of the federal
funds and the specific knowledge
of the role of public private
partnerships I feel that this is
truly a mechanism that can
enable us to make our
infrastructure development
speeded up and in the proper
situations this is a mechanism
it's one mechanism it's not for
everything but it's a mechanism
I also want to say one more
thing want one person to read
the bill said well this bill is
just going to and a name to
certain company this is going to
give them a free ride no nobody
gets a free ride I think that
when we look at that if we look
at broadband in the private ISPs
I think this is a way for local
communities and counties and
some of our smaller ISPs to work
together that's an example I
have where I think this would be
a mix of the powerful and
effective mechanism in the right
situation so with that I'll I
will in my comments.
And this has are dropped your
market words been moving in.
Yet promoted him so at on there
and they have to actually hit
okay so I'm not sure.
If.
Eight that.
He doesn't.
And these anymore.
Okay if he appears he is he's
not for or against the bill but
you just here because of.
That we're already working on
amendments and things like that
so thank you madam chair and
thank you committee members.
Thank you Representative before
we move forward I did want to
let folks know that the
amendment for house bill three
is uploaded on your share file
so what we can have that
discussion shortly
but are there any questions
right now on that issue on on on
this bill presented by
Representative Garrett.
Madam chair at that.
Pardon the interruption again I
didn't know if you're going.
Ask for for comments from the
public first of all before you
went to committee or not.
That's that's fine but if you
can raise your hands to for on
your on your
If you if you plan to speak that
would be great so attendees for
folks who are in attendance if
you could raise your hand if
you're here to speak in
opposition or in support of
Representative Garrett is
legislation
I'll give you a few seconds for
folks to do that right now.
We'll go ahead and start with
Catherine Catherine if you can
go ahead and speak.
Madam chair representative Gary
and members of the committee my
name is Katherine Nicolau I am a
registered lobbyist and external
affairs chair for state grid
winds communications when does a
sixteen year old New Mexico
owned and operated rural
broadband provider serving the
Navajo Nation other rural parts
of our beautiful state we stand
in support of house bill fifty
five he could wind has had the
opportunity to strike broadband
partnerships with several towns
and counties passage of this
bill would open up a great
opportunity for local and rural
providers.
Thank you.
Thank you Catherine next we have
JD Bullington.
Thank you madam chair can you
hear me.
Yes we can hear you thank you
this is JD Bullington I'm
representing the greater
Albuquerque chamber of commerce
supports house bill fifty five
public private partnerships
offer taxpayers the best of both
worlds the reddit readily
available resources a state
government and the speed and
efficiency of the private sector
we know our broadband
infrastructure is lacking at the
time we depend on it more than
ever we know our roads and
highways are in disrepair from
all the years we couldn't afford
improvements this year's on
president state revenues offer
us the perfect opportunity to
make real lasting investments in
these important areas of
infrastructure and we should do
that expeditiously with the help
of our private businesses
through public private
partnerships the greater out of
tricky chamber of commerce
supports this legislation as
does the American institute of
architects of New Mexico import
both organizations urged the
committee to get this to do past
thank you.
Thank you JT next we have ten
Baker.
All.
Thank you madam chair and
members of the this panel a
specially joy Garrett for
bringing this bill forward I
Representative The New Mexico
democratic veterans caucus and
the American veterans for equal
rights we stand in support of
this bill is it will help us get
broadband reached out to the
people who are far flung in the
state we wouldn't be on this
call we didn't have broadband
thank you.
Thank you pen
next we have Carter Bundy.
Thank you thank you madam chair
members of the committee Carter
Bundy with us we're usually
fairly skeptical of peach trees
because of some of the issues
that are that Representative
Garrett brought up taxpayers too
often get fleeced and a lot of
the time it's really just an
opportunity to privatize
government I can't thank you
this sponsor and chair woman
Lundstrom enough for reaching
out to us to to seek input on
how to make this a better bill
chairwoman Lundstrom talk to us
about this for several years and
Representative Garrett has been
terrific in reaching out there
are differences in this bill and
we think this is a good bill the
first is that it keeps the
operations and maintenance on
the transportation side in the
public sector and that's
incredibly important to keep
good jobs that should be done in
the public sector the second
thing is you know the public and
private sectors really have
different strengths and
broadband is not something that
is a strong from the state is
not in really something the
state does this is a perfect
example of an opportunity for a
good P. three and we have always
told P. three advocates bring us
a P. three to make sense and we
will support it I think this
fall squarely into that category
where we have the opportunity to
expand broadband and economic
opportunity to every part of the
state so we want to thank
chairman Lundstrom and
Representative Garrett for
reaching out we want to thank
them for their thoughtfulness
and thoroughness in drafting
this bill and we stand in
support of H. P. fifty five
thank you.
Thank you Carter next we have
the David Norton.
Hello my name is David Norman
I'm the CEO of task you value.
We like this bill is important
and we support.
Currently we are working on a
prototype project exempt
exemplifies the essence of the
public private partnerships act.
The project is known as the task
reason clean energy
transportation recreation court
there are four components of the
clean energy park which runs and
pass the test the value the
first component is zero emission
mass transit transportation
systems which operate on one
hundred percent daytime solar
the second component access the
outdoors are also provided by
has played lanes upgraded
trailheads in campgrounds.
The third point watershed
management including clean water
enhancements and wildfire
prevention in the fourth of on
improve roadway roadways
throughout the car or.
Partners in this clean energy
card or include that have tested
those task you value yes County.
The US Forest Service.
As well the other recreation
division travel it the nature
Conservancy.
Our illustrious.
This is a hundred fifty million
dollar investment with
approximately twenty percent
private investment match we are
ready to go we struggle to find
a path forward there is no clear
public private funding
mechanism.
We hope you take action on this
important bill.
Thank you David next we have
Larry current.
Thank you madam chair members of
the committee Larry heard and
and and and the pairing fronte
today's general counsel
registered lobbyists for the Rio
metro regional transit district
so real metro is tasked with not
only providing transportation
Bernalillo Sandoval influence
account as we we also operates
New Mexico rail runner express
and so you for some
presentations and in previous
sessions about the rail runner
and so when Representative
Garrett north visited about this
bill.
I talked about how the
opportunity for a P. three for
the rail runner is is a really
good example of how this could
be implemented we are as a as a
political subdivisions state
we're actually prohibited based
upon the agreement when the
state of New Mexico bot the rail
line necessary to run the rail
runner from actually operating
the rail runner so we have to go
out to bid every eight years to
get a contractor to operate the
rail runner what the P. three
would do is a couple of things
that would allow us to extend
the term of that contract so we
can get a better rate by by
having stability for that
contractor and also we would be
able to include in that in our
operations contract maintenance
and upgrades and potential
upgrades for the rail runner and
another good example is if
you'll recall we just have to
spend about fifty five million
dollars for to implement
positive train control which
includes an additional five
million annual cost that this is
the kind of project fund on
transportation we're we're P.
three you would serve the
taxpayers well and the state of
New Mexico because we could have
we can not only have savings in
our operations but we we could
also improve the court or in a
line item in the ways that you
all talk to me about is how do
we get how do we get to Santa Fe
faster and how do we improve
service and so we appreciate the
the discussion and hope that
this version of Petri does get
implemented unfortunately we
just went out to bid and have
are under a new contract but who
knows maybe in a couple years we
could try a P. three and replace
that that regular procurement
thank you madam chair.
Thank you Larry.
Next we have Jennifer Weber.
Yes good morning chair Rubio
members of the committee my name
is Jennifer Weber and I am here
representing the New Mexico
chamber of commerce in support
of house bill fifty five the
public private partnership back.
In twenty twenty one the chamber
published dry The New Mexico's
future and economic competitive
analysis of the state and an
action plan to jumpstart our
economy post pandemic the four
key factors we found in our
study that New Mexico must do to
build a more equitable and
diverse economy include
improving our business climate
retaining and growing our
workforce building out our
infrastructure and investing in
our innovation ecosystem house
bill fifty five and the
development of public private
partnerships is a key elements
to address the New Mexico the
infrastructure needs the bill as
well drafted will work to build
capacity in local and regional
governments while creating
safeguards to protect the public
interest as well as make
important and necessary
adjustments to the state
procurement code to allow for
long term capital investments H.
P. fifty five is a key component
to making New Mexico more
attractive to investment and job
creation we urge your support
thank you.
Thank you Jennifer.
Next we have Cameron Graham from
a a RP.
Sorry.
Madam chair members of the
committee my name is Cameron
Graham I'm a volunteer advocate
with a a RP New Mexico A. R. P.
New Mexico stands in support of
this bill and we want to thank
the sponsors for bring it
forward.
Improving broadband access is a
very high priority for a a RP
New Mexico and A. A. R. P. E.
nation wide the concept of
private public partnerships as
one means of enhancing the
availability of broadband access
is one more means of achieving
that goal and as I said we
support the bill thank you very
much for your time.
Thank you Cameron.
We have shatter can broke from
see that the way.
My apologies we have a zone that
we share this is for non to roam
on and the good morning madam
chairwoman and members of the
committee again my name is for
non Romano I'm a representative
of the communication workers of
America we strongly support
legislation which improves and
expands the availability of
broadband to New Mexicans and
appreciate that you as
legislators are making hundreds
of millions of dollars public
public dollars available for
those purposes H. B. fifty five
would provide additional
opportunity and we support the
general intent however we
strongly advocate that the
addition of measures to be added
to the bill would protect the
workforce installing of the
broadband expansion and the
public investment as to ensuring
there be clear an adequate
oversight and accountability for
the maintenance of the projects
completed the the use of
people's investment use of
public funds to that end we
suggested language for such
goals to lead sponsor of HB
fifty five we want to extend
those amendments requests to you
as well as for deliberation on
the merits of this legislation
please consider the
communication workers of America
to be partner in this expansion
our workers know their jobs and
know how the proper broadband
installation requirements we're
willing to work with you and
your staff to create the best
bill possible have any questions
we are available thank you madam
chair and members of the
committee.
Thank you.
One
I believe that is all for folks
on public comment.
so all move on to the council
councillors representatives
first we have Representative
Crowder.
Thank you madam chair the.
Appreciate you let me just ask
you questions but my questions
are quick and simple I believe
of the the sponsor madam chair
can you tell me what the two oh
two number is on this bill so
that I make sure I'm looking at
the right copy please.
Yeah.
The two oh two is two two one
four nine nine point three.
Wonderful thank you madam chair
I I just wanna make sure I had a
couple circumstances where I
study a bill it's one so want to
make sure as I understand your
bill madam chair and
Representative Garrett.
It is structured so that right
now it's dealing with
transportation and broadband but
with additional legislation it
could be amended to include or
broaden the scope to other
possibilities is that correct
that is correct that is correct.
I didn't have time to add it
there's a great handout that I
will have added to the share
files from the bioscience
Authority at UNM that list a lot
of those possibilities because
already the New Mexico
bioscience Authority has a
capacity to do private.
Public private partnerships in
that field so yes this this
specific build starts with
transportation broadband okay.
Appreciate that and and it's
good to know that there some
protection in there that the
only way it can be expanded is
through the legislative body
looking at this through
legislation so that's a that's
providing some protection I
appreciate that I also noticed
that the LFC has recommended a
delay repeal in order to bring
this back for a review.
Is there a proposed amendments
to
But a five year delayed repeal
on there so that it can be
reviewed by the legislature.
I'm Madam chairwoman and
Representative Crowder I learned
about it delayed repeal last
night when she when I read it
and it and it sounds like a very
practical thing to add
that's what I'm not sure if
market would start in but we've
already opened the file frankly
for amendments like that.
So yes we don't have it now but
yes that's something we'll
prepare okay so madam chair and
and Representative Garrett
understand that as it I don't
know where it goes from Riyadh
and look to see where this bill
goes probably to appropriations
I'm not sure but
I'm assuming you'll put a sunset
clause or delayed repeal I'm
okay I'll take your word for
appreciate that yes and also
start interrupt about market
we're is on he's on as a
panelists now so if there's any
direct technical questions he's
he's on now.
Sheriff mark would like to
comment on the sunset or delayed
repeal that would be fine with
me.
Madam chair can you hear me.
Yes we can hear you.
Madam chair Representative
Crowder
I'm staff I don't take a
position on steals a repeals but
we can.
I'm glad to do that amendment
requests.
So.
And madam chair Representative
Crowder we we will obviously
will not obviously but we will
be requesting.
Thank you Representative rejects
a madam chair my final question
has to do with the proprietary
information of the private
partner.
I noticed there's a great deal
of language in this bill
protecting that are.
Is there any that.
Is there any pushback on on that
protection provided to the
private partner.
I'm madam chair woman in
Representative Crowder I'm some
if if the public entity is
running.
the project then a certain
amount of propriety information
might have to be given in order
to carry that out but that would
be the only circumstance that it
would be
share only at the if it had to
be shared for the public partner
if if the contract calls for the
public partner to run it and
they need that information would
have to be given I think that's
in there if it's not I think it
was identified in one of the now
sees thank you the Madam chair
representative Derek I I believe
the language it as I understand
it says that it it may provide
proprietary the protection and I
would ask that maybe have the
mark look at it and see if we
need to insert the word shall I
know if I was a private investor
going into a business I would
want my proprietary information
protected and I don't know
whether the word may or shall as
appropriate but I would ask that
you guys look at that please.
And that's all my questions
madam chair thank you madam
chairman and representative
thank you for pointing those
things out.
Thank you Representative Crowder
next we have Representative
Harper.
Thank you madam chair.
Representative Garrett said
great to see you this morning
I.
I guess I'm I'm really.
I'm pleased to see this
legislation I'm supportive I
have a few questions I wanna
make sure that we get it right.
we've obviously been.
Looking at proposals like this
for the last all I don't know
for five years
and I know there is I believe
it's thirty three other states
right now have some form of a
public private partnership so we
can learn from them
and and I agree with you know
some of the comments that were
made by the.
Attendees that we want to.
Protect both sides of the
equation right
the very first bill I passed was
a mandatory clawback provision
for Leda funds.
At at natural gas I'm very
pleased to hear that there are
you know some clawbacks in here
is you want to protect the the
taxpayer we have some pretty
high profile.
We are projects that and not
being complete boondoggles and
the taxpayer was left holding
the bag.
I'm used for up for enrollment
madam chair and Representative
Garrett just talk about the the
clawback kind of
How how we it's structured and
and
You know your thoughts on that.
What is that what section is
the.
I'm not sure I market when I was
reading it here.
And madam chair in
Representative Harper you
probably know more about
politics than me just.
Yeah I'm I'm not gonna.
Yeah I I'm not gonna waste the.
Committee's time trying to work
through this and find it on the
fly my apologies for not marking
it as I was reading it but I I
just want to say I really
appreciate.
That we're really trying to take
care of both sides of that coin
that we're looking to protect
the taxpayer.
And then on the other side of
the coin you know the the the
private business right
Representative Crowder already
brought up you know protecting
intellectual property you know
that's.
One of the three key things you
need to be a successful
businesses intellectual property
assessed property acted.
That business is gonna fail and
so we want to make sure that
they have that assurance.
so that they will go ahead and
engage in this and this
partnership is a great way to to
leverage taxpayer dollars to.
Partner with the.
Private business off.
The
couple of last questions I have
madam chair representative.
Gareth not going through the FY
are there a lot of great
suggestions in here from
different organizations
I I really.
I'm curious about
MFA I think they're they're the
right people to administer this
they've got lots of experience
doing similar things.
They mention that
There's no Steve money to really
get this going and I think they
say they could.
Around five hundred thousand
would be helpful.
Yeah there is based on the FIR.
start up costs and operating
costs are about five hundred K.
a year.
all of you talk with.
MFA recently about
you know potentially helping
with some of that start up cost
or ceding some of the the money
for the.
the bonds.
Madam chair woman and and
Representative I'll wait that is
one of our follow up things to
do after today just so you're
now.
That's perfect that's great
thank you I'm happy to hear
that.
I think they had some very
reasonable requests that you
know a special soccer funding
situation I think would not be.
To challenging.
I think madam chair that are we
with that
I'll just say I think.
This is a great mechanism for
for broadband for for roads and
infrastructure I really like
this this kind of mechanism and
services other states have done
it and if we can learn from them
and work with everyone at the
table to make sure that both
sides of the equation or
contractually taken care of.
I think this is a good idea.
so thank you madam chair thank
you Representative.
Thank you madam chair thank you
Representative Harper.
Thank you Representative Harper
next we have Representative
Pettigrew.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Representative Garrett for
bringing this legislation.
Probably is the only member in
the house for the Senate to to
actually use written legislation
like this in other states and
use use public private
partnerships in the past.
I'm very familiar with these
Representative Garrett I a.
We appreciate the fact that
you're working on some
amendments on this right away
systematic Starmer what is we're
I think those should be.
I would be happy to meet with
you offline and talk about those
specific things
I see this is an advantage we're
we're the duties cease all right
thing that we can use us and and
several federal funds along a
lot quicker and so like you said
they're there are some things
inside the bills are.
I'm.
I feel very strongly that need
to be fixed but
I will Representative Garrett if
you're willing to work with that
on on the outside before we get
to the house for.
Do that with you.
Representative Madam chair
representative right I hope that
you would say something like
that I'm glad it's in this
committee
and I value that insight and
lived experience you have
because I know that you'll
contribute something
relevant and helpful so thank
you and we'll set up a meeting
after this that sounds that
sounds wonderful the other side
of the.
Of this
I think my only other notes is
is just to let you know because
of what I do for a living I will
be upstanding from the boat but
I am glad that we got through
here we got to have the
conversations.
Thank you very much madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Pettigrew next we have
Representative role metal.
Thank you madam chair the
morning Representative Garrett
So couple of my questions have
been covered by Representative
Harper in his line of
questioning.
But on page seven line three and
we heard this from testimony
from the audience that
operations and maintenance
Is in the public sector for
roads I'm just wondering so if
we have this public private
partnership for any sort of
construction
on the true the the maintenance
and the operation of that stays
within the private sector
exclusively.
Can you just say that again
Madam chair representative for
on page seven lying.
Line three.
Okay the double check my work as
well.
You yes.
Madam chair representative
Romero for this bill applying to
transportation and broadband it
does provide that the operations
and maintenance for public
project except broadband is
performed by the public partners
so in a road situation that
means that the D. O. T. would
actually provide the operations
and maintenance of our roads for
example.
And and thank you for that and
so that is that does not include
any of the pod broadband
infrastructure that correct
no remember each project has to
have its own contract.
So in studying
I uploaded an article on
broadband and public private
partnerships to the shared file.
Thank you for doing that it
explains several dozen case
studies where different models
have been used in different
governments or community
projects.
Cool thank you for that madam
chair and representative Karen
You're you're still the teacher
assigning homework so I
appreciate that and I'll be sure
to do that before we meet again
so in this operations and
maintenance of the public
project again if we have like a
public private partnership for
building some sort of road from
I don't know.
I will give an example
but if we have this road that's
built in this public private
partnership the public is paying
for all the operations and
maintenance on how do we assure
in the same spirit all of making
this equitable that the public
is able to have enough money in
order to provide to the
operations and the maintenance
of these roads because I I do
think it's good that we have
this I'm just a little afraid of
of we end up in a situation I
think we're we're talking about
those like this where we don't
have enough funding in
government in order to provide
for the upkeep of such
infrastructure.
Madam chair woman and and
Representative Romero I don't
know I can fully
answer that question but I did
send the bill
to and M. D. O. T. who.
I did not find a problem with
that and they're the ones that
would actually fund it.
Let's see.
This is let's see we find it.
Their comments.
Let's see.
They would say this is what they
said and I can I can get
permission from duty to upload
it to they said if there was
implemented and M. D. O. T.
would consider new summer peach
tree project as sources of
private funding when the value
waiting available project
delivery methods and timelines
it would also consider P. three
projects right here in.
Once developed by the the P.
three board and NMFA in the
development of or improvements
to transportation facility or
infrastructure projects so again
I'm they would have to evaluate
if this was the appropriate
and best method of delivering a
project it's it's not like now
all roads are going to be P.
three they would have to
evaluate if it fit into their
budget and their criteria that
that's the best I can say.
Madam chair representative
Garrett I I appreciate that
answer in the a yes I could
follow up with with in India T.
in the secretary and staff there
to follow up on it because I I
appreciate that they have an
answer for that I just I'm just
wondering then how that might be
different from the way we do
projects now certainly like the
beginning in the impact just to
get an infrastructure project
done but then in the future when
it comes to maintenance and the
operation side then are we
looking at you know this back
and forth of the department
coming to us for additional
funding to keep these need this
new infrastructure in this sort
of deal and I do see the
secretary.
Women can secretary Santa
speaking sure secretary if you
if you can come on if you have
sure thank you madam chair and
representative Romero and
Garrett
yeah I think you know we have
done P. threes before and we're
in the middle of a few right now
and one of the things that we
really look at is can we do the
operation and maintenance if we
do enter into an agreement with
a private entity and so we would
prefer that in all cases DOT
does operate and maintain
whatever facility is built on so
that's part of our process now
and we take that into
consideration if we're going to
do business with somebody in a
pre in a public private
partnership so I think that's
the right way to go I think
that's the right provision in
the bill that's the way that we
would prefer and we would enter
into a P. three agreement unless
we're able to operating maintain
that and have budget for that.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Secretary for that I need to
do so Mr secretary if I may you
mentioned that that you do these
now so so how is this still
different I understand that
there's a creation of counseling
to provide
what might be the advantage of
us passing this bill yes.
B. threes in your department are
already engaged in this
activity.
I think that the bill opens up
more maybe complicated.
P. three transactions and so
just for example right now one
P. three that was complete was
interchange on New Mexico five
ninety nine where private
developer wanted to put in
interchange there they paid for
everything it was just strictly
a will pay for it if you
maintain it kind of transactions
that was pretty straight forward
there's nothing that prevents us
from doing that I think if this
bill were to pass we would
number one I think it'll be more
standardized and formalized but
then we could all probably enter
into a more complicated
situations rather than just
straight will pay for this if
you do that and I think that's
what this bill is trying to do
is set up a structure so that
these kind of deals in these
kinds of things are done a more
consistently across the board.
And madam chair Mr Secretary on.
I mean in in that's honestly a
bit of my concern and hesitation
with the expansion of P. three
projects this is I mean you just
said that opening it up to more
complex
projects and and I am really
hesitant to make the oversight
in the Cooper acts for such
projects and the board in the
way that or that the council I
think it's called within the
bill for board how it's
structured in making sure that.
These projects all our all our.
Clear that there's added and
that the public particularly
especially when we're going to
be
asking the taxpayers to operate
and maintain such infrastructure
are are properly taking care of
things and so that's a little
bit of my hesitation so I look
forward to to the amendments and
the work that you all are are
are proposing to bring forward
on in in relation to these but
thank you madam chair thank you
Mr secretary and thank you
Representative Garrett.
One strong.
Thank you madam chair I do
apologize for jumping in and out
I'm actually putting a bill on
right now in the house energy
committee have their own
testimony sorry I've got a
moment now to to speak on behalf
and in favor of this bill.
I am a co sponsor to this bill
and it is incredibly important
bill.
Particularly now that we are
going to say infrastructure
dollars coming into the state of
New Mexico we do have the
ability to participate in a
private public partnership
initiative and what I mean by
that is that they're happening
anyway but there's not an
authorization for it you see it
often particularly with charter
schools charter schools are
generally governed by nonprofit
boards but when you look at how
their construction of their
facilities occur it usually
banks outside of the state of
New Mexico.
We've got a jails that are built
that way in certain counties we
have
Other projects that have
happened without the
authorization of P. three which
means that we as a legislative
body don't have oversight as to
how these things are done.
I think the bill that
Representative Garrett has
brought forth is critically
important particularly for
broadband transportation
development
in many cases we've seen.
And and and initially this is
happened I've had experience
with BNSF where they've asked
how.
Okay may provide funding to the
New Mexico DOTA for bridge
improvement close to I believe
it's lost let us we have no way
to receive those dollars because
we don't have a P. three
structure in place which meant
that.
At that project is put on the
five year construction schedule
and they needed it now they
needed to have it for a number
of reasons that we've had
private companies like that come
forth and actually offered to
help us with our infrastructure
but we don't have a way to
receive that support so I wanted
to know without question I
support Representative
Garrettsville I'm not sure what
kind of amendments have been
proposed by this committee but I
sure would like to see this go
through thank you madam chair
thank you committee.
Thank you chairman.
Are there any other questions
Representative Pettigrew did you
still did you have additional
questions.
No okay madam chair I just
forgot to take my hand okay
great
thank you representatives for
your questions I know that folks
came in late for public comment
I'm just gonna add one comment
of that on the chat for folks so
that they have it it was laid
out in the queue in a but
I'll just copy and paste it so
you all have it for for for an
additional public comment I I
know that this that versions of
of this bill have been
introduced in various years and
and and while I think in my in
the past I have been prone to
oppose it because I think that
it's important to invest in in
public in public dollars
I know that there's some
importance in this legislation
out considering where we're at
but I I think it's important
that moving forward
Part of why we're we're we're
struggling right now is because
of the the the amount of
How we depleted state government
not only here in New Mexico but
all across the country there's
there's been this very
This this whole process of
trying to minimize the amount of
investment that we put into
state dollars and so I think
part of why this legislation now
so important is to help
figure that out but at the same
time how did how was this part
of a bigger plan of of that it's
not just about just investing in
three pieces but also in in
making sure that our state
agencies are are provided with
the the kind of investment that
they need to make sure that we
are providing for communities as
best that we can so
Representative Garrett I
appreciate you bringing this
legislation I'm glad that we had
an opportunity in this committee
to listen to it too that it I
know it wasn't going to make it
to this committee initially but
I appreciate your advocacy to
make it to have it come here so
with that if
I agree so we'll go ahead and
and vote on the legislation if
you could please
Carl on that.
So madam chair all go ahead make
a motion that.
Yeah I'll move our.
With with the cav yachts that
we'll see lots of good
amendments in the next committee
I will move to pass on house
bill fifty five seconds second.
So we have a motion from
Representative Harper for I do
pass the second from
Representative a chairwoman
Lundstrom a tree so if you could
please call the roll.
Representative Crowder yes.
Representative direct.
Yes.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Yes.
Representative madrick.
Representative Pettigrew.
The state.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero.
Know when I'd like to explain my
pope.
Chair growth here.
Share Rubio.
Yes.
We have.
I.
Yes one number and one of the
state.
Representative Romero if you'd
like to go ahead.
Thank you madam chair I I yes I
was unclear about
when we were gonna be getting
the amendments and seen the
amendments in this committee
before books on I'm always
hesitant to vote on bills with
the
with the course no disrespect to
any of the Sanchez but being
promised amendments that that we
are privy to when I think we all
agreed we would like to see
amendment solved so I'm always
hesitant to to do that thank you
madam chair.
Thank you Representative
Representative Garrett you do
have a due pass on your
legislation
so thank you for doing that I
know that you didn't think that
you would be presenting this
morning so I appreciate your
willingness to.
To get that going.
Madam chair and members of the
committee thank you for all your
feedback I'm I know that
Representative Pettigrew will I
will be meeting I will be
touching down with secretary
Santa but please feel free to
email me or talk to me on the
floor about any other feedback
and and Representative Romero be
sure to show you the amended
version thank you.
Representative yes Mr.
One that died can get online
with to have me as of the
participants in our panelists
will be just on that.
Okay thank you Mr.
Well one of them.
I don't think there's any
opposition from committee for to
allow you to do that.
with that then thank you
Representative here we
appreciate it will go ahead and
go on to house bill three I did
confirm with Representative
Pettigrew that
well everybody received the
excel document they hadn't
received the amendment and so
the the amendment language but
it's not there's not any changes
from that excel doc.
so were of what will we'll go
ahead and move forward with that
convert with that discussion
mention if you could please go
ahead and and and begin.
Warning.
Morning members of the
committee.
According to the amendment.
Making appropriation act.
Just the financial political
unity earlier into the well
which meant that over you have
on the three.
And this
is the year twenty three
operating budget for the
department of transportation so
this is the content of the three
amended is this recommendations
by to take your which we have
worked with the program budget
and impunity.
When the state funds and federal
We have meant this time in our
tech group.
Time constraints.
Why I'm gonna report you to once
we have decided to do
if you could you please share
you.
Excel spreadsheet yes.
If.
I think she restrictions on them
that.
So you can see I'm calling
being.
You can see the original LFC
recommendation which was in the
hospital for any reason of
their.
Madam do you.
Which we have worked on in doing
it thank you and we.
Thank you one we have decided we
added and you let them million
million seven hundred sixty five
thank you Revenue.
Which was originally forecast in
our forecast.
We added two point one nine one.
In in P. five six eight two
zero.
We added eight million.
In P. five sixty three point
zero we added seventy seven
sixteen point four million in P.
five sixty four Caro.
And we added eight hundred
twenty one point two million
K. five sixty five zero.
We also added in five point six
four one million.
Revenue again what.
in Lawrence will come from the
New York Pete.
We added in nine hundred forty
thousand dollars local
government growth fund.
Four point.
Zero seven million dollars in
transportation project on.
One hundred fifty thousand
dollars in highway
infrastructure from.
Hundred ninety one thousand
dollars aviation Fund.
One thing I also wanted to
mention that the correction with
many to reflect the correct
number on the budget.
Healthy originally estimate.
That was the match but instead
there is only twelve point three
million to match which resulted
in a seven point seven million
difference the line with LFC
recommendation with the federal
funds.
So I'm we'll go to it.
Thank you to we added sixteen
point eighty six seven million
to federal funds to match new
infrastructure bill appropriated
by the Congress.
Thank you with the match thank
seven point seven million
dollars.
Thank you maybe then we added.
Balance of cash from the state
will provide thousand.
Thank you we added eight point
two million dollars.
Representative state project.
Illegible federal funds and help
with covering inflation current.
Thank you we had a eight million
design projects they are not yet
development to put out.
Three we added twenty three
million dollars between six
districts equally for contract
maintenance and you find.
Maintenance means for example
overly middle infield should
feel.
I mean oil all contenders.
Thank you for we added one
million dollars the building is
that and.
The only building energy
efficient operation eight point
so this will be off of the lack
of money and then you will have
to do.
I think we have I think what
eight point two million the
state project
eight million will be used for
design projects the number you
can see on the spreadsheet.
Right.
This
project will be ready to go one
other funding show up.
Will be allocated to build the
contract maybe there is thank
you thank and all the we'll go
into real time department of the
consent of the by thank you very
like we mentioned earlier.
Sixty million dollars was added
to payroll from which they act
one million dollars liability
assessment which I just
mentioned earlier well.
Appropriation filled bash the
Robeco there.
Want to point out is that need
an immunity at the vacancy
savings and of agency rate is
going down we don't have a lot
of backlog in New York you will
have eleven point seven six five
million to note on
the person that is in New York
he was strapped to make a big
recruiting this year.
The one point two billion of the
total estimated budget and
impunity no additional payroll I
have been added to payroll in
addition the sacraments do not
include a seven percent percent
pay increase
thank you recommendation and
in your case that happened that
I'm balance left over to the
border seven percent pay
increase without additional
funding.
Over change protective number
to thirty million dollars I'm
balances.
Sorry fifty five million dollars
thank you
and twenty nine million dollars
pattern in which thirteen point
five million would be used aero
report for now thank you.
Thank you mentioned do we have
any all opening up for public
comment if folks do you have any
In in opposition or support of
the budget you can raise your
hand right now.
Otherwise we'll go ahead and
move to the committee
Are there any questions from the
committee members.
Representative Harper.
Thank you madam chair just just
one quick question to make sure
I understand so
Madam chair my understanding was
the really kind of a big
difference between HB three and
what the agency and LESC it all
together was the federal funds
component just because there's a
lot of uncertainty as to what
will actually come federally to
the state of New Mexico and I
see the changes in numbers here
but we just kind of a high level
talk about.
What's the consensus group kind
of settled on and how they
settled on that.
Representative I will act you
question to the LFC New York NY.
Mr chair this is Connor
Jorgensen I'm the LFC analyst
for DOT good morning nice to see
everyone.
So just to just to take a step
back from a really high level
when that D. O. T. puts together
it's request for the for the
career for the upcoming fiscal
year.
Based on an assumption of
additional road funds is is I
think that's been changing.
Because of the timing issue the
D. O. T. request did not include
the federal funding because it
hadn't passed at the time that
the budget was submitted.
The LFC had a little bit more
time and so it took a it took a
gas out what we thought was
going to be in the in that
federal package and it's been a
little bit of a.
Really has been a guessing game
because a lot of that
The rules and rags around that
federal funding have not been
determined and even in some
programs still are not.
So the LESC took a gaps and it
added on amount in it turned out
I think we're about thirty
million last band what what you
see in the tech group so between
the LFC recommendation to try to
account for that federal fund
funding and group number one
we made it change the tech group
did to reflect what was in the
federal infrastructure package
that was the biggest single
change between tech group number
one and tedcruz number two we
also accounted for additional
state road fund because those
are those numbers are updated in
January some neither
recommendation included state
road fund balance I think it's
also important to point out that
that state road fund balance by
the time all was said and done
with our.
Tech group number two
recommendation and that's the
one that's before you today
there's about twenty nine
million dollars and in available
fund balance so that did not get
spent all the way down and we
left the where with all in there
Particularly when she mentioned
that there was a seven percent.
Salary increase of the LFC
version we need to make sure
that the department has the
funding to pay for that the
department does have the funding
to pay for that there were also
a couple of little tweaks to
language the hearing there but
generally you're seeing the same
program transferred the same
rollover Authority in the same
our authority that you see are
generally every year
defer to Mallory months about us
was also on the tech group she's
the HSD director at DOT if I if
I missed anything Mallory
Yeah what is now.
Morning madam chair members of
the committee primary I think
you will you cover everything we
do with the twenty million
twenty nine million dollars that
Connor mention and fund balance
we did incorporate that seven
percent pay increase that we
will expect to pay out if the
raised as pets for the
department.
madam chair and
Committee thank you for for help
me understand that the timing
those issues that that really
answer my my question is and it
sounds like we're we're not a
good place are we are there any
other kind of unknowns out there
that to.
we might anticipate before we
have to send this to
appropriations and get it over
to the Senate.
Madam chair and representative I
I don't really think on nose in
terms of the operating budget we
do have some unknowns in terms
of you know some of those other
programs that were created under
the infrastructure act so when
we think about you know bridge
replacement or funding for
border infrastructure approved
improvement what does that mean
for the department
we don't know but I think that's
probably more of a federal issue
and we're waiting for that
guidance.
Great
thank you madam chair and and
and thank you all for your great
work on this you are you make it
easy on us and and we appreciate
that
and and please keep up the great
work we we certainly appreciate
you know Senator Santa and and
everyone at and I'm D. O. T. the
great work that you all do thank
you.
Thank you Representative I don't
know if we make it easy for them
but they certainly make it easy
for us so we appreciate it
Representative Garrett.
Thank you madam chair woman.
The question is not directly
related to the our.
Budget but it's it's more of
this time line we should put on
the committee analysis report
under keep purpose synopsis
this amendment does not address
special appropriations being
considered by the legislature
because I'm getting calls about
roads that fall under that
category where do the special
appropriations.
How did they come to our
attention I just need
clarification on that.
For New Madam chair
Representative Garrett I think
there's a there's a couple of
moving pieces and in this year's
budget that are that are kind of
unique so if we go back to the
special session House Bill to
included funding.
Four DOT projects.
That was initially part of a of
a bigger LFC recommendation for
nonrecurring funding for the
department so right now we're
looking at nonrecurring road
funding that would include
additionally I believe it's two
hundred seven point five million
that would be for
for state projects now there's
some there's some other funding
in there as well for locals I
believe there is an amount to
four airports but that is that
is nonrecurring funding and it
is currently planned out side of
this because it is nonrecurring
this is simply the the recurring
operating budget.
Thank you madam chair and thank
you Connor.
Thank you all are there any
other questions from members.
Great so can I get a motion then
to move the amendment
From anyone.
Representative Crowder even
moves of has a motion to move
the amendment is their second.
Representative Harper thank you
both
so we currently have to help the
amendment for house bill three
on the table for both can I get
a motion
for that please.
Great we have a motion from a
chairwoman Lundstrom a second
from Representative Crowder so.
if you can do a roll call vote
please.
Representative Crowder yes.
Representative Garrett.
Yes.
Representative Harper yes.
Representative Lundstrom those
yes.
Image twenty Representative
Madrid actual cast is
nonsensical just just
Representative the so called
clean.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero.
Representative
And vice chair Garcia.
Your Rubio.
Yes.
Okay we have six yes vote.
Representative.
Okay thanks for the so we have
yes in the affirmative
of six in the affirmative so
thank you thank you luncheon
thank you all all from the techs
from the tech committee we
appreciate all the work you did
on this I know that
there it was
a lot jam packed within the
thirty but this thirty day
session trying to get this bill
out so we appreciate all your
work hopefully there's some time
to breed
Over the course of the next few
days so thank you Representative
Harper.
Madam chair now we that amended
the bill can I move that I do
pass on house bill three is
amended.
Yes you can do that Sir thank
you yep.
So we have the a day we have a
motion from Representative
Harper is their second.
Officials not leaders.
Okay and so
three so if you can do a roll
call on house bill three as
amended.
Yes.
Rural rural areas and ended.
Representative Crowder.
Yes.
Representative Garrett yes.
Representative Harper.
Yes.
Representative Lundstrom.
Representative Madrid.
Representative Pettigrew.
Representative Powdrell Culbert.
Representative Romero.
Vice chair Garcia is.
I'm here Rubio.
Yes.
We have I yes folks.
Thank you thank you for.
Thank you all of for your help
and in this morning's Committee
I know that were scheduled to
head back onto the floor
Representative Chandler has
asked to rule the bill over so
we'll hear house joint
resolution one on Tuesday
morning in addition to a number
of other pieces of legislation
on things are pretty slowly
coming into this committee now
that this legislation is is
moving that house bill three is
moving out so will if there's
any changes to the schedule we
will certainly keep you all
posted but in the meantime for
Tuesday we we are planning to be
here at nine AM so we will we
will see you all there.
Thank you all have a good one.
Thanks for your thank you.
